                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ARE FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS CONTAGIOUS?

                                         Richard Baldwin
                                         Dany Jaimovich

                                       Working Paper 16084
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16084


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2010




We would like to thank the useful comments and suggestions of Jean-Louis Arcand, Patricio Aroca,
and participants of seminars organised by the Swiss Trade Economist Cooperative (STEC), Graduate
Institute (Geneva), World Trade Organization (WTO), Hitotsubashi University, European Economic
Association, Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association (LACEA), Universidad de Chile,
and Universidad Catolica del Norte (Antofagasta). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Richard Baldwin and Dany Jaimovich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Are Free Trade Agreements Contagious?
Richard Baldwin and Dany Jaimovich
NBER Working Paper No. 16084
June 2010
JEL No. F13

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper presents a new model of the domino effect which is used to generate an empirical index
of how “contagious” FTAs are with respect to third nations. We test our contagion hypothesis together
with alternative specifications of interdependence and other political, economical and geographical
determinants of FTA formation. Our main finding is that contagion is present in our data and is robust
to various econometric specifications and samples.


Richard Baldwin
*UDGXDWH,QVWLWXWH*HQHYD
Cigale 2
1010 Lausanne Switzerland
and CEPR
and also NBER
baldwin@graduateinstitute.ch

Dany Jaimovich
*UDGXDWH,QVWLWXWH*HQHYD
132 rue de Lausanne
1202 Geneva Switzerland
Dany.Jaimovich@graduateinstitute.ch
1




     Are Free Trade Agreements Contagious?

                    Richard Baldwin and Dany Jaimovich *            F




                                 Graduate Institute, Geneva



            First draft: 23th September, 2008. This version: 9th June, 2010

                                   ABSTRACT
     This paper presents a new model of the domino effect which is used to
     generate an empirical index of how “contagious” FTAs are with respect to
     third nations. We test our contagion hypothesis together with alternative
     specifications of interdependence and other political, economical and
     geographical determinants of FTA formation. Our main finding is that
     contagion is present in our data and is robust to various econometric
     specifications and samples.
     Keywords Contagion Effect, Free Trade Agreements and International Trade
     JEL Codes F13

1.      INTRODUCTION
       0B




Regionalism is sweeping the world trade system like wildfire while WTO talks advance
at a glacial rate – an unconditional correlation that is often used to suggest that
regionalism is a threat to the multilateral trading system (Bhagwati 2008). This concern
has prompted a wave of research on why nations are so eager to remove barriers
bilaterally.
The most common theoretical explanation in recent decades is “slow multilateralism”, i.e.
the assertion that regionalism is spreading because multilateral talks are progressing so
slowly (Krugman 1991, Bhagwati 1993, 2008). Another set of explanations turn on
idiosyncratic events, such as the US’s opening of the US-Canada FTA talks in 1986
(Bhagwati 1991 p.71), the breakup of the USSR in 1991 (Lester and Mercurio 2009 p.3),
and the Asian Crisis of 1997 (Harvie, Kimura and Lee 2006 p.3). More institutional
explanations for regionalism’s popularity include the global spread of democracy
(Mansfield, Milner, and Rosendorff 2002, Wu 2004), and the quest for geopolitical
stability (Mansfield and Pevehouse 2000, Martin et al. 2008, 2010, and Vicard 2008).

*
 We would like to thanks the useful comments and suggestions of Jean-Louis Arcand,
Patricio Aroca, and participants of seminars organised by the Swiss Trade Economist
Cooperative (STEC), Graduate Institute (Geneva), World Trade Organization (WTO),
Hitotsubashi University, European Economic Association, Latin American and Caribbean
Economic Association (LACEA), Universidad de Chile, and Universidad Catolica del
Norte (Antofagasta).
2


One lacuna in these hypotheses is the lack of recognition of third-nation effects, i.e. FTA
interdependence. This angle is stressed by the so-called bandwagon or emulation
arguments that posit a link between FTAs signed by the ‘trade giants’ (US, EU and
Japan) and the attitudes of other nations. The giants’ FTAs create “a sense elsewhere that
regionalism is the order of the day and others must follow suit” (Bhagwati 1991 p.73,
and, more recently, Solis, Stallings and Katada 2009). The political economy logic of this
assertion has not been fully worked out but the idea seems a general ‘demonstration
effect’. A related line of thinking for which the political economy links have been worked
out is the domino theory of regionalism formalized in Baldwin (1993). 1 This argues that
                                                                        F   F




the signing or deepening of one FTA can induce excluded nations to sign new FTAs that
were previously shunned. The logic turns on the way that trade diversion creates new
political economy forces in excluded nations. Specifically, excluded nations seek to sign
FTAs as a means of redressing the new discrimination. The second-round FTAs in turn
create their own trade diversion that may in turn lead to more FTAs. Using an obvious
metaphor, the domino theory explains why FTAs seem to be ‘contagious’.
Our paper aims to crystallize the domino-effect logic with respect to bilateral FTAs and
to test it in a broad panel of countries. The empirical linkages have already been
established in a more reduced form setting by Egger and Larch (2008) using spatial
econometric methods.
The value added of our paper is threefold. First, we extend the domino theory model to
allow for FTAs (the original contributions concerned customs unions). Second, we use
the model to develop a theory-based measure of contagion. Importantly, our measure of
contagion captures asymmetries in the dyads, while Egger and Larch (2008) implicitly
assume contagion is bilaterally symmetric (since their measure depends on distance).
Third, we test the domino-effect against alternative hypotheses using a broader sample of
FTAs than previous studies. The key empirical lever that allows us to distinguish them
from the contagion is the extent to which trade ties connect the new FTA signers. The
contagion hypothesis works on trade diversion, so the spread of FTAs should follow a
pattern that is clearly related to the new signers’ trade patterns. In particular, a pair of
nations should be more likely to sign a new FTA if either of them has recently signed
FTAs with third nations that are the pair’s exporting rivals.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the literature and
the subsequent one presents our model. Next we present our empirical strategy, data and
results. The final section presents our concluding remarks.

1
  There are precedents. Whalley (1993) informally argues that Western Hemispheric
regionalism was largely defensive, focusing on fears of US aggressive unilateralism
instead of trade diversion; he also does not posit a circular causality between bloc size
and the strength of inclusionary pressures. Hufbauer (1989) uses the term “FTA
magnetism” which captures the first step (idiosyncratic deepening sparks membership
requests) but does not relate the strength of the magnetism to the bloc size. Winters
(1996) and Lawrence (1996) surveys regionalism and multilateralism models, putting the
domino theory in perspective. See Baldwin (1994, 1997, 2008) for applications to,
respectively, the waves of regionalism in Europe, the Western Hemisphere, and East
Asia.
3



2.     1BLITERATURE REVIEW
2.1.   11B  Theoretical work on FTA formation
A wide range of theory articles have studied the incentive to form or join FTAs. The first
paper to consider endogenous customs union formation seems to be Riezman (1985). He
works in a 3-nation Walrasian setting, assuming that international transfers are
impossible but that nations’ can violate their GATT/WTO commitments by raising
external tariffs after a customs union is formed. He formally shows that many unexpected
results can occur depending upon exogenous national asymmetries. For example, he
shows that a customs union may be stable between nations even though they would both
be better off under global free trade. A very different approach is the domino theory of
regionalism (Baldwin 1993). Working with a monopolistic competition trade model, he
shows that the trade-diversion effects of customs union formation can induce nations that
were previously against membership to change their minds and join. Moreover, the pure
economic incentive of excluded nations to join rises with customs union membership. If
the membership expansion is spread over time for practical reasons, a single event of
regionalism may appear to spark a domino-like chain reaction where each new
membership triggers another. The result may be global free trade if nations’ intrinsic
resistance to joining is not too great.
Yi (1996), working with a version of the Brander-Krugman model of oligopolistic firms
facing segmented markets, applies standard game theoretic analysis of coalition
structures to study the domino effect more formally. He shows that the global free trade
outcome (the grand coalition) is stable when membership is open, but not necessarily
when incumbents can veto enlargement. Krishna (1998) also works with the Brander-
Krugman model of trade and symmetric nations, but assumes governments’ FTA choices
are only affected by their firms’ operating profit. He studies the interests that countries
have in forming an FTA, showing that nations of similar size are likely to gain from the
FTA. He also shows that FTAs which produce a great deal of trade diversion are
especially beneficial to the FTA partners. Freund (2000), working with a Brander-
Krugman like model where every firm sells to every market, shows that any two nations
would gain from forming an FTA as long as the MFN tariff was below the optimal tariff
level. Note that trade bloc formation in this sort of oligopoly model shifts pure profits to
the bloc at the expense of third nations. Multilateral free trade would eliminate the bloc’s
advantage, so analyses based on such models tend to produce endogenous bloc sizes that
do not include all nations, i.e. the trade blocs are stumbling blocks to global free trade.
Aghion, Antras and Helpman (2007) use cooperative game theory to analyse FTA
formation. So as to be able to directly employ well-known game theoretic results, they
apply to nations assumptions which are standard when modelling cooperative games
among private agents. Specifically, they assume that one nation is the undisputed agenda
setter, and that unlimited transfers among nations are possible and costless (transferable
utility). Under these strong assumptions they are able to formally show that almost
anything can happen, including an outcome that resembles the domino effect.
4



2.2.   12B  Empirical studies of FTA formation
Empirical studies of FTA formation are much rarer as FTA membership is typically taken
as exogenous by empirical researchers.
A first systematic empirical study on the economical determinants of FTAs is Baier and
Bergstrand (2004). This paper, however, does not consider any of the hypotheses
accounting for the spread of FTAs. The authors use cross-section data to estimate a linear
probability model linking ‘economic’ factors to the choice of FTAs. In particular, they
find that the likelihood of an FTA between a country pair is higher the closer they are, the
more distant from the rest of the world, the larger and more similar their economic size
are and the more different their labour ratios are. The authors argue that these factors
explain which FTA would lead to the greatest welfare gains.
Several empirical studies have focused on aspects beyond the economic determinants.
Mansfield and Reinhardt (2003) offer a political explanation, providing empirical support
for the “slow multilateralism” argument and other developments at the GATT/WTO as
key explanations. Mansfield, Milner, and Rosendorff (2002) empirically find that pairs of
democratic countries are more likely to form an FTA, a result confirmed by Wu (2004),
who also claims that economic and trade uncertainty matter. Holmes (2005) shows
“mercantile interests” in assuring export market access are also important determinants.
The first evidence of the geopolitical stability hypothesis is Mansfield and Pevehouse
(2000), who show that countries with an FTA are less likely to have a war, a result
formally explained in Martin et al. (2008) and tested in Martin et al. (2010) and Vicard
(2008).
FTA interdependence has received little empirical attention. The first efforts are attempts
to prove the domino theory in the European context. Sapir (1997) estimates year-by-year
gravity equations to identify the trade diversion effect of the EU on non-members. He
finds that trade diversion estimates tend to spike just in advance of EU enlargements and
suggests that the enlargements were caused by the heightened trade diversion. Baldwin
and Rieder (2007) undertake a similar procedure as a first stage to identify trade diversion
and add a second stage that estimates a linear probability model linking the likelihood of
joining the EU to contemporaneous trade diversion. This procedure, however, is plagued
by the endogeneity of the membership decision in the first stage. An early use of the
spatial econometric techniques in the FTA study is Manger (2006). Building a weight
matrix based in the average geographical distances of the countries in the involved dyads,
he provides evidence of spatial dependence. Egger and Larch (2008), using a similar
weighting strategy, extend the spatial econometric analysis to the study of dynamic FTA
formation and enlargement and incorporate long term implications of interdependence in
a cross-section analysis estimated with Bayesian techniques.

3.     2BTHEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The formal domino theory presented in Baldwin (1993) applies to the analysis of an
expanding customs union, not FTAs. In the case of a customs union, the choice is simply
to be in or out. The analysis, however, must be quite different when considering bilateral
FTAs as the lack of a common external tariff changes the analysis fundamentally. The
key domino result concerns the way a third party FTA can switch a nation’s decision to
5


sign a particular FTA from ‘no’ to ‘yes.’ The fulcrum of the modelling is therefore the
comparison of the Home government’s objective function when it chooses to stay with
MFN trade policy versus when it chooses to sign an FTA with, say, nation-j. The domino
effect is said to arise when an FTA between nation-j and a third nation makes the Home
government more likely to sign the FTA with nation-j when previously it preferred MFN
trade policy. This section introduces a model where the domino effect arises with respect
to bilateral FTAs.
Endogenising the decision to form an FTA partnership requires an economic model that
specifies the effects of trade agreements and a political model that maps the economic
effects into policy choices. We turn first to the economic model, keeping it as simple as
possible. We conjecture that the domino effect would arise in many other economic
settings.

3.1.1. The economy
        20B




We assume a world of R countries, each with two sectors: a manufacturing sector (the M-
sector) and a numeraire sector (the A sector) and two factors (labour L and capital K).
The tastes of all consumers are identical and given by the indirect utility function:
                                                               1 /(1− σ )
                                           PM ≡ ⎛⎜ ∫ pi1−σ di ⎞⎟
                   E                 μ                                                     (1)
              V=     ;   P ≡ p1A− μ PM ,                                    , 0 < μ <1<σ
                   P                             ⎝ i∈Γ         ⎠
where E is the typical nation’s expenditure, P is the ideal price index, pA is the price of A,
pi is the consumer price of manufacturing variety i (the variety subscript is dropped
where clarity permits), μ is the expenditure share on all varieties, Γ is the set of varieties
available for consumption, and σ is the constant elasticity of substitution between any
two varieties; the regularity conditions on μ and σ are maintained throughout the
analysis. Demand for variety-j sold in a typical market is thus:
                                                   p −j σ μE
                                            cj ≡                                           (2)
                                                     PM1−σ
The basic features of this sort of trade model are well known, so we move quickly
through the analysis (see Appendix 1 for details).
The A-sector assumptions are designed to permit analysis of trade in manufactures with
as few confounding factors as possible. Specifically, it is marked by perfect competition,
constant-returns and uses only labour; its output is costlessly traded. Consumers facing
(1) demand good-A according to: CA=(1-μ)E/pA. Perfect competition forces marginal
X   X




cost pricing, so pA=aAw in all nations, where aA is the unit labour input coefficient.
Costless trade equalises pA globally and thus equalises wage rates in all nations (as long
as the nations are sufficiently similar in size to ensure that some A-good is made in all
regions, an assumption maintained throughout). Taking A as numeraire and choosing
units such that aA=1, the law of one price in good A implies w=1 in all nations.
The M-sector is subject to Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition and increasing returns
of the fixed-cost-and-constant marginal-cost type. The fixed cost comprises only K (one
unit of K per variety) while the marginal cost comprises only L (aM units of L per unit of
output).
6


While nations’ labour supplies are fixed, capital is assumed to be constructed using
labour and it is assumed to depreciate in a ‘one horse shay’ manner, i.e. it works perfectly
until it dies – an event that occurs according to a Poisson process with a hazard rate of δ.
In the long run, the capital stock in each nation rises to equate its long-run equilibrium
reward, namely (ρ+δ)F, where ρ is the discount rate, δ is the hazard rate, and F is the
fixed cost of producing the unit of capital that every variety requires (see Appendix). In
short, entry in reaction to a rise in π is fast (instantaneous) but exit is slow (governed by a
Poisson ‘death’ process); see Appendix for details.
As usual, a constant mark-up and ‘mill pricing’ are optimal, so choosing units such that
aM = (1-1/σ) and using w=1, the consumer price of a good produced in origin nation ‘o’
and sold in destination nation ‘d’ is:
                                                           pod = τ od                                     (3)

where τod is one plus the ad valorem tariff on goods sold from nation-o to nation-d (of
course, τoo=1).
The constant mark-up pricing means that a firm’s operating profit is 1/σ times its
revenue. Employing (2) and (3) , a typical firm based in nation-o earns operating profit
                         X        X       X   X




on its sales to nation-d (we denote this as πod) equal to:
                                                              φod s Ed μE w
                                                   π od   ≡                                               (4)
                                                                Δd σ nw
where the bilateral “freeness of trade parameter”, φod ≡ (τod)1-σ, applied against exports
from nation-o to nation-d rises from zero (when the tariff is infinite) to unity (when
bilateral trade is perfectly free); also
                             Ei                                                 ni
                                      , Δ d ≡ ∑i =1 s niφid , s ni ≡                   , φ oo ≡ 1 ∀o, d
                                                    R
                s Ei ≡           w
                             E                                                 nw
Here Ei and ni are nation-i’s expenditure and the number (mass) of symmetric varieties
produced, Ew and nw are the world totals of expenditure and varieties, and Δ is a weighted
average of the bilateral trade freeness parameters where national shares of nw are the
weights. Summing πod across all markets, operating profit of a typical o-based firm is:
                                                         μE w              φ od s Ed
                                                  πo =          ∑                                         (5)
                                                                    R

                                                         σ nw       d =1
                                                                             Δd
Since capital is used only as the fixed cost, πo is the reward to capital in nation-o. Instant
entry and slow exit implies that the steady state reward is:
                                                    μE w
                                                         = (ρ + δ )F                                      (6)
                                                    σ nw

3.1.2. The political economy model
       21B




Our political economy model is designed to capture the tendency of nations to sign
‘defensive’ FTAs, i.e. to seek preferential trade agreements that offset emerging
7


discrimination. The key modelling assumption concerns the asymmetric nature of
lobbying for gains and against losses. There are many ways of modelling this “losers
lobby harder” phenomenon, perhaps the most famous being the “conservative social
welfare function” of Corden (1974). The modelling approach we adopt – an approach that
turns on sunk market entry costs – is that of Baldwin and Robert-Nicoud (2007). In our
economic model, firms enter quickly but exit slowly, so incumbent manufacturing firms
cannot benefit from lobbying for pure gains – in the sense of raising their operating profit
above the equilibrium rate. The reason is that these gains would be instantly arbitraged
away by new entrants, leaving the incumbents with the lobbying cost and zero benefit.
Incumbents can, by contrast, benefit from lobbying when faced with pure losses. The
reason is that the sunk entry-cost creates quasi-rents that can be exploited without
inducing entry. (See Appendix 1 for a full exposition of entry and the exit in the model.)
More specifically, any π > (ρ+δ)F is instantly eliminated by free entry, but when π <
(ρ+δ)F firms exit according to the Poisson death process where δ is the hazard rate. This
slow exit creates the possibility of quasi-rents, i.e. the possibility that π can be raised up
to it long-run rate without attracting entry. Firms lobby for changes in trade policy in
order to obtain these quasi-rents, i.e. to push their operating profit back to its normal
level. (See Baldwin and Robert-Nicoud 2007 for a detailed treatment of this political
economy effect.)
Apart from the asymmetric treatment of above-normal and below-normal operating
profit, the political economy model is standard. As in Grossman and Helpman (1994), the
government chooses trade arrangements to maximise a weighted objective function,
where the weights apply to, respectively, the utility of income derived from labour
income, capital owners’ quasi-rents and tariff revenue. 2 The typical government’s
                                                                 F   F




objective function is:
                       ⎛ α w o L o + β n o [(π o − ( ρ + δ ) F )] + χ TR o   ⎞
                G o = ⎜⎜                                                     ⎟⎟ − ∑ i =1 Z      (7)
                                                                                    R

                       ⎝                                                      ⎠
                                                                                           oi
                                                 Po

where Po is nation-o’s price index, and α, β and χ are the weights on labour, quasi-rents
and tariff revenue (denoted as TR), and the Z’s are the idiosyncratic political costs
nation-o’s government faces when signing a free trade agreement with nation-i (this may
be positive or negative depending upon how nation-o voters view each possible FTA).
Due to our assumptions on fast entry and slow exit, the maximum of the term in square
brackets is zero.

Trade diversion as a political economy force
27B




The core mechanism in the model is the domino or contagion effect of third-nation FTAs.
To illustrate this, we consider R=3, and an initial situation where all three nations are
symmetric in size and trade policy. To keep the reasoning concrete, we study the decision
of nation-1 to sign a free trade agreement with nation-2. To start the analysis, we


2
 Grossman and Helpman (1994) derive this assuming that every organised lobby signs
an enforceable contract with the government whereby the lobby pays money to the
government in exchange for tariffs according to a specific schedule.
8


determine the baseline level of nation-1’s objective function and establish conditions
under which no FTA would be signed. To simplify the formulas, we join Krishna (2003)
in assuming that α = χ = 0 and β = 1 in (7) , so only quasi-rents matter.
                                                    X     X




By symmetry in the initial situation, each nation has a third of world M-sector firms. The
usual features of Dixit-Stiglitz competition imply that operating profit globally is μEw/σ,
where Ew is world expenditure. Given free entry, the number of varieties worldwide, nw,
must adjust to equate the reward to capital, μEw/σnw, to its equilibrium rate, (ρ+δ)F.
Plainly then the middle term in (7) is initially zero. With α = χ = 0 and β = 1:
                                        X     X




                                                        G1MFN = 0                             (8)

This is the baseline level of the objective function that nation-1’s government will use
when deciding whether to sign an FTA with nation-2. Here the superscript indicates the
case using an obvious notation.
Next consider whether nation-1 would sign an FTA with nation-2. To begin with, we
consider the short run effects, i.e. when the number of varieties in each nation is fixed at
1/3 of the world’s total. In this case, straightforward manipulation of the Dixit-Stiglitz
monopolistic competition equilibrium when nations 1 and 2 form an FTA but all other
trade flows are subject to MFN tariffs implies:
                                            μE w (2 + 6φ + φ 2 )         μE w
                           π 1FTA12 =                                >
                                            σn w (1 + 2φ )(2 + φ )       σn w
Comparing this to (6) , we see that operating profit for nation-1 firms has risen above its
                   X   X




equilibrium level (with the same being true for nation-2). This will attract entry, so there
will be no quasi-rents to affect the government’s decision. Using these facts in (7) and
                                                                                  X   X




adding in the idiosyncratic political-resistance factor, the objective function’s value is:
                                                  G1FTA12 = − Z 12                            (9)

Assuming Z12 is positive (i.e. there is some intrinsic resistance to economic integration),
the nation-1 government will not ask for nor accept an FTA with nation-2. By symmetry,
neither will any nation, so the initial MFN trade policy is a stable policy equilibrium.
To move away from this MFN situation, the system needs a shock and we model this as a
change in the parameters of intrinsic resistance to FTAs, i.e. the Z’s. Specifically, we
assume that, for reasons not addressed in the model, the intrinsic resistance to an FTA
between nations 2 and 3 switches sign, so nations 2 and 3 find it politically optimal to
sign an FTA even though it was not politically optimal to do so before the shock.
Our task is to show that this exogenous FTA formation alters the political optimality of
an FTA between nations 1 and 2. To preview the political economy logic, note that the
new FTA will lower the operating profit of firms in nation-1 due to trade diversion. This,
in turn, creates quasi-rents that enter into government 1’s objective function. As we shall
see, this may switch the nation-1’s attitude towards an FTA with nation-2.
After the formation of the nation 2 and 3 FTA, and again focusing on the short run, (3)   X    X




and (5) imply that the operating profit of a typical nation-1 firm is:
    X   X
9



                             μE w (2 + 3φ + 4φ 2 )                μE w
               π   FTA23
                   1       =                               <
                             σn w (1 + 2φ )(2 + φ )               σn w
By inspection, operating profit is less than it was in the MFN baseline, so the trade
diversion has created quasi-rents. These enter nation-1’s objective function, so it is now:
                                                                                                μ
                              μE ⎛ (2 + 3φ + 4φ 2 ) ⎞
                                    w
                                                                       ⎛ n w (1 + 2φ ) ⎞ 1−σ        (10)
                G1FTA23     =       ⎜                  − 1⎟            ⎜⎜              ⎟⎟    <0
                              σn w ⎜⎝ (1 + 2φ )(2 + φ ) ⎟⎠              ⎝      3        ⎠
The FTA between nations 2 and 3 raises the operating profit of their firms; the resulting
entry will depress nation-1 operating profits even further. (See Appendix 1 for the precise
formulas.)
Importantly, the nation 2 and 3 FTA has deleted the MFN status quo equilibrium. The
negative level of the nation-1’s objective function shown in (10) is the new baseline
                                                                                    X   X




against which the nation-1 government will judge the impact of an FTA with nation-2. Or
to put it differently, the attractiveness of signing with nation-2 is boosted by
considerations that did not enter the calculation before nation-1’s trade partners signed an
FTA. The FTA with nation 2 is more attractive now because it allows the nation-1
government to redress its firms’ losses. More formally, nation-1 will sign an FTA with
nation-2 as long as:
                           G1FTA12 & 23 − G1FTA23 > Z 12
where the superscript “FTA12&23” indicates the situation when there are FTAs between
nations 1 and 2 as well as between 2 and 3. Plainly, the fact G1FTA23 is negative makes it
more likely for the inequality to hold.
Performing the short-run calculations, we see that:
                                             μE w (5 + 4φ )              μE w
                           π   FTA12& 23
                               1           =                      <
                                             σn w 3(2 + φ )              σn w
so that operating profit is still below the equilibrium value. 3 This means that the new
                                                                                F   F




FTA does not fully offset the discrimination faced by nation-1 firms. In other words,
nation-1 would rather return to the baseline of global MFN trade than sign an FTA with
nation-2, but it no longer has that choice. Calculating the short-run price index in this
case, the implied level of the objective function is:
                                                                                            μ
                                      μE w    ⎛ (5 + 4φ ) ⎞           ⎛ n w (2 + φ ) ⎞ 1−σ          (11)
                    G  FTA12 & 23
                                    =         ⎜⎜          − 1⎟⎟       ⎜⎜             ⎟⎟    <0
                                               ⎝ 3(2 + φ ) ⎠
                      1
                                      σn w                             ⎝     3        ⎠




3
 By symmetry, the same is true for nation-3, but nation-2, which is the hub in this hub-
and-spoke arrangement, enjoys higher operating profit and so some firms would enter.
This would further depress π1 and π2.
10


When evaluating nation-1’s choice, the key is whether (11) is less than (10) . If this is
                                                                      X   X                 X       X




true, nation-1 will embrace an FTA with nation-2 as long as the intrinsic resistance Z12 is
not too large. To rank (10) and (11) we study their ratio, which can be shown to equal:
                           X       X     X    X




                                        μ
                  6φ      ⎛ 2 + φ ⎞ 1−σ
                          ⎜⎜        ⎟⎟        < 1
                1 + 2φ     ⎝ 1 + 2φ ⎠
What this means is that G1FTA12&23 is indeed less negative than G1FTA23, so nation-1 will
embrace an FTA with nation-2 after nation-2 has signed an FTA with nation-3, provided
that Z12 is not too large. (See Appendix 1 for the precise formulas when we allow for
instant entry in nations 2 and 3; the qualitative results are not affected.)

3.1.3. Deriving a contagion index
       22B




The preceding analysis makes it clear that the linchpin of the domino effect is the way an
FTA between a nation’s partners harm its exporters’ operating profit. In the example
studied, the domino effect stemmed from the impact on nation-1’s operating profit of
freer trade between nations 2 and 3. It is impossible to calculate this analytically for
general patterns of bilateral tariffs (the sni’s cannot be solved for a general R and general
pattern of φ’s). We can, by contrast, derive the impact of a marginal change in third-
nation trade freeness and we propose this as a way of operationalising, on real data, the
strength of the domino effect arising from any given FTA.
Differentiating (5) for nation-1 with respect to reciprocally freer trade between nations j
                X   X




and k, we have:

                                 μE w   ⎛ s Ejφ1j − s nk          s Ejφ1k − s nj        ⎞
                        dπ 1 =          ⎜        (       )dφ kj +        (       )dφ jk ⎟               (12)
                                 σn w   ⎜ Δ        Δj               Δk     Δk           ⎟
                                        ⎝ j                                             ⎠
While the preferential liberalisation between nations j and k is reciprocal in the case of an
FTA, we can think of it as two separate changes in trade policy – lower tariffs charged by
j on imports from k (this is reflected in the rise of φkj) and the lower tariff charged by k on
imports from j (this is reflected in the rise of φjk). This allows us to consider the
‘contagion’ coming to nation 1 from nation j and, separately, from nation k. Separating
the effects and forming proportional changes for the first, we have:

                               dπ 1 / π 1 ⎛ π 1j ⎞⎛⎜ − s nk φkj   ⎞
                                                                  ⎟
                                         =⎜       ⎟
                               dφkj / φkj ⎜⎝ π 1 ⎟⎠⎜⎝ Δ j         ⎟
                                                                  ⎠
Note that the first right-hand is the proportion of operating profit that a typical nation-1
firms earns on sales to nation-j. Because operating profits in this model are proportional
to sales, we can take the share of nation-1’s exports that go to nation-d as a proxy for the
first right-hand term. The second right-hand term is, as inspection of (2) reveals, the
                                                                                      X         X




market share of firms from nation-k in nation-j’s market. We can take j’s import share
from k as a proxy for this. Putting these together, and noting that the bilateral φ goes to
zero under the FTA, we can approximate the contagion effect from nation-j’s FTAs on
nation 1 by:
11



                                    ⎛ bilateral exports 1j ⎞⎛ bilateral exports kj ⎞
                   Contagion 1kj ≅ ⎜⎜                      ⎟⎟⎜                     ⎟ FTAkj              (13)
                                        total exports        ⎜ total imports ⎟
                                    ⎝                 1     ⎠⎝                j    ⎠
Here the first subscript indicates that nation 1 is subject to the contagion caused when
nation j offers tariff preferences to imports from nation k.

4.      3BEMPIRICAL STRATEGY
4.1.    13B  Measure of contagion
According to our theory model, the contagion comes from the threat of trade diversion.
This suggests that two elements must be considered: the number of FTAs signed among a
nation’s trade partners, and the importance of those markets to the nation’s exporters.
Equation (13) provides a simple bilateral contagion index. This index can easily be
expanded to an N-country setting. To get the total contagion that nation-1 is exposed to
from j, we sum over all of nation-j’s FTAs, namely:
                                    ⎛ bilateral exports 1j ⎞⎛ bilateral exports kj   ⎞
     Contagion1j,t ≡       ∑ ⎜⎜
                          k∈Ω j , t ⎝
                                                           ⎟⎜
                                        total exports 1 ⎟⎠⎜⎝ total imports j
                                                                                     ⎟ FTA jk
                                                                                     ⎟                  (14)
                                                                                     ⎠
where Ωj,t is the set of nations with which nation-j has FTA in year t. The index can be
interpreted as the sum of FTA signed by nation- j up to year t weighted by the relevance
of market-j for the exporters in nation-1 (export share of j in 1) and the importance of
exports of nation-k in market j (import share of k in j).
In the empirical specification, we will follow the spatial econometrics literature and
represent the structure of the spatial interdependence in the contagion index as an N*N
weight matrix (W), where each element wpq is a measure of the ‘distance’ between the
dyads p and q, with dyad p formed by country-pair i,j and dyad q by country-pair k,l .
In previous studies that use spatial econometrics to analyze FTA interdependence, both
Egger and Larch (2008) and Manger (2006) use a symmetric weight matrix where the
element wpq is defined as the inverse of the average geographical distance (D). For
example, in Egger and Larch (2008) wpq=e-Dpq/500 with Dpq=(Dik+ Dil+ Djk+ Djl)/4 4 .            F   F




Following (14), we will derive a weight matrix version of the contagion index with the
following characteristics:
              i.     Our definition of ‘distance’ comes from the model presented in section 3.
                     Specifically, we will define each element in W as:
                           ⎛ bilateral exports ij ⎞ ⎛ bilateral exports kj ⎞
                     wpq= ⎜⎜                      ⎟⎜                       ⎟.
                               total  exports     ⎟ ⎜ total imports        ⎟
                           ⎝                  i   ⎠⎝                  j    ⎠



4
 Egger and Larch (2008) also have an alternative specification where the weights are
natural bilateral trade flows.
12


              ii.   The matrix W is not symmetric, since generally wpq≠ wqp (except when
                    both are zero), reflecting the fact that the threat of trade diversion will be
                    different for each country in the pair.
             iii.   The matrix W is (theoretically oriented) sparse, since wpq=0 l≠j,
                    meaning the country-pair’s probability to sign an FTA will not be affected
                    by FTA signed by countries outside the dyad.

Apart from these particularities, all the traditional properties of the spatial weight
matrices hold, namely a zero diagonal and rows normalized to sum up to unity.
Our matrix W differs from the one used in previous studies of FTA interdependence,
reflecting its structural origin. Using the classification recently proposed by Neumeyer
and Plumper (2010), it is possible to say that the spatial weight strategy of Manger (2006)
and Egger and Larch (2008) belongs to undirected dyad contagion class, while the one
we use in the present study is specific target contagion.
For the empirical part, we will define a spatial weight matrix Wt, where the subindex
indicates that a different matrix will be created for each period. Nevertheless, as can be
seen in (14), the export and import share measures are time-invariant. This is because we
don’t want the index to change with the time variation of the shares that can be correlated
with determinants of the FTA signature, leading to simultaneity problems. For example,
if nation-i signs an FTA with nation-l, then it is likely that the export share to nation-j
will be reduced, and with it the contagion index from j to i will decay as well. To avoid
this sort of problems, we estimate the shares as the first observation in the sample of
predicted shares from a simple gravity equation estimated with fixed effects and the log
GDP of nations in the dyad as regressors 5 (data details in Appendix 3).
                                               F   F




4.2.     EMPIRICAL SPECIFICATION
       14B




The empirical specification aims to test the main conclusions of the theoretical model
presented in section 3, meaning that the probability that a pair of countries sign an FTA
will increase with the threat of trade diversion. We will follow the empirical literature
summarized above in having a dummy variable reflecting the existence of a particular
FTA (unity if yes and zero if no) as the dependent variable. Our main explanatory
variable is the Contagion Index (Equation 14). We will test the prediction of the model
against alternative hypotheses of FTA formation and control for several economic,
institutional and geographic determinants of FTA.



5
  One possible concern with the total export shares as weight is the fact that some FTAs
cover just a number of industries, so only these sectors are threaded by the potential trade
diversion, and only the export share of these industries might be used as the weight in the
contagion indexes. Even this concern is true, our database do not have information on
the specific sectors covered by the FTA. Moreover, our prior is that even if a sector is not
included in the original FTA, the fact that the agreement was signed creates the threat that
the sector can be included in the future.
13


Given the dynamic nature of the domino theory, panel data is more suitable to analyze
contagion in FTA formation 6 . For this, we will follow Mansfield and Reinhardt (2003)
                            F   F




and Egger and Larch (2008) in using the following specification:


                                        ,   1/        ,        0
                                    ,            ,         ,                         (15)


where the probability to switch status from non-FTA to FTA is determined by the logistic
cumulative distribution function G(*) of a linear vector of lagged explanatory variables
at different levels (country-pair-year, country-year and year) and the spatial lag
             ,   , with Wt-1 a one period lagged weight matrix and        ,    the vector of
all FTA accumulated until t-1.
When estimating (15), we include only dyads that do not have an FTA before the
beginning of the sample (e.g. country-pairs formed by the EU founding members are not
included) and keep the dyads in the panel until the point where they change their FTA
status. 7 This procedure avoids simultaneity problems with the explanatory variables. In
      F   F




other words, the use of a time-lagged spatial lag avoids the usual complications of spatial
econometric techniques to deal with endogeneity; this relies on the assumption that FTAs
cannot affect the probability of FTAs retroactively.
Estimating a panel data model with a limited dependent variable raises the problem of
incidental parameters, namely inconsistency in the estimation of fixed effects is
‘transmitted’ to inconsistency in the estimation of parameters. Our first approach to deal
with this is to exclude country-pair fixed effects relying instead on dyad-level time
invariant control variables (like geographical distance).
We also pursue two alternative specifications that allow controlling for unobserved
heterogeneity. First, we use conditional logit estimation, as proposed by Chamberlain
(1980). If the conditional probability is different than 1, the logit function does not
involve the fixed effects parameters and conventional maximum likelihood estimation
can be performed. In this case, conditional logit will provide unbiased estimates of the
parameters, but only for the sub-sample of dyads that switch the FTA status during the
observed period. The conditional likelihood function will take the following form:

                                                     ,…,
                                                                   ,
                                             ∑

                                            1 and              1                      (16)

6
  Jaimovich (2010) estimates contagion effects with cross-sectional data using both
simple probit and Bayesian spatial probit models.
7
  One concern is that non-zero values are rare events in the dependent variable, implying
possible loss of power and bias in the estimation. In order to address this problem, we re-
estimate all the main regressions using the methodology proposed by King and Zeng
(2001), and all the main results do not change. These results are available upon request.
14


A second way to address the problems is to include unobserved individual effects in
Chamberlain’s random effects probit model (Wooldridge 2002), where averages of the
time variant variables are included in the estimation 8 .
                                                     F   F




Another concern with this empirical specification relates to serial correlation. Because
observations are likely to be temporally correlated due to duration dependence, the use of
traditional probit or logit techniques poses problems. To address this, we include a
natural cubic spline function of the number of years a dyad have been without an FTA, a
solution proposed by Beck et al. (1998). A different strategy to deal with serial
correlation is the use of duration models. We estimate a Cox proportional hazards model,
where the length of time before the ‘failure event’ (FTA signature in our specification) is
considered in the estimation using the baseline hazard function.
Finally, the inference in dyadic regressions is problematic because observations are not
independent and then the errors are not homoskedastic (Fafchamps and Gubert, 2007).
We first correct for this by clustering standard errors at the dyad level. We also perform a
robustness check using a two-way clustering of errors at the country level proposed by
Cameron et al. (2009).

5.     4BDATA AND RESULTS
5.1.   15B  Free Trade Agreements
Our data on FTAs comes from the recently released Preferential Trade Agreements
Database developed by Hufbauer and Schott (2009). This source is the most extensive
and detailed currently available; it is more comprehensive than the WTO database which
lists only agreements that have been officially notified. The Hufbauer-Schott database has
570 agreements recorded from 1948 to 2007; of these, 329 agreements were still force in
2007. We limit the period of investigation to 2005 due to lack of comprehensive data on
our ‘right hand side’ variables.
In the original database, a cumulative total of 1319 country-pair trade deals are registered
up to 2005, but just 1134 are still in force or signed for later implementation. This means
that around 17% of country pairs are covered by some sort of trade agreement in 2005.
Among these agreements, 65% are classified as ‘pure’ Free Trade Agreements, 21% as
partial scope or preferential agreements and the rest as currency unions, accessions and
consultative frameworks. Nevertheless, to avoid linguistic infelicities, we refer to all as
FTAs and, more importantly, for our analysis we will use all types of registered
agreements, since our prior is that the contagion effect is produced at the moment the
agreement is created. The idea is that the threat of trade diversion is as important as
actual trade diversion. Nevertheless, as a robustness check, we will also explore if the
results change when the strict FTA definition is used.



8
 Additionally, linear probability models can be estimated to deal with unobserved
heterogeneity. We tried this alternative but do not report it because of the well known
problems with this kind of models. The results, that support our main hypothesis, are
available upon request.
15


Appendix 2 presents the number of FTAs signed by each country in our database during
the period 1976-2005 for a total of 704; 572 when just pure FTA are considered. 9F   F




5.2.     Sample and Controls
       16B




Properly computing the contagion indicators required sufficient information on export
shares, so we drop countries that had information on bilateral exports to less than 45
destinations. Some additional countries are eliminated for lack of information in some of
the controls used in the estimation. The final sample includes a maximum of 113
countries over the period 1977-2005 (the full list of countries is in Appendix 2). Thus we
have a total of 100,116 observations organized in 4,466 country-pairs.
Descriptive statistics for the variables are presented in Table 1 and the details about
sources and data construction in Appendix 3. As mentioned above, previous studies
investigated the hypothesis of interdependence of FTA using undirected spatial lags. In
order to show that our contagion index is capturing a different form of spatial
dependence, we will include the variable GENERAL INTERDEPENDENCE, that is the
time-lagged spatial lag calculated using as weights the inverse of the geographical
distances, as showed in section 4.2. For all measures of spatial dependence we include
the squared term (orthogonalized using a modified Gram-Schmidt procedure to avoid
multicollinearity) to study if the effect holds until a certain threshold.
In testing the effects of multilateral trade liberalisation on regionalism, we follow
Mansfield and Reinhardt (2003) in including four explanatory variables: (1) WTO
ROUND, a dummy equal 1 if a trade round is ongoing in a given year, to test if FTAs are
used as a way to gain bargaining power during multilateral talks; (2) WTO MEMBERS, the
detrended number of GATT/WTO members, since a larger number of members implies
lower leverage power within the system that can induce bilateralism; (3) WTO DISPUTE, a
dummy equal 1 if one country in the dyad was in a GATT/WTO dispute in t-1, since
countries can be more willing to sign FTAs in order to enhance their leverage in the
quarrel; and (4) a country losing a dispute can be more willing to form an FTA that
mitigates the negative impacts of the lost, then we include a dummy equal 1, WTO LOST,
if one country in the pair lost a dispute that started three years before.
Baier and Bergstrand (2004) show the importance of gravity-like variables and the
difference in relative factor endowments. To control for these influences, we include GDP
SUM, the sum of the logs of real GDP and GDP DIFFERENCE, the absolute value of the
difference in the logs of real GDP of countries in the dyad for each year, DISTANCE, the
geographical distance between the countries and its relative distance to the rest of the
world, REMOTE. To proxy the difference in factor endowments, we follow Egger and
Larch (2008) and use the absolute value of the log difference in real GDP per capita as a
proxy, labelled as GDPPC DIFFERENCE.
Taking advantage of the panel nature of our data, we can include other important
economic determinants that cannot be present in the cross-section analysis of Baier and

9
 This do not necessarily means that 352 country-pair agreements were signed, because in
some cases just one country of the pair was present in the sample, for lack of information
of the other country. This just happens in 6 out of 704 agreements.
16


Bergstrand (2004). A crucial determinant is the level of trade integration between the
countries before the FTA. Since trade partner importance is an asymmetric characteristic,
we include the variable BILATERAL TRADE measured as the sum of exports to and
imports from the partner in the dyad, over the country’s own GDP. Also, as a country has
fewer barriers, greater the expertise in negotiating agreements, we expect the country to
be more likely to sign new FTAs. To capture this, we include FTA COVERAGE, the
percentage of total exports covered by previous FTAs 10 . The idea that crisis and
                                                         F   F




economic downturns can promote trade reforms as a way to improve the performance is
captured by the variable GDP GROWTH, the country’s real GDP variation and RELATIVE
GROWTH, the relative real GDP growth with respect to the average of the rest of the
world in the same year.
                                 Table 1: Descriptive statistics

Variable                                    Mean        Std. Dev.     Min      Max
FTA                                         0.007         0.083         0       1
PURE FTA                                    0.006         0.075         0       1
CONTAGION INDEX                             13.285       17.210         0     76.375
GENERAL INTERDEPENDENCE                     33.906       14.542      0.001    90.019
WTO MEMBERS                                 0.368         5.072     ‐11.020   9.607
WTO ROUND                                   0.605         0.489         0       1
WTO DISPUTE                                 0.581         0.493         0       1
WTO LOST                                    0.243         0.429         0       1
GDP SUM                                     49.610        2.419     39.572    59.222
GDP DIFFERENCE                              2.465         1.771         0     10.150
GDPPC DIFFERENCE                            1.951         1.314         0     5.864
DISTANCE                                    8.876         0.671      4.710    9.892
REMOTE                                      0.935         2.737         0     9.405
BILATERAL TRADE                             0.505         2.213         0     76.743
GDP GROWTH                                  3.602         3.740     ‐24.049   20.266
RELATIVE GROWTH                             3.146         0.813      1.043    4.643
FTA COVERAGE                                39.255       30.488         0     98.193
POLITICAL DISTANCE                          6.662         6.190         0       20
DEMOCRACY                                   0.598         0.490         0       1
COMMUNIST TRANSITION                        0.177         0.381         0       1
MILITARY ALLIANCE                           0.070         0.255         0       1
COMMON LANGUAGE                             0.115         0.318         0       1
COMMON COLONIZER                            0.051         0.219         0       1
FORMER COLONY                               0.029         0.167         0       1
COMMON BORDER                               0.007         0.082         0       1
FTA DENSITY                                 0.012         0.032      ‐0.039   0.061
Number of observations: 100116


We include other political determinants. DEMOCRACY – a dummy equal to 1 if the
country has a positive level in the POLITY IV index (an index constructed by political

10
  We test the inclusion of the average country MFN as explanatory variable, but it was
never significant and therefore is not included in the final specification.
17


scientists that ranges from -10 to 10, increasing in democratic level). We also test the
related idea that countries with political regimes that are more similar will be more likely
to sign an agreement including the dyad-year level variable POLITICAL DISTANCE,
namely the absolute difference in the POLITY IV values. The quest for geopolitical
stability is captured by the variable MILITARY ALLIANCE, which is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the countries concerned are in a military alliance (we get this from the
Correlates of War database). To control for the opening of Central and Eastern nations to
the world trade system, another dummy, COMMUNIST TRANSITION, is unity if one of
the countries is a former communist economy.
Some other country-pair common characteristics are included in the regressions but not
reported for the sake of space: border, language, colonizer and former colonial relation.
Also, we add a time trend and the (detrended) proportion of total dyads covered by FTAs
in a given year.

5.3.     Estimation Results
       17B




The main results of the empirical exercises are in Table 2. The discussion begins with the
first five rows of Table 2 that focus on different measures of spatial dependence and their
respective quadratic terms.
In column 1, only the undirected spatial lag, GENERAL INTERDEPENDENCE, is included
in the regression. Our results reproduce the finding of previous studies as the coefficient
is positive and significant (but just at the 10% of confidence). In Column 2, we add the
CONTAGION INDEX and see that this changes the results. The CONTAGION INDEX
is positive and significant with less than a 1% probability of error, and its quadratic term
is negative, indicating a threshold effect. Interestingly, the coefficient on the GENERAL
INTERDEPENDENCE index becomes insignificant. In Column 3, we do the same test
but use only agreements classified as ‘pure FTA’ in the Hufbauer and Schott (2009)
database. The results hold for the CONTAGION INDEX, but the undirected spatial effect
is again positive and significant.
In column 4 we use the broader definition of FTA as a dependent variable and seek to
show that our results on the CONTAGION INDEX are not spurious. We create a
“RANDOM CONTAGION INDEX” that is calculated in the same way as the
CONTAGION INDEX, but using random exports and import shares. This variable is not
significant, showing that the theoretically-justified weight matters – the positive influence
of contagion does not depend merely on the use of directed versus undirected dyads.
Since the inference with dyadic data imposes additional complications, in Column 5 we
reproduce the model of Column 2 but adjust the standard errors by two-ways clustering.
Even the standard errors are now about the double of the previous size, the main
conclusions are the same, apart from the fact that the quadratic term becomes
insignificant even at the 10% level.
In Columns 6 and 7 we address the issue of unobservable heterogeneity. In column 6 we
estimate a Chamberlain probit random effects model in which the averages of the time-
varying regressors are added as controls (not displayed in the table). Some results change,
notably the GENERAL INDEPENDENCE variable becomes negative. This is due to the
fact that this index has little time variation and is thus highly correlated with its own
    18


    mean. Column 7 shows the results when we use a conditional logit, equation (16), so the
    sample is limited to switchers. Of course there is a dramatic reduction in the sample size.
    Here again we obtain the expected results for the CONTAGION INDEX but not the
    statistical significance of the GENERAL INTERDEPENDENCE variable.
    In the last column, the Cox duration model confirm the results related to the
    CONTAGION INDEX and provide some support for the undirected spatial lag measure.


                                                  Table 2: Main empirical results
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)               (7)             (8)
                              Indirect       Spatial                      Defeating      Two ways      Chamberlain
                                                                                                                         Conditional      Duration
                                dyad        contagion       Pure fta         the          cluster        random
                                                                                                                            Logit          model
                             contagion        index                        random         errors          effects
Contagion Index                              0.020***       0.027***           0.019***       0.020***     0.012***         0.356***        0.017***
                                              (0.003)        (0.004)            (0.004)        (0.006)       (0.002)         (0.086)          (0.002)
Contagion Index2                             ‐0.071**      ‐0.126***             ‐0.053         ‐0.070     ‐0.055***       ‐1.428***         ‐0.058*
                                              (0.033)        (0.036)            (0.037)        (0.071)       (0.015)         (0.448)          (0.031)
General Interdep.                 0.009*       0.001        0.020***             ‐0.001         0.001      ‐0.036***          0.013         0.013***
                                  (0.005)     (0.005)        (0.007)            (0.005)        (0.006)       (0.005)         (0.033)          (0.003)
General Interdep.2                0.198**    0.239***      ‐0.348***           0.237***       0.239***       0.076*           ‐0.354        0.240***
                                  (0.085)     (0.086)        (0.093)            (0.086)        (0.037)       (0.039)         (0.406)          (0.052)
Random Contagion                                                                 0.001
                                                                                (0.006)
WTO Members                        ‐0.025            ‐0.024         ‐0.048*      ‐0.022         ‐0.023         0.006          0.019
                                  (0.023)           (0.023)         (0.025)     (0.023)        (0.032)       (0.011)         (0.049)
WTO Round                          ‐0.135            ‐0.101          ‐0.083      ‐0.099         ‐0.101        ‐0.109          0.100
                                  (0.176)           (0.177)         (0.208)     (0.177)        (0.321)       (0.077)         (0.350)
WTO dispute                        0.192             0.197           0.135       0.179          0.197          0.084          0.247            0.055
                                  (0.142)           (0.143)         (0.159)     (0.144)        (0.230)       (0.062)         (0.309)          (0.093)
WTO Lost                           0.073             0.010           0.101       0.019          0.010         ‐0.002          ‐0.150          ‐0.033
                                  (0.185)           (0.188)         (0.210)     (0.189)        (0.273)       (0.082)         (0.467)          (0.139)
GDP Sum                          0.234***          0.224***        0.220***    0.221***       0.224***     1.247***         10.07***        0.187***
                                  (0.026)           (0.027)         (0.031)     (0.027)        (0.042)       (0.114)         (1.936)          (0.020)
GDP Difference                  ‐0.240***         ‐0.232***       ‐0.231***   ‐0.232***      ‐0.232***         0.019        6.232***       ‐0.200***
                                  (0.040)           (0.041)         (0.048)     (0.042)        (0.057)       (0.142)         (1.628)          (0.030)
GDPpc Difference                 ‐0.114**           ‐0.095*          ‐0.047     ‐0.101*         ‐0.095         0.232        6.316***          ‐0.051
                                  (0.052)           (0.054)         (0.057)     (0.054)        (0.087)       (0.141)         (2.039)          (0.041)
Distance                        ‐1.376***          ‐1.30***       ‐1.216***   ‐1.305***      ‐1.301***     ‐0.544***                       ‐1.249***
                                  (0.080)           (0.084)         (0.092)     (0.085)        (0.124)       (0.039)                          (0.055)
Remote                             0.006             0.019           0.022       0.020          0.019      0.022***                         0.049***
                                  (0.017)           (0.017)         (0.020)     (0.017)        (0.021)       (0.009)                          (0.012)
Bilateral Trade                  0.036***          0.043***        0.046***    0.044***        0.043*      0.016***           0.070         0.035***
                                  (0.013)           (0.013)         (0.017)     (0.013)        (0.024)       (0.006)         (0.235)          (0.013)
GDP Growth                       ‐0.026**         ‐0.036***       ‐0.053***   ‐0.037***         ‐0.037        ‐0.005         ‐0.077         ‐0.023**
                                  (0.012)           (0.012)         (0.013)     (0.012)        (0.030)       (0.005)         (0.047)          (0.011)
Relative Growth                 ‐0.604***         ‐0.612***       ‐0.475***   ‐0.617***      ‐0.612***     ‐0.261***       ‐0.533***           0.202
                                  (0.097)           (0.099)         (0.116)     (0.100)        (0.190)       (0.044)         (0.170)          (1.247)
FTA Coverage                     0.009***          0.011***        0.014***    0.012***        0.011**         0.001        0.058***        0.009***
                                  (0.001)           (0.002)         (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.005)       (0.002)         (0.021)          (0.001)
Political Distance              ‐0.105***         ‐0.099***       ‐0.092***   ‐0.099***      ‐0.099***     ‐0.100***        ‐0.212**       ‐0.103***
                                  (0.020)           (0.021)         (0.025)     (0.021)        (0.025)       (0.012)         (0.088)          (0.015)
Democracy                         ‐0.395*            ‐0.340          ‐0.439      ‐0.354         ‐0.340        ‐0.177        16.89***       ‐0.655***
                                  (0.235)           (0.249)         (0.312)     (0.250)        (0.440)       (0.112)         (0.713)          (0.178)
Communist Transit.              ‐0.671***         ‐0.467***       ‐0.862***   ‐0.487***        ‐0.467*      0.165**        ‐5.100***           0.154
                                  (0.155)           (0.156)         (0.158)     (0.157)        (0.274)       (0.079)         (0.968)          (0.102)
Military Alliance                  ‐0.105            0.029           ‐0.119      0.030          0.029          0.009          1.181            ‐0.165
                                  (0.212)           (0.217)         (0.237)     (0.218)        (0.249)       (0.098)         (0.925)          (0.126)
Observations                      100116            100116          100116      100116         100116       100116             3698            99809
Pseudo R2                          0.317             0.326           0.333       0.326          0.326          0.394          0.601
Standard errors clustered at dyad level in parentheses Six duration dependence splines, time trend and FTA density not showed in the table. .
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
19


Taken together, these results provide strong support for the notion that FTAs are
contagious when this effect is measured by our theoretically motivated contagion index.
It also supports the idea of decreasing marginal effects of this contagion effect, captured
by the quadratic term. By contrast, we find that the undirected measure of spatial
dependence (GENERAL INTERDEPENDENCE) is not robust to the different
specifications.
In addition, with respect to other hypothesis of the FTA formation, we find little evidence
that developments at the multilateral level have an impact. The four variables from the
Mansfield and Reinhardt (2003) study are almost always insignificant and often with
unexpected signs. Also, we find weak support for the idea that democracy influence
regionalism, since DEMOCRACY has the wrong sign and is statistically insignificant,
with the interesting exception of the conditional logit estimates. Nevertheless, the
similarity of political regimes seems to have an effect as POLITICAL DISTANCE is always
negative and significant, indicating that very different political regimes have trouble
signing agreements. In terms of the integration of the Eastern bloc hypothesis, the
variable COMMUNIST TRANSITION has a negative sign, providing no support for the
idea; this result should be interpreted with caution since several of the former communist
countries are excluded from our sample due to a lack of data. The other political variable,
MILITARY ALLIANCE is never significant.
All the economic and geographical determinants have the expected sign and significance.
In terms of the dyad level DISTANCE, GDP DIFFERENCE and GDPPC DIFFERENCE are
always negative and significant (except in the conditional logit for the last two), the
opposite for REMOTE and GDP SUM. For the country level variables, BILATERAL TRADE
indicates that previous trade level with the partner is a significant predictor of FTAs.
Also, the more FTAs a country has, the more likely it will continue with others, since the
variable FTA COVERAGE is also positive and significant. The variables GDP GROWTH
and RELATIVE GROWTH are both negative and significant, providing some preliminary
evidence to the idea that trade reforms are more likely in economic downturns.

5.4.     Quantification of the results
       18B




The nature of our empirical strategy makes quantification a difficult task. The dependent
variable is a switch from non-FTA status to FTA status – a rare event in our data set, just
0.7% of the observations classified as non-zeros for all type of agreements and 0.6% for
pure agreements (Table 1). This implies that the traditional “correct classification ratio”
that assigns a value 1 to all predicted values over 0.5 and zero otherwise is uninformative
in our case. An alternative is to use the sample mean of the dependent variable as a cut-
off when classifying correctly predicted values. If we do so, we find that the model in
column 1 of Table 2 correctly predicts 85.5% of the cases, while the model in column 2,
that includes the contagion index, correctly predicts 84.5% of the non-zeros.
One different way to quantify the results is to take advantage of the fact that logit
estimates can be interpreted in terms of changes in the odds. Specifically, we calculate
the change in the odds-ratio of one standard deviation increase in the regressor keeping
all the other variables constant. The results for the model using all type of agreements and
20


pure FTAs (corresponding to Column 2 and 3 of Table 2, respectively) are summarized in
Table 3. 11 For all agreements, the column 2 model, a one standard deviation increase in
        F   F




the CONTAGION INDEX leads to a 43.2% increase in the odd of signing an FTA. In the
case of pure FTA the positive change in the odd is 51.9%. It is interesting to note that,
apart from the CONTAGION INDEX, the only variables that produce statistically
significant changes in the odds ratio of more than 20% are: GDP SUM, GDP
DIFFERENCE, DISTANCE, RELATIVE GROWTH, FTA COVERAGE and
POLITICAL DISTANCE.


            Table 3: Change in odds associated to the main explanatory variables.
                  Variable                      All Agreements                       Pure FTA
                                           % Change in Odd      p-value      % Change in Odd       p-value
       Contagion Index                           43.2           0.000              51.9            0.000
       Contagion Index2                          ‐6.4           0.036             ‐13.4            0.000
       General Interdependence                   0.7            0.920              36.6            0.006
       General Interdependence2                   20            0.005             ‐23.6            0.000
       WTO Members                              ‐11.2           0.302             ‐21.5            0.056
       WTO Round                                 ‐4.6           0.580              ‐3.9            0.698
       WTO dispute                                10            0.174              6.8             0.399
       WTO Lost                                  0.4            0.959              4.7             0.609
       GDP Sum                                   71.7           0.000              69.6            0.000
       GDP Difference                           ‐33.5           0.000             ‐33.6            0.000
       GDPpc Difference                         ‐11.7           0.076              ‐5.9            0.410
       Distance                                 ‐58.3           0.000             ‐55.9            0.000
       Remote                                    5.1            0.292              5.9             0.299
       Bilateral Trade                           10.1           0.001              11.6            0.001
       GDP Growth                               ‐12.7           0.001             ‐18.6            0.000
       Relative Growth                          ‐39.2           0.000             ‐31.9            0.000
       FTA Coverage                              39.9           0.000              52.6            0.000
       Political Distance                       ‐45.9           0.000             ‐44.1            0.000
       Democracy                                ‐15.1           0.178             ‐19.8            0.146
       Communist Transition                     ‐16.3           0.003             ‐28.1            0.000
       Military Alliance                         0.8            0.888              ‐3.1            0.601
      Note: The percentage change in odds is related to a one standard deviation increase in each regressor when all
      the other variables are holding in their means. For “all agreement” the results are based in Column 2 of Table
      2, for “pure FTA” in Column 3 of Table 2.



In terms of the goodness of fit of the different models, there is a small improvement
(0.8%) from column 1 to column 2 using Pseudo-R2 (similar results are obtained using
adjusted McFadden R2). A more accurate way of comparing the two models is the
Bayesian information criterion (BIC), that provides an indication on how likely the model
generates the observed data. The difference in BIC between the two models is 46.82.
Using the Raftery (1995) guidelines, it is possible to say that there is “very strong”


11
   A similar exercise can be produced using the survival model estimations in the last
Column of Table 2. The results (available upon request) are in line to those summarized
in Table 3.
21


support for the use of the contagion index. The Akaike’s information criteria (AIC), with
a decrease of 65.92 in the model that includes the contagion index, support this
conclusion. For all other specifications, the information measures yield similar results. In
the model for pure FTA, the difference in BIC is 10.51, while in the conditional logit it is
35.08.

6.      CONCLUDING REMARKS
       5B




The rapid proliferation of FTAs is one of the more remarkable developments of the world
trade system over the past decades. As it involves more than a hundred nations and many
different types of agreements, the driving force behind this trend is surely quite complex.
Our paper is an effort to understand the theoretical and empirical determinants of this
proliferation.
Our basic theoretical hypothesis is that much of the spread of regionalism is driven by a
domino-like effect whereby FTAs between a nation’s trade partners rearranges the array
of political economy forces in such as way as to make the nation more likely to sign an
FTA. Putting it roughly, FTAs are contagious and the degree of contagion is related to
the importance of the partners’ markets.
We believe our paper contains three elements of value-added. First it extends the Baldwin
(1993) domino theory of regionalism to allow for FTAs (the original paper applied only
to customs unions). Second, we use this model to develop a theory-based directed
measure of contagion. Third, we use this measure, the ‘contagion index’, to test for
domino effects and to test these against alternative hypotheses. Our main finding is that
the contagion phenomenon is present in our data and robust to various econometric
specifications and samples, including allowing for other effects (e.g. the bandwagon
effect, slow-multilateralism, etc.).

 REFERENCES
6B




Aghion, Philippe, Pol Antràs and Elhanan Helpman (2007). "Negotiating free trade,"
Journal of International Economics, vol. 73(1), pages 1-30.
Baier, Scott and Jeffrey Bergstrand (2004). “Economic Determinants of Free Trade
Agreements”. Journal of International Economics, vol. 64, pp. 29-63.
Baldwin, Richard (1993). “A domino theory of regionalism,” NBER WP 4465.
Eventually published in Baldwin, Haaparanta and Kiander (eds.), Expanding membership
of the European Union, Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Baldwin, Richard (1994). Towards an integrated Europe, CEPR, London.
Baldwin, Richard (1997). “The causes of regionalism,” The World Economy, Vol. 20,
No, 7, pp 865-888.
Baldwin, Richard (1999). “Agglomeration and endogenous capital,” European Economic
Review 43, 253-280.
Baldwin, Richard (2008). “Managing the Noodle Bowl: The fragility of East Asian
Regionalism,” Singapore Economic Review, vol. 53, issue 03, pages 449-478.
22


Baldwin, Richard, Rikard Forslid, Philippe Martin, Gianmarco Ottaviano, and Frederic
Robert-Nicoud (2003). Economic Geography and Public Policy, Princeton University
Press.
Baldwin, Richard and Roland Rieder (2007). “A test of endogenous trade bloc formation
theory on EU data,” Journal of International Economic Studies, 11(2), pp 77–111.
Baldwin, Richard and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud (2007). “ Entry and Asymmetric
                                                       H




Lobbying: Why Governments Pick Losers ,” Journal of the European Economic
                                         H       H




Association , MIT Press, vol. 5(5), pages 1064-1093, 09.
           H




Beck, Nathaniel, Jonathan Katz, and Richard Tucker (1998). “Taking Time Seriously:
Time-Series–Cross-Section Analysis with a Binary Dependent Variable”. American
Journal of Political Science. Vol. 42, No. 4, pp. 1260-1288.
Bhagwati, Jagdish (1991). The World Trading System at Risk, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, New Jersey:
Bhagwati, Jagdish (1993). “Regionalism and multilateralism: An overview,” in
Anderson, K and Blackhurst, R. (eds), Regional integration and the global trading
system, (London: Harvester-Wheatsheaf).
Bhagwati, Jagdish (2008). Termites in the Trading System: How Preferential Agreements
Undermine Free Trade. Oxford University Press.
Cameron, C., J. Gelbach, and D. Miller (2009). “Robust Inference with Multi-way
Clustering”. University of California at Davis, Department of Economics. Working Paper
09-9.
Chamberlain, Gary (1980). “Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data,” Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. XLVII(1), No. 146.
Corden, W. M. (1974). Trade Policy and Economic Welfare, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Egger, Peter and Mario Larch, “Interdependent Preferential Trade Agreement
Memberships: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of International Economics 76 (2), 2008,
384–399.
Marcel Fafchamps & Flore Gubert, 2007. “ Risk Sharing and Network Formation ,”
                                             H                                  H




American Economic Review , vol. 97(2), pages 75-79.
H                           H




Freund, Caroline (2000). “Different Paths to Free Trade: The Gains from Regionalism”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 115:4, 1317-1341.
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1994). “Protection for Sale” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 84, No. 4, 833-850.
Harvie, Charles, Fukunari Kimura, Hyun-Hoon Lee, eds (2006). New East Asian
Regionalism: Causes, Progress And Country Perspectives, Edward Elgar Publishing.
Holmes, Tammy (2005). “What Drives Regional Trade Agreements that Work?” HEI
Working Paper, No. 07/2005, Graduate Institute of International Studies, Geneva.
Hufbauer, G. (1989). Background Paper for The Free Trade Debate, Reports of the 20th
Century Fund Task Force on the Future of American Trade Policy, Priority Press, New
York.
23


Hufbauer, G. and J. Schott (2009). “Fitting Asia-Pacific agreements into the WTO
system,” in R. Baldwin and P. Low (eds), Multilateralising Regionalism: Challenges for
the global trading system, Cambridge University Press.
Jaimovich, Dany (2010). “A Bayesian spatial probit estimation of the Contagion Index in
Free Trade Agreements”, HEID working papers, Graduate Institute of International
Studies, Geneva.
King, Gary, and Langche Zeng (2001). Explaining Rare Events in International
Relations. International Organization, 55, 3: 693-715.
Krishna, Pravind (1998). “Regionalism and Multilateralism: A Political Economy
Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1998, Vol. 113, No. 1, Pages 227-
250.
Krugman, Paul (1991). "The move toward free trade zones," Economic Review, Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, issue Nov, pages 5-25.
Krugman, Paul (1993). “Regionalism versus multilateralism: Analytic notes”, in De
Melo, J. and Panagariya, A. (eds), New dimensions in regional integration, (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press for CEPR).
Lawrence, R. (1996). Regionalism, multilateralism and deeper integration, Brookings
Institute, Washington.
Lester, Simon and Bryan Mercurio, eds (2009). Bilateral and Regional Trade
Agreements: Commentary and Analysis, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Manger, Mark (2006). “The Political Economy of Discrimination: Modelling the Spread
of Preferential Trade Agreements”. Working Paper. Montreal, Department of Political
Science, McGill University.
Mansfield, E.D. and E. Reinhardt (2003). “Multilateral Determinants of Regionalism:
The Effects of GATT/WTO on the Formation of Preferential Trade Agreements,”
International Organization, vol. 57, pp. 829-862.
Mansfield, Edward, Helen Milner and B. Peter Rosendorff (2002). “Replication, Realism,
and Robustness: Analyzing Political Regimes and International Trade,” American
Political Science Review, 96(1):167-69.
Mansfield, Edward and Jon Pevehouse (2000). “Trade Blocs, Trade Flows, and
International Conflict” International Organization, Vol. 54, No. 4, pp. 775-808.
Martin, Philippe, Thierry Mayer and Mathias Thoenig (2008) “Make Trade not War?”
Review of Economic Studies, 2008, vol. 75(3).
Martin, Philippe, Thierry Mayer and Mathias Thoenig (2010). "The geography of
conflicts and free trade agreements", CEPR Discussion Paper 7740.
Neumayer, Eric and Thomas Plumper (2010). “Spatial Effects in Dyadic Data”.
International Organization, 64 : 145-166.
Raftery, A.E. (1995). “ Bayesian model selection in social research”. Sociological
                       H                                            H




Methodology, 25, 111-196.
24


Riezman, Raymond (1985). “Customs unions and the core”, Journal of International
Economics, vol. 19(3-4), pp 355-365.
Sapir, A. (1997).”Domino effects in Western European Trade, 1960-1992,” CEPR DP
1576, published in European Journal of Political Economy, Vol 17: 386, 2001.
Solis, M., B. Stallings, S. Katada (2009). Competitive Regionalism: FTAs in the Pacific
Rim, Palgrace, MacMillan, New York.
Vicard, Vincent (2008). “Trade, conflicts and political integration: explaining the
heterogeneity of regional trade agreements”. Documents de travail du Centre d'Economie
de la Sorbonne.
Whalley, J. (1993). “Regional trade arrangements in North America: CUSTA and
NAFTA,” in De Melo, J. and Panagariya, A. (eds), New dimensions in regional
integration, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Wooldridge, J. (2002) “Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data”, MIT Press.
Wu, J.P. (2004). “Measuring and Explaining Levels of Regional Economic Integration,”
ZEI Working Paper B12/2004, Centre for European Integration Studies, Bonn.
Yi, S. (1996). “Endogenous formation of customs unions under imperfect competition:
Open regionalism is good,” Journal of International Economics, 41, 151-175.
25



 APPENDIX 1: FORMALIZATION OF THE MODEL
7B




This appendix presents the model more formally and more fully. The economic model is
a multi-country version of the constructed capital model from the economic geography
literature (see Chapter 6 of Baldwin, Forslid, Martin, Ottaviano and Robert-Nicoud
2003); the two-nation version was originally introduced by Baldwin (1999).
The model assumes R nations each with two sectors (A and M), and two factors (physical
capital K and labour L). The global distribution of factor ownership is such that shares sni
and sLi of the world’s labour and capital are owned by nation-i residents. Each region’s
supplies of labour and capital are internationally immobile; labour supplies are fixed but
capital is constructed from labour and thus endogenous.
The A-sector is Walrasian and uses only labour to produce its homogenous output which
is traded costlessly; A is the numeraire good. The M-sector supplies a set of differentiated
varieties subject to increasing returns, Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition, and tariffs
on international trade. The M-sector uses capital and labour but the fixed cost involves
only capital while the variable cost involves only labour; the cost function is:
                                    π + wa m x i
where π is the reward to a typical firm’s unit of capital, am is the variable unit input
requirement, and xi is firm-level output. Since there is one unit of K per variety, a
country’s number (mass) of varieties and its capital stock are identical, i.e. :
                                                     ni          K
        ni = K i , ⇔       s ni = s Ki ;    s ni ≡     w
                                                         , s Ki ≡ wi     ∀i
                                                     n           K
where sni and sKi are nation-i’s share of world varieties nw and world capital Kw,
respectively.
Physical capital depreciates according to the “one-horse shay” model, i.e. capital is either
in perfect working order, or it ‘dies’ in the sense that it becomes completely useless. Each
unit of capital faces a constant probability, δ, of ‘dying’ at every instant. Given the
continuum of varieties, the law of large numbers implies that the proportion of a nation’s
capital stock – and thus a proportion of M-sector varieties – that disappears each period is
exactly equal to δ. 12
                   F   F




A new unit of physical capital can be constructed using aI units of labour by a sector
which is perfectly competitive (the investment good sector, I-sector for short). The
marginal cost of a new unit of capital, what we call F, is equal to waI. The flow of new
capital equals LI/aI where LI is the amount of L employed in the I-sector, thus: 13
                                                                                  F




                                       F = wa I ,       Q K = LI / a I                     (17)


12
   More technically, the probability at time t that a unit of K will still be working at time s
is e-δ(s-t), where δ is the instantaneous failure rate, or hazard.
13
   Given our assumptions on depreciation and construction of capital, a typical nation’s
capital stock evolves according to: dK/dt=QK-δK.
26


where QK is the I-sector’s output, i.e. the flow of newly constructed capital.
Instantaneous preferences over A and M goods are given by:
                                                                               1 /( 1-1/σ )
                U = C;      C ≡ C Mμ C 1A− μ , C M ≡ ⎛⎜ ∫ ci1−1 / σ di ⎞⎟                     , 0 < μ <1<σ   (18)
                                                      ⎝ i∈Γ             ⎠
Since capital is constructed, intertemporal issues are unavoidable; the assumed
intertemporal preferences are:
                                                    ∞

                                                    ∫e
                                                          − ρt
                                             U =                 ln Cdt                                      (19)
                                                   t =0


where ρ is the subjective discount rate.

6.1.1. Short run equilibrium
         23B




We open our analysis of the equilibrium by taking the capital stocks as given.
Consumers in this model find it optimal to spend (1-μ)E on A-goods and μE on all M-
sector varieties, where E is national expenditure. Utility optimisation yields a standard
CES demand function for each M variety, namely (2) . The demand function for A is:
                                                                     X     X




                         C A = (1 − μ ) E / p A
Perfect competition in nation-i forces marginal cost pricing of A, so:
                         p Ai = wi a A , ∀ i

Costless trade in A equalises all national prices of A, and this, in turn, indirectly equalises
wage rates in all nations. Choosing units of A such that aA=1 and taking A as numeraire:
                                    p Ai = p Aj = wi = w j = 1 , ∀i, j                                       (20)

Under Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition, each M-firm is atomistic and thus
rationally ignores the impact of its price on the denominator of the demand function in
(2) . Moreover, since variety differentiation is costless there is no reason for two firms to
X    X




produce the same variety, so no direct strategic interaction among firms arises. This
means that the typical firm acts as if it is a monopolist facing a demand curve with a
constant elasticity equal to σ, and a demand shifter equal to μE/Pm1-σ. Given the standard
formula for marginal revenue, this implies that the profit-maximising consumer price is a
constant mark-up of marginal cost. Formally, the first-order conditions for a typical M
firm’s sales to its local market and an export market are:
                                             wo aM                       τ od wo aM                          (21)
                                    poo =            ,           pod =
                                            1 − 1/ σ                      1 − 1/ σ
where poo and pod are the local price and export price to nation-d for firms based in
nation-o (the maintained assumption that σ>1 ensures that prices are positive).
An important implication of (21) is that firms find it optimal to engage in so-called mill
                                X      X




pricing. That is to say, a firm charges the same producer price (viz poo) for sales to all
markets, i.e. the ratio of the price facing consumers in nation-d to the local price equals
the pair-specific trade cost factor τod. Choosing units of x such that aM=(1-1/σ), we have:
27



                                                 p oo = 1,       p od = τ od ,            (22)

Mill pricing makes it very easy to calculate the equilibrium operating profit earned by a
typical firm in any market. By definition, πod=(pod -mcod)xod and since pod=mcod(1-1/σ),
we have πod=pod xod/σ. Thus, using (2) and the fact that all firms engage in mill pricing,
                                                  X     X




operating profit for a typical firm is:
                                                             Ew                       μ   (23)
                                       π od = bDo               ;                b≡
                                                             Kw                       σ
where b is defined for notational convenience, and Do is the effective demand facing a
typical firm in nation-o, namely:
                                                 s Ed         E
                   Do ≡ ∑d =1φod Bd , Bd ≡            , s Ed ≡ dw , Δ d = ∑d =1φid s ni
                          R                                                R

                                                 Δd           E
Here φod≡τod1-σ is our measure of bilateral trade freeness, the B’s are the market specific
demand shifters, sEi is nation-i's share of world expenditure, and

6.1.2. The Market Size Condition
         24B




As (23) shows, capital’s reward depends upon the spatial distribution of industry (the
     X    X




sni’s) and the spatial distribution of expenditure (the sEi’s). Since capital’s reward is the
fulcrum of our analysis and we are taking sn as given for the moment, the next task is to
characterise the sEi’s. We begin with the denominator, Ew.
Capital construction uses resources, so consumption expenditure does not equal income
in this model. At the world level, consumption expenditure equals world income minus
world spending on new capital. World income is the wage bill plus operating profits, i.e.
Lw+bEw. 14 Spending on capital construction equals the value of resources employed by I-
               F    F




sectors, which we denote as LIw. 15 Given (17) , the amount of labour necessary to
                                        F    F               X     X




maintain the world capital stock equals δaIKw. Using this and the definition Ew= Lw+bEw-
LIw:
                                                          Lw − δa I K w                   (24)
                                                      E =
                                                       w

                                                             1− b
where Kw is the worldwide capital stock (to be determined below).
To finish our characterisation of sEi, we calculate expenditure of typical nation-i. The
nation’s income comprises its labour income, sLiLw, (where sLi is its share of world
labour), its capital income is bsniDiEw. From this, we subtract its share of world
depreciation, namely sniδKw. Thus Ei=sLiLw+bsniDiEw-sniδaIKw. Taking the ratio of this to
our expression for world expenditure:



14
  With mill pricing, operating profit is 1/σ times sales and μEw is world-wide sales.
15
  Spending on capital accumulation equals the I-sector total cost since, by perfect
competition, its revenue always equals its total costs.
28



                                          s Li Lw − s ni δa I K w
                            s E = (1 − b)                         + bs ni Do                                                (25)
                                               Lw − δa I K w

6.1.3. Long Run Equilibrium
        25B




In the long run, national capital stocks are endogenous and rise or fall until the cost of
constructing/replacing a new unit of capital just equals the present value of the income
stream it would generate. Finding the long-run equilibrium capital stocks requires
evaluation of the costs and benefits of having an extra unit of capital.
In any interior long-run equilibrium (i.e. where 0<sni<1 for all i), all nations must be
actively constructing enough capital to replace depreciation and the value of extra capital
created must equal its construction cost F. To summarise:
                               vi = F ;           ∀i       s.t .   0 < s ni ≤ 1                                             (26)

where v denotes the present value of a unit of capital, and F=aI is the construction cost for
a unit of capital.
To finish our characterisation of the long run we need to find the v’s. This is where
intertemporal features enter the model. The classic way of expressing optimal
intertemporal consumption behaviour with respect to (19) is the so-called Euler equation:
                                                                        X   X




                                 E& / E = r − ρ − δ
This can be easily derived using the Hamiltonian approach to maximising (19) , noting               X           X




that each unit of capital has a probability of being ‘alive’ at time t equal to e-δt. The only
aspect of this intertemporal optimisation affects the calculations is the fact that in the
long-run equilibrium, E stops evolving, so r=ρ+δ. Using this to calculate the present
value of a unit of capital in nation-i:
                                                  πi                                                                        (27)
                                      vi =            ;            ∀i
                                                 ρ +δ

6.1.4. Characterising the Long Run Equilibria
        26B




We turn next to finding Kw. From (26) and (27) , π’s are equalised, so each unit of capital
                                      X      X         X       X




must earn the world average reward, namely bEw divided by Kw. From (26) and (17) ,          X           X           X       X




(bEw/Kw) must equal aI(ρ+δ), so Kw=bEw/[(ρ+δ)aI]. Solving this together with (24) , the                         X       X




long-run equilibrium values of Ew and Kw are:
                              βLw              Lw                                     bρ
                      K =
                        w
                                        , E =
                                           w
                                                   ;                            β≡                                          (28)
                          (1 − β ) ρa I       1− β                                   ρ +δ
where β is a group of parameters that frequently appears. Using these, in (25) , we have:       X           X




                                    s Ei   =       β s ni + (1 − β ) s Li                                                   (29)

so a nation’s share of world expenditure is its weighted average of its share of Lw and Kw.
29




The equalisation of the π’s implied by (26) and (27) , pins down the equilibrium location
                                                        X   X    X       X




of industry among all nations, i.e. the sni’s. From (23) , the sni’s, enter in the denominator
                                                                     X       X




of in the B’s, so the resulting system of equation is non-linear and we cannot find general
solutions.
One special case that does allow solution is that of symmetric MFN tariffs. In this case
we can solve (26) to find that the equilibrium distribution of industry is: 16
                   X     X                                                                F




                                                     1 ⎛      φR ⎞         1                         (30)
                                      s ni       =    + ⎜⎜1 +    ⎟⎟( s Ei − ), ∀i
                                                     R ⎝ 1−φ ⎠             R
Assuming the distribution of expenditure is sufficiently even to ensure all the sni’s are
positive. This tells that a nation’s share of industry deviates from the symmetric solution
1/R according to the region’s own size bias, i.e. the difference between its expenditure
share and the even share 1/R.

6.2.       Explicit solutions for the R=3 case
         19B




The example in the text relied on the case of R=3 when the nations were symmetric in
their labour endowments, and initially symmetric in the MFN tariffs.
The text referred the reader to the Appendix on a number of points. The first was the
assertion that allowing entry in nations 2 and 3 did not qualitatively change the impact on
π1 in the case of an FTA between 2 and 3. When 2 and 3 form an FTA, the operating
profit of a typical firm in either nation is:
               Ew                                                                                   (31)
     π2 = b       (φB1 + B2 + B3 ) , Δ1 = s n1 + 2φs n 2 , Δ 2 = φs n1 + 2s n 2
               nw
where by symmetry π3 is the same, and sn2=sn3. In the text, we normalised sn1=1/3 and so
we impose that here following the logic that firms under profit pressure exit only slowly.
Plugging all this into in (30) yields a quadratic equation in sn2. Solving the results is:
                                  X          X




                               3φ − 1 − φ 2 + 7φ 2 − 2φ 3 + φ 4 + 2φ + 1
                       sn2   =
                                                12φ
By inspection this exceeds 1/3 since 0≤φ≤1, thus as claimed in the text, the FTA between
2 and 3 leads to entry in those nations. This new entry alters the operating profit for
nation 1 firms. In this case, nation-1 operating profit is:
                                Ew     s E1                sE 2                                 1
                       π1 = b      (             + 2φ                ) , s E1 = s 2 E1 = s n1 =
                                n s n1 + 2φs n 2
                                 w
                                                      φs n1 + 2s n 2                            3

16
  The equality of π’s implies all the D’s from (23) must equal unity, and also that all the
B’s must be equal. Adding up all the 1=Di equations yields R=(1+ (R-1)φ)RB. Since all
the φs are the same, each Δ equals sni+φ(1-sni); using this in the B and solving yields the
result.
30



By inspection, we can see that a rise in sn2 from 1/3 will lower π1. More precisely,
plugging in the new equilibrium value of sn2 we have π1 equals:




This confirms the claim in the text that considering the full impact on π1 does not change
the analysis qualititatively.
The second point concerned the assertion that an FTA between nations 1 and 2 when
there was also an FTA between 2 and 3 would result in a π1 that was below its
equilibrium value. This is a simple calculation since we investigate what happens to
π1=π3 and π2, when all the n’s stay at 1/3. The operating profit for the ‘hub’ nation,
nation-2, is:
               Ew   2    1                   Ew 1+φ 1
       π2 =b      (    +   ) , π   = π   = b   (     + )
               nw 2 + φ 3                    nw 2 + φ 3
                                 1     3



By inspection, the first expression is more than bEw/nw and the second is less, since φ<1.
31




 APPENDIX 2: COUNTRIES IN THE SAMPLE
8B




                           Number of                      FTA          Pure FTA
              Country                    Fisrt year
                          observations                (1976‐ 2005)   (1976‐2005)
     Albania                  150          2002            3               3
     Algeria                  306          1999            12             12
     Argentina               1495          1976            0               0
     Armenia                  215          2000            0               0
     Australia               1914          1976            3               3
     Austria                 1476          1976            18             17
     Azerbaijan               237          1999            0               0
     Bahrain                  206          1993            3               3
     Bangladesh              1395          1976            1               0
     Belarus                  429          1999            0               0
     Belgium                  306          2000            3               2
     Belize                   360          1996            2               0
     Bolivia                  657          1990            0               0
     Brazil                  1684          1976            0               0
     Bulgaria                 544          1996            13              9
     Burkina Faso              29          1997            0               0
     Cambodia                 192          2001            1               1
     Canada                  1920          1976            5               4
     Chile                   1335          1976            22             22
     China                    569          1999            11              6
     Colombia                1192          1981            3               0
     Congo, Dem. Rep.         137          1976            0               0
     Costa Rica               793          1990            5               2
     Cote d'Ivoire           1272          1976            0               0
     Croatia                  351          1999            25              6
     Cyprus                  1374          1976            15             15
     Czech Republic           694          1994            9               8
     Denmark                 1348          1976            10              7
     Dominican Republic      1063          1976            7               4
     Ecuador                  548          1996            0               0
     Egypt, Arab Rep.        1326          1976            22             18
     El Salvador              624          1991            2               2
     Estonia                  365          1999            5               5
     Finland                 1461          1976            18             16
     France                  1366          1976            8               7
     Gabon                    399          1978            0               0
     Georgia                  270          1999            1               1
     Germany                 1367          1976            8               7
     Ghana                    955          1976            0               0
     Greece                  1772          1976            8               5
     Guatemala                740          1991            1               1
     Guinea                   381          1996            0               0
     Guyana                   118          1976            0               0
     Haiti                    124          1976            0               0
     Honduras                 582          1994            1               1
     Hungary                 1466          1976            26             24
     Iceland                 1045          1976            13             12
     India                   1750          1976            4               2
     Indonesia               1625          1976            3               1
     Iran, Islamic Rep.       403          1999            0               0
     Ireland                 1317          1976            10              7
     Israel                  1321          1976            19             19
     Italy                   1371          1976            8               7
     Jamaica                 1273          1976            4               0
     Japan                   2075          1976            2               2
     Jordan                   345          1999            11             11
     Kazakhstan               368          1999            0               0
32




 APPENDIX 2 (CONTINUATION)
9B




                             Number of                      FTA          Pure FTA
               Country                     First year
                            observations                (1976‐ 2005)   (1976‐2005)
     Kenya                     1385          1976             6              0
     Korea, Rep.               1769          1976             2              1
     Kuwait                     513          1976             0              0
     Kyrgyz Republic            240          1999             0              0
     Latvia                     273          1999             5              5
     Lithuania                  320          1999             5              5
     Luxembourg                 232          2000             3              2
     Macedonia, FYR             252          1999            22             22
     Madagascar                1016          1976             1              0
     Malawi                     579          1976             4              0
     Malaysia                  1758          1976             3              1
     Mali                       167          1997             0              0
     Mexico                     925          1986            19             19
     Moldova                    210          1999             2              2
     Morocco                    874          1987            12             12
     Netherlands               1363          1976             8              7
     New Zealand               1796          1976             3              2
     Nicaragua                  747          1976             1              1
     Norway                    1471          1976            15             15
     Pakistan                  1678          1976             4              0
     Panama                     516          1997             0              0
     Paraguay                   467          1994             0              0
     Peru                      1376          1976             0              0
     Philippines               1485          1979             1              1
     Poland                     858          1991            24             20
     Portugal                  1433          1976            18             17
     Romania                    947          1988            24             19
     Russian Federation         527          1999             0              0
     Singapore                 1691          1976            12             10
     Slovak Republic            621          1995             7              6
     Slovenia                   589          1994            13             11
     South Africa              1514          1976            14             12
     Spain                     1622          1976            27             22
     Sri Lanka                 1393          1976             2              0
     Sweden                    1480          1976            20             19
     Switzerland               1556          1976            15             15
     Syrian Arab Republic       310          1999             0              0
     Tanzania                   484          1996             1              0
     Thailand                  1495          1982             4              4
     Togo                       336          1990             0              0
     Trinidad and Tobago       1290          1976             3              0
     Tunisia                    772          1990            13             13
     Turkey                    1378          1976            21             19
     Turkmenistan                78          1999             1              1
     Uganda                     332          1995             0              0
     Ukraine                    395          1999             1              1
     United Arab Emirates       203          1994             3              3
     United Kingdom            1375          1976            10              7
     United States             2022          1976             6              6
     Uruguay                   1019          1976             0              0
     Uzbekistan                 165          2000             0              0
     Venezuela, RB              695          1990             1              0
     Vietnam                    514          1999             0              0
     Yemen, Rep.                272          1999             0              0
     Zambia                     440          1985             1              0
     Zimbabwe                   498          1980             2              0
33




  APPENDIX 3: DATA DESCRIPTION
10B




Distance         CEPII

Remoteness       Relative distance from the rest of the world, as defined by Baier and Bergstran (2004) :

                 We use data from the World Bank's World Development Indicators (WDI). For each
GDP              country we use the oldest available data, starting in 1960 for old countries and the year of
                 creation for new countries (in some exceptions the data just start later).
capital/labour   Taken from Baier, S.L., Dwyer, G., Tamura, R., 2000. We use the oldest data available for
ratio            each country.
Common
                 Dummy for Common Language, CEPII.
language
Common
                 Dummy for Common Colonizer after 1945, CEPII.
colonizer
Colony           Dummy for pairs ever in Colonial Relationship, CEPII.
                 We use the newly built database described in Hufbauer and Schott (2009) and available at
All FTA          the World Trade Institute (WTI). The data is based on historical notifications of the date
                 the agreements entered into force and their contemporary participants.
                 UN Comtrade database (using the World Integrated Trade Solution of the World Bank), at
Export Shares    the 1-digit Standard International Trade Classification (SITC) level. Whenever a country
                 did not report data on exports, we use the import image from the partner.

GDP, GDP
                 The data is taken from the World Bank's World Development Indicators (WDI).
growth, GDP
per capita
                 Captures this regime authority spectrum on a 21-point scale ranging from -10 (hereditary
                 monarchy) to +10 (consolidated democracy). The data comes from the Polity IV project,
Democracy
                 which publicly available data can be found at
                 http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm
                 H                                                 H




Trade with
                 UN Comtrade database (using the World Integrated Trade Solution of the World Bank), at
county partner
                 the 1-digit Standard International Trade Classification (SITC) level.
over GDP
                A dummy taken value one for any positive record in the variable “formal alliances” in
Military        Correlates of War database: http://www.correlatesofwar.org Since the variable is just
                                              H                               H




Alliance        available up to 2000, we assumed that the values of the last year were the same for the
                missing period 2001-2004.
Transition from We updated the variable in Mansfield and Reinhardt (2003) database, incorporating
communism       former Soviet republics and other countries not included in their sample.
