                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DO STICKY PRICES INCREASE REAL EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY AT
                            THE SECTOR LEVEL?

                                          Mario J. Crucini
                                         Mototsugu Shintani
                                         Takayuki Tsuruga

                                        Working Paper 16081
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16081


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




We thank Yasushi Iwamoto and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Clemson
University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Otaru University of Commerce for their helpful discussion
and comments. We are grateful to John Taylor for his encouragement at the early stage of the project.
We also thank Virgiliu Midrigan for providing the data set used in the analysis. Mario J. Crucini and
Mototsugu Shintani gratefully acknowledge the financial support of National Science Foundation (SES-
0524868). Takayuki Tsuruga gratefully acknowledges the financial support of Grant-in-aid for Scientific
Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Mario J. Crucini, Mototsugu Shintani, and Takayuki Tsuruga. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Sticky Prices Increase Real Exchange Rate Volatility at the Sector Level?
Mario J. Crucini, Mototsugu Shintani, and Takayuki Tsuruga
NBER Working Paper No. 16081
June 2010
JEL No. F0,F33,F4,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

We introduce the real exchange rate volatility curve as a useful device to understand the role of price
stickiness in accounting for deviations from the Law of One Price at the sector level. In the presence
of both nominal and real shocks, the theory predicts that the real exchange rate volatility curve is a
U-shaped function of the degree of price stickiness. Using sector-level European real exchange rate
data and frequency of price changes, we estimate the volatility curve. The results are consistent with
the predominance of real effects over nominal effects. Nonparametric analysis suggests the curve is
convex and negatively sloped over the majority of its range. Good-by-good variance decompositions
show that the relative contribution of nominal shocks is smaller at the sector level than what previous
studies have found at the aggregate level. We conjecture that this is due to significant averaging out
of good-specific real microeconomic shocks in the process of aggregation.


Mario J. Crucini                                   Takayuki Tsuruga
Department of Economics                            Graduate School of Economics
Vanderbilt University                              Kyoto University
Box 1819 Station B                                 Yoshida Honmachi Sakyo-ku
Nashville, TN 37235-1819                           Kyoto 606-8501
and NBER                                           JAPAN
mario.j.crucini@vanderbilt.edu                     ttsuruga@kansai-u.ac.jp

Mototsugu Shintani
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
mototsugu.shintani@vanderbilt.edu
1. Introduction

   Among international macroeconomists, it is widely believed that the variability of real
exchange rates is increasing in the degree of local currency price rigidity. The reasoning is
found in passages describing exchange rate overshooting in prominent textbooks:


      “Exchange rate overshooting results from the rapid response of exchange rates to
      monetary policy and the sluggish adjustment of prices. A monetary expansion

      will lead to an immediate depreciation but only a gradual increase in prices.
      Exchange rate overshooting implies that real exchange rates are highly volatile.”

      Dornbusch, Fischer, and Startz (2004, p. 534)


   The basic idea is that the nominal exchange rate is an asset price (since currencies are

actively traded in the foreign exchange market) and like all asset prices, its value adjusts

instantaneously in response to unexpected changes in exogenous variables in current and

future periods. In contrast, many goods and services have prices which economists have

documented to be …xed in local currency for extended periods of time. By de…nition, this

means nominal and real exchange rates will be highly correlated with each other over time

and will have a comparable level of time series variability, at least at the highest frequencies.

The expectation, then, is a positive correlation between the volatility of real exchange rates

and the degree of price stickiness if nominal shocks dominate the landscape, as they do in
much theorizing on the topic.

   The New Open Economy Macroeconomics (NOEM) framework provides fully articulated
models of the channels through which monetary shocks drive transitory ‡uctuations in real
exchange rates. Quantitative investigations of this framework have been undertaken, by

Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002) who focus on the aggregate real exchange rate in a
one-sector model and by Kehoe and Midrigan (2007) who focus on Law-of-One-Price (LOP)
deviations in a multisector model.



                                               2
   The empirical evidence emanating from the VAR literature is mixed on the question of

the relative contribution of real and nominal shocks to real exchange rate variability. Using
a structural VAR model, Clarida and Galí (1994, Table 3) …nd that the relative contribution
of nominal shocks to the 1-period-ahead forecast error variance of the quarterly bilateral

U.S. real exchange rate is 47 percent for the German mark, 36 percent for the Japanese yen,
but a mere 2 percent for British pound and less than 1 percent for the Canadian dollar. At
much longer horizons –31 to 36 months –Eichenbaum and Evans (1995, Table 1a) …nd the

contributions of money shocks to the forecast error variance of real exchange rates are 42.9,
38.1, 37.5, 26.2 and 23.0 percent, for Germany, Italy, France, the UK and Japan, respectively

(see also Rogers, 1999).

   An early advocate for the role of real shocks in the equilibrium determination of real

exchange rates is Stockman (1980). Stockman casts his model in a ‡exible price setting, so

that nominal shocks make no contribution to real exchange rate volatility. Crucini, Shintani,

and Tsuruga (2010), on the other hand, neutralize the e¤ect of nominal shocks by focusing

on intranational trade and investigate the role of real shocks on good-level real exchange

rate volatility across cities in the presence of local currency price rigidity. Unlike models

emphasizing the role of the nominal shocks, their model predicts a negative correlation

between price stickiness and real exchange rate variability because only real shocks a¤ect

real exchange rates across locations within a country.

   The current paper puts these two views of real exchange rate determination on the
same playing …eld by combining the model of Kehoe and Midrigan (2007) which emphasizes
money shocks and nominal exchange rates with the model of Crucini, Shintani, and Tsuruga

(2010) which emphasizes productivity shocks and trade costs. These models rely on the
time dependent pricing assumption of Calvo, but allow the frequencies of price changes
to vary across goods, as measured in the micro-data. Under the synthesized framework,

we theoretically explore the cross-sectional relationship between price stickiness and real
exchange rate volatility at the level of individual goods. We refer to this relationship as


                                             3
the real exchange rate volatility curve: the functional relationship between the forecast error

variance of the real exchange rate and the infrequency of price changes at the level of a good.
When real shocks are absent, the volatility curve is upward-sloping: an increasing function
of the price stickiness parameter and the good with the least ‡exible price should exhibit the

greatest amount of real exchange rate variability. When nominal shocks are turned o¤, the
volatility curve is downward-sloping: a decreasing function of the price stickiness parameter
and the good with the most ‡exible price has the greatest amount of real exchange rate

variability. When both real and nominal shocks are present, the real exchange rate volatility
curve becomes U-shaped and could result in a zero unconditional correlation between real

exchange rate volatility and the frequency of price adjustment.

   We estimate the volatility curve using sector-level real exchanges of Austria, Belgium,

France, and Spain vis à vis the US, constructed by Kehoe and Midrigan (2007). We …nd

that the shape of the estimated curve is consistent with the predominance of real shocks

over nominal shocks, in the sense that the curve is minimized at the level of price stickiness

which corresponds to a more than 4 month duration between price changes. Nonparametric

analysis suggests the convexity of the curve as well as a negative relationship between price

rigidity and real exchange rate volatility over the vast majority of empirical frequencies of

price change found in the cross-section of goods. The negative correlation together with the

theoretical prediction of our model suggests that sector-speci…c real shocks explain the bulk

of short-run volatility in real exchange rates. We further conduct variance decompositions
of sector-level real exchange rates to evaluate the relative contribution of nominal and real
shocks at various horizons. For almost all goods, the contribution of nominal shocks are

smaller than that of real shocks, and real shocks rise in dominance as the forecast horizon
lengthens.
   Our …ndings on the role of sector-speci…c real shocks are consistent with recent micro

evidence by Bergin, Glick and Wu (2009), but in stark contrast with the traditional view
that aggregate real exchange rate variability is attributable mostly to nominal shocks (Rogo¤,


                                              4
1996). To reconcile the microeconomic evidence with the macroeconomic evidence, it seems

necessary to allow for large idiosyncratic real shocks at the sector-level such that these
microeconomic sources of variation average out in the move to the CPI-based real exchange
rate.


2. The Model

The theory combines the key features of Kehoe and Midrigan (2007) and Crucini, Shintani
and Tsuruga (2010).1 Both of these models assume heterogeneous price stickiness across
goods, but the former relies on nominal exchange rate variations whereas the latter focuses

on the labor productivity variations in explaining the real exchange rate volatility at sector

level. In what follows, the core implications of the model are discussed focusing on the cross-

sectional volatility of the (log) real exchange rate for a bilateral pair of countries, de…ned

as:

                                           qit = st + pit    pit ;                                      (2.1)

where pit (pit ) denotes the (log) sectoral price index in the home (foreign) country and st is
the (log) nominal exchange rate. Throughout the paper, variables marked with an asterisk

denote foreign analogs of home variables.

      For ease of exposition, some simplifying assumptions are made on the sources of real
exchange rate variation. The …rst assumptions concern nominal shocks and exchange rates.

The nominal shocks in the model are the home and foreign money growth rate,                       t   and   t,

which are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). The semi-log household preferences
over consumption and leisure, combined with a local-currency cash-in-advance constraint,

leads to the equality of the money growth rate di¤erential and the nominal exchange rate
growth rate (i.e.,    t     t   =   st ).2 These assumptions are taken from Kehoe and Midrigan
      1
     The full model is presented in the technical appendix of this paper, which is available from the authors
upon request.
   2
     To be speci…c, semi-log period utility is given by ln Ct Lt , where Ct , Lt and (> 0), denote aggregate
consumption, hours worked, and marginal disutility of labor supply, respectively.




                                                     5
(2007) and are convenient since the nominal exchange rate st becomes a random walk,
consistent with the seminal paper of Meese and Rogo¤ (1983).

      The second set of assumptions concern real shocks and trade costs. Monopolistically
competitive …rms set prices of their goods, which are produced using a technology that

is linear in labor and subject to productivity shocks. Due to our microeconomic focus,
the productivity shock for each good consists of three components: a global component, a
nation-speci…c component and a good-speci…c component. To be precise, the productivity

(in logs) for production of good i at time t, at home ait , and in the foreign country, ait , are
given by:

                                            ait = zt +       t   + "it ;            ait = zt +    t   + "it ;                                     (2.2)

respectively. The three components, then, are: (i) zt , a common global stochastic trend,
                                                                  2                               2                                  2
following zt = zt               1   + "zt , "zt   i.i.d.(0;       z ),   (ii)   t     i.i.d.(0;       ) and         t   i.i.d.(0;         ), capture
                                                                                                                                             2
country-speci…c productivity shocks common to all goods, and (iii) "it                                                         i.i.d.(0;     ")    and

"it       i.i.d.(0;    "
                           2
                               ) are idiosyncratic shocks to the production of each good in each country.3
These labor productivity shocks are the real shocks in the model. Finally, …rms in each

country are required to pay an iceberg transportation cost                                            to send good across the border.

This transportation cost leads to home bias in consumption because the home variety of

each good is cheaper than the imported variety.

      The focal equation of the model is the k-period-ahead forecast error variance of the
sector-level real exchange rate:

                                                 2                                         2                    2
                V art k (qit ) =            ik [ i V   ar(   t       t)    + (1         i ) (1        i   )2        V ar(ait     ait )]           (2.3)

                       Pk              2(j 1)
where         ik   =            j=1    i      ,   i    is the good-speci…c degree of price stickiness in the sense

of Calvo (1983) and the parameter,                                  = 1             (1 + )1       = 1 + (1 + )1                 , captures the

asymmetric transmission of productivity to the relative price of good i, across countries due
      3
     A common stochastic trend zt among two countries can be speci…c to the sector i, zit = zit 1 + "izt ,
without changing the substance of our results. Also, for simplicity, we assume that 2" and " 2 are common
across i. In the empirical part of the paper, the possiblity of heterogenous variances of real shocks across
sectors is considered.

                                                                            6
to the home bias in expenditure on home and foreign varieties of good i. The veracity of this

asymmetry depends positively on the trade cost, , and the elasticity of substitution among
di¤erentiated products, .
    Equation (2.3) attributes the forecast error variance of the sectoral real exchange rate to

the variance of the money growth di¤erential,                 t   t   (the nominal shocks) and the variance
of the cross-country productivity di¤erential, ait                ait (the real shocks).4 The …rst term of
Equation (2.3) will be referred to as the nominal e¤ect and the second term as the real

e¤ect, alluding to the e¤ects of nominal and real shocks on the volatility of the sectoral real
exchange rate.

    Under time dependent pricing, monopolistically competitive …rms cannot change prices

with probability         i   which is assumed to be common across countries but di¤ers across goods.5

That is, some sectors are allowed to change their prices more frequently than others. Viewed

as a function of the sector-speci…c degree of price stickiness,                    i   2 [0; 1], equation (2.3) is
                                                                         2
called: the real exchange rate volatility curve. Note that               i   ik   is increasing in   i,   while (1
    2
 i ) (1    i   )2   ik   is decreasing in   i.   Fixing the forecast horizon k, an increase in            i   (‘stickier

prices’) increases the contribution of the nominal e¤ect and decreases the contribution of the

real e¤ect to the total forecast error variance of the sectoral real exchange rate.

    To gain some intuition for how price stickiness ampli…es the impact of nominal shocks or

mitigates the impact of real shocks on the real exchange rate volatility represented by (2.3),

recall the de…nition of the real exchange rate given in equation (2.1). To see the impact of
nominal shocks in (2.1), consider a positive money growth rate shock in the home country,
holding …xed foreign money growth. The model predicts an immediate depreciation of the

nominal exchange rate, that is, an increase in st in (2.1). The responses of local currency
   4
      Note that we allow shocks to the money supply and labor productivity to have permanent e¤ects on the
levels of prices and outputs which appear to …t the data. However, the relative price (real exchange rate) is
stationary as a consequence of equilibrium adjustment of the nominal exchange rate with respect to nominal
shocks and as a consequence of our cointegration restriction on the productivity across countries.
    5
      Much of the existing empirical work on the topic has emphasized the dominance of good-dependent fre-
quencies over location-dependent frequencies. However, when in‡ation rates and/or exchange rate properties
di¤er substantially across bilateral pairs, this may change.



                                                          7
prices, though, depend on the good-speci…c frequencies of price adjustment. For goods with

prices that change every period, their local currency price adjustment completely o¤sets the
impact of the nominal exchange rate depreciation and preserves the original LOP deviation.
At the other end of the continuum, goods with prices that are extremely sticky will have real

exchange rates that basically follow the path of the nominal exchange rate with negligible
pass-through of the nominal shock to local currency prices. Simply put: the nominal e¤ect
on real exchange rate variability is ampli…ed by slow local currency price adjustment.

   Turning to real shocks, consider a positive shock in home productivity in sector i: Since
this productivity shock is isolated to a single sector, it is assumed to have no equilibrium

consequences for the nominal exchange rate, st in (2.1). What it does is reduce both home and

foreign price indexes of sector i, because …rms in the home country sell the goods produced

in this sector in both countries. However, due to home bias generated by trade costs, the

home sectoral price index will decrease more than the foreign sectoral price index which

increases the price index di¤erential pit    pit in (2.1). Because this economic channel requires

prices to actually change and thereby induce asymmetric price changes across locations, it is

more quantitatively important when prices are relatively ‡exible. Conversely, the real e¤ect

is mitigated by slow local currency price adjustment. This discussion should make clear that

the conventional wisdom of a positive relationship between real exchange rate volatility and

price stickiness is predicated on the assumption that the nominal e¤ect dominates the real

e¤ect. The next section provides some numerical examples of how di¤erent intensities of real
and nominal shocks alter the shape of the real exchange rate volatility curve.


3. Numerical Examples

This section uses numerical examples to show how the shape of the real exchange rate

volatility curve, as function of   i   2 [0; 1], depends upon the relative volatility of real and
nominal shocks and a few key structural parameters.

   We focus on the one-period-ahead forecast error variance by setting k = 1 in equation


                                                 8
(2.3),
                                   2                                       2                 2
               V art 1 (qit ) =    iV   ar(    t         t)   + (1      i ) (1     i    )2       V ar(ait        ait ):               (3.1)

and make note of the fact that the k period ahead forecast is proportional to the one-period
ahead forecast: V art k (qit ) =         ik    V art 1 (qit ) for any k.

   The structural parameters are calibrated as follows: i) the data is monthly, so the discount
factor is set to      = 0:961=12 = 0:9966; ii) trade costs, broadly de…ned at the retail level, are
in the neighborhood of             = 0:5; and iii) the elasticity of substitution is set at                                           = 10.
                                                                                                                              2
The multiplier on the productivity di¤erential, re‡ecting home bias, then, is                                                     = 0:9.
While trade costs and elasticities of substitution are expected to di¤er across goods, the

salient features of the volatility curve are not very sensitive to these parameters, leaving

the interesting dimension as the interaction of the frequency of price adjustment                                             i   and the

variances of nominal and real shocks.

   For purposes of discussion, the expression is simpli…ed by noting that since the discount

factor and the trade-bias factor are close to 1, the variance decomposition of the real exchange

rate is well approximated by:

                                              2                                    4
                      V art 1 (qit ) =        iV   ar(    t      t)   + (1       i) V   ar(ait         ait ) .                        (3.2)

Simply put, the variance of the sectoral real exchange rate is a weighted average of nominal

and real shocks. The share of the nominal shock (the money growth di¤erential) in real

exchange rate variability rises from zero toward 1 as prices become less ‡exible (                                                i   ! 1)

at a rate equal to the square of the infrequency of price changes. In contrast, the share of

the contribution of the real shock (the productivity di¤erential) toward real exchange rate
variability rises from zero toward 1 as prices become more ‡exible (                               i   ! 0) at a rate equal to

4th power of the frequency of price changes (1                          i ).   The theory conveniently encompasses

the varied role of nominal and real shocks in the cross-section of goods and the feature that
these two opposing forces give rise to a real exchange rate volatility curve that is U-shaped

over the support       i   2 [0; 1].6
   6
       To prove this, evaluate the …rst derivative of the total variance with respect to                         i   at   i   = 0 and 1.

                                                                 9
      Turning to numerical examples, Figure 1 uses equation (3.1) to construct conditional

variances as a function of           i   separately for three distinct stochastic environments (each
with the Std(     t      t)   normalized to 1 percent): (a) Std(ait             ait )=Std(   t   t)   = 5; (b)
Std(ait     ait )=Std(   t      t)   = 1; and (c) Std(ait      ait )=Std(   t       t)   = 1=5. Each panel

shows the variance due to the real e¤ect (in blue) and variance due to the nominal e¤ect
(in red). When the distribution of goods across frequencies of price change is uniform on
the interval [0; 1], these areas fully summarize the role of real and nominal shocks across the

entire cross-section of goods.
      The extent to which the role of real shocks is more quickly mitigated by price rigidity than

is the role of nominal shocks by price ‡exibility is clearly evident in the middle panel where

the two shocks have equal variance. The critical good for which real and nominal shocks

contribute equally to real exchange rate variability has a frequency of price change,                     i,   of

about 0.4 (rather than 0.5, the midpoint of the unit interval), indicating more price ‡exibility

is needed to handicap the advantage given to nominal shocks by the theory. However, as

evident in panels (a)-(c), the overall size of each area is sensitive to the relative variance of

real and nominal shocks.

      The asymmetries across goods are, of course, greatest at the extremes of price ‡exibility

and in‡exibility. Consider …xing a particular good, indexed by its frequency of price change,

 i.   The height of the volatility curve is the model’s prediction for the total one-step ahead

forecast error variance of the real exchange rate for that good. The blue and red segments
of the vertical line drawn from that point in the              distribution up to the volatility curve
gives the partition of the variance into the contributions of real and nominal shocks. At the

extremes, real exchange rate ‡uctuations of goods with fully ‡exible price are driven solely
by real shocks while goods with completely rigid prices are driven solely by nominal shocks.
When evaluated at i = 0, the …rst derivative of the variance due to the nominal e¤ect is zero but that
due to the real e¤ect is negative and …nite, which implies that the …rst derivative of the total variance with
respect to i is strictly negative when i = 0. Analogously, we can also show that the total variance has
a strictly positive slope at i = 1. Because total variance is continuous in i , there exists i 2 (0; 1) that
minimizes total variance.



                                                      10
Perhaps the closest real-world counterparts of such goods are crude petroleum trading on

the centralized spot market and postage stamps.
     Panel (a) calibrates the model such that only real shocks are of consequence and the
prediction of the model is that the volatility curve is downward sloping over almost its entire

range. Only as completely rigid local currency prices are approached at         i   = 1 do we see the
curve begin to slope upward, providing the …rst hint of a nominal e¤ect (i.e., the red area
becomes visible). The good with the lowest real exchange rate variance in this calibration –

the point at which the sign of the slope changes –is   i   = 0:75. This corresponds to an average
duration between price changes of 4 months. The average contribution of real and nominal

shocks to the variance of sectoral real exchange rate may be evaluated by integrating the real

exchange rate volatility curve over the entire range of      i.   The blue area, which corresponds

to real e¤ects, accounts for 93% of the total area, the red area (nominal e¤ects) contributes

a mere 7%.

     Panel (c) calibrates the model such that only nominal shocks are of consequence and

the prediction of the model is that the volatility curve is upward sloping over almost its

entire range.      Only as we approach goods with completely ‡exible prices do we see the

curve begin to slope downward, providing evidence of real e¤ects (i.e., the blue area becomes

visible). The point which minimizes variance, and therefore the point at which the sign of

the slope changes is virtually indistinguishable from complete price ‡exibility,           i   = 0:06.

This corresponds to an average duration between price changes of 1 month. The red area,
the nominal e¤ect, accounts for about 98% of the total area, the blue area (real e¤ect), a
trivial 2%.

     The middle panel (b), with equal variances of real and nominal shocks, displays an
obvious U-shape. The blue area is comparable in size to the red area, with the real e¤ect
accounting for 35% of the variation and nominal e¤ects accounting for the remaining 65%

(these are averages across goods). The minimum point on the exchange rate volatility curve
is   i   = 0:40. This corresponds to an average duration between price changes of 1.7 months.


                                               11
     Consider, now, what we would expect to …nd in terms of the correlation of price stick-

iness, as measured by the Calvo parameter,                    i,   and the volatility of the sector-level real
exchange rate. Computing the correlation of frequency of price changes and real exchange
rate variability will yield a negative correlation in panel (a) because real shocks dominate;

a positive correlation in panel (c), because nominal shocks dominate; and a near zero corre-
lation in panel (b) due to the U-shape of the volatility curve. This is a textbook example
of a situation in which correlation, a linear measure of dependence, fails to reveal the true

underlying economic structure. The model gives a compelling rationale for investigating
a non-linear relationship between real exchange rate variability and the frequency of price

adjustment.

     In practice the sign of the correlation will depend on the distribution of goods in the

sample (in terms of their frequencies of price adjustment) as well as the relative importance

of real and nominal shocks. Consider a researcher with a limited sample of goods with

prices which happen to be very sticky in local currency units. Even in the case of panel (b),

this researcher will …nd positive correlation rather than a zero correlation, and thus will be

tempted to conclude that nominal shocks predominate. For the goods in his sample, this is

true, but it need not be true in general, over the entire distribution of                i   across goods in the

economy.

     Note that the blue and red areas in Figure 1 represent the cross-sectional average of the

sector-level variance decomposition.7 However, individual goods may have vastly di¤erent
                                                                                         2                   2
variance decompositions. This arises from the fact that the weights                      i   and (1       i ) (1

            2
 i   )2         appearing in (3.1) are very sensitive to the sector-speci…c value of          i.   Recall that the

blue and red areas in panel (b) account for 35% and 65% (respectively) of the variance of real
exchange rates over the entire unit interval. Consider two goods, one with                     1   = 0:25 and the
other with          2   = 0:56. These two real exchange rates turn out to have the same total forecast

error variance as panel (b). However, due to the manner in which shocks are transmitted to
     7
         It corresponds to the average when the degree of price stickiness is uniformly distributed across goods.



                                                         12
relative prices, the sources of the variance di¤ers dramatically across the them: the relative

contribution of nominal shocks is only 18% for the …rst good but 90% for the second good.
   To summarize our numerical analysis, there are two striking empirical implications of
our model when both real and nominal shocks are allowed to impinge on the economy.

First, it is possible that the data suggest a negative correlation between total real exchange
rate volatility and degree of prices stickiness, contrary to the conventional wisdom. As
panels (a) and (b) in Figure 1 suggest, negative correlations can occur when the variance of

productivity di¤erentials dominate the economic environment for most goods in the cross-
section. Second, since the real exchange rate volatility curve is a U-shaped curve, running

a simple linear regression of the sectoral real exchange rate variance on    i   may be a poor

method for uncovering the underlying structure. It is useful to consider a ‡exible functional

form in the regression and …nd the degree of price stickiness which minimizes the volatility

curve.


4. Empirical Analysis

The empirical analysis focuses on (i) examining the relationship between total variance and

the degree of price stickiness; (ii) …nding the degree of price stickiness which minimizes the

volatility curve; and (iii) assessing the relative importance of the real and nominal e¤ects at

the sectoral level. The data used here was originally obtained by Kehoe and Midrigan (2007)
and consist of highly disaggregated sectoral real exchange rates for four European countries

(Austria, Belgium, France, and Spain) relative to the U.S.. Essentially this involves matching

monthly local currency micro-price data from Eurostat and the Bureau of Labor Statistics
and converting to a common-currency using spot nominal exchange rates. The sample period

is monthly from January 1996 until December 2006. The number of sectors is 66. Kehoe

and Midrigan (2007) take the cross-country average monthly infrequencies of price changes
within each sector. The country-speci…c frequencies for the U.S. are from Bils and Klenow

(2004) and those for each of the European countries are taken from the individual country


                                              13
studies by: Baumgartner, Glatzer, Rumler, and Stiglbauer (2005) for Austria; Aucremanne

and Dhyne (2004) for Belgium; Baudry, Le Bihan, Sevestre, and Tarrieu (2007) for France;
Alvarez and Hernando (2004) for Spain. The details of the data construction are found in
the appendix of Kehoe and Midrigan (2007).

      While the Euro was o¢ cially introduced part-way through our sample, even before this
the nominal exchange rate of these European countries were quite stable against each other.
This is evident in the standard deviations of the nominal exchange rate growth of the U.S.

dollar against Austrian Schillings, Belgian Francs, French Francs, and Spanish Pesetas, which
are 2.36, 2.37, 2.35, and 2.36 percent, respectively. The similarity of nominal exchange rate

volatility, e¤ectively the nominal shocks of the theory, rationalize a pooled regression of the

four country-pairs against the dollar as the benchmark in the analysis below. However, the

productivity di¤erentials may di¤er across bilateral pairs, so we estimate the relationship for

each country separately as a robustness check.

4.1. Estimating the real exchange rate volatility curve

Let Vij be the one-period-ahead forecast error variance of the real exchange rate for good

i for country j, vis à vis the United States. The technical appendix of the paper proves

that qijt follows an AR(1) process with an AR coe¢ cient               ij   under a set of maintained

assumptions. E¤ectively, this means Vij is equal to the sample variance of qijt                   ij qijt 1

using the observed infrequency of price changes,          ij .   When either    ij   or qijt is missing or
when Vij can be computed from only a short time sample, we exclude such goods from the
sample.8

      As a preliminary analysis, the …rst set of regression results are simple linear regressions of
Vij on    ij   using (i) the pooled samples of all four country-pairs; and (ii) country-by-country
samples. The results are reported in Table 1. In all cases, the sign of the coe¢ cient on

 ij   is signi…cantly negative based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors reported
      8
    After excluding the samples, the number of sectors amounts to 57 for Austria, 46 for Belgium, 48 for
France, and 31 for Spain.



                                                  14
below the point estimates. Despite its simplicity, this speci…cation, explains 70 percent of the

cross-sectional variation in the volatility of real exchange rates using the pooled regression.9
The estimated slope coe¢ cients are similar across the four nation-speci…c regressions and
the cross-country pooled regression. Regression …t is especially good for Austria and France.

    Table 1 also reports the minimum and maximum values of price stickiness in our data
(denoted     min   and   max ).   The linear regression estimates suggest that the real exchange
rate volatility curve is downward sloping within the range of the observed                       ij .   According

to the theory, the negative correlation is consistent with the dominance of productivity
di¤erentials over money growth rate di¤erentials, consistent with the stylized numerical

example presented in panel (a) of Figure 1.

    Recall, however, that the theory predicts a non-linear relationship between the frequency

of price adjustment and real exchange rate variability when both nominal and real shocks

are present.10 To more adequately address this implication of the theory, the volatility curve

is augmented with a quadratic term and a quartic term following the structural model:

                                        2                        2
                            Vij = b1j   ij   + b2j (1        ij ) (1   ij   )2 + uij ;                          (4.1)

where the b’s are regression coe¢ cients and uij is the regression error term for good i for

country j. The second regressor is constructed by setting                    = 0:961=12 . According to (3.1),

regression coe¢ cient b1j should capture the nominal e¤ects, due to V ar(                    t          jt ),   where

the money growth rate has been replaced by the variance of the bilateral nominal exchange
rate to anticipate the empirical implementation that follows. The regression coe¢ cient,
                                      2
b2j , captures the real e¤ects        jV   ar(ait       aijt ), with the restriction that the variance of
productivity di¤erentials are common across i. Note that since the empirical work involves
more than one bilateral pair (as assumed in the theory), the trade costs, demand elasticities
   9
      For robustness, we also run the pooled regression with the country dummies for both intercept and slope
coe¢ cient to control for di¤erences in trade costs paid to carry goods from a country to another country.
The results are essentially unchanged.
   10
      Using Ramsey’s (1969) RESET test, the null hypothesis of linearity is rejected at the one percent
signi…cance level for the pooled case, as well as for the Austrian and French cases. Weaker evidence of
nonlinearity is obtained for Belgian and Spanish cases possibly because the power of the test is lower in
smaller samples.

                                                        15
and productivity shocks are allowed to vary for across bilateral pairs for each good. For

example, productivity variation may be higher across Spain and the United States (the
numeraire) than between France and the United States. With this nonlinear extension, it
is also possible to locate the degree of price stickiness which minimizes the volatility curve

using the estimates of b1j and b2j .
   Table 2 presents the estimation results of regression model (4.1). In all cases, the esti-
mated coe¢ cients have positive signs which is consistent with the theory, all are statistically

signi…cant. The quartic regression is comparable to the linear regression in terms of the
goodness of …t.11 The role of nominal shocks compared to real shocks, as implied by the

estimates b1j and b2j , indicates a much larger role for real shocks. While the regression does
                                                              2
not separately identify the role of home bias                 j   and productivity shocks V ar(ait   aijt ),

b2j identi…es their combined in‡uence and serves as a lower bound on V ar(ait aijt ) given
       2
                                                                         p
0      j   1 for j     0 and j    1. The same argument establishes that b2j =b1j can be

used as a lower bound for Std(ait         aijt )=Std(     t        jt ).

   Using the coe¢ cient estimates reported in Table 2 the ratios of the standard deviation

of real to nominal shocks are inferred to be: 5.28, 6.17, 4.42, 5.30 and 9.64, for the pooled

case and the Austrian, Belgian, French and Spanish nation-speci…c cases, respectively. Thus,

the quartic regression result is very comparable to the numerical example of case (a) where

Std(ait ait )=Std(    t    t)   = 5. This is further con…rmed in the left panel of Figure 2 showing

the …tted curve of the pooled quartic regression (the solid line) from Table 2, along with

that of the pooled linear regression (the dashed line) from Table 1. The …tted curve of the
quartic regression resembles panel (a) of Figure 1 in terms of the shape of the curve, again

suggesting the importance of real e¤ects.

   The last two columns of Table 2 compare the estimated degree of price stickiness which
minimizes the forecast error variance in each regression. For the pooled case, the variance

of the real exchange rate is minimized at        i   = 0:76 which is remarkably close to the value of
  11
    The inclusions of country dummies into the pooled regression again did not a¤ect the signs and magni-
tudes of the estimated coe¢ cients.


                                                     16
0.75 from our numerical example with dominant real shocks. This frequency of price change

implies that the U-shaped real exchange rate volatility curve is minimized when the duration
between price changes is 4.2 months.
   Note that the parametric regression (4.1) imposes a strict theoretical shape restriction on

the real exchange rate volatility curve. As a robustness check, the functional form restriction
is replaced with a general nonparametric regression,

                                                   Vij = mj (    ij )   + uij

where mj ( ) is an unknown conditional mean function for country j. The right panel of Figure

2 shows the estimated curve using the nonparametric local linear regression estimator with

pooled data.12 The shape of the …tted curve shown as the solid line is very di¤erent from the

linear regression …t shown as the dashed line. This suggests the plausibility of a nonlinear

structure in the real exchange volatility curve.

   Turning to a comparison of the quartic regression (4.1) and the non-parametric regression,

both similarities and di¤erences are evident. Both estimates imply convexity in the real

exchange rate volatility curve. When the …rst derivative of the m function is evaluated

nonparametrically, it tends to be increasing in                    ij ,   which is consistent with the theoretical

prediction. The slope of the curve is negative over the empirical range of                      ij   and it becomes

‡atter as          ij    increases. The most notable di¤erence between the quartic regression and

nonparametric regression is the location of the bottom of the curve. The value of                          ij   which

minimizes the forecast error variance in the nonparametric regression is close to unity, a
value larger than the theoretical prediction based on the quartic regression.

   To formally investigate the shape of the estimated curve, a nonparametric test of monotonic-

ity developed by Ghosal, Sen and van der Vaart (2000) is employed –a test of the null hy-
pothesis that the m function is an increasing (or decreasing) function over a certain interval.

In the present context, the shape of the curve is examined over the observed range of the

data, [    min ;        max ].   The test is also applied to establish the monotonicity of the …rst derivative
  12
       In estimation, Gaussian kernel is used along with the bandwidth selected by the rule of thumb.

                                                            17
of the m function. The results are reported in Table 3.

       Regarding the m function itself, the hypothesis of an increasing function in                ij   is rejected,
and that of decreasing function is not, based on a conventional signi…cance level. For the …rst
derivative, the test fails to reject a monotonically increasing function while a monotonically

decreasing function is rejected. Simply put: the real exchange rate volatility curve is a
convex function consistent with the U-shape prediction of the theory.
       Establishing the in‡ection point on the real exchange rate volatility curve is tenuous, it is

likely to be associated with a           ij   larger than estimated from the quartic regression, though
the structurally restricted estimate of 0.76 (a duration of about 4 months between price

adjustments) is our preferred choice. Since the minimum point is largely a function of the

stochastic environment and not the underlying structural parameters, the minimum need

not be a crucial focus. However, it would be reassuring in terms of validating the generality

of the theory to explore other samples of goods, cross-sections of countries and historical

periods such that the nominal shocks play a larger role and the U-shape not be truncated

at the upper boundary of price rigidity.

4.2. Variance decomposition

Let us now turn to the relative importance of the real and nominal e¤ects at sector level

by directly using equation (2.3) at various horizons along with an empirical measure of the

variance of the nominal shock. According to the theory, the appropriate metric of                         t    jt   is
                                                                                   2
  sjt and the nominal contribution to real exchange rate variance is               ij     ijk V   ar( sjt ). The

k-period-ahead forecast error variance, V art k (qijt ), is obtained from the quasi-di¤erence
           k
qijt       ij qijt k ,   using observed sectoral infrequency of price changes,     ij .

       The relative contribution of nominal shocks to the total forecast error variance of the real

exchange is:
                                                            2
                                                            ij    ijk Var( sjt )
                                              (i; j; k) =
                                                                 V art k (qijt )
where the indices of the share function, (i; j; k), re‡ect the role of goods (infrequency of price


                                                             18
changes), country (due to the variability of the bilateral nominal exchange rate of country j

vis à vis the U.S. dollar) and horizon. As k ! 1, the sample variance of qijt is used for the
                                2           2
unconditional variance and [    ij =(1      ij )]V   ar( sjt ) is used to measure the contribution of
the nominal shocks. In addition to its simplicity, this good-by-good variance decomposition

method has the advantage that it does not require the assumption of a common volatility of
real shocks across sectors, since 1      (i; j; k) is unrestricted and may vary due to heterogeneous
variance of real shocks across sectors.

   Table 4 reports the summary statistics for the contributions of the nominal shocks to the
forecast error variance of sectoral real exchange rates at monthly horizons of k = 1; 3; 6; 12

and 1. Note that unlike the variance decomposition of aggregate real exchange rates often

reported in the literature, the decomposition is calculated for each sectoral good. The …rst

row of the table shows the average contribution of nominal shocks, with the average taken

across all goods and all four bilateral pairs. The numbers in parentheses in the second

row are the standard deviations across goods and countries. The remaining rows report

corresponding results for each pair of countries.

   For the one-period-ahead forecast error decomposition, nominal shocks account for about

40 percent of real exchange rate variation on average and range from a high of 49 percent

for Austria to a low of 35 percent for Spain. The large standard deviations in the table

imply that the contributions of nominal shocks di¤er considerably across goods. This cross-

sectional dispersion is very similar across countries. For the shortest horizon it seems safe to
conclude that the contribution of real shocks is at least as large as that of nominal shocks
for many goods.

   The role of nominal shocks becomes smaller as the horizon lengthens. At a horizon of
6 months, the relative contribution is about one half of the 1-month horizon. The long-
run contribution of nominal shocks, evaluated at k = 1, is lower than 10 percent for all

countries except for Austria, thus leaving 90 percent to be explained by real shocks. The
cross-sectional variation (across goods) at the longest horizon is much smaller than that at


                                                     19
shorter horizons, implying the dominance of real shocks in real exchange rate ‡uctuations

for most goods. This …nding of a dominant role of sector-speci…c real shocks is consistent
with recent micro evidence by Bergin, Glick and Wu (2009) who claim that idiosyncratic
industry price shocks account for about 80% of variation in LOP deviations in disaggregated

data, with nominal exchange rate shocks playing a very small role.
   Let us now compare the variance decompositions of sector-level real exchange rates with
previous studies involving the aggregate real exchange rate. Using a structural VAR model,

Clarida and Galí (1994, Table 3) …nd that the relative contribution of nominal shocks to 1-
period-ahead forecast error variance of quarterly real exchange rate is 47 percent for Germany

and 36 percent for Japan. In contrast, our three-month (the counterpart to one quarter)

ahead variance decomposition indicates nominal shocks account for between 19 to 31 percent,

depending on the country, when results are averaged across sectors (see Table 4). Using over

100 years of annual UK-US real exchange rate data, Rogers (1999) …nds that the contribution

of nominal shocks to the 1 year-ahead forecast error variance ranges from 19 percent to

60 percent, with a median value of 41 percent. Our 12-month ahead forecast variance

decomposition estimates indicate nominal shocks only account for about 14 percent when

we average across countries and sectors. The benchmark estimates of Eichenbaum and Evans

(1995, Table 1a) show a nominal shock contribution at horizons of 31- to 36-months averaging

38 percent for France, while our estimates imply long-run contributions between 9 and 12

percent for France (again, using averages across sectors). Thus, largely independent of the
horizon or countries examined, nominal shocks play a more important role in accounting for
aggregate real exchange rate ‡uctuations than in accounting for sector-level real exchange

rate ‡uctuations.
   What accounts for this di¤erence in the microeconomic and macroeconomic evidence?
Our suspicion is that the sectoral real e¤ects tend to average out across sectors while the

nominal e¤ects, almost by de…nition cannot, since there is only one nominal exchange rate
per bilateral pair. When researchers use aggregate level CPI-based real exchange rates,


                                             20
the impact of real shocks is attenuated by the aggregation process, while the impact of

nominal shocks is not (since the nominal exchange rate shock is common to all goods, up
to heterogenous price adjustment rates). When using less aggregated data, it is therefore
perhaps not surprising that nominal and real shocks are more on par as contributors to real

exchange rate variation.
   In terms of the theory, recall productivity shocks found in equation (2.2) are expected
to embody idiosyncratic sector-speci…c shocks "it and "it , at least in part. The aggregation

of goods prices across sectors eliminates this idiosyncratic component and one is left with a
national productivity di¤erential shock and the money growth di¤erential shock to account

for the aggregate real exchange rate variance. This averaging-out argument is consistent

with a recent …nding by Crucini and Telmer (2007) who show that only a small fraction of

LOP changes are common to all goods. Assigning all of the common component to nominal

exchange rates in the presence of sticky-prices would, thus, leave most of the LOP variation

unaccounted for. The decomposition performed here …lls this gap with real shocks.


5. Conclusion

We use a time-dependent Calvo pricing model with real and nominal shocks to develop the

concept of a real exchange rate volatility curve. The curve was proved to have a U-shape

as a function of the degree of price stickiness, implying an ambiguous correlation between
the forecast error variance of real exchange rates and price stickiness. Using US-European

real exchange rate data, the correlation between the forecast error variance and the degree
of price stickiness was found to be negative over most of the range of the micro-data. The
good with minimal real exchange rate volatility was estimated to have a duration between

the price changes of about 4.2 months. The downward sloping pro…le suggested that for
this micro-sample of goods and countries, the variance of sectoral real exchange rates is
dominated by real shocks, though nominal shocks are important as well.

   These results point to the value of examining cross-sectional di¤erences in real exchange


                                             21
rate variability in order to ‡esh out the rich quantitative predictions of models of micro-

price adjustment currently under development. Di¤erences across goods help us to disentan-
gle heterogeneous responses to common shocks due to di¤erences in economic propagation
mechanisms such as costs of price adjustment and trade costs from heterogeneity in the

underlying shocks themselves. Averaging across goods, as is inevitable in the move to an
aggregate real exchange rate, is not innocuous in terms of the weight given to real and nomi-
nal shocks. The same averaging may also lead to an under-appreciation of the sources of the

risks that individuals and …rms face. We hope to explore these possibilities in future work.
Much remains to be done.




                                             22
References

[1] Alvarez, L. J., and I. Hernando. 2004. “Price setting behavior in Spain: Stylized facts
   using consumer price micro data.”ECB working paper series No. 416.

[2] Aucremanne, L., and E. Dhyne. 2004. “How frequently do prices change? Evidence
   based on the micro data underlying the Belgian CPI.”National Bank of Belgium Work-

   ing paper No. 44.

[3] Baumgartner, J., E. Glatzer, F. Rumler, and A. Stiglbauer. 2005. “How frequently do

   consumer prices change in Austria?”ECB working paper series, No. 523.

[4] Baudry, L., H. Le Bihan, P. Sevestre, and S. Tarrieu. 2007. “What do thirteen million

   price records have to say about consumer price rigidity?”Oxford Bulletin of Economics

   and Statistics, 69(2), 139-183.

[5] Bergin, P. R., R. Glick, and J.-L. Wu. 2009. “The micro-macro disconnect of purchasing

   power parity,”NBER Working Papers 15624, National Bureau of Economic Research.

[6] Bils, M., and P. J. Klenow. 2004. “Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices.”

   Journal of Political Economy, 112(5), 947-985.

[7] Calvo, G., 1983. “Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework.”Journal of Mon-

   etary Economics 12 (3), 383–398.

[8] Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan. 2002. “Can sticky price models generate

   volatile and persistent real exchange rates?" Review of Economics Studies, 69(3), 533-
   563.

[9] Clarida, R., and J. Galí. 1994. “Sources of real exchange-rate ‡uctuations: How im-

   portant are nominal shocks?” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
   41(1), 1-56.



                                           23
[10] Crucini, M. J., M. Shintani, and T. Tsuruga. 2010. “The law of one price without the

    border: the role of distance versus sticky prices.”Economic Journal, 120, 462-480.

[11] Crucini, M. J., and C. Telmer. 2007. “Microeconomic sources of real exchange rate

    variability.”unpublished manuscript.

[12] Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and R. Startz. 2004. Macroeconomics. McGraw-Hill, New
    York.

[13] Eichenbaum, M., and C. Evans, 1995. “Some empirical evidence on the e¤ects of mone-

    tary policy shocks on exchange rates.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 975–1010.

[14] Ghosal, S., A. Sen, and A. W. van der Vaart. 2000. “Testing monotonicity of regression.”

    The Annals of Statistics, 28(4), 1054-1082.

[15] Kehoe, P. J., and V. Midrigan. 2007. “Sticky prices and sectoral real exchange rates."

    Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper No. 656.

[16] Meese, R. A. and K. Rogo¤. 1983. “Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies :

    Do they …t out of sample?”Journal of International Economics, 14(1-2), 3-24.

[17] Ramsey, J. B., 1969. “Tests for speci…cation errors in classical linear least-squares re-

    gression analysis.”Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B, 31, 350–371.

[18] Rogers, J. H., 1999. “Monetary shocks and real exchange rates.”Journal of International
    Economics, 49, 269-288.

[19] Rogo¤, K., 1996. “The purchasing power parity puzzle.”Journal of Economic Literature,
    34(2), 647-668.

[20] Stockman, A. C., 1980. “A theory of exchange rate determination.”Journal of Political

    Economy, 88(4), 673-698.




                                             24
                           Table 1: Linear regressions
            Const            i          Adj. R2          Obs.        [   min ,   max ]


Pooled          0.013         -0.014          0.700         182      [0.223, 0.979]
              (0.001)        (0.001)                                       -

Austria         0.016         -0.016          0.886             57   [0.223, 0.979]
              (0.002)        (0.002)                                       -

Belgium         0.011         -0.011          0.454             46   [0.296,0.956]
              (0.001)        (0.001)                                       -

France          0.013         -0.014          0.833             48   [0.254, 0.958]
              (0.002)        (0.002)                                       -

 Spain          0.014         -0.015          0.589             31   [0.524, 0.964]
              (0.003)        (0.003)                                       -

NOTES: The heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. The
“Adj. R2 ”denotes the adjusted R2 . The “Obs.”denotes the number of observations.
The last column shows the empirical range of infrequencies of price changes
[ min , max ] in our dataset.




                                       25
                      Table 2: Structural regressions
               2               2        2            2
               i      (1    i ) (1   i )      Adj. Ruc

Pooled      0.0016          0.0456             0.751             0.762
           (0.0001)        (0.0039)                             (0.008)

Austria     0.0012          0.0475             0.895             0.784
           (0.0001)        (0.0066)                             (0.011)

Belgium     0.0021          0.0419             0.623             0.735
           (0.0004)        (0.0056)                             (0.017)

France      0.0015          0.0411             0.905             0.763
           (0.0001)        (0.0040)                             (0.009)

 Spain     0.0017           0.1567            0.716               0.836
          (0.0002)         (0.0292)                              (0.011)
NOTES:The heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.
           2
The “Adj. Ruc ”denotes the adjusted uncentered R2 . presents the estimates
of which minimize the total variance.




                                      26
                            Table 3: Tests of monotonicity
                   m( i )                   m0 ( i )               Critical values
              Null hypothesis         Null hypothesis
          Increasing Decreasing Increasing Decreasing         1%     5%         10%

Pooled    10.329***      -1.831      -2.324     17.014***    5.342 4.386       3.964

Austria    4.927**       -1.546       1.883      9.362***    5.530 4.488       4.027

Belgium     4.608*       -0.647       1.866      9.378***    5.737 4.609       4.111

France     6.369***      -1.212       1.397      6.675***    5.645 4.554       4.072

 Spain       5.098*       -1.281        -0.025     7.731*** 6.924 5.382          4.701
NOTES: The …rst two columns correspond to the hypothesis testing for m( i ) and the
second two columns correspond to the test for the …rst derivative of m( i ) with respect
to i . Critical values shown in the last three columns are computed from the method by
Ghosal, Sen, and van der Vaart (2000).




                                       27
   Table 4: Percentage of forecast error variance accounted for by nominal shocks
   k           1              3               6             12              1

Pooled         40.6           23.6            18.7           14.2             11.4
              (24.1)         (16.5)          (15.7)         (13.5)           (11.8)

Austria        48.6           30.5            25.7           20.3             17.1
              (24.4)         (16.9)          (17.1)         (15.7)           (16.3)

Belgium        34.9           19.9            15.3           11.4              8.9
              (23.0)         (14.9)          (13.6)         (11.2)            (8.2)

France         40.2           21.8            16.2           11.7              9.2
              (22.7)         (15.2)          (13.5)         (10.2)            (7.6)

 Spain         35.2          18.9             14.6           11.1               7.9
              (24.5)        (16.4)           (15.6)         (13.3)             (8.0)
NOTES: Numbers are in percent. Each column corresponds to the cross-sectional
average of the k-period-ahead forecast error variance of sector-level real exchange rates
accounted for by nominal shocks. Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations.




                                        28
                                                                      Figure 1: Simulated real exchange rate volatility curves

                                                 (a)                                                               (b)                                                               (c)
                            25                                                                1                                                                 1
                                                             real effect                                                       real effect
                                                                                                                                                                                                 real effect
                                                             nominal effect                  0.9                               nominal effect                  0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                 nominal effect

                            20                                                               0.8                                                               0.8

                                                                                             0.7                                                               0.7

                            15                                                               0.6                                                               0.6

                                                                                             0.5                                                               0.5

                            10                                                               0.4                                                               0.4




                 Variance
                                                                                  Variance
                                                                                                                                                    Variance

                                                                                             0.3                                                               0.3




29
                             5                                                               0.2                                                               0.2

                                                                                             0.1                                                               0.1

                             0                                                                0                                                                 0
                                 0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8              1                    0   0.2   0.4         0.6            0.8     1                    0   0.2   0.4         0.6            0.8     1
                                                 λi                                                                λi                                                                λi



     NOTES: Each panel of the figure shows contributions of the nominal and real shocks on the sector-level real exchange rate volatility over the range of the degree
     of price stickiness. The volatility is measured by the one-period-ahead forecast error variance. For each good, the variances due to real and nominal shocks are
     expressed by the heights of blue and red areas. The combined height of the two areas corresponds to the total variance. Panels (a),(b) and (c) show the cases of
     Std(ait − a∗it )/Std(µt − µ∗t ) = 5, 1, and 1/5, respectively. Standard deviation of nominal shocks is set to one.
                                                         Figure 2: Estimated real exchange rate volatility curves

                                                  Quartic regression                                                Nonparametric regression
                                       0.02                                                              0.02

                                                                               data                                                            data
                                      0.018                                                             0.018
                                                                               linear                                                          linear
                                                                               quartic                                                         nonparametric
                                      0.016                                                             0.016

                                      0.014                                                             0.014

                                      0.012                                                             0.012

                                       0.01                                                              0.01

                                      0.008                                                             0.008




                           Variance
                                                                                             Variance




30
                                      0.006                                                             0.006

                                      0.004                                                             0.004

                                      0.002                                                             0.002

                                          0                                                                 0
                                              0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8             1                      0      0.2    0.4        0.6      0.8          1
                                                              λi                                                                    λi

     NOTES: The both panels show the scatter plot of the one-period-ahead forecast error variance of the sector-level real exchange rates against the degree of price
     stickiness. The solid line in the left panel shows the fitted curve based on the quartic regression. The solid line in the right panel represents the fitted curve based
     on the nonparametric regression. The dashed line in both panels show the linear regression fit for comparisons.
