NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUPPLY SHOCKS, WAGE INDEXATION
AND MONETARY ACCOMMODATION

Joshua Aizenman

Jacob A. Frenkel

Working Paper No. 1609

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1985

An earlier version of this paper was presented at the NBER—World
Bank Conference on Structural Adjustment and the Real Exchange Rate
in Developing Countries, Washington, D.C., November 29—December 1,
i984. We wish to acknowledge helpful comments by Stanley Fischer.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs

in International Studies and Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1609
April 1985

Supply Shocks, Wage Indexation
and Monetary Accommodation

ABSTRACT

This paper develops a unified framework for the analysis of wage
indexation and monetary policy in the presence of supply shocks. We first
present simple formulae for the optimal wage indexation rule and for the
optimal money supply rule. In order to set the stage for an evaluation of
departures from the optimal policy rules we first analyse two extreme cases
—— a rule that stabilizes employment and a rule that stabilizes the real
wage. The analysis of these two extreme cases provides the ingredients for
the evaluation of various rules for wage indexation and for monetary
targeting. We examine the implications of indexing wages to (1) nominal
GNP, (ii) the DPI and (iii) the value—added price index, as well as the
implications of targeting the money supply to these alternative three indicators. It is shown that, the various indexation rules bear a dual relation
to the various monetary targeting rules. The welfare ranking of the
various rules depends on whether the elasticity of the demand for labor
exceeds or falls short of the elasticity of labor supply. If the demand
for labor is more elastic than the supply, then policy rules that stabilize
employment produce a smaller welfare cost than policy rules that stabilize
the real wage. In that case, indexing wages to nominal GNP results in a
smaller welfare cost than indexing to value—added price index which, in turn,
produces a smaller cost than indexation to the CPI. Because of the dual
relation between monetary policy and wage indexation, it follows that under
the same circumstances, monetary policy that targets nominal GNP produces a
smaller welfare cost than policy that targets the value—added price index
which, in turn, results in a smaller cost than the policy that targets the
CPI. This ranking is reversed when the elasticity of the supply of labor
exceeds the elasticity of demand.

Professor Joshua Aizenman
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 E. 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60631
(312) 962—1260

Professor Jacob A. Frenkel
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street

Chicago, IL 60631
(312) 962—8253

The energy crises of the 1970's stimulated a renewed interest in
questions concerning the proper adjustment to external supply shocks. In

general, restoration of equilibrium in response to shocks necessitates
adjustment of both quantities and prices. When applied to labor markets,

various proposals for policy rules attempting to restore labor-market
equilibrium may be classified in terms of their impact on the division of
adjustment between quantities (the level of employment) and prices (the real

wage). The design of' optimal policies provides for the appropriate division
of this adjustment.

This paper develops a unified framework for the analysis of wage

indexation and monetary policy. The analytical framework is applied to
determine the optimal policy rules in the presence of supply shocks as well

as to evaluate the welfare consequences and ranking of alternative (sub—
optimal) policy rules. In order to set the stage for an evaluation of the

welfare implications of alternative policy rules, we first analyse two

extreme cases —— a rule that stabilizes employment and a rule that stabilizes the real wage. The analysis of these two extreme cases provides the
ingredients for the evaluation of various rules for wage-indexation and for
monetary targeting .

We

examine the implications of indexing wages to (1)

nominal GNP, (Ii) the CPI and (iii) the value-added price index. The
distinction between the CPI and the value—added price index is of a special

importance in the presence of supply shocks. We also examine the implications of targeting the money supply to these alternative three indicators.

Our analysis demonstrates that, on the formal level, the various
iridexation rules bear a dual relation to the various monetary targeting

rules. We show that the welfare ranking of the various rules depends on
whether the elasticity of the demand for labor exceeds or falls short of the

elasticity of labor supply. Specifically, if the demand for labor is more

2

elastic

than the supply, then policy rules that stabilize employment produce

a smaller welfare cost than policy rules that stabilize the real wage and

vice—versa. Accordingly, using this principle, we show that if the elasticity of the demand for labor exceeds the elasticity of supply then, indexing
wages to nominal GNP results in a smaller welfare cost than indexing to the
value—added price index which, in turn, produces a smaller cost than indexa—

tion to the CPI. Likewise, because of the dual relation between monetary
policy and wage indexation, it follows that under the same circumstances,
monetary policy that targets nominal GNP produces a smaller welfare cost
than policy that targets the value—added price index which, in turn, results

in a smaller cost than the policy that targets the CPI. This ranking is
reversed when the elasticity of the supply of labor exceeds the elasticity
of demand.

Our analysis is of relevance to both the theory and the policy
discussions concerning wage indexation and monetary rules. Specifically,

great attention has been given to the question of whether the monetary
authority, when faced with a higher price of imported energy, should follow

an accommodative policy and expand the money supply in order to "finance"

the higher energy price or, whether it should be anti—accommodative and
contract the money supply in order to lower inflation. The key question was

whether, in the absence of an active monetary response, labor markets can
adjust without costly deviations from full employment [e.g. Gordon (1975,
198Ls), Phelps (1978), Blinder (1981), Rasche and Tatom (1981) and Fischer

(1985)]. Our analysis deals with these questions as part of the more
general analytical framework.

Section I describes the building blocks of the model including the
specification of the stochastic shocks and the determination of output and

employment. Section II introduces the objective function which aims at
minimizing the expected value of labor—market distortions. In our model, as
in Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977a, 1977c), the need for wage-indexation and

3

monetary policy arises from the existence of labor-market contracts accord-

ing to which wages are set in advance of the realization of the stochastic

shocks. This labor-market convention results in some stickiness of wages.

Wage indexation and monetary policies intend to reduce the undesirable
consequences of this stickiness. With the aid of' the objective function we
derive the optimal wage inclexation rule which eliminates the welfare cost.

The key characteristic of the optimal indexation rule is that it separates
between

the effects of monetary and real shocks on the wage.

In Section III we examine the implications of departures from the
optimal indexation rule. In this context we develop a general

criterion for

the comparisons between rules that. stabilize employment and rules that
stabilize real wages. We then apply this criterion to determine the welfare
ranking of alternative proposals for wage indexation rules.

The question of monetary accommodation is addressed in section IV.

We start by specifying the conditions for monetary equilibrium. We then
determine the optimal money—supply rule and analyse its dependence on Ci)
the nature of the stochastic shocks (ii) the parameters of the demand for

money, (iii) the elasticities of the demand for and supply of labor, and
(iv) the degree of' wage indexation. The section concludes with an analysis

of various targeting rules for monetary policies. Analogously to the com-

parisons among wage—indexation rules, the monetary rules are analysed in
terms of their relative impact on stabilizing quantities (employment) versus

stabilizing prices (the real wage). Finally, section V contains concluding
remarks.

14

I.

The Model

In this section we outline the structure of the model which includes

a specification of the productive technology, and a determination of the
levels of output, employment and wages.

1.1 Output and Employment
Output is assumed to be produced by a Cobb-Douglas production tune—

tion using labor and. imported energy as variable inputs. Thus, for period

(1)

where

log I =

log

B +

8log

Lt +

A

, O<<1

log Vt +

,

O<A<1

and V denote, respectively,

denotes the level of output,

the inputs of labor and energy, B denotes a parameter including all fixed

factors of production and

denotes a productivity shock. The produc-

tivity shock is assumed to be distributed independently and normally with a

zero mean and a known variance
meters

.

in

competitive equilibrium the para-

and A denote, respectively, the relative shares of labor income

and energy bill in national product. Throughout the analysis we assume that

information is complete; thus, producers and other agents in the economy
know the realized values of the stochastic shocks.

Producers, who are assumed to maximize profits, demand labor and
energy so as to equate the real wage and the relative price of energy to the

marginal products of labor and energy. Expressed logarithmically, these
equalities are

(2)

lo() = log B — (1—)log

Lt +

A

log Vt +

5

p

log)

(3)

where ,

log AB +

log Lt — (1—A)log Vt

and P denote the nominal wage, the nominal price of energy

P

and the price level, respectively.

Equations (1)—(3) characterize the levels of output and factor
inputs for a given realization of the stochastic productivity shock
In the absence of stochastics shocks, the corresponding levels of output and

factor inputs are denoted by I. L and V and the corresponding real
factor prices are (W/P)0 and (PIP). For subsequent use we denote by
lower case letters the percentage discrepancy of a variable from the value

obtained in the absence of shocks. Thus, x =

log

X —

log X. Accordingly,

the percentage deviation of output from its non—stochastic level is

where

+

y =

(1')

y

log

+

log

9.

log L-lo L, and v = log V-lo V0.

Analogously, subtracting from equations (2) and (3)

the corresponding equa-

tions for the non—stochastic equilibrium yields

w—p = —(i—b)P. + Ày + ii

(2')

— (1—A)v +

where, for simplicity, the time subscript has been omitted. From equations
(2' )

and

(3'

) the

demands for labor and energy (or more precisely the per-

centage discrepancy of the demands for labor and energy from their non—
stochastic levels) are

6
(i4)

2.

(5)

V

=

+

ci[(1—A)(p—w)

— (l—t)(PP)

o=

where

+

1 —p—A

Assuming that producers are always able to satisfy their demands for labor
and energy inputs, we substitute equations (i4) and (5) into (1') and obtain

y

(6)

a[(p-w) — A(p—p)

+

Equation (6), which may be viewed as the aggregate supply function, shows
that the percentage deviation of output from its deterministic level depends

on the percentage deviations of the real wage and of the relative price of
energy from their deterministic levels, as well as on the real productivity

Higher values of the real wage anu of the real energy price oper-

shock

ate like neatlve supply shocks and result in lower output, whereas a positive productivity shock raises output.

We assume that the economy is small in the world energy market and
that

it

faces an exogenously given energy price wliich is distributed nor-

mally around a given mean. In order to simplify the notations we define an

effective real shock u as the sum of the positive supply shocks arising
from shocks to productivity and to the price of imported energy, Thus
u

—

A(p—p)

.

With this definition of the effective real shock, the

demand for labor in equation () and the supply of output in equation (6)
can be written as:

p4')

2.

n(p-w) + au

7

and
(6')

y — a[8(p—w) +

u]

where =a(1-A) denotes the (absolute value of the) elasticity of the
demand for labor with respect to the real wage. This specification of
employment and output (or more precisely the percentage discrepancy of
employment and output from their non-stochastic levels) reflects the assumption that 9. and y are determined exclusively by the demand for labor rather

than by the interaction between the demand and the supply of labor.2 The
resultant disequilibrium in the labor market induces welfare cost and our
subsequent analysis deals with ways to minimize this welfare cost. In order
to obtain a benchmark for the assessment of the implications of distortions

in the labor market, we turn first to an analysis of the equilibrium that
would have obtained in the absence of distortions.

1.2 The Undistorted Equilibrium

In the undistorted equilibrium the demand for labor equals the
supply. Let the supply of labor be

(7)

S
log Lt

where

log A + c

w

log()

denotes the elasticity of labor supply. As before, using lower-

case letters to denote the percentage deviation of labor supply from the
non-stochastic level, we obtain

(7')

9S

—

c(w—p)

8

Equating the demand for labor (equation (u'))

with

the supply (equation

(7')) yields the undistored equilibrium employment, £, and the undistorted
equilibrium real wages, (w—p);

(8)

(9)

Efl

()

Using equation (9)

—

(10)

y =

in

(6') yields the undistorted equilibrium output y

(1i) u

When this equilibrium obtains, the demand for labor equals the supply of
labor arid, in the absence of other distortions, efficiency is maximized.

II. The Measure of Welfare Loss and Optimal Indexation
Inc foregoing analysis determined the equilibrium undistorted levels

of output, employment and real wages. It was assumed that the flexibility

of wages and prices yielded an undistorted labor market equilibrium. The

values of the key variables in the undistorted equilibrium serve as the
benchmark against which the actual levels of output, employment ani real
wages can be compared. Such comparisons provide the basis for the computa-

tion of the welfare loss of labor market distortions. In this section we
outline a measure of the welfare loss and we discuss the optimal policies
designed to eliminate this loss. A more formal derivation of the measure of
welfare loss is presented in the Appendix.

9

11.1 The Welfare Loss
It is assumed that due to costs of negotiations nominal wages are
Set In advance at their expected market clearing level, and employment is
determined by the demand for labor. For a given realization of the effec-

tive real shock, u, the resulting level of employment is

9., as given by

equation (4'). The corresponding equilibrium level of employment is

2., as

given by equation (4''), obtained by substituting into (4') the equilibrium
real wage (w-p) for the actual real wage.

(14'')

9. =

n(p-w)

+ ou

is responsible for the welfare loss. That

The discrepancy between 9. and 2.

discrepancy is

(11)

9. —

2.

=

nL—(WP)

+

(w—p)}

In order to compute the welfare loss associated with this discrepancy we
need to multiply it by one half of the difference between the demand and the

Supply prices at the actual level of employment.
Figure 1

Diagramatically, in

£ and (W:p) designate the equilibrium values of employment and

real wages, whereas
ment level,

9.

,

9.. designates actual employment. At the actual employ-

the demand price for labor, (w—p), exceeds the correspond-

ing supply price, (w-p)5. The welfare loss is represented by

measuring

the area of the triangle ABC. This triangle expresses the welfare loss in
terms of consumer and produces surpluses. Thus,

(12)

=

{wpd

—

(w—p)8j

(

— 2.)

w-p

Iis

(wp)d

(WP)

(w-p)5

1'

f, $

I
Figure -

1.

10

By using the definitions of the elasticities of the demand and the supply of
=

labor we note that (w_p)d - (w—p)5

(! + J) ( — 9). Substituting

into

(12) and recalling that the equilibrium real wage, (W:p), is specified by
equation (9), yields

c+n

1

(13)

o

2

Equation (13) measures the area of the triangle ABC in Figure 1. In what
follows we assume that the objective of policy is to minimize the expected

value of the welfare loss, and we denote the loss function by H where

As is evident by inspection of (13), a policy that is capable of

generating a real wage w-p that is equal to the equilibrium wage
au/(+), will eliminate the welfare loss. In wh.. follows we determine the

optimal wage-indexation formula that eliminate the welfare loss. We then
use the loss function to evaluate the welfare implications of alternative
formulae for wage indexation and for money supply rules.

11.2 Optimal Wage Indexation

As was already indicated it is assumed that due to cost of negotiations nominal wages are set in advance and are adjusted over time accord-

ing to a simple, time—invariant indexation rule. Let the indexation rule be

(1L)

log

=

log W + b0(log

I' -

log

P0) +

b1u

Equation (114) specifies the wage at period t as a function of (i) W0, the
equilibrium wage that is obtained in the absence of shocks,14 (ii) the per—

centage deviation of the price from its non—stochastic equilibrium, and

11

(iii) the effective real shock u. Expressing the wage rule in terms of
lower-case letters, recalling that the effective real shock is composed of

productivity and energy—price shocks, i.e., u=i—Aq, and allowing for different coefficients of indexation to i arid

(15)

w

q,

yields

b0 p + b1 i + b2 q

Equation (15) specifies an iridexation rule by which the nominal wage adjusts

in response to the price, p, to the productivity shock, .i, and to the
energy-price shock, q. The optimal values of b0, b1 and b2 are chosen so
as to eliminate the discrepancy between actual and equilibrium real wages.
Inspection of the last bracketed term in (13) reveals that the nominal wage
which eliminates the welfare loss is

w

Au
p +—i ——q
a

where —Aq has been substituted for the effective real shock u. Thus, the
optimal values of the coefficients in the indexation rule (15) are:

(16)

1,

=

, and

b2

—Ab1

This formulation of the indexation rule is analogous to that of
Karni (1983) who showed in the context of a closed economy without energy
input that at the optimum the nominal wage must adjust to the price level by

an indexation coefficient of unity whereas, in general, its adjustment to
the productivity shock differs from unity.5

The magnitude of the indexation coefficient b1 depends on the
structure of the economy as reflected by the elasticities of the demand and

12

the supply of labor. For example, a lower elasticity of labor supply raises

the absolute values of the optimal coefficients of indexation to the real

shocks (i.e. to productivity shocks and to energy—price shocks). When the
elasticity of the supply of labor approaches zero, b1 approaches

[1/(1—A)J>1, and b2 approaches -A/Cl—A). Likewise, the magnitude of the
coefficients of' indexation to real shocks depend on the relative share of

energy cost in output. As seen in equation (16), a higher share of energy
cost raises b1 as well as the absolute values of b2. In general, b1 will be
positive and b2 will be negative.

The key point to emphasize is that by altering the nominal wage the

optimal indexatiori rule eliminates the welfare loss associated with the
distortion to the real wage. The equilibrium that is obtained with optimal
indexation replicates the equilibrium that would have been obtained if labor

market cleared after the realization of the stochastic shocks. Thereby, the

optimal indexation formula serves to nullify the distortions arising from
the assumption that, because of contracts, nominal wages are predetermined.

Further, if' economic policy was only concerned with the efficiency of
resource allocation then, in the absence of other distortions, once the
optimal indexation formula is adopted there is no need to undertake additional macroeconomic policies.

The essense of the optimal incjexatiori rule lies in the separation

between the coefficients of indexation to nominal and to real shocks. In
the specification of equation (14), nominal shocks were represented by p

and real shocks were represented by u.

it was shown that with optimal

indexation wages should be indexed to p with a coefficient of' unity

whereas the magnitude of the optimal indexation to u depends on the
elasticities of the demand and the supply of labor. Since ultimately the
real shocks are manifested in the realized level of' output, we may also

13

include the level of output directly in the indexatlon rule and, thereby,
obtain an alternative formulation. The alternative formulation expresses
the wage indexation rule in terms of the response of nominal wages to the
price and to the level of output. Accordingly,

wp +

(17)

where b

b,y

denotes the coefficient of indexation of nominal wages to real

output. Substituting by for (w-p) in (6') yields

the realized value of

y, and equating this realization with the equilibrium value y from
equation (10), yields the optimal indexation coefficient:

1+E

y

Thus, the optimal inciexation rule expressed in terms of prices and output
is:

(17')

w = p +

!_y

.7

The advantage of this alternative (but equivalent) formulation is its
simplicity. Here the wage rule is specifiec in terms of the observable
variables

p

and y about which data are readily available.

ILl. Alternative Wage Iridexation Rules

In the previous section we specified the optimal wage indexation
formula. In this section we apply the analytical framework to an evaluation

of specific proposals for indexation rules including the indexatiori of
nominal wages to nominal income, to the consumer price index (CPI) and to

1'4

the domestic value—added price index.8 In general, restoration of labor
market equilibrium in response to some shocks necessitates some adjustment

of employment and some adjustment of real wages. The optimal indexation
formula provides for the optimal division of the adjustment between changes
in employment and changes in real wages. Tne various proposals which depart

from the optimal indexation rule differ in terms of the allocation of adjustment between employment and real wages. In order to evaluate the

rela-

tive merits and welfare costs of such alternative allocations of adjustment

we start with an analysis of two extreme indexation rules -- a rule that
stabilizes the real wage and a rule that stabilizes employment. In general,

the various proposals for wage rules involve some combination of the two
extreme rules. Tnerefore, the analysis of the two extreme cases provides
the necessary ingredients for an evaluation of the various proposals.

111.1 Stable Real Wages Versus Stable Employment

Generally,

proportional to

as

was shown before,

the expected welfare loss, H ,is

the expected squared discrepancy between the actual wage and

the equilibrium real wage:

(18)

H

aE[—(w—p) + (W:p}2

where a denotes the proportionality factor implied by equation (13).
Consider first the indexation rule that stabilizes the real wage. With this

indexation rule w—p=O. Substituting the equilibrium real wage from equation (9) into (18) implies that in this case the welfare loss is

(19)

a 2 2

at——)

15

In equation (19) H

indicates that this loss results from the

wp

stabilization of real wages. Thus, equation (19) shows the welfare loss
resulting from an indexation rule by which nominal wages are indexed to the
CPI with a coefficient of unity.

Consider next the other extreme indexation rule which stabilizes

employment and thereby ensures that 2.=O.

In that case it follows from

equation (4') that. the actual real wage is u/(1—A). Substituting into (18)

implies that with =0 the welfare loss is

(20)

H0 =

U
aE{—

+

au -2

— __________
aL(lA)i 2 °
2

where the notation indicates that this welfare loss results from the stabilization of employment.

These two measures of the welfare cost are described diagramatically

in Figure 2. Trie schedules £d and

portray the demand and the supply of

labor as specified by equations (4') and (7') in section I. The slopes of
and

are —i/ri

and

1/c ,

respectively,

that is, the slopes are the

inverse of the corresponding elasticities. The initial equilibrium is

described by point 0 at which, the initial demand curve (not drawn)
intersected with the supply. Thus, initially, (w:p)O. The demand schedule
drawn in Figure 2 corresponds to a situation in which there was a positive
realization of the effective real shock, u. As indicated by equation (4'),
this shock induces an upward displacement of the demand schedule by u/(1—A)

and results in a new equilibrium real wage au/(cri) and, correspondingly,
in a new equilibrium level of employment.

Wnen the indexation rule stipulates that real wages must not change
the real wage remains at point 0 and employment increases to

at point

w-p
E

'S
U

i-k

'is

I

igur -

2

16

C. In that case the welfare loss is proportional to the area of the 'tri-

angle CEB,

and its expected value is

as specified by equation (19).

In the other extreme, when the inuexation rule stipulates that employment

must. not change, the level of employment remains at point 0 and the real

wage rises to u/(1—A) at point A. in that case the welfare loss is
proportional to the area of the triangle CAB, and its expected value is

as specified by equation (20). Since the various expressions relate to

percentage deviations from the non—stochastic equilibrium, the actual
welfare loss expressed in units of output is obtained by multiplying (19)
and (20) by the equilibrium non-stochastic wage bill.
In order to determine the relation between the extent of the welfare

losses in the two cases we need to compare the areas of the two triangles

CEB (denoted by ) and CAB (denoted by 2• We first note from the
geometry that the two triangles are similar arid that the ratio AD/DO (where

point C inaicates the equilibrium real wage) equals the ratio AB/BC. It
follows, therefore, that the ratio of the two areas 2'1 equals (AD/DO)2.
As seen in Figure 2,

1

o

______

1—A

c+r

T1(Cfl)

u

and

therefore,

(21)

2 =

(e)2

Thus, if the elasticity of labor supply, ,
of'

labor

is

smaller than the elasticity

demand, r , then an indexatiori rule that fixes employment induces

17

a lower welfare loss than an indexation rule that fixes the real wage. Tnis
is the case illustrated in Figure 2. On the other hand if the elasticity of
the supply of labor exceeds the elasticity of the demand,
>

;

under such circumstances rules which stabilize employment inflict

higher welfare cost than rules which stabilize the real wage.

The preceeding analysis of the two extreme indexation rules provides

the ingredients necessary for the evaluation of various proposals which

combine elements of the two extreme rules. We turn next to examine the
properties of the proposal of linking the nominal wage to nominal income.

111.2 Indexation to Nominal Income

When the nominal wage is indexed to nominal income with a unit

coefficient, w

p+y. In this case the coefficients of indexation to the

price arid to real output are both unity. We first note with reference to

equation (17') that as long as the elasticity of the supply of labor, c,
differs from zero, full indexation to nominal income entails welfare loss.

Only when c=O the optimal indexation rule requires that wages be indexed
to nominal income with a coefficient of unity.

In order to evaluate the welfare cost induced by the deaprture from
the optimal indexation rule, we note that with indexation to nominal income,

w—p

y. Substituting w-p for y in (6') and solving for the realized

real wage yields:

(22)

u

(w-p)

w=p+y

where the notation in (22) indicates that this wage is obtained under the
rule by which nominal wages are indexed to nominal income with a coefficient

18

of unity. With this real wage the level of employment can be read from
equation p4'). Substituting (22) for the real wage in equation (a') shows

that in this case .=Q. Thus, an indexation rule that links the nominal
wage to nominal income through an indexation coefficient of'

unity

results in

stable employment. The resulting welfare loss corresponds to the area of

the triangle OAB in Figure 2 and is expressed by equation (20). Thus it
follows that

(23)

111.3

— i-f

H
w-p+y

2-0

lndexation to the Value—Added Price Index

An alternative proposal which received wide attention especially
following the energy shocks of the 1970's links wages to the domestic value—

added price index. Tnis proposal was analysed recently by Marston and
Turnovsky (1983). In what follows we explore further the implications of
sucn an indexation rule.

Let the price of final output p be a weighted average of the
domestic value-added price index,

,

and the price of imported energy

input p , and let the weights correspond to the relative shares of value
added and energy in output. Thus

+ Ap

It follows that the domestic value—added price index is

1

(2k)

A

19

An indexation rule which links the nominal wage to this index through a
coefficient of unity, sets w=p .

By using the definition of

from

(24), the implied real wage Is

(25)

=

(w-p)

-

q

Wpd
where the notation indicates that tnis wage is obtained under the rule by

which nominal wages are indexed O

p with a coefficient of unity. A

comparison between equations (25) and (22) reveals that in the special
easefor which i=0 (so that shocks to the imported energy price constitute

the only component of the effective real shack) then u =

—Aq

and the

indexation of wages to the domestic value-added price index is equivalent to

the indexation of wages to nominal income. Furthermore, as was shown
before, in this case such indexation results in stable employment and the
corresponding welfare loss is also represented by equations (20).

In the more general case, however, with non—zero productivity shocks

the indexatiori to

does not stabilize employment and the welfare loss

differs from the one represented by equations (20). The expression for the
welfare cost in that case is obtained by substituting the equilibrium real
wage from (9) and the actual real wage from (25) into (18).Accordingly,

(26)

=

_______ -2 A22
°q

al(l_A)(C+fl)i

+

_______ -2
aL(1_A)(+fl)i

2

o

where the notation indicates that this welfare loss results from adopting

the rule by which nominal wages are indexed to d with a coefficient of
unity.

20

III.LI Ranking the Indexatiori Rules

The preceeding discussion implies that, in general, the choice
between indexation to nominal income and to the domestic value-added price
index depends on the difference between the expressions measuring the losses
H

(In (26)) and H0 (in (20)). In order to facilitate such com-

parison it is useful to rewrite equation (20) somewhat differently by
decomposing the effective real shock into its two components. Thus,

(20')

£

H

9.0

a[

-

(1—A)(Lfl)

j

2-2
j +

22

Ao

q

)

Since the terms involving the variance of q are identical in both of the
expressions in (26) ana (20'), differences in the welfare cost arise only

from the terms involving the variance of

i.

Subtracting

(20') from (26)

and denoting the difference by D yields

(27)

D

a( 22
- )

[(1-x)( +)j2

Thus, the sign of U depends on whether the elasticity of the demand for
labor exceeds or falls short of the corresponding elasticity of supply.

Since r = (1—A)o exceeds unity (in practice, with typical relative snares,
the magnitude of r is likely to be around 3), and since estimates of the
elasticity of labor supply are typically small, it seems that indexation to

nominal income is likely to be preferable to indexation to the domestic
value—added price index. The opposite holds, however, for cases in which
the elasticity of supply exceeds the elasticity of demand.

A comparison been (20') and (26) shows that when c=0 ,

indexa-

tion to nominal income is optimal since in that case the value of the loss

21

function in (20') is zero. In contrast, as shown in equation (26), the
welfare loss associated with indexation to the domestic value—added price
index is positive even though c=o. In this case, the expression In (26) is

reduced to a[1/(1—A)j2a2. As argued before, only when the variance of the
productivity shock, i ,

is

zero the two indexation rules yield identical

outcomes.9

In order to gain a broader perspective over the issues involved in
the comparison between the two forms of indexation we note that the condition determining the sign of D in (27) is the same as the condition deter-

mining whether the cost of indexation rules that stabilize the real wage
exceeds or falls short of the cost of indexation rules that stabilize employment. These relative costs are reflected in the relative sizes of the
triangles in Figure 2. As shown in equation (21) when the elasticity of the

demand for labor exceeds the elasticity of supply indexation rules that
stabilize employment are preferable to those that stabilize real wages.

Those are also the circumstances under which the indexation of wages to
nominal income is preferable to indexation to the domestic value-added price
index.

The equivalence between the condition under which stable employment
is preferable to stable real wages and the condition under which indexation
to nominal income is preferable to indexation to the value-added price index

is interpreted by reference to equations (22) and (25). When wages are
indexed to the value-added price index then, as seen in equation (25), any

given realization of the productivity shock, ji , does not alter the real

wage. Therefore, when the effective real shock consists only of productivity shocks this rule stabilizes the real wage. On the other hand when

wages are indexed to nominal income then, as seen in equation (22), any
given realization of the productivity shock alters the real wage by

22

/(1-A).

This change in

the

real wage corresponds precisely to the vertical

displacement of the demand for labor arising from the productivity shock
and, therefore, results in stable employment. Finally, as indicated above,

when tne effective real shock consists only of shocks to the price of im-

ported energy then, as seen from equations (22) and (25), the two rules
yield identical outcomes in terms of real wages, employment and welfare.

The following analysis of the various wage indexation rules is

In

summarized in Table 1 .

it we report the coefficients of indexation to

the price (b), to the productivity shock (b1) and to the energy—price shock

(b2) that are implied by the alternative indexation rules. For example,
when wages are indexed to

then, as indicated by the second line of

Table 1 ,such a rule implies an indexation to p with a coefficient b01

and an indexation to q with a coefficient b2

A/(1--A)

.

This rule

follows from equation (25). Likewise, the third line of Table 1 specifies
the coefficients implied by an indexation rule by which nominal wages are
Indexed to nominal income with a coefficient of unity. These coefficients

follow from equation (22). The optimal indexation formula corresponds to
the final line in the Table that follows from equation (16).

analysis also determined the welfare cost associated with the
various indexation rules. Accordingly, as shown in Table 1, if the elasOur

ticity of the supply of labor is smaller than the elasticity of the demand,
then the welfare ranking of the alternative rules is

(28)

>-

Pd>

P

where the symbol x)' y indicates that x is prefered to y. Thus, it
follows that under this assumption full indexation to nominal income is
prefered to full indexation to the domestic value—added price index which,

TABLE 1

ALTERNATIVE WAGE RULES

w bp + b1ii + b2q

Indexation Coefficients
b

Wages
Indexed to

CPI(p)

b1

b2

1

0

0

1

0

1

—-

Value—added
deflator(pd)

—

Nominal
income (p+y)

—

Optimal
Indexat ion

1

+n

()

Conclusion:

e+

If c<r then the welfare ranking of the

alternative rules is: b >p+y >Pd>P , and if
c>r then the welfare ranking is

b >p

d

23

in turn, is prefered to full indexation to the

indexation rule, b ,

is

CPI.

Of course, the optimal

prefered to all of the other alternatives. On the

other hand, for cases in which the elasticity of the supply of labor exceeas

tne elasticity of the demand, the welfare ordering of the sub-optimal rules

is reversed. In that case

(28')

b> c>

IV. Monetary Equilibrium and Optimal Accommodation
Up to this point the monetary sector has played no explicit role in

the analysis of the wage-indexation rules. Detailed considerations of the
money market could be left in the background since in all the rules that we

have examined, wages were indexed to the CPI with a coefficient of unity.
Furthermore, as shown in Aizenman and Frenkel (1935), the specification of
the model implies that there is a redundancy of policy instruments. Therefore, in the absence of other distortions, once the optimal indexation rule
is adoptea there is no need to undertake additional macroeconomic policies.

On the other hand it also follows that if wages are not indexed optimally
then there may be room for other policies aiming at the restoration of labor

market equilibrium. In this section we introauce the monetary sector and
analyse the optimal money supply rule.

IV.l The Monetary Sector

In order to determine the equilibrium levels of the nominal quan-

tities like the price level we need to introduce the conditions of money
market equilibrium. Let the demand for money be

(29)

log

log k +

log

+

clog

—

24

where

M denotes nominal balances,

and

i denotes the nominal rate of interest

denotes the (semi) elasticity of the demand for money with respect

to the rate of interest and

denotes the income elasticity of the demand.

The domestic price level is assumed to be linked to the foreign price
through purchasing power parity. Thus,

(30)

log Pt

log St +

log

where S denotes the exchange rate (the price of foreign currency in terms

of domestic currency), and P denotes the foreign price. Let the foreign
price be

(31)

log P1 =

log

F' +

where a prime (') denotes a foreign variable and where a bar over a variable
denotes the value of its fixed component. In equation (31),

denotes

the stochastic component of the foreign price which is assumed to be distributed normally with zero mean and a fixed known variance. Using (31) for

log P yields

(32)

log P log S + log

F'

In principle, the random component of P, may also include stochastic
deviations from the purchasing power parity relation of equation (32). When
all shocks are zero, the domestic price is:

(32')

log P = log S0 + log

F'

25

and subtracting (32') from (32) yields

(33)

where, as before, we suppress the time subscripts.
The nominal rate of interest is linked to the foreign rate of
Arbitrage by investors, who are assumed to be risk neutral,

interest, i'

assures that uncovered interest parity holds:

+

E(log

S÷1 — log S)

where Et log S÷ denotes the expected exchange rate for period t+1
The foreign rate of inter-

based on the information available at period t .

est is also subject to a random shock, p , which is distributed normally
with zero mean and a fixed known variance. Thus,

(35)

i =

-' + Pt

The specification of the stochastic shocks imply that the expected exchange

rate for period t+l is S

(the level obtained in the absence of shocks)

and, therefore, E(lo S1 — log S) = — s•

(35),

it follows that

(36)

i - 1' =

Thus, using equations (3k)-

10

In the absence of stochastic shocks i=i' and, therefore,

(29')

log Md

log K

log P0 +

log

26

Subtracting (29') from (29), omitting the time subscript and recalling that
from (33)

(37)

sp—

md

yields

(l+a)p+y -

The supply of money (or more precisely, the percentage deviation of

the supply of money from its non—stochastic level) is denoted by m.
Monetary equilibrium is obtained when the demand for money equals the
supply. We turn next to an analysis of the optimal money supply.

IV.2 Optimal Monetary Policy
The analysis of section Ii derived the optimal wage—indexation rule.

In this section we focus on the determinants of a money—supply rule that is

designed to achieve the same goal of elinimating labor-market disequilibrium. In order to determine the optimal money supply and to contrast the
results with those of the previous sections, we assume that wages are com-

pletely unindexed so that wO. The question that is being addressed concerns the optimal response of monetary policy in the face of exogeneously

given shocks. This question is not new. It was addressed by various
authors in the context of the energy supply shocks of the 197Os.h1 The key
question was whether monetary policy should be accommodative and expend the

money supply in order to "finance" the higher energy price or whether it
should be anti—accommodative and contract the money supply in order to lower

inflation. It has of course been recognized that a real shock which lowers
the potential level of output can not be combated successfully by monetary
policy. The question was whether monetary policy could be designed so as to

prevent the additional costs arising from departures from the new (lower)
level of potential output. In what follows we reexamine this question.

27

In order to determine the optimal money supply we first equate the

dernanO for money md (from 37) with the supply m and, by using equation
(10) for the equilibrium level of output, we obtain the equilibrium price

level p:

=

(38)

4; Lm + (x)

(1+dça

From equation (9) it is evident that when w=0 (as is the case when

nominal wages are unindexed), the value of p which yields the equilibrium
real wage and thereby eliminates labor market disequilibrium is

(9')

p=—

0
u
C+ fl

Equating the value of p which clears the money market (from equation (38))

with the corresponding value of p which clears the labor market (from
equation (9')) and solving for cn yields the optimal monetary rule

(39)

rn

- a(p)

+

[(1d(1)]o

(-Aq)

where .i-Aq has been substituted for the effective real shock u.
Inspection of equation (39) reveals that when the income elasticity

of the demand for money, ,

is

unity, while the elasticity of the supply of

labor, c, and the (semi) interest elasticity of the demand for money, x, are
zero then m =

0.

This is the case analysed in detail by Fischer (1985). In

this special case the price generated by the condition of money market
equilibrium is precisely the price needed to yield the equilibrium real wage

and, therefore, no accommodation is necessary. In fact, any attempt to
alter the money supply in response to the supply shock would result in

28

suboptimal employment and would inflict welfare loss.

as long as a or c differ from zero and

In general, however,

differs from unity, there is

room for active monetary policy.12
In interpreting the rule specified by (39) we note that a positive

foreign interest rate shock, p, as well as a positive foreign price shock,

x

lower the demand for money; the interest shock operates through its

direct effect on the Qomestic rate of interest while the price shock
operates through its impact on exchange rate expectations. Wneri both shocks

are present, their impact is to reduce the demand for money by
The proper response should reduce the money supply by the same amount and,
thereby, prevent further spill—overs of the effects of these shocks to other

segments of the economy. The second term on the right-hand-side of equation
(39)

specify

the optimal response to shocks to productivity, , and to the

imported energy price, q. Both of these shocks alter the equilibrium level

of output and result in a new equilibrium real wage. In addition, the new
equilibrium level of output alters the demand for money. Without changes in

the money supply, the conditions of money market equilibrium yield a new
price level and, thereby, a new real wage. As shown in equation (39) the
induced change in the real wage will be Just sufficient to restore labor

market equilibrium only if (1c) equals (1+a). In general, a rise in the
price of imported energy should induce an expansionary monetary policy if
(1+a) >

(1+c),

and vice versa. it is also relevant to note that in gene-

ral the optimal monetary response to the effective real shock depends on the

relative share of imported energy in output. A higher value of the energy
share, A, raises the (absolute value of) the optimal response.

The preceeding analysis demonstrated that when wages are unindexed

monetary policy could be designed to ensure labor market equilibrium.
Furthermore, it was shown that when =1 and caO monetary policy should

29

not accommodate supply shocks. Prior to concluding this section it is worth
reexamining these results for situations in which wages are indexed accord-

ing to an arbitrary rule by which w = b0p.

Recalling the equilibrium real

wage from equation (9) and using the assumed inuexation rule, yields the
equilibrium price which clears the labor market

-

(9,1)

(1-b )(En)

U

Following the same procedure as before we equate this price with the price
that clears the money market and obtain the optimal money supply rule

(39')

rn =

—a(p)

+

(1—b)(+n)

(i—Aq)

Two points are worth noting with reference to equation (39').
First, in contrast with the discussion of equation (39) where nominal wages

were unindexed, here even if =1 and c=a=O,

rn does not equal zero, and

a real shock calls for an active monetary response. In that case the
optimal money supply rule becomes

—

(39'')

UI

—b
=

°

(ii —Aq)

(1—b0)(1—A)

Thus, with a partial wage indexation a rise in the price of energy and a
negative productivity shock require an expansionary monetary policy.

Second, with one important exception, the welfare cost induced by

the choice of a sub-optimal value of b0 could be eliminated through the
monetary rule prescribed by equation (39'). The important exception occurs

30

when b is set arbitrarily to equal unity. In that case the indexation rule

prevents changes in the real wage and results in an absolute real—wage
rigidity. Therefore, any real shock that alters the equilibrium real wage
results in labor market disequilibrium arid inouces welfare cost. Monetary
policy can not reduce this cost.

IV.3 Alternative Monetary Rules
The preceeding discussion specified the optimal money-supply rule.
In practice, various alternative rules for monetary targets have been proposed, with special attention given recently to the proposal that monetary

policy targets nominal income.1 In this section we apply the analytical
framework to the evaluation of alternative proposals. For this purpose we

substitute equation (6') for y into the demand for money (equation (37))

and recalling that with zero wage iriUexation w=O, the demand for money can
be written as

md (l÷+ço)p + ou

(37)

-

Consider first a monetary rule that targets the CPI. With such a
rule prO

(40)

This

in

equation (37'), and the resulting money supply is

—

ou

—

c(px)

monetary rule assures that prO and, in the absence of wage indexa—

tion, the real wage is stabilized. The welfare loss associated with CPI
targeting is the same as the loss resulting from a full indexation of wages

31

to the CPI since both stabilize the real wage. This loss is specified in
equation (19).

Consider next the monetary rule which targets nominal income. Witri

sucn a rule p÷y=O. In this case, using equation (6'), the value of output

is you/(1o). Substituting into equation (37') and recalling that p—y,
the resulting money supply is

(1) m=

u= 1—A

In order to evaluate the lfare loss associated with this monetary rule we

note that in this case, with w=O, the real wage (w-p) equals y

using (6') y=L1/(1—A)ju .

and,

With this real wage the level of employment

remains unchanged (as seen from equation (14')) and, therefore, the resulting

welfare loss is specified in equation (23).

Consider next a third monetary rule which targets the domestic
value—added price index. With this rule d0 and, using the definition of'
form (214), it follows that p

[A/(1— A)jq .

Substituting

into (37')

the resulting money supply is

(142)

-

Aq

-

With this targeting rule and with unindexed wages, w=PdO and the resulting welfare loss is specified by equation (26).

Tne equivalence between the measures of the welfare cost associated

with the targeting rules for monetary policy and the iridexation rules for
nominal wages implies that the welfare rankings of the various rules is also

32

the same as those in equations (28)-(28'). it follows that if c < n ,

the

welfare ranking is

(143)

rn>m
p+yO

and, if

(143')

> n ,

rn

m d0

p=O

the welfare ranking is

rn

rn

pO dO fp+yo

It is interesting to note that the ranking provided by (3) is also
consistent with that in Tobin (1983) where the targeting of nominal income
(with annual revisions) is supported and the targeting of price indexes is

criticizea. However, in discussing the choice between targeting p and
targeting d Tobin concludes that

if

any price index were to be a policy
target, it should surely not be the CPI,

"...

subject as that index is to fluctuations from

specific commodity prices, taxes, exchange
rates, import costs, interest rates, and other

idiosynoracies. It should be some index of
domestic value added at factor cost, [Tobin
(1983, p. 119)].

Our analysis shows that this ranking is not robust. As revealed by the
comparison of (143) with (143'), the ranking of the various alternatives
depends on the relative magnitudes of the elasticities of the demand and the
supply of labor.

In this section we have considered three specific targeting rules.

A similar procedure can be applied to the evaluation of other rules like
targeting the exchange rate (e.g., setting sO), targeting the interest rate
(e.g., setting i—i' =

0)

targeting the money supply (e.g., setting m=O), or

33

Hall's

(1984) "elastic price rule". Each of these alternatives inflicts

welfare cost but, in general, the welfare ranking of the various rules
depends on the values of the pirameters. It can be shown, however, that

(414)

in

pO

)m

>.m s-O

i—i'—O

Thus, in the present model, a monetary rule that targets the CPI produces
smaller welfare costs than a rule that targets the exchange rate which, in
turn, has smaller costs than a rule

that

targets the rate of interest.

Furthermore, in the special case for which c=O , the targeting of nominal
GNP is optimal and, therefore, it dominates the other policy rules including
the constant money—growth rule.

Finally, it Is relevant to note that when there are no real shocks

so that

qyO , then,

In this special case all of the

targeting rules (including the optimal rule, m )

yield

identical money—

supply response. This response ensures that the real wage remains intact,
that changes in the money supply exactly offset shocks—induced changes in
the money demand, and that the welfare cost is eliminated.

V. Concluding Remarks
In this paper we analysed the interactions among supply shocks, wage

indexation and monetary policy. We developed an analytical framework for

the determination of optimal wage indexation and monetary policy. This
framework was then applied to the analysis of the implications of sub—
optimal policy rules. The welfare ranking of these rules was based on the
relative magnitudes of the dead-weight losses associated with the various

3L

policies.

The main results of our analysis are summarized in the introduc-

tion to this paper. In what follows we outline some of the limitations and
further extentions.

In our framework labor-market contracts stipulate the nominal wage

rule for the length of the contract period. These contracts reflect the
cost of negotiations. Since the wage rule is set in advance of the realiza-

tion of tne stochastic shocks, it may give rise to dead-weight losses associated with disequilibrium real wages. Our analysis employs this specific

form of wage contracts as a stylized description of conventional labor—
market arrangements. Implicit in our formulation is the assumption that
workers and employers are risk neutral. A useful extension would allow for

risk aversion which would rationalize contracts in terms of the insurance
function Lsee, for example, Azarariadis (1978)J
Further, in our specification the welfare loss arises only from sub—

optimal employment level. Implicit in this specification is the assmumption

that all other markets are undistorteu. An extension would allow for other

distortions. In that case the welfare loss due to sub-optimal money
holdings would be added to the loss associated with labor—market distortions
and would depend on both the level and the variance of inflation.

While we have assumed In the main analysis that the stochastic
shocks are identically and independently distributed with a zero mean and a

fixed variance, we have outlined the way by which one could allow for more

general time—series properties of the stochastic shocks. An explicit
elaboration of such on extension would highlight the important distinction

between permanent and transitory shocks, and would generate a profile of
wage cynamics. Richer and more complicated dynamics could also be induced

by staggered contracts and by capital accumulation [see, for example,
Fischer (1977c,1985) and Taylor (1980)J.

35

Our analysis assumed that there is one composite good which is
traded internationally at a (stochastically) given world price. With this

level of aggregation we demonstrated that wage—indexation rules bear an
exact dual relation to monetary—targeting rules. This duality implied that

there was no fundamental difference between the outcomes of various wageindexatiori rules and the outcomes of the corresponding monetary—targeting

rules. Tnerefore, when there is a single composite commodity the choice

between wage indexation and monetary policy is governed by additional
considerations like the relative costs and complexities associated with the

implementation of the two alternatives rules. In the more general case,
however, when there are many sectors producing a variety of goods, the exact

duality between wage indexation and monetary policy breaks down.
Specifically, as shown by Blinder and Mankiw (19814), it is clear that
monetary policy, being an aggregative policy, is not suitable for dealing

with sector-specific shocks. Under such circumstances it is evident that
optimal sector-specific policies are called for. A natural extension of our

analysis would apply the analytical framework to the determination of the
optimal sector-specific wage—indexation formulae that would eliminate the
welfare loss resulting from labor-market distortions.

36

APPENDIX

The Computation of the Welfare Loss

In this Appendix we provide a formal derivation of' the welfare loss
that is used in the text.

Consider a two—period model and let the present value of utility U
be:

U =

(A—i)

where

u(C1,L1)

+

u(C,L)

designates the subjective discount factor, C. and L1 (1=1,2)

denote the levels of' consumption and labor in period

i

and where the

subscripts 1 and 2 designate periods 1 and 2 respectively. The value of
assets which are not consumed in period 1 is A1

and their value in period

2 is (i÷r)A1 where r designates the exogenously given (stochastic) world
rate of interest on internationally traded bonds. Profits are denoted by R

and are assumed to be redistributed as lump—sum transfers. The value of
profits in each period is the corresponding value of output,

minus

payments to labor and energy inputs:

(A-2)

where W, P

Rt =

Yt(Lt,Vt)

-

)tLt

-

()tv

(t=1,2)

and P denote the nominal wage, the price of energy and the

price of output, respectively. Producers are assumed to maximize profits

37

subject to the given real wage and the given relative price of energy. In
equilibrium the real wage and the relative price of energy are equated to
the marginal products of labor and energy, respectively.

Y(L,V)

-

(A

w

aL - -

—
(A3)

Y(L,V)

)

-

-p--

These conditions yield the demands for labor and energy inputs. The

brium real wage that clears the labor market is defined by (W/P) and L
and V denote the corresponding equilibrium levels of employment and energy
utilization. At this general equilibrium all markets clear.

We turn now to the formal maximization problem starting with the
maximization of second period utility. Denoting by R1 (i1,2) the solution

to the producers' profit maximization problem in period i as implied by

the solutions to (A—3)—(A—), we can write the maximization problem in
period 2 as

(A—5)

max u(C2,L2)

s.t.

C2 = (1+r)A1

+

(—) L

*
+

R2

The solution to this problem yields C2 and L2 as the optimal values of
consumption and labor supply in period 2. These optimal values are condi—
tional, of course, on the historically given value of A1

Thus, we can

define a function u(A1) which denotes the expected value of second
period's optimal utility. Thus, u(A1) =

E[u(C;L;)]

problem for period 1 can then be presented as:

.

The maximization

38

max u(C1,L1) +

(A-6)
s.t.

C1 = Q

+

L1

u(A1)
+

— A1

where Q denotes the given initial endowment. The solution to (A—6) yields

and A1 .

the optimal values C1 ,L1

For subsequent use we note that the

is chosen so as to satisfy the first order condition

optimal value of A1
requiring that

(A-7)

u(A )/A1

au(C1 ,L1 )/C1

The value of utility in the general equilibrium is denoted by U(L1)

where it is understood that this level of utility is obtained when C1 L1
and A1 are set at their unconstrained optimal values C1 ,L1 and A1 .

In

practice, due to contracts, the level of employment might be constrained to
.

L1

The resulting level of utility would be U(L1) where it is understood

that C1 and A1

are still chosen optimally subject to the constraint that

the maximization of profits and the given nominal wage yield labor demand

(and therefore employment) at the level L1
constrained employment (L1 )

(A-8)

U
—=
0

where U = U(L1)-U(L1)

in

.

The welfare cost of the

terms of first period consumption is

U(L1) — U(L1)

-

and where 0 =

u(C1,L1)/C1

denotes first

period's marginal utility of consumption evaluated around the general equi—
ii b r i urn.

39

In order to obtain an expression measuring the welfare loss we first

compute the change in welfare associated with a marginal change in employment around an initial arbitrary level L .

In

what follows we compute the

welfare cost for period 1 and we suppress the corresponding time
subscript.Using equation (A—6), the first order approximation of the change
in welfare resulting from a marginal change in employment is

(A—9)

U(LL)—U(L) = [.u(C,L)/aCiAC

+

[au(C,L)/L)iL

+

[au

*

(A)/AJ.AA

Using equation (A—fl and expressing (A—9) in terms of first period
consumption yields

(A-b)

U(L+L)-U(L)

- ()AL + A

=

where (W/P)5=—au(C,L)/L denotes the real wage as measured along the

supply of labor. From the definition of profits in (A—2) and the budget
constraint in (A—6) we note that

C +

A

-

Q =

Y(L,V)

-

and, therefore,

(A-li)

+

A

=

+

—

Since produces always maximize profits, we may substitute the first order
conditions (A—3)—(A—A4) into (A—il) to obtain

40

CAb')

where

C +

A

=

(W/P)d denotes the real wage as measured along the demand for labor.

Substituting (A—b') into (A—b) yields

A-12

[U(L+L) —

-

u(C,L)/aC

w

-

p)

Finally we note that as L.0 (A-12) becomes

(A12')

du(L)/dL

u(C,L)/C

—

wd pJ

In computing the welfare loss we note that

U(L1) - U(L1)

_

dL

Substituting this expression together with (A—12') into (A—8) yields

(A-13)

-

1

b

-

u(C,L) [W

-

h
]dL

au(C1,L1)/aC1 L1

Finally, assuming a constant marginal utility of consumption (i.e. assuming
risk neutrality), (A—12) can be written as

(A—13')

f1 wd

w

41

In order to obtain a more useful expression for the welfare loss we first

express ()

and

in

()

terms of the elasticities of supply and demand

for labor. Using the definitions of elasticities the values of ()

and

around the general equilibrium are:

()

d

- AL

W\ (
P1

P/

S

W
(—)
p

where

AL = L — L

,

AL
W c
=(—)
'1÷—
P
—

¼

e and n denote the elasticities of the

and where

supply and the demand for labor. Substituting into (A—13') yields

(A-H)

=

j1
L1

(

(I + I) (L-L)dL

L

Integrating the expression in (A—H) yields

(A-15)

=

() (

+

1)(LL)

The loss function H is the expected value of (A—15). Denoting by c and
L

the equilibrium levels of output and employment obtained in the absence

of stochastic shocks, we note that
(L—L ) — (L—L
AL =

and

L-L

=

°

L0(

)

=

L

L0(L-)

42

_)

=

We

also note that from the first order condition

()L =

= BY(1÷y)

Substituting these expressions into (A—15), ignoring terms higher than
second order terms of Taylor expansion, and computing the expected value
_I..
y LV.LU
•%

(A-16)

=

E[()L

(I +

1

(j9)2

Finally, substituting equation (11) of the text for (i—i) yields the loss
function

(A—17)

where

H =

n--

(I

+ I) {—(w—p)

H is the approximation to

+

(W:p)]2}

.

is the expected value of equation (13) in the text.

The expression in (A—17)

43

FOOTNOTES

1This assumption is relaxed in Aizenman and Frenkel (1985) where it is

assumed (in the context of a model without energy) that the value of the
stochastic shock is not known at each point in time. In that case, behavior is

governec by the conditional expectations of the shocks based on the available
information.

2The question concerning the efficiency of the assumed wage contract is
addressed in section 11.2, footnote 6.

3mis expression corresponsd to equation (A—VT) in the Appendix. in order
+4-k..-.
..- '-,-4 +--. ,,,,i4-,r,], #-4,-.- (1)\
LU L414J L.. %J
) .JLJ .Ljj ILL

,-

L

W LU '.J

by the equilibrium (non—stochastic) wage bill (W/P)0L0. For a useful discussion
of the measurement of the welfare cost see Harberger (1971).

It is assumed that the initial contractual nominal wage is set at

the level that would have prevailed in equilibrium in the absence of shocks.

Any other initial wage would not minimize the expected value of

the

welfare

loss. In making this statement we use the approximation
Ut ) —Et_i(e
Et_. (ut). This approximation is valid for small values of the
variance and the realization of the stochastic shock u.

log

5For an analysis of optimal indexation rules see Fischer (1977a, 1977b).

6The assumption that employment is determined by the demand for labor was

challenged by Cukierman (1980) who examined alternative specifications. As is
evident with optimal policies, these issues turn inconsequential since, at the

optimum, there is an equality between the demand and the supply of labor.
Likewise, at the optimum the conceptual difficulties raised by Barro (1977)
concerning the existence of suboptimal contracts, are also inconsequential since

with optimal policies these contracts are in fact optimal. For a further
discussion and rationalization of such contracts see Hall and Lazear (1984), and
Fischer (1977b).

7The specification in (17) constrained the coefficient of

p to be unity.

More formally let the coefficient of p in (17) be b; in that case the real
wage is w—p =
y =

1(b—1)P

(b—i)
+

+

by,

and the level of output (using 6') is

ouJ/(1+ub).

Substituting this expression into the real—wage

equation and using equation (13) reveals that in order to equate the realized

real wage with the equilibrium real wage, the coefficient of p must be unity

and the coefficient of y must be /(1+€). It is also relevant to note that

44

equation (17') corresponds to equation (15) in Karni (1983, p. 286). The
precise analogy may not be apparent due to a typo-graphical error in Karril's

(15).

equation

Using Karni's notations his coefficient of indexation to real

output is /(w+ówa).
8For

analyses

of alternative proposals see Fischer (1977a) Eden (1979)

Marston and Turnovsky (1983) and Marston (1984). For an analysis of alternative
compensation systems and for a related discussion of employment versus real wage
stabilization, see Weitzman (1983).

91t is relevant to note that with a Cobb-Douglas production function
indexing nominal wages to nominal income is equivalent to indexing real wages to

the real
define
—

value of value added in terms of units of

the

final output. To verify,

real value added by Y—(P/P)V and the percentage change thereof is:

(q+v).

From the first—order conditions ÀY/V =

yq+v. It follows therefore that
argue that the rule according to

-

y=y.

P/P

and, therefore,

Marston and Turnovsky (1983)

which nominal wages are indexed to the value-

added price index produces equivalent results to the rule by which real wages
are indexed to real GNP. Our analysis shows that this equivalence holds only as

long as there are no productivity shocks. Further, if the two rules are
equivalent then they will be optimal only if, in addition, €=O.

10The implicit assumption underlying this formulation is that all
variables are stationary, i.e., that there are no trends, and that Et log
is not influenced by the observed price. Therefore, in the absence of shocks,

i=i' .

Our assumption about the absence of trend allows us to focus on the

properties of the stationary equilibrium for which the current values of the

stochastic shocks do not affet the expectations about future values of the

variables. In general, the stochastic shocks need not be identically and
independently distributed with zero mean and a fixed variance. Allowing for a

more general specification requires a modification of the definition of the
bench-mark equilibrium that is obtained in the absence of shocks. With a more
general specification of the stochastic shocks we let lower-case letters denote

log X - Et_i log X instead of
according to which x = log X -

an innovation of a given variable. Thus, x =
the specification which is adopted in the text

log

X. Obviously, in the special case discussed in the text, the assumed

properties of the stochastic shocks Imply that Et_i log X =

log X0. with this

interpretation of x (as the innovation of log Xe), the analysis can allow
for trends in the various series and the various stocks may include permanent

45

and transitory components. It is also relevant to note that the specification
of equation (36) also embodies the assumption that the equilibrium is unique.
The choice of the unique equilibrium is consistent with the criterion suggested

by McCallum (1983). On the issue of uniqueness see Calvo (1970) and Turnovsky
(1983).
11

Relevant early references are Gordon (1975) and Phelps (1978). The

focus on the question of accommodation in the presence of supply shocks is
contained in Blinder (1981), Gordon (19814), and Fischer (1985), and various
structural issues concerning adjustment to external shocks in an international
setting are found in Bruno (19814), Bruno and Sachs (1982), Findlay and Rodriguez
(1977), and Marion and Svensson (1982).
12

Phelps (1978) emphasizes the implications of an income elasticity

differing from unity.

131n the more general specification of the stochastic shocks (which was
described in footnote (10)), the term (px) in equation (37) would be replaced

by th innovation in i, +

E log S÷ +
Et_ii) + E

i -

where p = log P —

+

which can also be expressed as

Thus, the innovation of this term is

log P .

—

(iL

log

p

log P .

In

—

Et log
Et_i log S1 and
order to obtain this expression for the

where Etst+i

innovation we first substitute equation (314) into the demand for money (equation

(29)), and replace i' (in equation (29')) with Et_ii . Subtracting the
resulting two equations from each other yields the more general expression
corresponding to equation (37).

114For an analysis of nominal-income targeting see Meade (1978), Poole

(1980), Tobin (1980, 1983), Hall (1983), Bean (1983) and Taylor (1985). For
discussions of a close variant of nominal-income targeting see McCallum (19814)
and Mishkin (19814), and for other rules see Phelps and Taylor (1977).

46

REFERENCES

Aizenman, Joshua and Frenkel, Jacob A. "Optimal Wage Indexation, Foreign
Exchange Intervention and Monetary Policy." American Economic Review

75,

No. 3 (June 1985), forthcoming.

Azariadis, Costas. "Escalator Clauses and the Allocation of Cyclical
Risks." Journal of Economic Theory 18, No. 1 (June 1978); 119—55.

Barro, Robert J.

"Long—term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary

Policy." Journal of Monetary Economics 3, No. 3 (July 1977): 305—16.

Bean, Charles H. "Targeting Nominal Income: An Appraisal." Economic Journal
93, No.

)4

(December 1983): 805—19.

Blinder, Alan S. "Monetary Accommodation of Supply Shocks Under Rational

Expectations." Journal of Money, Credit_and Banking 13, No. )4
(November 1981): 125—38.

Blinder Alan S. and Mankiw, Gregory N. "Aggregation and Stabilization Policy

in a Multi—Contract Economy." Journal of Monetary Economics 13, No. 1
(January 1984): 67—86.

Bruno, Michael. "Raw Naterials, Profits, and the Productivity Slowdown."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, No. 1 (February 1984): 1—30.

Bruno, Michael and Sachs, Jeffrey. "Input Price Shocks and the Slowdown in

Economic Growth: The Case of U.K. Manufacturing." Review of Economic
Studies 5 (Special Issue, 1982): 679—705.

Calvo, Guillermo A.

"On Models of Money and Perfect Foresight."

national Economic Review 20, No. 1 (February 1979): 83—102.

Cukierman, Alex. "The Effects of Wage Indexation on Macroeconomic Fluctuations: A Generalization." Journal of Monetary Economics 6, No. 2
(April 1980): 117—7O.

Ecen, Benjamin. "The Nominal System: Linkage to the Quantity of Money or
to Nominal Income." Revue Economique 30, No. 1 (January 1979): 121—L13.

47

Findlay, Ronald and Rodriguez, Carlos A. "Intermediate Imports and Macro-

economic Policy Under Flexible Exchange Rates." Canadian Journal of
Economics 10 (May 1977): 208—17.

Fischer, Stanley (1977a). "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability." in

Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer (eds.) Stabilization of Domestic and
International Economy, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public

Policy, Vol. 5, a supplementary series to the Journal of Monetary
Economics (1977): 107—147.

_________ (1977b). "Long Term Contracting, Sticky Prices and Monetary
Policy: A Comment." Journal of Monetary Economics 3, No. 3 (July
1977): 317—23.

_______

(1977c).

"Long—term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the

Optimal Money Supply Rule." Journal of Political Economy 85, No. 1
(February 1977): 191—205.

_________

"Supply Shocks, Wage Stickiness, and Accommodation." Journal

of Money, Credit and Banking, 17, No. 1 (February 1985): 1—15.

Gordon, Robert J. "Alternative Responses of Policy to External Supply
Shocks." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1975): 183—206.

__________

"Supply Shocks and Monetary Policy Revisited." American

Economic Review 714,

No.

2 (May 19814): 38—143.

Gray, Jo Anna. "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach." Journal of
Monetary Economics 2, No. 2 (April 1976): 221—35.

Hall, Robert E. "Macroeconomic Policy Under Structural Cnange." in
Industrial Change and Public Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, 1983: 85—111.

_________

"Monetary Strategy with an Elastic Price Standard." in Price

Stability and Public Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 19814:
1 37—59.

48

and Lazear, Edward P.

"The

Excess Sensitivity of Quits and

Layoffs to Demand." Journal of Labor Economics 2, no.

2

(April

198)4):

233—57.

Fiarberger, Arnold C. "Three Basic Postulates for Applied Welfare Economics:

An Interpretive Essay." Journal of Economic Literature 9, No. 3
(September 1971): 785—97.

Karni, Edi. "On Optimal Wage Indexation." Journal of Political Economy 91
No. 2 (April 1983): 282—92.

Marion, Nancy P. and Svensson, Lars E. 0. "Adjustment to Expected and Un-

expected Oil Price Increases." NBER Working Paper Series, No. 997,
October 1982.

Marston Richard C. "Real Wages and the Terms of Trade: Alternative
Indexation Rules for an Open Economy." Journal of Money Credit and
Banking 16, No. 3

(August

198)4): 285—301.

Marston, Richard C. and Turnovsky, Stephen J.

"Imported Material Prices,

Wage Policy and Macroeconomic Stabilization." NBER Working Paper
Series, No. 125)4, December 1983.

McCallum, Bennett T. "On Non—uniqueness in Rational Expectations Models:
An Attempt at Perspective." Journal of Monetary Economics 11 , No.

2

(March 1983): 139—68.

___________

"Monetarist

Rules in the Light of Recent Experiences." American

Economic Review, 714 No. 2 (May 198)4):

388-91.

Meade, James E. "The Meaning of Internal Balance." Economic Journal 8,
No. 3

(September

1978):

1423—35.

Mishkin, Frederic S. "The Causes of Inflation" in Price stability and Public
Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of' Kansas City, 19314:

12)4.

Phelps, Edmund S. "Commodity-Supply Shock and Full—Employment Monetary
Policy." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 10, No. 2 (May 1978):
206—221.

49

Phelps, Edmund S. and Taylor, John B. "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary
Policy under Rational Expectations." Journal of Political Economy 85,
No. 1 (February 1977): 163—90.
Poole, William. "Comments on Paper by Tobin." Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1 (1930): 79-85.
Rasche, :obert H. and Tatom, John A. "Energy Price Snooks, Aggregate Supply

and Monetary Policy: The Theory and the International Evidence." In
Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer (eds.) Supply Shocks, Incentives and
National Wealth, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,

Vol. 1. Amsterdam: North—Holland Publishing Co., 1981, pp. 9—93.

Taylor,

John B. "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts." Journal of

Political Economy 88, No. 1 (February 1980): 1—23.

"What Would Nominal GNP Targeting Do To the Business Cycle?"

___________

Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 22, Spring
1935, forthcoming.

Tobin, James. "Stabilization Policy Ten Years After." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1 (1980): 19—71.
_________

"Commentary" in Industrial Change and Public Policy, Federal

Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1983: 113—22.
Turnovsky, Stephen J. "Exchange Market Intervention Policies in a Small Open
Economy." in Bhandari, J. and Putman B. (eds.) Economic Interdependence

and Flexible Exchange Rates, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983, pp. 286'
311

Weitzman 1artin L. "Some Macroeconomic Implications of Alternative
Compensation Systems." Economic Journal 93, No. !t (December 1983):
763—83.

