                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INCORPORATING EMPLOYEE HETEROGENEITY INTO DEFAULT RULES FOR
                     RETIREMENT PLAN SELECTION

                                          Gopi Shah Goda
                                    Colleen Flaherty Manchester

                                        Working Paper 16099
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16099


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2010




We would like to thank James Robertson for excellent research assistance, and Kristine Brown, Maria
Fitzpatrick, Caroline Hoxby, Damon Jones, Ron Laschever, Brigitte Madrian, Olivia Mitchell, Kevin
Mumford, Anita Alves Pena, Greg Rosston, John Shoven, and Sita Slavov for helpful comments as
well as seminar participants at Stanford University, the University of Minnesota and the NBER Summer
Institute. This research was supported by the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College pursuant
to a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration through the Steven H. Sandell 2009-2010 Grant
Program for Junior Scholars in Retirement Research. The opinions and conclusions are solely those
of the authors and should not be construed as representing the opinions or policy of the Social Security
Administration, any agency of the Federal Government, the Center for Retirement Research at Boston
College, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Gopi Shah Goda and Colleen Flaherty Manchester. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Incorporating Employee Heterogeneity into Default Rules for Retirement Plan Selection
Gopi Shah Goda and Colleen Flaherty Manchester
NBER Working Paper No. 16099
July 2010, Revised February 2012
JEL No. H8,J26

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the effect of incorporating heterogeneity into default rules by examining the choice between
retirement plans at a firm which transitioned from a defined benefit (DB) to a defined contribution
(DC) plan. The default plan for existing employees varied discontinuously depending on their age.
Employing regression discontinuity techniques, we find that the default increased the probability of
enrollment in the default plan by 60 percentage points. We develop a framework to solve for the optimal
default rule analytically and numerically and find that considerable welfare gains are possible if defaults
vary by observable characteristics.


Gopi Shah Goda
Stanford University
SIEPR
366 Galvez St.
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
gopi@stanford.edu

Colleen Flaherty Manchester
Human Resources and Industrial Relations
University of Minnesota
Room 3-300R
321 - 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
cmanch@umn.edu
1    Introduction

The impact of default rules, which specify an individual’s outcome when no choice is made, has
been well-documented over the last decade. From dramatically increasing participation in 401(k)
plans (e.g., Madrian and Shea 2001) to influencin organ donor status (e.g., Johnson and Goldstein

2003), default rules have a large effect on outcomes despite holding the set of choices constant.
They have attracted widespread attention because their influentia effects challenge the standard

economic assumption of rational decision-making (DellaVigna 2009). Furthermore, the strong
effects of defaults open up the possibility for welfare-enhancing policy interventions.

    In this paper, we examine the role of default provisions in a new setting: a one-time, irre-
vocable choice between two alternative pension plans, a define benefi (DB) plan and a define
contribution (DC) plan. While DB plans provide retirement benefit that are a set formula based on

earnings and service, DC plans provide benefit based on tax-advantaged contributions and sub-
sequent investment performance. Because the plans differ in their accrual patterns and risk char-

acteristics, decisions regarding the two plans can lead to substantially different retirement income
profiles Furthermore, the fact that the choice cannot be changed after a particular date represents

an important distinction from much of the previous work on defaults in the context of planning
for retirement. In particular, decisions regarding asset allocation, the rate of contributions, or even
participation in 401(k) plans are choices that affect one’s financia circumstances over a horizon as

short as a single pay period and can be corrected if mistakes are thought to have been made. By
contrast, an irreversible choice between retirement plans can lead to significantl different amounts

of wealth.
    We examine a particular firm s transition from a DB plan to a DC plan. While all new em-

ployees were offered only the DC plan, the fir      offered existing workers a one-time opportunity
to make an irreversible choice between the DB plan and the DC plan for all future benefi accruals
while employed at the firm Employees who did not actively choose a retirement plan were en-

rolled by default into one of the two plans, assigned based on their age at the time of the transition:
the DB plan was the default for individuals age 45 or older, while the new DC plan was the default

                                                  1
for employees under age 45.

   The unique nature of the default allows us to estimate the causal effect using a regression
discontinuity framework. This methodology differs from past studies of the effect of defaults,

which have exploited changes in a default policy regime over time or across localities to identify
the effect of the default. Figure 1 depicts the percent enrollment in the DC plan as a function of
age. By visual inspection, the large discontinuity at age 45 supports the hypothesis that the default

had a substantial effect on plan enrollment. Formally, our regression estimates likewise indicate
a strong effect: individuals just under the age of 45 are approximately 60 percentage points more

likely to enroll in the DC plan relative to those just over age 45 at the time of plan transition. Given
the permanent nature of the decision and the large amount of wealth at stake, the effect is even

more dramatic than previous finding of the effects of defaults.
   We also consider the potential gains from having a heterogeneous default rule. We model
default rules that are characterized by a cutoff age where employees younger than the age cutoff

are assigned the DC plan as their default and employees older than this cutoff age have a DB plan as
the default, and provide an expression for the optimal cutoff age from the perspective of employees

at the firm where the objective function maximizes the employees’ expected wealth, adjusted for
differences in risk. We allow for the propensity to follow the default to vary with the employee’s

age in relation to the cutoff age, reflectin the fact that employees’ likelihood of following the
default may be endogenous to the chosen cutoff age. We defin measures to evaluate the gain
from implementing the optimal age-based default against alternative universal default policies in

which all employees are assigned the same default plan or a policy that incorporates additional
characteristics in the determination of the default.

   We illustrate properties of the optimal age cutoff numerically for the fir      in our analysis that
underwent the transition. We fin that, under baseline assumptions, the firm s chosen age cutoff of

45 is within the range of optimal cutoff ages under reasonable assumptions regarding risk aversion,
and show how these results change with the value of different parameters. Finally, we fin that an
optimal age-based default policy is far superior to a universal policy and steers over 90 percent of


                                                   2
employees to their optimal plan over a broad range of plausible levels of risk aversion. However,

the relative value of each retirement plan is strongly influence by the level of risk aversion as-
sumed. Therefore, if the employer misestimates the level of risk aversion among employees or if

there is substantial heterogeneity in risk aversion across the workforce, the benefit of conditioning
the default on age are reduced. Nonetheless, the benefit of an age-based default are still greater
than those under a universal DC default and comparable to those under a universal DB default in

our context.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the

changing pension landscape and describes how our analysis builds upon the literature on retirement
plan choice and default provisions. Section 3 presents the regression discontinuity analysis to

identify the causal effect of the default on plan enrollment. Section 4 models the optimal age-
based default rule and its properties for the general case, while Section 5 empirically illustrates the
results from Section 4 using simulated retirement wealth and variability for the employees at the

fir in our setting. Section 6 concludes the paper.



2    Background and Related Literature

Over the last 30 years, there has been a pronounced shift from DB plans to DC plans as a result of
legislative changes that increased the administrative burden of offering DB plans and changing de-

mand from an increasingly mobile workforce. These changes led employers to replace terminated
DB plans with DC plans (Papke 1999; GAO 2008) and made DC plans the most common type of
newly implemented employer-provided retirement plan (Kruse 1995). In a recent study, the GAO

found that approximately 3.3 million workers who actively participate in a DB plan were affected
by a DB plan “freeze,” or the discontinuation of future benefi accruals (GAO 2008). Among

these, approximately 83 percent implemented alternative retirement plans, usually a DC plan, im-
plying that a substantial number of employees have experienced a plan migration. A 2003 report

by Towers-Perrin indicates that 14 percent of programs that implemented a plan change in recent



                                                  3
years allowed current employees to choose between the old and new plan (Towers-Perrin 2003).

   This paper builds off both the literature on determinants of retirement plan selection and the
literature on the role of default provisions on individual’s retirement savings behavior. The two

types of retirement plans differ in the risk faced by participants: participants in DC plans bear the
risk of poor investment experience, while DB participants are exposed to the labor market risk
of unexpected separations as well as the risk of their employer defaulting on pension obligations.

The consensus in the literature on plan selection is that the expected relative value of retirement
wealth under either plan depends on an individual’s risk preferences, demographic characteristics,

and expected job mobility (Bodie, Marcus and Merton 1988; Papke 1999; Clark and Pitts 1999;
Clark, Ghent and McDermed 2006; Brown and Weisbenner 2007). Studies in this area typically

evaluate whether the individual determinants of plan selection are consistent with economic theory
in terms of which worker characteristics are associated with higher expected retirement wealth for
a DC plan relative to a DB plan, or vice versa. These papers use data from institutions, such as

public university systems, that offer individuals a choice between enrolling in either a DC or a
DB plan (Clark and Pitts 1999; Clark, Ghent and McDermed 2006; Brown and Weisbenner 2007;

Manchester 2010) or those that have changed plan offerings, for example, replacing a DB plan
with a DC plan (Papke 2004; Yang 2005).

   The second branch of literature – the role of default rules in retirement savings behavior –
developed from the fact that DC plans shift the responsibility of enrollment, contribution, and in-
vestment decisions to the individual. There is now a large established body of literature that shows

that default provisions can have a large impact on saving decisions (for summary, see Beshears,
Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2008)). This literature has investigated the role of defaults in deci-

sions regarding participation (e.g., Madrian and Shea 2001), contribution rates (e.g., Choi, Laibson,
Madrian and Metrick 2004), asset allocation (e.g., Choi, Laibson and Madrian 2005) and, recently,

distributions from DC plans (Mitchell, Mottola, Utkus and Yamaguchi 2009). Typically these stud-
ies use changes in 401(k) plan characteristics and default rules at a particular employer as a type
of “natural experiment” to investigate the causal effect of defaults on employee retirement saving,


                                                 4
particularly among new hires. This literature has found that despite the fact that a default does

not change the menu of options, switching the default option has substantial effects on retirement
savings decisions at each juncture. It is important to note, however, that these previous studies

estimate changes in an outcome variable that has a limited time horizon because participants can
change their enrollment decisions at future dates. On the other hand, plan choice at the time of
a transition from DB to DC plans is irreversible. As pointed out by Beshears et al. (2008), this

permanent feature of the decision may mitigate the effect of defaults in the context of plan choice
relative to previous results in the literature.

       While the role of default rules in savings plans has been well-studied, the literature on the role
of default provisions on plan choice is much more limited. In order to determine the causal effect

of a default in this context, there must be a choice of plans and variation in the default plan either
across employees or over time. Past research on firm transitioning from DB plans to DC plans
has been in settings where the authors were unable to exploit any variation in the default rule to

estimate a causal effect. For example, Papke (2004) and Yang (2005) both examined a one-time
plan transition with a universal DB default, which precluded the identificatio of the default’s

causal effect on plan choice.1
       While there are a few examples of heterogeneous defaults in the realm of retirement savings

(e.g., default distribution options for DB plans that vary by marital status and target-date funds
which vary default asset allocation by age), there are often potential legal consequences of treating
employees differently. As a result, data limitations have thus far prevented the explicit examina-
   1   Both Lachance, Mitchell and Smetters (2003) and Milevsky and Promislow (2004) evaluate
the option instituted by the State of Florida in which public employees were given the opportunity

to convert their accrued DB benefit into an individually-managed DC plan. The plan choice
was revocable in that employees had a one-time option to “buy back” their DB benefi prior to

retirement and both papers focus on analytically evaluating the value of this option, rather than the
determinants of plan choice.




                                                     5
tion of the effect of incorporating heterogeneity into default provisions (Carroll, Choi, Laibson,

Madrian and Mertrick 2009).
    Recent work on defaults has, however, recognized the presence of worker heterogeneity in the

design of welfare-enhancing policy interventions. Carroll et al. (2009) fin that a third type of
enrollment, “active decision,” in which individuals must actively choose between enrolling or not
is preferable to standard or automatic enrollment even when there is a large degree of heterogeneity

in preferred savings rates if individuals have a strong propensity to procrastinate. When individuals
are forced to make an active choice, the effect on enrollment rates in 401(k) plans is comparable to

a default policy of automatic enrollment. A recent study by Handel (2009) suggests that removing
switching costs by requiring active choice may allow people to make more appropriate health

plan choices, but may also lead to worse outcomes in health care markets by increasing adverse
selection into health plans.
    We contribute to the existing literature in several ways. First, we quantify the effect of default

provisions in a new context: an irreversible decision regarding plan choice. Second, we are able
to exploit the variation in the default rule across employees as a new source of identification and

the particular type of variation allows for estimation using a regression discontinuity framework.
Third, we provide an analytical framework for solving for the optimal age-based default rule and

for assessing the gains from incorporating heterogeneity relative to alternative default policies.
Finally, we illustrate these results empirically using data from the fir in our setting.



3    Causal Effect of Default on Plan Enrollment

This section outlines the regression discontinuity methodology used to estimate the causal effect
of the default, provides additional details on the employees involved in the transition, and reports

the results from estimating the effect of this particular age-based default on plan enrollment.




                                                  6
3.1    Regression Discontinuity Methodology

We implement a standard regression discontinuity framework (see, for example, Imbens and Lemieux

(2008) and Lee and Lemieux (2009)) to examine the role of the default rule on plan choice. In par-
ticular, we are interested in estimating how being assigned the DC plan as the default relative to

the DB plan affects the probability of switching to the DC plan. In this methodology, the treat-
ment (being assigned the DC plan as the default) is determined by the value of a forcing variable

(the employee’s age as of September 1, 2002) being above or below a fi ed cutoff value (age 45).
Therefore, employees under age 45 received the treatment, while those age 45 or older did not.
Because the treatment is a deterministic function of the forcing variable, age, this framework is

known as a “sharp” regression discontinuity design. This methodology allows for age to be corre-
lated with plan choice; however, the key assumption is that the relationship between age and the

outcome is a smooth, continuous function. This assumption allows any discontinuity at the cutoff
value to be interpreted as a causal effect (Imbens and Lemieux 2008). Therefore, the discontinuity

in plan enrollment at the cutoff age is the causal effect of the DC default on the probability of
enrolling in the DC plan.
   Formally, the treatment is the default assignment, given by di , and is a deterministic function

of the participant’s age as of September 1, 2002, Ai ,


                                               di = 1{Ai < c},                                        (1)

where the variable c denotes the cutoff value and is equal to 45 in this context. A value of di = 1
implies that the participant is assigned the DC plan as the default and di = 0 corresponds to being

assigned the DB plan as the default.
   The outcome of interest, enrollment into the DC plan, is given by the variable Yi . We are

interested in the causal impact of di on Yi . This treatment effect, given by τ, is estimated as follows:


            τ = lim E[Yi |Xi , Ai = c] − lim E[Yi |Xi , Ai = c] = E[Yidi =1 −Yidi =0 |Xi , Ai = c],   (2)
                 a↑c                     a↓c




                                                      7
where Xi represents other observable characteristics that are correlated with the outcome variable

Yi . The estimate of τ is thus obtained by estimating the following regression equation:


                            Yi = α + β(Ai − c) + τdi + γ(Ai − c)di + Xi π + εi                    (3)


for individuals whose age is in the interval [c − h, c + h] for a bandwidth value of h. We examine the

sensitivity of our results to different choices of bandwidths and to including higher order powers
of (Ai − c).


3.2      Data

To estimate the regression discontinuity estimate of the effect of the default as outlined above, we
utilize administrative data from a large non-profi fir     that offered 925 existing union employees

an opportunity to remain in a DB plan or switch to a DC plan.2,3 While we do not know the exact
motives of the default rule, the firm s decision to discontinue the DB plan to new hires was likely
due to increased administrative costs and follows the widespread movement toward DC plans.

       These existing employees had approximately six months to make the election. As of September
1, 2002, employees were enrolled in their chosen plan or, if they had failed to make a choice, were

assigned to their default plan depending on whether they were older or younger than age 45 on
that date.4 We refer to those who formally chose their plan as “active” participants, and those who
   2   While the fir   employs over 5,000 workers, only existing employees covered by a collective
bargaining agreement were eligible for this transition; the existing non-unionized employees were

offered a similar one-time opportunity to transition out of the DB plan into the DC plan in 1997.
Data are not available for this earlier transition. However, the default rule for these workers was
also an age-based default with a cutoff value of age 45.
   3 The DB and DC plans were of roughly similar generosity; the specifi features of each plan are


discussed in greater detail in Section 5.
   4 The default asset allocation for the DC plan was the Fidelity Investments target-date retirement


funds. While we use the asset allocation of this fund in the empirical evaluation of the optimal


                                                    8
failed to indicate a plan as “passive” participants.

   Table 1 shows the distribution of the type of choice (active vs. passive) and the enrollment
decision for the two age groups. Of those employees eligible for the transition, just under half

made an active choice. However, the vast majority (70 percent) of employees who made an active
choice mimicked the default rule, which is consistent with employees taking the default provisions
as advice (Beshears et al. 2008).

   After the plan transition, 48 percent of employees were enrolled in the DC plan (Table 2). The
dataset contains information regarding the participant’s age, gender, ethnicity/race, hourly wage,

tenure, and hours per week. In addition, the employees are divided between two nearby campuses,
a primary location where approximately two-thirds of the employees work and a secondary smaller

location a few miles away. Summary statistics for these additional variables are provided in Table
2. We restrict the sample to workers under age 65, the normal retirement age at this fir under the
DB plan; the average age is approximately 46 years.

   One potential concern is that the sample used for the subsequent empirical evaluation is com-
prised of only unionized workers who may differ from non-unionized workers. Given that unions

have historically favored DB plans over DC plans, the overall participation rates in the DB plan
may be higher than in a non-unionized sample. Unionized workers may also have different propen-

sities to enroll in the default plan. However, the estimation of the causal effect of the default, as
outlined in Section 3.1, is not affected by factors that influenc the sample’s overall behavior be-
cause it is identifie from the outcomes of workers on either side of age 45.


3.3    Regression Discontinuity Results

In order to validate using regression discontinuity methods to estimate a causal effect, we firs
verify that there is no discontinuity in the density of age at the cutoff value of age 45. As shown in

Figure 2, there is a relatively constant density of employees surrounding the cutoff value of age 45.
default in Section 5, testing the influenc of this default fund on asset allocation decisions is beyond
the scope of this paper.


                                                   9
Second, we confir that other observable covariates are a smooth function of the forcing variable

and do not experience a discontinuity at the cutoff value as shown in the six panels of Figure 3.
      After having verifie these conditions for causal inference, we estimate the coefficien τ in

Equation (3) by fittin linear probability models to the data assuming a rectangular kernel. Table
3 summarizes regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of the DC default on enrollment into
the DC plan assuming a bandwidth of f ve years. Column (1) reports the estimate of τ with no other

right-hand side regressors. Column (2), the local linear estimate, allows the relationship between
age and DC enrollment to be linear, with a different slope below and above the discontinuity.

Column (3) adds in control variables summarized in Table 2. Columns (4) and (5) provide estimates
assuming the relationship between age and DC enrollment follows a cubic function, and differ only

in the addition of control variables in Column (5).
      These estimates indicate that the default had a strong effect on the enrollment into the DC plan,
confirmin the initial evidence in Figure 1. An employee just under age 45 was approximately 60

percentage points more likely to enroll in the DC plan than an employee just over age 45. The
estimated effect is larger when higher order powers of (Ai − c) are included in the regression. We

prefer the estimates in Column (3) because the linear specificatio fit the data well, as shown in
Figure 1, which plots the best fi line and cubic polynomial on either side of the discontinuity.

Quantitatively similar results are found when estimating the regression using the nonlinear probit
model which accounts for the dichotomous nature of the dependent variable and the effects are
robust to the choice of bandwidth as shown in Appendix A.5

      Adding demographic control variables does not substantially improve the fi of the model after
the default provision is taken into account. Coefficient on gender and race binary variables (not

shown) are statistically insignificant as are coefficien on hours, hourly wage, and whether the
employee works in the primary location. Only the coefficien on length of past tenure in the fir is
  5   Cross-validation methods are often used to fin the optimal bandwidth in regression discontinu-
ity estimation. However, because the function on either side of the discontinuity is approximately

linear, the results are inherently less susceptible to the bandwidth choice (see Figure 1).


                                                   10
statistically significant though the estimate is quantitatively small. We also examine whether the

causal effect of the default on plan enrollment differs by gender to investigate whether females are
more susceptible to the default and we fin no difference.6

        In summary, we fin a substantial effect of the default on plan choice: the default increases the
probability of enrolling in one plan over the other by 60 percentage points. This effect is, to our
knowledge, the firs estimate of causal effect of the default in the context of the choice between

DB and DC plans. There are several potential mechanisms behind the effect of the default we
observe, including inertia, transaction costs, complexity, inattention, anchoring, procrastination,

or the perception of endorsement (Beshears et al. (2008); Bernheim, Fradkin and Popov (2011)).
While the magnitude of the estimated effect is comparable to prior work on defaults in the re-

tirement savings literature, the effect estimated here is somewhat surprising given the potentially
large differences in wealth accrual across the two plans and the irreversible nature of the decision
(Beshears et al. 2008). In addition, the heterogeneity in the default across age provides a unique

source of identificatio for estimating the causal effect of the default.



4        Solving for the Optimal Age-Based Default Rule

The estimates of the default shown in the previous section along with those found in prior literature
indicate that defaults can be powerful tools to steer economic behavior. An important question

that has been broached in the literature on defaults and in policy circles is how defaults may be
constructed to improve welfare. In this section we explore: (1) how to set an optimal default based
on observable characteristics (namely age), and (2) how to determine the value of incorporating

heterogeneity into default provisions based on age relative to alternative default policies.7
    6   These results are not reported but are available upon request.
    7   Note that the approach outlined in this section need not be limited to the particular fir in this

paper; in theory, any firm s employee and pension plan characteristics could be utilized to obtain
the optimal age-based default rule for that firm



                                                     11
4.1       Characterizing retirement wealth in the DB and DC plan

We begin by characterizing the future benefit that accrue in both the DB and the DC plan.8 The

DB formula is define by b j (w j ) for all years j between 0 and r − a, where r is the age of exit
from the fir        and a is the worker’s current age, as a function of annual wages in year j, w j . The

function b j is completely general in that it can allow for various types of accrual patterns.9 The
wealth evaluated at retirement age ρ in the DB plan as a function of age a is then:

                                                    Z r−a
                                        wDB (a) =             b j (w j )Aρ d j,                       (4)
                                                     0


where Aρ is the actuarial present value of a stream of $1 annual payments commencing at age ρ
and paid until death, which therefore differs by gender due to differences in life expectancies.

       The wealth in the DC plan at retirement age ρ is equal to the contributions made, accumulated
with returns from investment experience. Contributions are typically a percentage of annual wages,

though they can vary from year to year. We denote employer contributions into the employee’s ac-
count in year j by c j and the sequence of returns in all subsequent years by δ(k) for k ∈ [ j, ρ − a].10
   8   At the fir    in our setting, while the employee had also accrued years of service prior to the

plan migration, the employee received that benefi stream regardless of the plan they were enrolled
in after the transition. Therefore, the value of past benefit accrued are not included in wealth cal-

culations for either the DB or DC plan and are not relevant for the comparison of future retirement
wealth across the two types of plans.
  9 For example, a fir  that offers 2 percent of average wages for each year of service as the annual

retirement benefi would have b j (w j ) = 0.02w j for all j. Similarly, a fir that offers its employees
2 percent × years of service × the average salary over the last f ve years at the fir as the annual
                                                                                                       wj
retirement benefi would be characterized by b j (w j ) = 0 if j < r −a−5 and b j (w j ) = 0.02(r −a)   5

if j ≥ r − a − 5.
   10 Note we assume c includes only employer contributions, not employee contributions. This
                      j

distinction is made so both plans’ values reflec the benefit provided by the employer only.




                                                         12
The wealth evaluated at retirement age ρ in the DC plan as a function of age a is then:

                                             Z r−a             R ρ−a
                                                                       δ(k)dk
                                 wDC (a) =           c jw je    j               d j.                (5)
                                              0


       We next compute the expected discounted utility of retirement wealth for each plan by ex-
plicitly modeling two sources of uncertainty: separation risk, which affects the age of exit r, and

investment risk, which affects the sequence of returns δ(·).11 We assume r and δ(·) are drawn
from a joint distribution h p (r, δ|a < r ≤ r¯) for plan p ∈ {DB, DC}. Separation risk affects the value

of both the DB and the DC plan: if the employee leaves the firm both contributions to the DC
account and benefi accruals in the DB plan cease. The degree to which separation risk affects

the relative values of the two plans depend on whether the rate of wealth accrual is front-ended,
back-ended, or age-neutral. As DB wealth accrual is typically more concentrated towards the end
of one’s career, the risk that an employee leaves the fir may affect DB wealth accrual more than

DC wealth accrual. On the other hand, investment risk only affects DC retirement wealth as DB
wealth does not depend on δ(·).12,13
  11   We do not explicitly model other sources of risk, such as the risk that the employer goes

bankrupt and can no longer honor DB pension obligations, or the risk of dying prior to retire-
ment. However, it can easily be shown that the results presented here are general to any types of

risk.
   12 In our numerical results that follow, we assume independence between separation risk and


investment risk and that the distribution does not vary by plan choice. We assume r is drawn from
                                    f (r)
a distribution f (r|a < r ≤ r¯) = 1−F(a)  where F is the cumulative distribution function of f and that
the sequence δ(·) is determined by a draw from a distribution g(δ). However, these assumptions

do not affect our analytical results, which are all in terms of the certainty equivalent.
  13 Our analysis omits future opportunities for pension wealth accrual in other jobs after separa-


tion. If there is significan backloading of DB wealth accrual, this omission will tend to undervalue
the DB plan relative to the DC plan in our framework.




                                                     13
       Assuming a discount rate β, the expected utilities for each plan are given by:

                                        Z ∞ Z r¯
                                                 U(wDB (a))
                    EU(wDB (a)) =                 ρ−a
                                                       hDB (r, δ|a < r ≤ r¯)drdδ                  (6)
                                   −∞ a    (1 + β)
                                  Z ∞ Z r¯
                                           U(wDC (a)) DC
                    EU(wDC (a)) =                  ρ−a
                                                       h (r, δ|a < r ≤ r¯)drdδ.                   (7)
                                   −∞ a (1 + β)


       We then defin the certainty equivalent for plan p ∈ {DB, DC} as:


                                      CE p (a) = U −1 (EU(w p (a))).                              (8)


The certainty equivalent CE p (a) for plan p is the amount that makes the individual indifferent
between receiving the amount CE p (a) for certain and the gamble characterized by the uncertain

income stream from plan p. Therefore, plan p̃ is preferable to plan p̂ if and only if CE p̃ (a) >
CE p̂ (a).


4.2       Solving for the Optimal Default Rule

We posit that the optimal default policy for workers is one that maximizes aggregate pension
wealth, as given by the the expected certainty equivalent that each employee receives aggregated

over all employees at the firm 14 We consider age-based default policies that take the following
form for a given cutoff age ã: (1) individuals younger than ã at time t are assigned the DC plan

as their default plan, and (2) individuals age ã or older at time t are assigned the DB plan as their
default plan.15

       We model an employee’s propensity to enroll in his or her default plan as endogenous to the
  14   While in this paper we focus on policies that are likely to maximize employee welfare, we
recognize that firm may have alternative objective functions that take into account the relative

costs of the two plans.


  15   A possible alternative age-based default policy is one in which the default plan would switch
from the DC to the DB plan once the employee achieved a certain age; however, this would increase

                                                   14
given age cutoff, ã, as the likelihood of choosing the default plan may depend on the default policy

itself. The function d(a, ã) represents the proportion of individuals age a who enroll in the default
plan define by the age cutoff ã. By allowing this function to vary with the cutoff age, individuals

closer in age to the cutoff age may opt out of the default at rates different from those farther from
the age cutoff.16
   We defin the minimum age among employees at the fir                   as a and the maximum age as a.

Formally, the optimal age-based default policy that satisfie conditions (1) and (2) above is define
by a∗ , where a∗ maximizes:

                                 Z a∗
                    L(a∗ ) =            [d(a, a∗ )CE DC (a) + (1 − d(a, a∗ ))CE DB (a)]da
                                   a
                                 Z a
                           +            [d(a, a∗ )CE DB (a) + (1 − d(a, a∗ ))CE DC (a)]da.           (9)
                                   a∗


   It is informative to consider a special case where two conditions are satisfied (1) d(a, a∗ ) =
k(a), which implies that the likelihood of enrolling in the default plan is not endogenous to the

choice of the cutoff age (i.e.   da∗ d(a, a ) = 0), and (2) d(a, a ) ≥ 0.5, which ensures that employees
                                  d        ∗                      ∗


are more likely to enroll in their default plan than in the alternative plan, reflectin the findin from
Section 3 and past literature on defaults. If these conditions are met, the maximization problem

is equivalent to that which emerges under the assumption that all employees enroll in their default
plan. For this special case, one can show that the optimal age-based default rule define by a∗ is

increasing in the value of parameters that improve the relative value of the DC plan over the DB
the administrative burden considerably because the transition would occur gradually over time.
  16 Note that the function d(a, ã) is completely general and could also reflec propensities to default


that differ across observable characteristics other than age. In our numerical simulation presented

in the next section, however, we will estimate the function to be linear in (a− ã) and not differ based
on other observable or unobservable characteristics. While these assumptions are consistent with
the effects of the default we estimate in Section 3.3, there may be heterogeneity in the propensity

to default along factors we do not observe.



                                                       15
plan.17 For example, an increase in the generosity of the employer contribution to the DC plan

would lead to an increase in the optimal cutoff age, thereby defaulting more employees into the
DC plan. Similarly, a more generous DB benefi plan formula would lead to a decrease in the

optimal cutoff age.
       The ability to set the default based on age rather than having the same default for all employees
at the fir     is at worst welfare-neutral because a universal default (i.e., a∗ equal to a or a) is a

choice available under the optimization procedure outlined above. But how much do employees
gain from a heterogeneous default that differs by age? Moreover, how much would be gained by

conditioning the default on additional observable characteristics?
       We evaluate the performance of the optimal age-based default policy using two measures, Nπ

and lossπ , where π denotes one of three potential policies: {universal DB default policy, universal
DC default policy, optimal age-based default policy}. Universal policies are important to consider
not only for their ease of implementation, but because a universal DB default policy has been a

common policy used by firm that have undergone a plan transition (e.g., the transitions evaluated
by Papke (2004) and Yang (2005)). A universal DC default may be attractive to firm that wish to

minimize future DB liabilities.
       We defin Nπ to be the number of employees whose default plan under policy π is suboptimal,

where
                                                      Z a
                                               Nπ ≡         1[CE>CEπ ] da                                 (10)
                                                       a

and lossπ to be the average loss in certainty equivalent for these employees, relative to the certainty

equivalent in their optimal plan:
                                                           R a CE−CEπ
                                                            a           da
                                               lossπ ≡           CE
                                                                                                          (11)
                                                                 Nπ

where CE = max(CE DB ,CE DC ) and CEπ represents the certainty equivalent of the plan specifie

as the default under policy π. By comparing the value of Nπ under the optimal age-based default
  17   The first-orde condition simplifie to CE DC (a∗ )−CE DB (a∗ ) = 0 and, under certain conditions,
            ∂CE(a)DC ∂CE(a)DB
                    − ∂γ
∂a∗            ∂γl
∂γl    =−                 l
            ∂CE(a)DC ∂CE(a)DB
                                       where γ is the vector of parameters [γl ] that defin the solution a∗ .
               ∂a   − ∂a        a=a∗


                                                            16
policy to that under either universal policy, we can determine the default policy’s ability to allocate

employees into their optimal plan. The magnitude of the difference in the certainty equivalents
for those defaulted into a suboptimal plan is encompassed in the measure lossπ . Because a default

based on all observable characteristics that influenc the value of each plan would result in no em-
ployees defaulted into a suboptimal plan, if Nπ is small under the optimal age-based default, then
conditioning the default on additional characteristics would be unlikely to result in additional wel-

fare gains, unless these additional characteristics were correlated with factors such as risk aversion
or separation hazards that influenc the relative value of the plans.

    It is important to note that our results implicitly assume that utility is additively separable in
other sources of retirement wealth (for example, from past or future employer plans or personal

savings accounts) and ignore the potential value of other benefit from DB or DC plans, such as
the ability to borrow against DC plan balances. We also ignore any potential effects on other com-
ponents of total compensation, for instance, the possibility that more workers enrolling in the plan

that gives them higher benefit increases the cost to the employer, thereby causing the employer to
reduce wages or other fringe benefits Despite these limitations, our framework provides valuable

insights into how heterogeneity may be introduced into default provisions.



5    Numerical Simulations of the Optimal Age-Based Default Rule

In this section we empirically evaluate the optimal age-based default using data from the large,
non-profi fir that was the focus of the analysis in Section 3. This allows us to evaluate how the
optimal cutoff age compares to the firm s chosen cutoff age of 45 and how the optimal cutoff age

changes with values of relevant parameters. We also quantify the value of conditioning the default
on age relative to alternative default policies, such as defaulting all employees to the same plan

or setting defaults that vary with additional characteristics. This analysis is performed under two
scenarios that differ in regards to the propensity of employees to enroll in their default plan.




                                                  17
5.1      Simulation methods and assumptions

We discretize the optimization procedure in the previous section and consider age-based default

policies where a∗ is an integer. We model uncertainty in r, the exit age from the firm and un-
certainty in the sequence of investment returns. Separation probabilities are assumed to follow a

constant hazard rate, h(t) =      pt
                                1−Pt−1   = λ where pt is the probability of leaving in time t and Pt−1
is the cumulative probability of leaving the fir in time t − 1 or earlier. To model investment risk

(δ(k) from our analytical framework), we simulate S draws of investment return sequences using a
Monte Carlo method outlined and used by Shoven and Sialm (1998, 2003) that draws series of asset
returns for three different asset classes: stocks, bonds, and money market. The distribution of re-

turns is assumed to be lognormal and draws are assumed to be serially-independent (see Appendix
B). Our numerical results assume that separation risk and investment risk are independent.18

       The assumptions used to simulate DB and DC retirement wealth are based on the known char-
acteristics of the fir   in our setting and are reported in Table 4. The firm s DB formula provides

workers a stream of payments equal to a constant percentage of the employee’s average wage for
each year of service at the firm so b j (w j ) = bw j for all j, where the DB multiplier b is equal to
2 percent. The employer’s contribution to the DC plan is comprised of 5 percent of the employ-

ees’ annual salary plus additional matching contributions, up to a total contribution of 10 percent.
We model our results assuming the median match percentage of 3.5 percent of salary for a total

employer contribution rate c equal to 8.5 percent.19 In evaluating both the DB and DC retirement
wealth, we assume real wages grow at a constant 2 percent per year, and a 2.5 percent rate of infla
tion. We assume a constant real discount rate d of 1 percent, and a constant separation hazard of
  18   If we assume that these risks are correlated, perhaps because poor economic conditions reduce
investment returns and increase involuntary separations, these two sources of risk would tend to

counteract each other, as high separation risk reduces the relative value of the DB plan and low
investment returns reduce the relative value of the DC plan.
  19 In order to obtain a match percentage of 3.5 percent of salary, employees must contribute


approximately 2.5 percent of their salary each year.


                                                    18
5 percent, taken from the data. The normal retirement age at the fir is 65, so we assume ρ = 65.

Annuity values are taken from Social Security Administration mortality tables for males and fe-
males born in 1960 and assume a 2.9 percent interest rate, implying an annuity value of 14.48 for

women and 13.15 for men.
       The mean, standard deviations, and covariances for different asset classes used in the simula-
tion are calibrated based on historical real returns reported by Ibbotson Associates (Ibbotson 2008)

and summarized in the bottom panel of Table 4. We assume asset allocation follows the pattern
of Fidelity Investments target-date retirement funds, the default fund allocation for DC partici-

pants at this firm 20 Target-date funds have become increasingly popular default options among
employer-sponsored savings accounts; Vanguard (2009) reports that 9 out of 10 plans with au-

tomatic enrollment have target-date funds as the default asset allocation. When illustrating the
comparative statics of the optimal age-based default policy, we vary each of these parameters from
their baseline values independently.

       We use the standard constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility function to evaluate the
expected discounted utility for each plan and to then translate it into a certainty equivalent for each

individual as in Equation (8). The functional form of the utility function is given by:

                                                     w1−α
                                            U(w) =        ,                                       (12)
                                                     1−α

where α is the measure of relative risk aversion. Estimates of α in the literature vary from 1

to 10, or higher depending on the context (e.g., Mehra and Prescott 1985; Kocherlakota 1996;
Chetty 2006). Recent work by Goldstein, Johnson and Sharpe (2008) estimate α = 6.1 from an

experimental setting in which participants indicated their preferences for a distribution of future
retirement income given a cost constraint. In our empirical analysis we vary α from 0 to 10 to
  20   We use the allocation for ages between 20 and 65 in 5-year intervals assumed by current funds
to fi a fractional multinomial logit model with fourth order age terms in order to estimate an

implied asset allocation across the three classes for ages between the 5-year intervals.



                                                  19
evaluate how a∗ changes with the level of risk aversion among employees at the firm

       We consider two scenarios that are characterized by different functional forms for the function
d(a, a∗ ), which specifie the likelihood of an a-year old employee enrolling in the default plan as

designated by age cutoff a∗ . Scenario 1 assumes that the propensity to enroll in the default plan is
given by d(a, a∗ ) = k(a) ≥ 0.5. As discussed in Section 4.2 the interpretation is that employees’
propensity to follow the default does not depend on the age cutoff itself and employees are at least

as likely to enroll in the default plan as the alternative.
       Scenario 2 models the propensity to enroll in the default plan as a linear function of the differ-

ence between the employee’s age a and the cutoff age a∗ :


                             d(a, a∗ ) = k + b1 1(a<a∗ ) + b2 1(a≥a∗ ) (a − a∗ ).                   (13)
                                                                      



This functional form allows for the possibility that individuals closer to the cutoff age may opt

out of the default at rates different from those farther from the age cutoff. If b1 < 0 and b2 >
0, individuals whose age is close to the age cutoff, for whom |a − a∗ | is small, will have lower

propensities to enroll in the default plan relative to those far from the cutoff, reflectin the idea that
a particular default policy may be less appropriate for individuals near the age cutoff.21

       We estimate the parameters k, b1 , and b2 from Equation 13 using enrollment data from the
fir     in our setting. We run linear regression models where the dependent variable is a binary
variable which equals 1 if the employee enrolled in his or her default plan. This procedure yields

k̂ = 0.787, b̂1 = −0.012, and b̂2 = 0.0074. Figure 4 plots the estimated propensity to follow the
default and the implied DC enrollment rate for three cutoff ages ac = {35, 45, 55}.22 When a < ac ,

the default propensity is equal to the proportion in the DC plan because the DC plan is the default
  21   By restricting k, b1 , and b2 to be independent of a∗ , we are assuming that the parameters of

the function are not dependent on the chosen age cutoff. This assumption may be violated if, for
instance, employees are more likely to enroll in the default plan when the age cutoff is optimally

set.
  22   Note we constrain the function d to give values between 0 and 1 for all ages.


                                                     20
option. When a ≥ ac , the implied DC plan enrollment is 1− d(a, ac ). When a = a∗ , then d(a, a∗ ) =

k; this parameter is related to the estimated effect of the DC default on DC enrollment from our
regression discontintuity estimation (the parameter τ from Equation 3) by τ = k − (1 − k) = 2k − 1.

The implied estimate of the effect of the default on enrollment behavior is 0.574, which is similar
to the estimates provided in Table 3, Columns 2 and 3, that assume a linear relationship between
age and DC enrollment. Plot (a) of Figure 4 shows that the implied DC enrollment rates by age

match the data well, and as discussed above in relation to Figure 1, a linear function is a good
approximation for plan enrollment behavior in this context. Plots (b) and (c) of Figure 4 show the

corresponding default propensities and implied rates of DC enrollment for alternative cutoff ages
that arise from the parameters k, b1 , and b2 estimated from our firm s data.


5.2    Main simulation results

The panels in Figure 5 show how the certainty equivalents of the two pension plans varies with
age and across different levels of risk aversion for each individual in our data. The absolute levels
of the certainty equivalent are decreasing in the relative risk aversion, ranging from an average of

$112,106 (DC) and $98,390 (DB) for α = 0 to $7,261 (DC) and $18,015 (DB) for α = 10. For
lower levels of risk aversion, the certainty equivalent is higher in the DC plan for younger workers

as shown in panels (a) and (b) in Figure 5. For the highest level of risk aversion shown (panel (d)),
the certainty equivalent from the DB plan exceeds the DC plan for all ages.

   As outlined in Section 4, we defin the optimal cutoff age a∗ for the simple, age-based default
as the one which maximizes the aggregate pension wealth (Equation (9)). We use our baseline
parameter assumptions to solve for a∗ for different levels of risk aversion given that employees’

propensity to enroll in the default plan is (1) independent of a∗ and greater than one-half (Scenario
1), or (2) a linear function of the difference between the employee’s age and the cutoff age, with

parameters estimated from the data (Scenario 2). For Scenario 1, the objective function in Equation
(9) is plotted against age for different values of α in the panels of Figure 6. The age at which the

objective function is maximized is a∗ , and is reported in the firs row of Table 5 for different values


                                                  21
of α. The optimal cutoff value ranges from 47 for α = 2 to 20 for α = 10, and is non-monotonic

in nature due to the opposing sources of risk: the presence of investment risk implies that more
risk-averse individuals would prefer the DC plan, but separation risk affects the value of the DB

plan more than the DC plan and thus pushes the optimal cutoff age in the opposite direction. This
non-monotonicity results from the particular features of the two pension plans considered.
   We also plot the objective function against age by risk aversion for Scenario 2. These graphs

are shown in Figure 7 and the age at which the objective function is maximized is reported in the
firs row of Table 6. The range of optimal cutoff values is similar to Scenario 1, ranging from 49

when α = 2 to 23 when α = 10.
   For levels of risk aversion less than 4, the optimal age cutoff is between 42 and 49, largely

in line with the firm s chosen age cutoff of 45 under these baseline assumptions. Therefore, our
simulation results indicate that the firm s cutoff age is close to optimal for levels of risk aversion
less than 4 under the assumption that the objective was to maximize aggregate pension wealth. The

lowest value for α such that a universal DB default is optimal is approximately equal to 8 when
the propensity to default is independent of the age cutoff (Scenario 1); a universal DB default is

never optimal when we use the predicted propensity to default estimated from the data (Scenario
2). Therefore, we fin that for a sizable range of risk aversion, an age-based default rule produces

a higher aggregate pension wealth than a universal DB default under our baseline assumptions. A
universal DC default is never optimal under the baseline assumptions.


5.3    Sensitivity of Cutoff Age to Alternative Assumptions

In Tables 5 and 6 we also illustrate how the optimal age cutoff changes with different assumptions

regarding pension plan characteristics, asset allocation, separation hazards, investment risk, wage
growth, the discount rate, and the rate of inflation For both scenarios, we fin that increasing

the generosity of the DC contribution rate or reducing the generosity of the DB plan increases the
optimal cutoff age across all values of α. The optimal cutoff age depends on the asset allocation

chosen in the DC plan such that when the portfolio is invested solely in stocks, the riskiest asset


                                                 22
class, the optimal cutoff age is higher for lower levels of risk aversion and is lower for higher levels

of risk aversion. Analogously, investing only in bonds reduces the optimal cutoff age; however, a∗
does not vary as dramatically across different levels of risk aversion. Under the assumption that

DC participants are invested solely in low-yielding risk-free assets, the DB plan performs better
than the DC plan for all levels of risk aversion.
   Eliminating separation risk entirely illustrates that the optimal cutoff age monotonically de-

creases in risk aversion due to investment risk. Similarly, eliminating investment risk while main-
taining the base assumption for separation risk yields a monotonically increasing optimal cutoff

age. As separation risk increases, the certainty equivalent in the DB plan is reduced more than
the certainty equivalent in the DC plan, and, therefore, the optimal cutoff age increases, defaulting

additional employees into the DC plan. If the risk of the three asset classes is doubled, the optimal
age cutoff is unchanged under risk neutrality and decreases relative to the baseline for higher levels
of risk aversion.

   The optimal cutoff age is weakly decreasing in real wage growth, indicating that higher wage
growth increases the relative value of DB plan benefit over DC plan benefits though the effect is

small. For Scenario 1, the real discount rate does not affect the relative values of the DB and DC
certainty equivalents; therefore, the optimal cutoff age does not change. For Scenario 2, a higher

real discount rate has a very limited effect on the optimal cut-off age. The inflatio rate assumption
affects the optimal cutoff age because inflatio differentially affects the value of the DB relative
to the DC plan. DB plan participants’ benefit are based on a formula that includes their nominal

wages, from what may be many years prior to retirement. By contrast, early contributions in DC
accounts are invested in markets that implicitly adjust for inflation High inflatio therefore reduces

the value of DB benefit relative to DC benefit and increases the optimal cutoff age. Note that
the low sensitivity to wage growth and the higher sensitivity to the inflatio rate is likely due to

the fact that our firm s DB benefi formula uses wages throughout a worker’s career rather than
common alternatives, such as a formula that bases benefit on fina average salary. This alternative
formula would be more likely to protect DB participants from inflatio and would reward higher


                                                    23
wage growth more than a DC plan. On the other hand, the relative effect of separation risk on the

DB plan is likely to be greater with a DB formula that bases benefit on fina average salary.
   In our analysis, we do not explicitly value the differences in death benefit and vesting require-

ments between the two plans. In our firm the DB plan provides a survivor benefi to a named
beneficiar equal to 50 percent of the accrued retirement benefit while the DC plan provides the
survivor the worker’s entire DC account. This makes the DB plan less attractive for all workers,

with a greater differential for younger workers who have a higher likelihood of dying at some
point before retirement relative to older workers who are closer to retirement. Similarly, because

DB benefit vest after 5 years of service while employer contributions to DC accounts vest after
only 1 year, incorporating vesting requirements into our analysis would have an analogous effect,

raising the relative value of the DC plan for all workers and particularly for younger workers who
are more likely to have less tenure at the firm The combination of these effects would slightly
increase the optimal cutoff age, assigning the DC plan as the default for more workers, when the

propensity to follow the default is independent of the age cutoff.


5.4   Evaluation of Optimal Age-Based Default Policy

We quantify the gain from an age-based default policy under both scenarios using the measures

Nπ and lossπ as outlined in Equations (10) and (11) and report the results in Table 7. For Scenario
1, the optimal age-based default policy assigns at most 9 workers a suboptimal default plan. The

largest average loss in certainty equivalent for these employees is 4 percent. Under Scenario 2, the
optimal age-based default assigns at most 89 employees (9.6 percent) a suboptimal default plan
with an average loss in certainty equivalent of 4 percent or less. Because the optimal cutoff age

in Scenario 1 was selected to maximize the aggregate certainty equivalent of the default plan, it is
not surprising that the age-based default rule fares better in Scenario 1 as compared to Scenario 2.

More important is the comparison of the age-based default to a homogenous default. A universal
DC default assigns at least 50 percent of employees a suboptimal default plan with an average

loss in certainty equivalent of approximately 34 percent. A universal DB default performs notably


                                                 24
better than the universal DC default, particularly for higher values of risk aversion.

   Furthermore, because the optimal age-based policy assigns at least 90 percent of employees
a default plan that provides their higher certainty equivalent, conditioning the default policy on

other observable characteristics that affect the relative value of the two plans, namely gender and
income, would not have a large effect on the optimal default assignment. If, however, observable
characteristics such as gender and income were correlated with other factors that influenc the

relative value of the two plans, such as risk aversion, the discount rate, or separation hazards,
conditioning on these factors would likely improve welfare.

   One limitation of the measure Nπ is that it masks the composition of employees who are as-
signed a default plan with the lower certainty equivalent. In particular, under Scenario 1, we fin

that all of the workers who lose from the optimal age-based default policy are women, and the
majority are workers with below-median income. This findin is likely due to the low weight that
women and lower income workers receive in the aggregate default wealth due to their smaller num-

bers (in the case of women) or lower certainty equivalents (for lower-income workers). Modifying
the objective function to place more weight on these potentially more vulnerable groups could

address this issue.
   Thus far, our analysis has presumed that risk aversion is both known and homogenous across

employees. However, these assumptions are tenuous given that risk aversion is not a readily observ-
able characteristic. Moreover, the DB and DC certainty equivalents are sensitive to the employees’
level of risk aversion. Therefore, we briefl consider how the benefi of an age-based default policy

relative to a universal policy is affected by: (1) misestimating the level of risk aversion; and (2)
heterogeneity in risk aversion across employees.

   In the top panel of Table 8, we simulate Nπ and lossπ under the assumption that the employer
misestimates the level of risk aversion by one when the true level of relative risk aversion is α = 5.

These results can be compared to those found in Table 7 when the fir          correctly assumes that
α = 5. Overall, misestimating the level of risk aversion assigns more employees a suboptimal
default plan relative to when risk aversion is known. Under Scenario 1 (Scenario 2), if the fir


                                                 25
underestimates risk aversion by one and assumes α = 4, then the fir would set the optimal cutoff

age to be 42 (42) rather than 36 (35), resulting in 144 (144) employees being assigned a suboptimal
default plan. If the fir overestimates the parameter by one, and believes α = 6, then the optimal

cutoff age is 25 (27) for Scenario 1 (Scenario 2), resulting in 120 (109) employees assigned a
suboptimal default plan. When we compare this cost of misassignment to that under a universal
default policy, we see that even when risk aversion is misestimated by one, an age-based default

policy performs better than the policy of defaulting all employees into the DC plan when α is
known to be 5. In fact, because the optimal cut-off age is less than 65 for all non-negative values

of risk aversion, the age-based policy is always superior to a universal DC default regardless of the
assumed value of risk aversion.

   When we compare the cost of misclassificatio to that under the universal DB default, we see
that misestimating α by one when α is known to be 5 results in an outcome that is comparable to
the degree of misassignment when all employees are assigned the DB plan as the default, but the

average loss in certainty equivalent is slightly less (e.g., 9.9% - 13.2% versus 15.4%). Therefore, in
our context, an optimal age-based default policy dominates a universal DC default, but a universal

DB default may be preferable if there is sufficien uncertainty regarding the employees’ level of
risk aversion.

   Next, we consider heterogeneity in risk aversion across employees. To illustrate the sensitivity
of the results to different types of heterogeneity, we assume an average value of α equal to f ve, and
we model the heterogeneity in two ways. First, we model risk aversion as randomly distributed

across employees using a discrete probability distribution where α takes on one of three values (3,
4, or 5) with equal probability. Second, we model risk aversion as a deterministic linear function

of age, αi = f (a), based on the finding from Barsky, Juster, Kimball and Shapiro (1997) and
Kimball, Sahm and Shapiro (2009), which fin evidence of a positive correlation between age and

risk aversion.
   When risk aversion is randomly distributed, this form of heterogeneity increases the optimal
cutoff age for Scenario 1 (Scenario 2) from 36 (35) when α = 5 for all employees to age 39


                                                 26
(36), and results in the assigning 118 (93) employees to a suboptimal default plan. When risk

aversion is tied to age, the optimal cutoff age is 39 (37), which results in 19 (46) employees
being assigned a suboptimal default plan. We conclude that heterogeneity in risk aversion across

employees assigns a greater number of employees a suboptimal default plan. However, because age
is a strong predictor of the relative value of the two plans, assuming risk aversion is an increasing
function of age results in a substantially smaller number of misassigned employees than when risk

aversion has a more random distribution (i.e. where there may be younger employees with high
levels of risk aversion who would prefer the DB plan and older employees with low levels of risk

aversion who would prefer the DC plan). We do not consider heterogeneity in risk aversion over
other observable characteristics, namely gender, because the literature has failed to fin consistent

evidence that risk aversion is strongly related to gender (see Arano, Parker and Terry (2010) for
review).
    Additional sources of unobservable heterogeneity that could affect the number of individuals

assigned a default retirement plan that is not optimal include separation rates and discount rates.
One one hand, if these factors were correlated with age in a way such that older individuals would

have an even higher preference for the DB plan, as was the case with risk aversion, the broad
conclusions described above would be the same. On the other hand, if they led older individuals to

increase their preference for the DC plan over the DB plan, then this would diminish the superiority
of the age-based default policy relative to a universal default policy.



6    Conclusion

The idea that individual choices can depend on institutional arrangements, such as the default
provisions that dictate what happens when an individual fails to make an active decision, is now

widespread in economics. This idea has given rise to a notion of “libertarian paternalism,” an
approach that encourages private and public bodies to steer individuals to choices that are likely

to make them better off while still preserving freedom of choice (Thaler and Sunstein 2003). The



                                                  27
current study provides strong evidence that a fir can signifi antly influenc the choice of a pension

plan by its decision of which plan is the default: our estimates indicate that employees who were
subject to a DC plan default were 60 percentage points more likely to enroll in a DC plan relative

to a DB plan. The default was an overwhelming determinant of plan enrollment, alone explaining
a substantial amount of the variability in plan choice. This evaluation differs from past studies of
defaults in that we examine a one-time, irreversible decision with potentially substantial retirement

wealth at stake and we are able to use a regression discontinuity framework to estimate the causal
effect of the default rule.

    We also develop a framework for findin the optimal age-based default rule for pension plan
choice. We solve for the age cutoff that maximizes the aggregate pension wealth of employees,

adjusting for differences in risk across different pension plans. For the fir in our setting, we nu-
merically simulate the optimal cutoff age and fin that over a broad range of plausible levels of risk
aversion, a heterogeneous default “nudges” employees into plans with a higher risk-adjusted value

relative to a universal policy of defaulting all employees into the DB plan, a common default policy
used by firm transitioning from a DB plan to a DC plan, or the DC plan. We also demonstrate

how the optimal age-based default rule varies with different levels of risk aversion, asset alloca-
tion strategies, and plan characteristics. The exact finding from our numerical analysis, however,

should be interpreted with care given that we are evaluating data from a single firm In particular,
the optimal cutoff ages we estimate are influence by the particular features of the DB and DC
plans at the fir we examine.

    In general, our finding highlight how the relative values of the two retirement plans are sen-
sitive to the level and distribution of risk aversion among employees at the firm If employers

systematically underestimate or overestimate the level of risk aversion among their employees
when constructing an optimal age-based default policy, or if there is substantial heterogeneity in

risk aversion across employees, more employees would be assigned a suboptimal default plan.
We fin that the optimal age-based default policy is superior to a universal DC default regardless
of the assumed level or distribution of risk aversion, but that the benefi of an age-based default


                                                 28
policy relative to a universal DB default policy decreases if risk aversion is misestimated or if

it is randomly distributed across employees. While incorporating risk aversion into a heteroge-
neous default policy would produce outcomes that are welfare-enhancing, such an approach may

be difficul to implement given that risk aversion is difficul to observe. However, there have been
advances in survey methods to assess risk aversion that could be utilized by firm to learn about
their employees’ levels of risk aversion. Furthermore, we show that the optimal age cutoff is not

sensitive to incorporating heterogeneity in risk aversion that increases deterministically with age.
   Overall, our results suggest that substantial welfare gains are possible by varying defaults by

observable characteristics. In particular, when a set of observable characteristics strongly predicts
the value of one choice over others, conditioning a default on these characteristics can “nudge”

decision-makers into choices that are likely to raise their expected utility.


References
Arano, Kathleen, Carl Parker, and Rory L. Terry, “Gender-Based Risk Aversion and Retire-
    ment Asset Allocation,” Economic Inquiry, 2010.
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro, “Preference
    Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and
    Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (2), 537–579.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov, “The Welfare Economics of De-
    fault Options: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of 401(k) Plans,” NBER Working Paper
    17587, National Bureau of Economic Research 2011.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, “The Importance
    of Default Options for Retirement Savings Outcomes: Evidence from the United States,” in
    Stephen J. Kay and Tapen Sinha, eds., Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas, Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 2008, pp. 59–87.
Bodie, Zvi, Alan J. Marcus, and Robert C. Merton, “Define Benefi versus Define Contribu-
    tion Pension Plans. What Are the Real Trade-offs?,” in Zvi Bodie, John Shoven, and David
    Wise, eds., Pensions in the U.S. Economy, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Brown, Jeffrey R. and Scott J. Weisbenner, “Who Chooses Define Contribution Plans?,” NBER
    Working Paper No. 12842, 2007.
Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Mer-
    trick, “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124
    (4), 1639–74.

                                                  29
Chetty, Raj, “A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion,” American Economic Review, 2006,
    96 (5), 1821–1834.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, “Are Empowerment and Education
    Enough? Underdiversificatio in 401(k) Plans,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
    2005, (2), 151–198.

     ,     ,       , and Andrew Metrick, “For Better or For Worse: Default Effect and 401(k)
     Savings Behavior,” in David A. Wise, ed., Perspectives in the Economics of Aging, Chicago,
     IL: University of Chicago Press, 2004.

Clark, Robert L. and M. Melinda Pitts, “Faculty Choice of Pension Plan: Define Benefi versus
    Define Contribution,” Industrial Relations, 1999, 38 (1), 18–45.

     , Linda S. Ghent, and Ann A. McDermed, “Pension Plan Choice among University Fac-
     ulty,” Southern Economic Journal, 2006, 72 (3), 560–577.

DellaVigna, Stefano, “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of Eco-
     nomic Literature, 2009, 47 (2), 315–372.

GAO, “Define Benefi Pensions: Plan Freeze Affect Millions of Participants and May Post Re-
   tirement Income Challenges,” Report Number: GAO-08-817, General Accounting Office
   Washington DC 2008.

Goldstein, Daniel, Eric J. Johnson, and William F. Sharpe, “Choosing Outcomes versus Choos-
    ing Products: Consumer-Focused Retirement Investment Advice,” Journal of Consumer Re-
    search, October 2008, 35, 440–456.

Handel, Benjamin, “Adverse Selection and Switching Costs in Health Insurance Markets: When
    Nudging Hurts,” mimeo., Northwestern University 2009.

Ibbotson, Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation 2008 Yearbook, Chicago, IL: Ibbotson Associates,
    2008.

Imbens, Guido and Thomas Lemieux, “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to Practice,”
    Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 615–635.

Johnson, Eric J. and Daniel Goldstein, “Do Defaults Save Lives?,” Science, 2003, 302, 1338–
    1339.

Kimball, Miles S., Claudia R. Sahm, and Matthew D. Shapiro, “Risk Preferences in the PSID:
   Individual Imputations and Family Covariation,” American Economic Review, May 2009, 99
   (2), 363–368.

Kocherlakota, Narayana R., “The Equity Premium: It’s Still a Puzzle,” Journal of Economic
    Literature, 1996, 34 (1), 42–71.

Kruse, Douglas L., “Pension Substitution in the 1980s: Why the Shift toward Def ned Contribu-
    tion?,” Industrial Relations, 1995, 34 (2), 218–241.

                                              30
Lachance, Marie-Eve, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kent Smetters, “Guaranteeing Define Contri-
    bution Pensions: The Option to Buy Back a Define Benefi Promise,” Journal of Risk and
    Insurance, 2003, 70 (1), 1–16.

Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux, “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” NBER
     Working Paper No. 14723, 2009.

Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Partici-
   pation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1149–1525.

Manchester, Colleen F., “The Effect of Pension Plan Type on Retirement Age: Distinguishing
   Plan Incentives from Preferences,” Southern Economic Journal, 2010, 77 (1), 104–125.

Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott, “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of Mone-
   tary Economics, 1985, 15, 145–161.

Milevsky, Moshe A. and S. David Promislow, “Florida’s Pension Election: From DB to DC and
    Back,” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 2004, 71 (3), 381–404.

Mitchell, Olivia S., Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus, and Takeshi Yamaguchi, “Default,
    Framing, and Spillover Effects: The Case of Lifecycle Funds in 401(K) Plans,” NBER Work-
    ing Paper 15108, National Bureau of Economic Research 2009.

Papke, Leslie, “Are 401(k) Plans Replacing Other Employer-Provided Pensions? Evidence from
    Panel Data,” Journal of Human Resources, 1999, 34 (2), 346–369.

     , “Pension Plan Choice in the Public Sector: The Case of Michigan State Employees,” Na-
     tional Tax Journal, 2004, 57 (2), 329–339.

Shoven, John B. and Clemens Sialm, “Long Run Asset Allocation for Retirement Savings,”
    Journal of Private Portfolio Management, 1998, pp. 13–26.

      and       , “Asset Location in Tax-Deferred and Conventional Savings Accounts,” Journal
     of Public Economics, 2003, 88, 23–38.

Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein, “Libertarian Paternalism,” American Economic Re-
    view, May 2003, 93 (2), 175–179.

Towers-Perrin, “Back to the Future: Redefinin Retirement in the 21st Century,” 2003.

Vanguard, “How American Saves 2009,” 2009.

Yang, Tongxuan, “Understanding the Define Benefi versus Define Contribution Choice,” Pen-
    sion Research Council Working Paper Series 2005-04, The Wharton School, University of
    Pennsylvania 2005.




                                             31
           Table 1: Distribution of Age Group by Choice (Active vs. Passive Choice)


                                                            Active Choice
             Age Group (default)     Passive Choice    Consistent Inconsistent
                                                      with Default with Default
             Under 45 (DC Plan)            194            162           41
             45 or Over (DB Plan)          308            134           86
             Total                         502            296           127

Notes: Sample restricted to employees less than 65 years of age. N=925.




                    Table 2: Summary Statistics: Employee Characteristics

                  Variable              Mean        Std. Dev.    Min  Max
                  Enrolled in DC Plan   0.478         0.500        0    1
                  Made Passive Choice   0.543         0.498        0    1
                  Age                   46.07          9.72     21.88 64.96
                  Female                0.188         0.391        0    1
                  White                 0.425         0.495        0    1
                  Black                 0.114         0.317        0    1
                  Hispanic              0.303         0.460        0    1
                  Other Race/Ethnicity  0.159         0.366        0    1
                  Weekly Hours          39.35          3.27     20.00 55.00
                  Hourly Wage           23.98          6.63     10.24 36.81
                  Tenure (years)        12.08          9.12      0.75 43.41
                  Primary Work Location 0.699         0.459        0    1

Notes: Sample restricted to employees less than 65 years of age. N=925.




                                              32
Table 3: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Default Effect on Plan Choice (Linear Probability
Model)

                                   (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)
       Under 45                 0.605***    0.576***    0.578***     0.777***   0.801***
                                 (0.042)     (0.080)     (0.081)      (0.141)    (0.143)
       (Age - 45)                            -0.017      -0.011       0.369**    0.437**
                                             (0.020)     (0.020)      (0.181)    (0.179)
       (Age - 45)2                                                   -0.169**   -0.198**
                                                                      (0.085)    (0.084)
       (Age - 45)3                                                    0.020*     0.024**
                                                                      (0.011)    (0.011)
       (Age - 45)×Under 45                    0.025       0.023         -0.4     -0.462*
                                             (0.029)     (0.029)      (0.266)    (0.261)
       (Age - 45)2 ×Under 45                                           0.129       0.167
                                                                      (0.130)    (0.130)
       (Age - 45)3 ×Under 45                                           -0.028    -0.030*
                                                                      (0.018)    (0.018)
       Hours                                             -0.004                   -0.005
                                                         (0.005)                 (0.006)
       Hourly Wage                                        0.005                   0.006
                                                         (0.005)                 (0.005)
       Tenure                                           -0.006**                -0.007**
                                                         (0.003)                 (0.003)
       Primary Work Location                              0.068                   0.075
                                                         (0.065)                 (0.065)
       Constant                 0.227***    0.272***      0.356       0.077        0.113
                                 (0.030)     (0.061)     (0.268)     (0.101)     (0.302)
       R2                         0.359       0.357       0.365       0.358        0.368
       N                           353         353         353         353          353

Notes: Dependent variable is enrollment in the DC plan. Regression discontinuity estimate is

coefficien on “Under 45,” which estimates the change in DC plan enrollment at the age cutoff.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Bandwidth of 5 years. Columns (3) and (5) also include
gender and race binary variables. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                              33
Table 4: Baseline Assumptions for Optimal Age-Based Default

                                     Assumption
        Plan Characteristics:
        DB Multiplier (b)                2.0%
        DC Contribution Rate (c)         8.5%
        Other Parameters:
        Real Wage Growth Rate (g)        2.0%
        Real Discount Rate (d)           1.0%
        Separation Hazard (⇒ par )       5.0%
        Inflatio (i)                     2.5%

        Real Asset Returns:            µ    σ
          Stocks                     6.4% 18.8%
          Bonds                      2.7% 9.2%
          Money Market               0.7% 3.9%
        Asset Covariances:
          Stocks-Bonds                 0.4065%
          Bonds-Money Market           0.2033%
          Money Market-Stocks          0.0763%




                            34
                            Table 5: Optimal Age Cutoff (Scenario 1)

                  Assumptions              α=0        α=2      α=5     α = 10
                  Baseline                  44         47       36       20
                  5% DC Contribution Rate   36         40       20       20
                  10% DC Contribution Rate  47         49       42       20
                  1% DB Multiplier          56         57       56       30
                  3% DB Multiplier          38         42       20       20
                  100% Stocks               48         48       20       20
                  100% Bonds                32         39       33       20
                  100% Cash                 20         26       23       20
                  0% Separation Hazard      40         36       23       20
                  10% Separation Hazard     46         48       36       20
                  No Investment Risk        44         49       52       52
                  Double Investment Risk    44         20       20       20
                  0% Real Wage Growth       45         47       36       20
                  4% Real Wage Growth       43         47       36       20
                  0% Real Discount Rate     44         47       36       20
                  2% Real Discount Rate     44         47       36       20
                  1.5% Inflatio             42         45       20       20
                  3.5% Inflatio             46         49       42       20

Notes: Each row gives the optimal cutoff age, a∗ , which is the integer value that maximizes

Equation (9), for different levels of risk aversion for deviations from the baseline assumptions
(for baseline assumptions see Table 4). The optimal cutoff age maximizes the aggregate pension

wealth assuming the propensity to default is independent of the cutoff age and greater than or
equal to one-half (Scenario 1).




                                              35
                              Table 6: Optimal Age Cutoff (Scenario 2)

                  Assumptions              α=0          α=2     α=5      α = 10
                  Baseline                  45           49      35        23
                  5% DC Contribution Rate   36           41      23        23
                  10% DC Contribution Rate  48           53      40        23
                  1% DB Multiplier          59           60      57        30
                  3% DB Multiplier          38           43      24        23
                  100% Stocks               51           51      23        23
                  100% Bonds                30           40      30        23
                  100% Cash                 23           27      26        24
                  0% Separation Hazard      41           38      27        23
                  10% Separation Hazard     47           51      35        23
                  No Investment Risk        44           55      55        55
                  Double Investment Risk    45           23      23        23
                  0% Real Wage Growth       46           49      35        23
                  4% Real Wage Growth       44           49      35        23
                  0% Real Discount Rate     45           49      35        23
                  2% Real Discount Rate     44           51      35        23
                  1.5% Inflatio             42           46      24        23
                  3.5% Inflatio             47           53      42        26

Notes: Each row gives the optimal cutoff age, a∗ , which is the integer value that maximizes

Equation (9), for different levels of risk aversion for deviations from the baseline assumptions
(for baseline assumptions see Table 4). The optimal cutoff age maximizes the aggregate pension

wealth assuming the propensity to default is given by Equation (13) with parameters estimated
from the data (Scenario 2).




                                                36
                     Table 7: Measures to Evaluate Optimal Age-Based Default

                                                                     Age
               α      Policy                                                 Nπ     lossπ
                                                                    Cutoff
                      Universal DB Default                           20      344    38.0%
            α=0       Universal DC Default                           65      581    34.7%
                      Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 1)         44        9     4.0%
                      Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 2)         45       53     3.8%
                      Universal DB Default                           20      462    41.8%
            α=2       Universal DC Default                           65      463    34.0%
                      Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 1)         47        6     3.6%
                      Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 2)         49       89     3.8%
                      Universal DB Default                           20      143    15.4%
            α=5       Universal DC Default                           65      782    33.8%
                      Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 1)         36        9     1.0%
                      Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 2)         35       18     4.1%
                      Universal DB Default                           20        –       –
            α = 10    Universal DC Default                           65      925    59.5%
                      Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 1)         20        –       –
                      Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 2)         23        3    37.7%

Notes: Nπ denotes the number of employees defaulted into a suboptimal plan across different levels

of risk aversion for three alternative policies. lossπ denotes the average loss in certainty equivalent
among the Nπ individuals defaulted into a suboptimal plan, as a percentage of the higher plan’s

certainty equivalent. Universal DB default assumes that all employees are defaulted into the DB
plan, universal DB default assumes that all employees are defaulted into the DC plan, and optimal

age-based default denotes solution to maximizing Equation (9). The optimal cutoff age maximizes
the aggregate pension wealth assuming the propensity to default is independent of the cutoff age
and greater than or equal to one-half (Scenario 1) or is given by Equation (13) and estimated from

the data (Scenario 2).




                                                  37
                      Table 8: Measures to Evaluate Optimal Age-Based Default

                              Panel A: Misestimation of Risk Aversion

      True     Assumed                                               Age
                             Policy                                              Nπ    lossπ
       α          α                                                 Cutoff
      α=5       α=4          Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 1)  42          144 9.9%
      α=5       α=4          Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 2)  42          144 9.9%
      α=5       α=6          Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 1)  25          120 13.2%
      α=5       α=6          Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 2)  27          109 12.2%



                              Panel B: Heterogeneity in Risk Aversion

                                                                         Age
               α             Policy                                              Nπ    lossπ
                                                                        Cutoff
                             Universal DB Default                        20      141   23.8%
           αi ∼ iid
                             Universal DC Default                        65      784   34.8%
                             Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 1)      39      118   14.2%
      p(4)=p(5)=p(6)=1/3
                             Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 2)      36       93   13.1%
                             Universal DB Default                        20      204   23.3%
           αi = f (a)
                             Universal DC Default                        65      721   36.2%
                             Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 1)      39       19    5.8%
      αi ∈ [4, 6] with α=5
                             Optimal Age-Based Default (Scenario 2)      37       46    1.8%

Notes: Panel A shows Nπ and lossπ when risk aversion parameter is under- or over-estimated by

1. Panel B shows Nπ and lossπ when risk aversion varies randomly across employees or varies
deterministically as a function of age. The optimal cutoff age maximizes the aggregate pension
wealth assuming the propensity to default is independent of the cutoff age and greater than or

equal to one-half (Scenario 1) or is given by Equation (13) and estimated from the data (Scenario
2).




                                                38
                                              Figure 1: DC Enrollment Rate by Age




                            1
                            .8
                 Proportion in DC Plan
                     .4     .2
                            0  .6




                                         20        30            40              50        60
                                                                      Age




Notes: DC enrollment rates computed for each single year of age. Best fi line and cubic are shown
for each side of the age 45 cutoff.


                                              Figure 2: Distribution of Employee Age
                          3050
                            40
                   Frequency
                 20         10
                            0




                                         20       30        40              50        60        70
                                                                      Age




Notes: Histogram of employee age as of September 1, 2002, using one-year bins.

                                                                 39
                                     Figure 3: Average Value of Covariates by Single Year of Age




                                                                                            1
                 .6




                                                                                            .8
         Proportion Female




                                                                         Proportion White
                       .4




                                                                           .4        .6
        .2




                                                                                            .2
                 0




                                                                                            0
                             20      30       40         50    60                                              20       30        40         50     60
                                                   Age                                                                                 Age



                                    (a) Proportion Female                                                               (b) Proportion White



                                                                                            30
                 40
                 39




                                                                         Average Hourly Wage
                                                                                         25
        Average Hours
             38




                                                                          20
                 37




                                                                                            15
                 36




                             20      30       40         50    60                                              20       30        40         50     60
                                                   Age                                                                                 Age



                                  (c) Average Hours per Week                                                          (d) Average Hourly Wage
                                                                                            1
                 25




                                                                         Proportion in Primary Work Location
                 20




                                                                                                  .8
        Average Tenure
         10      15




                                                                                  .6
                 5




                                                                                            .4
                 0




                             20      30       40         50    60                                              20       30        40         50     60
                                                   Age                                                                                 Age



                                      (e) Average Tenure                                                       (f) Proportion in Primary Work Location

Notes: Panels used to verify no discontinuity at age 45 for other observable characteristics; vertical
line marks age 45.



                                                                    40
      Figure 4: Estimated Propensity to Enroll in Default Plan and Implied DC Enrollment


                                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .8
                                                      Proportion in DC Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Default Propensity
                                                                     .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .6
                                                           .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                 20                30                           40                                              50                   60
                                                                                                                                  Age

                                                                                         Implied Proportion in DC Plan                                                             Default Propensity


                                                                                                                     (a) ac = 45
                    1




                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                             .8




                                                                                                                      .8




                                                                                                                                                                      .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .8
       Proportion in DC Plan




                                                                                                                                                Proportion in DC Plan
                                                                                                                      Default Propensity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Default Propensity
                      .6




                                                                                                                                  .6




                                                                                                                                                               .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .6
            .4




                                                                                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .4
                    .2




                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                    0




                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0



                                  20            30                               40           50            60                                                             20            30             40                 50                    60
                                                                                   Age                                                                                                                    Age

                                       Implied Proportion in DC Plan                            Default Propensity                                                              Implied Proportion in DC Plan                        Default Propensity



                                                                 (b) ac = 35                                                                                                                      (c) ac = 55

Notes: Solid line represents estimated propensity to follow the default as a linear function (Equa-
tion 13) estimated from plan enrollment data at the fir                                                                                                                              (ac = 45; k̂ = 0.787, b̂1 = −0.012, and
b̂2 = 0.0074). These estimates are applied to counterfactual age-based default policies in Panels

(b) and (c). Dashed line represents implied proportion in DC plan.




                                                                                                                                           41
                                                                Figure 5: Certainty Equivalent by Age for Different Levels of Risk Aversion




                                                                                                                     2000000
                 100000 200000 300000 400000 500000




                                                                                                        500000 1000000 1500000
                       Certainty Equivalent




                                                                                                            Certainty Equivalent
                                   0




                                                                                                                     0
                                                      20   30          40           50   60       70                               20   30   40           50   60   70
                                                                             Age                                                                   Age

                                                                            DB     DC                                                             DB     DC



                                                                (a) α=0 (risk neutral)                                                       (b) α=2
42




                                   60000




                                                                                                                     30000
                               40000




                                                                                                                      20000
                 Certainty Equivalent




                                                                                                        Certainty Equivalent
                 20000




                                                                                                        10000
                                   0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                      20   30          40           50   60       70                               20   30   40           50   60   70
                                                                             Age                                                                   Age

                                                                            DB     DC                                                             DB     DC



                                                                       (c) α=5                                                               (d) α=10

     Notes: Each panel shows the certainty equivalent for each plan by age for different levels of risk aversion (α).
      Figure 6: Aggregate Pension Wealth by Cutoff Age for Different Levels of Risk Aversion: Constant Propensity of Following Default




                              120000000




                                                                                                                     250000000
                                110000000
                  Aggregate Pension Wealth




                                                                                            Aggregate Pension Wealth
                                                                                                 200000000
                 100000000




                                                                                                              150000000
                              90,000,000




                                             20   30         40              50   60   70                                        20   30   40              50   60   70
                                                             Default Cutoff Age                                                            Default Cutoff Age


                                                       (a) α=0 (risk neutral)                                                              (b) α=2
                              30,000,000
43




                                                                                                                   15,000,000
                 Aggregate Pension Wealth




                                                                                            Aggregate Pension Wealth
                       25,000,000




                                                                                               10,000,000
                              20,000,000




                                                                                                              5,000,000




                                             20   30         40              50   60   70                                        20   30   40              50   60   70
                                                             Default Cutoff Age                                                            Default Cutoff Age


                                                              (c) α=5                                                                      (d) α=10

     Notes: Each panel plots the aggregate default wealth by cutoff age for different levels of risk aversion (α). The optimal cutoff age
     maximizes the aggregate pension wealth assuming the propensity to default is independent of the cutoff age and greater than or equal to

     one-half.
     Figure 7: Aggregate Pension Wealth by Cutoff Age for Different Levels of Risk Aversion: Propensity to Follow Default Varies with Age
     Cutoff




                             120000000




                                                                                                            300000000
                Aggregate Pension Wealth




                                                                                                   Aggregate Pension Wealth
                                                                                                             250000000
                      110000000




                                                                                           200000000
                             100000000




                                            20   30         40              50   60   70                                      20   30   40              50   60   70
                                                            Default Cutoff Age                                                          Default Cutoff Age


                                                      (a) α=0 (risk neutral)                                                            (b) α=2
                             28,000,000




                                                                                                            20,000,000
44




                               26,000,000
                 Aggregate Pension Wealth




                                                                                           Aggregate Pension Wealth
                                                                                                     15,000,000
                24,000,000




                                                                                                            10,000,000
                             22,000,000




                                            20   30         40              50   60   70                                      20   30   40              50   60   70
                                                            Default Cutoff Age                                                          Default Cutoff Age


                                                             (c) α=5                                                                    (d) α=10

     Notes: Each panel plots the aggregate default wealth by cutoff age for different levels of risk aversion (α). The optimal cutoff age
     maximizes the aggregate pension wealth assuming the propensity to default is given by Equation (13).
Appendix A: Robustness to Choice of Bandwidth

The regression discontinuity results shown in Table 3 were estimated with a bandwidth of 5 years.
The table below summarizes linear and probit estimates of the regression discontinuity for different
values of the bandwidth across different specifications


                                   (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
             LPM                0.584***    0.690***   0.703***    0.739***   0.737***
             (h = 2.5)           (0.058)     (0.108)    (0.112)     (0.196)    (0.200)
             LPM                0.636***    0.544***   0.532***    0.697***   0.709***
             (h = 7.5)           (0.035)     (0.066)    (0.066)     (0.122)    (0.125)
             LPM                0.665***    0.540***   0.538***    0.685***   0.694***
             (h = 10)            (0.030)     (0.059)    (0.059)     (0.108)    (0.110)

             Probit             0.584***    0.687***   0.718***    0.728***   0.741***
             (h = 2.5)           (0.058)     (0.099)    (0.096)     (0.172)    (0.171)
             Probit             0.605***    0.581***   0.601***    0.758***   0.784***
             (h = 5)             (0.042)     (0.082)    (0.083)     (0.116)    (0.110)
             Probit             0.636***    0.538***   0.542***    0.679***   0.708***
             (h = 7.5)           (0.035)     (0.071)    (0.074)     (0.114)    (0.114)
             Probit             0.665***    0.527***   0.547***    0.683***   0.722***
             (h = 10)            (0.030)     (0.065)    (0.069)     (0.101)    (0.098)

             Treatment of Age    Constant    Linear       Linear    Cubic       Cubic
             Controls              No         No           Yes       No          Yes

Notes: Dependent variable is enrollment in the DC plan. Robust standard errors in parentheses; *

p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. LPM represents linear probability models. Probit models report
marginal effects.



Appendix B: Monte Carlo Simulations

Monte Carlo simulations were performed to obtain 1,000 simulations of 45 years of asset returns.
This methodology follows Shoven (1999). Suppose ri = ln(1 + Ri ), where Ri denotes the simple

real return of one of three types of assets (stocks (i = s), bonds (i = b), and money market accounts
(i = m)). We assume ri is distributed normally, i.e. 1+Ri is distributed lognormally. The lognormal

distribution is skewed to the right and ensures that simple returns cannot fall below -100%. Let mi ,


                                                 45
si , and si j denote the moments of Ri , and µi , σi , and σi j denote the moments of ri .

    The Monte Carlo simulation is done in three steps. First, µi , σi , and σi j are obtained for all
classes of assets by the following set of equations:
                                                                   
                                                    1 + mi
                                                                                               (D-1)
                                                                  
                                     µi = log 
                                              r      
                                                                   
                                                                2 
                                                  1 + 1+m  si
                                                              i

                                                        s2i
                                                                
                                      2
                                     σi = log 1 +                                              (D-2)
                                                    (1 + mi )2
                                                                       
                                                              si j
                                     σi j = log 1 +                                            (D-3)
                                                    (1 + mi )(1 + m j )

    Next, three independent standard-normal random variables z are generated for each simulation
using Matlab’s random number generator. These three random numbers are combined such that
the returns have the desired variances and covariances.


                                    rs = µs + σs z1                                            (D-4)
                                                              s
                                                                                  2
                                                σsb                         σsb
                                                                        
                                    rb = µb +       z1 + z2   σ2b −                            (D-5)
                                                σs                          σs
                                    rm = µm + az1 + bz2 + cz3                                  (D-6)


    The constants a, b, and c are given by:

                                                σsm
                                             a=                                                (D-7)
                                                σs
                                                 σbm − σsmσ2σsb
                                             b= r          s
                                                                                               (D-8)
                                                                    2
                                                              σsb
                                                        
                                                      σ2b −   σs
                                                  q
                                             c=       σ2m − a2 − b2 .                          (D-9)


    Finally, the simple returns R are determined by using the transformation Ri = exp(ri ) − 1.




                                                      46
