NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY THEORY FROM A CHINESE HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Zheng Xueyi
Yaguang Zhang
John Whalley
Working Paper 16092
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16092

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

This paper is the first of a planned series examining the Chinese history of ancient economic thought
in light of later Western thought. We regret to report the sad passing of the senior Chinese author on
this paper. John Whalley from the non-Chinese side first met him in Beijing in 2002, and even with
language difficulties the scholarly rapport and intellectual honesty and creativity was richly apparent.
His pioneering work on Chinese history of ancient economic thought is being carried on by his students
who are co-authors of this paper. This work is of importance in better understanding the Chinese policy
response to the global issues of the day; the financial crisis, global warming and climate change. We
acknowledge financial support from the Ontario Research Fund (ORF-F3), IDRC, and the Centre for
International Governance Innovation (CIGI), Waterloo Ontario. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Zheng Xueyi, Yaguang Zhang, and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Theory from a Chinese Historical Perspective
Zheng Xueyi, Yaguang Zhang, and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 16092
June 2010
JEL No. N20
ABSTRACT
We discuss monetary thought in ancient China from the perspective of Western monetary theory. It
sets out the structure of economic activity in the various dynasties of ancient China and emphasizes
the differences in monetary structure from Europe (and later North America). Imperial China was
a politically integrated structure with regional segmentation of economic activities and hence with
regional money. Monetary policy was one body conducted at regional level, but overseen naturally
politically before national integration under the Ming dynasty (14th century). In various regions different
forms of money circulated, with gold, silver, copper, and paper all present at various times. Monetary
policy was guided by monetary thought, such as later in Europe. Basic concepts such as monetary
function, the velocity of circulation, inflation, interest rate parity and the quantity theory were all present.
The economics of Imperial China witnessed boom and bust, inflation and deflation and monetary control
much like Europe to follow. Monetary thought thus seemingly preceded Western thought, and had
remarkable similarities. Whether much of this thought travelled down the silk road remains unknown,
but the possibility is intriguing.
Zheng Xueyi†
Peking University
Yaguang Zhang
Economics Department
Peking University
China
arg.cheung@gmail.com

John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario N6A 5C2 CANADA
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca

1.

Introduction and Background
This paper is the first in a series of planned papers involving scholars specializing in the
history of ancient Chinese economic thought from the School of Economics, Peking University
in which ancient Chinese thought is discussed in language hopefully accessible to non-Chinese
audiences. The broad background to this is work is as follows.
First, there are claims from the Chinese scholarly community of many of the key ideas later
expressed in Western economic thought as being expressed much earlier in Imperial China,
admittedly in different statements and with different emphasis. In Imperial China, great issues of
the day were often passed to leading thinkers in the court who were given time and staff for
reflection and advice. Young scholars (Westerners would call them students) affiliated with at
least one of the commissions seemingly passed down the Silk Road, spent some years in Europe
and may have talked to Quesnay in France in the 1750’s (who intellectually, in some people’s
opinion, was a forerunner of Walras). There is speculation in the Chinese community that some
of the key ideas in Western economic thought may have, in part, origins in old Chinese thought.
Later, as detailed below, Marx in Das Kapital makes explicit reference to a specific old Chinese
thinker (economist). Thus, the intellectual heritage of modern economics (now global) may in
some small way reside in China.
Second, there are the large cultural differences between old Asia and newer OECD which
both divide and inspire contemporary policy debates globally, and specifically across the Pacific.
Eastern philosophical tradition does not accept absolute truth, as Popperian/Fredmanian in
economics. Rather think science with objective truth and progress as represented by forward
movement ever closer to the true frontier of knowledge, eastern philosophy argues instead there
is only ??. acknowledge, is embodied in deep thoughts of old and new texts, with old texts in
particular revered because of the tests of time to which they have been subjected. Delving into
the wisdom of the past from an Asian traditional perspective as a way of moving forward in
decision making on today’s problems thus seems a sensible way for Asians to proceed.
Think, there is the intellectual melting pot that modern economics especially in its
neoclassical form represents in today’s milieu. Impressively formalized in its mathematical
statement and rigorously econometrically analyzed in its data and empirical manifestation,
economics remains as Joan Robinson characterized it as a pseudosicence. Absence of controlled
repeated able laboratory experiments for entire economies (even if supplemented by modern
experimental economies) implies a science different from physics or chemistry and none in the
tradition of Durkheim’s emphasis on development of chains of deductive logic and careful

2

empires, in the case of economics, to aid policymakers in reaching decisions on social action.
Chinese thought of old thus enters the evaluation of how to proceed in the modern discipline of
old and new knowledge once to be given equal weight.
The monetary structure of the economies of ancient China was both varied across dynasties
and simultaneously more complex and less well developed than that in Europe. Three different
forms of coinage typically circulated (gold, silver, copper). There no financial institutions
involved in credit creation or issuance of insurance contracts, but there were monetary
depositories where merchants and others depositing money received a paper certificate which
could be exchanged for goods in the various provinces. Paper money is usually first credited to
China, and arrived in the late 8th or early 9th century. Originally it was labeled “flying money”
because it was so light the wind could blow it out of a holder’s hand. This money was originally
a draft rather than bank issued money, but private merchant drafts were taken over by
government in the early 9th century and this currency was used for forwarding local taxes and
revenues to the imperial capital. Later, silk notes replaced earlier paper, and older money had to
be exchanged for silk. A unified currency spread throughout China by the late 13th century, and
Chinese notes were a monetary medium in Persia. Marco Polo on his visit to China was greatly
impressed by Chinese money. In the Ming Dynasty (14th century) a new note named the
“precious note of great rising” was issued but only in one denomination which was inconvenient.
Copper coins were still allowed to circulate. Inflation occurred, and the precious note was
progressively replaced by silver. In the mid 17th century, the Ming attempted to revive paper
money after 200 years, but with no success. Only under European occupation in more modern
times did paper money return.
The older Chinese paper money profoundly influenced Western banking. The original
Hamburg and Swedish banks were set up following a Chinese model. The first western paper
money appeared in Sweden in 1661. America followed in 1690, France in 1720, England in 1797,
and Germany in 1806.
This paper focuses on ancient Chinese monetary thought. It sets out the structure of
economic activity in the various dynasties of ancient China and emphasizes the differences in
monetary structure from Europe (and later North America). Imperial China was a politically
integrated structure with regional segmentation of economic activities and hence with regional
money. Monetary policy was one body conducted at regional level, but overseen naturally
politically before national integration under the Ming dynasty (14th century). In various regions
different forms of money circulated, with gold, silver, copper, and paper all present at various

3

times. Monetary policy was guided by monetary thought, such as later in Europe. Basic concepts
such as monetary function, the velocity of circulation, inflation, interest rate parity and the
quantity theory were all present.
The economics of Imperial China witnessed boom and bust, inflation and deflation and
monetary control much like Europe to follow. Monetary thought thus seemingly preceded
Western thought, and had remarkable similarities. Whether much of this thought travelled down
the silk road remains unknown, but the possibility is intriguing.

2.

Schools of Monetary Thought in Ancient China
In ancient times, many innovative monetary theories were developed in the several thousand
years of the development covering both paper money and metal money. It is difficult to divide
Chinese economic thoughts into separate historical schools. Rather successive groups of scholars
shared similar views and understandings, with each adding new ideas to earlier theories. In this
way, special Chinese monetary theories were formed.
Basically speaking, monetary theory in ancient China may be divided into a number of
categories: a. theories concerning the origin of money; theories on the invention of money,
money as a symbol of kingship, money as a medium of exchange, and money as a facilitator of
commerce; b. theories on the nature of money, nominal money, metallic money, the trade-off
between mother and son coins, and theory on the weight of money; c. theories of monetary
circulation, the quantity theory of money, theories on the velocity of circulation, how “good
money drives out bad”, and how “paper money drives out metal money”; d. theories on
appropriate monetary policies; theories in favour of government monopoly, centralization of
money, state control over money, unification of the monetary system, and theories for or against
private coinage; e. theories of monetary management; theories for state intervention or for free
coinage, and on the management of both nominal and real money; f. discussions of monetary
materials, there were theories for real money, metal money, the replacement of money with grain
and cloth, and the replacement of paper money with metal money; g. discussions of how to make
money; there were theories for and against heavy money, theories for and against making money;
h. discussions of the role of paper money, there were theories which regarded paper money as the
pillar of the state, theories on the usefulness of paper money, theories in favour of convertible
paper money or of inconvertible paper money, and theories on limited issue of money; i. there
were discussions of gold and silver money; theories on the disadvantages of silver money,

4

theories on the co-existence of silver money and copper money, theories on the sole use of silver
money or copper money, theories on the gold standard, the silver standard and the gold exchange
standard.
Following Western thought, these theories may be categorized into the theory of metallic
money, the theory of nominal money, the quantity theory of money, the neutrality of money, the
demand for money, and the supply of money. Such a categorization weakens the boundaries
between ancient Chinese thinking and Western monetary theories. Money has been a common
historical phenomenon in the development of all human society, and money and its laws of its
circulation are largely universal despite its different forms in various regions. Many monetary
theories were developed earlier in China than in the West, and this is elaborated on in the third
part of the paper.

3.

Key Thinkers in the History of Monetary Thought in Ancient China
The list of ancient Chinese thinkers on money ranges across a broad spectrum of vocations,
including politicians, philosophers and finance ministers. Some of them held posts in the
ministry of finance, but many others had little to do with the administration of the economy. The
monetary elements of the economy affected various aspects of the social life in ancient China,
and people of different professions were induced to reflect upon related monetary issues.
Scholars of the history of monetary thought in ancient China usually divide this thought into
two stages, according to the emergence of paper money2. The first stage, in which metal money
prevailed, dates back to the Pre-Qin Period, lasting until the end of the Tang Dynasty (c. 6th
century BC – 10th century). The second stage began with the Song Dynasty and ended with the
Opium Wars of the Qing Dynasty (c. 11th century – 19th century). The following are the ??
contributions of a number of significant figures in the history of Chinese thought on monetary
issues; they are listed in chronological order:
a. From the Pre-Qin Period to the Tang Dynasty
Discussion of the trade-off between mother and son coins (“mother” and “son” respectively
referred to metal coins of different sizes and weight; the purchasing power of each was in
accordance with its weight) occurs with Shan Qi, a politician of the Spring and Autumn period,
2

See: Zhang Jiaxiang. The History of Monetary Thought in China. Wuhan: Hubei Renmin Press,
2001.

5

and Guan Zhong’s theory of the weight of money. Jia Yi, a poet and political writer of the
Western Han Dynasty, observed that debased money gradually drove undebased money out of
the market, about two thousand years before “Gresham’s Law” was proposed. His
“Expostulation against Private Coinage” was the earliest study of money in China, perhaps in the
world as well, written prior to Aristotle’s discussion on the same topic in Politics. Sima Qian, a
historian and writer of the Western Han Dynasty, held unconventional views on the origin of
money, which became an important reference for later studies on the history of money. Sang
Hongyang, an imperial secretary and finance minister of the Western Han Dynasty, was a
forerunner in founding and consolidating a monetary system; advocating the state’s control over
money and emphasizing the centralization of coinage.
Ban Gu, a historian and writer of the Eastern Han Dynasty, considered money to be a
reliable measure of wealth, an important component of the theory of money in ancient China. Lu
Bao, a recluse who lived in the Western Jin Dynasty, wrote a satire on the worship of money,
which may be compared with Shakespeare’s description of the power of money written 1200
years later. The free coinage policy proposed by Shen Qingzhi, a military general of the Southern
Dynasties, shows close resemblance to the demand for free coinage in modern capitalist
countries during the time when metal money was used. Liu Yi, an official of the Tang Dynasty,
was the first person in China to associate the demand for money with population growth, which
provided a method for estimating the required quantity of money in circulation and a solution to
the money shortage. Lu Zhi, a political philosopher of the Tang Dynasty, clearly presented a
version of the quantity theory of money, 800 years before a similar theory was put forward by
Jean Bodin, generally regarded as the founder of Western quantity theory of money later
associated with Marshall, Fisher and Friedman. Bai Juyi, a Tang Dynasty poet, postulated the
impact of money on other elements of the economy, claiming that money is capable of regulating
commodity circulation and social relations, which may be characterized as a belief in the
non-neutrality of money.
b. From the Song Dynasty to the Opium Wars
In the Northern Song Dynasty, a scholar named Zhou Xing realized that the issue of
convertible paper money required only a fractional reserve, an idea which was quite original at
the time but did not result in credit creation via banks in China. Shen Kuo, a scientist and
politician of the Northern Song Dynasty, proposed that the velocity of money is related to its
quantity, an argument about 600 years earlier than that suggested by William Petty. Emperor
Xiao Zong of Southern Song provided a clear analysis of the relationship between the quantity of

6

paper money in circulation and its value, which was an early version the law of circulation of
inconvertible paper money. Xin Qiji, a poet of the Southern Song Dynasty, while holding a
favorable view on the usefulness of paper money nonetheless asserted the necessity of stabilizing
its value – an unprecedented idea at that time. “Regulations on the Circulation of Bao Chao
(Treasure Notes)” drafted by Ye Li, a politician and finance minister of the late Song Dynasty
and early Yuan Dynasty, were the earliest regulations on the issue of inconvertible paper money
in China and in the world. Having realized that it was possible to substitute metal money with
paper money in circulation, Ye Ziqi, a Ming Dynasty scholar and philosopher, advocated the
circulation of convertible paper money be based on its circulation laws. Wang Maoyin, a finance
minister of the Qing Dynasty, was a Chinese scholar mentioned in Karl Marx’s Das Kapital for
suggesting the issue of “token money” be backed by “real money”, a system based on
convertible paper money.
It should be noted that due to the differences in their class, social status and life experience,
as well as their ideologies, approaches and points of view, these thinkers tended to vary in their
academic capacities, understanding and experience of monetary matters and fields of
specialization. The range, content and form of their studies was also diverse.

4.

The Social Context of Chinese Monetary Theory
Over several thousand years Chinese monetary policies were discussed in terms of how they
might best facilitate the growth of the Chinese economy, which had long been one of the world’s
most advanced economies. In the separate periods of metal and paper money, China’s debate
focused on various monetary issues in different ways, and had profound influence on national
progress and even the change of dynasties. Those considerations explain why some monetary
theory in ancient China developed earlier than that in Western countries.
a. Money and monetary policies in ancient China
China was not only one of the first countries in the world to use money, its origin dating
back to the later stages of the primitive society, but was also one of the first countries to use
metal money measured by weight. This is clearly evidenced by findings from the Shang Dynasty
and the Zhou Dynasty at the latest. Additionally, China was one of the first countries to utilize
precious metal as metal money, and one of the first countries to invent metal coins. It is
especially worth mentioning that China was the first country in the world to use paper money.
In the first year of the reign of Sheng Yuan of the Southern Song Dynasty (1023), the Jiao

7

Zi Office of Yizhou (situated in present-day Sichuan) was established for issuing Guan Jiao, the
authorized paper money. The first issue of Jiao Zi was 1,256,340 guan backed by a reserve of
360,000 guan, at a reserve ratio of around 28%. Notes of the first issue were supposed to expire
and to be replaced by notes of the second issue in three years (two years in reality). The Guan
Jiao marked the beginning of the authorized issue of paper money in China, which was earlier
than that in Sweden (1656), Britain (1692) and France (1716).
China was also a pioneer in monetary policy, being the earliest country in the world, for
example, to have a unified national monetary system. As early as the middle and later Warring
States Period, a unified half-liang coin system was set up. The “Law of Gold Coins”, a regulation
on money discovered among the Shuihudi Qin bamboo slips unearthed in Yunmeng, Hubei in
1975, is regarded as the earliest legislation on money among current discoveries in China and the
world. The half-liang coin system was promoted in various parts of country as Emperor
Qinshihuang conquered separate states and gained control over China. However, a fully unified
money system was not achieved in the Qin Dynasty, leaving the standardization of money
incomplete, and the weight of half-liang coins greatly varied.
It was not until the reign of Emperor Wudi of the Han that a unified monetary system was
generally established. Although free coinage was once allowed in the early Han Dynasty, in the
fourth year of the reign of Yuan Ding (113 BC), a law prohibiting counties from making metal
coins was introduced for the purpose of strengthening centralized control over the economy. The
State Minting Factory, as well as a complete system of minting institutions, was established in
Jingshi, signifying the official standardization of the money in China. In the Yuan Dynasty, a
comprehensive monetary system was developed, one that was unmatched by those of the
Western countries until the 1930s. The administration of Yuan Dynasty paper money was
exceedingly detailed, its issue highly centralized. The issue of paper money and any changes in
relevant laws had to be approved by the Emperor himself before it could come into force.
Officials were appointed for the administration of Bao Chao, locations were chosen and methods
were devised for printing it, specific steps and measures were devised for enforcing the laws,
regulations were laid down for recycling worn notes and prohibiting private destruction of notes,
and criminal laws were passed for penalizing forgers.
In addition to the above-mentioned characteristics, money and the monetary system in
ancient China also differed from those found in Western countries in the following ways:
a) The monetary system was not unchanged from dynasty to dynasty. Each dynasty
developed its own monetary system with little resemblance to that of its previous and following

8

dynasties. This frequently led to problems in circulation, which demanded strengthened
administration of the newly established government.
b) The making and circulation of copper coins, which were utilized throughout the dynasties,
was complicated. The use of copper coins has a history of at least two thousand years from the
half-liang coins of the Qin Dynasty to the Guangxu coins of the Qing Dynasty. A special problem
that troubled governments of various dynasties was that copper was the main material for making
a great variety of daily necessities, and even musical instruments, Buddhist figures and pagodas.
This led to the conflict between the daily use of copper and the making of copper coins, a
problem not faced by European countries which utilized only gold and silver coins. Consequently,
special measures were devised for the administration of the making and circulation of copper
coins. Thus, in ancient China, theories on making metal coins were far more discussed than those
in the West.
c) The minting of metal coins was often regionalized. In ancient China, copper coins were
usually made by separate states in times of political disunity, or by regional authorities when a
central government existed. For example, the Kai Yuan coins during the reign of Hui Chang of
the Tang Dynasty, the Hong Wu coins during the reign of the Da Zhong of the Ming Dynasty,
and copper coins of the Qing Dynasty were all made by regional governments. This added to the
difficulty of administering money, for it would necessarily result in variation in the fineness,
weight and form of copper coins. Because copper coins were circulated on a national scale, coins
of different fineness, weight and form were bound to exist in the same market to complicate
commodity exchanges and the circulation of money. Scholars’ attention has long been attracted
to these problems, upon which they formulated noteworthy theories.
b. Monetary topics and focuses of different historical periods
According to Chinese legend, money originated four or five thousand years ago in China.
The earliest record of money was the “bei”, and minted money existed in the 10th century BC in
the form of copper bei. But the discussions on money during that period are little known to us
due to the lack of written records. Among current discoveries, the earliest exposition on money is
Shan Qi’s expostulation against King Jing’s decision to make heavy coins and abolish light coins,
which was recorded in “Zhou Yu” of the book of Guo Yu. From then on to the Tang Dynasty,
copper coins were the major form of money in China. Monetary theories of this period mainly
focused on problems of making and the circulation of copper coins. These included: a) how the
weight and size of copper coins could meet the demand in actual use, and whether it was feasible
for light coins and heavy coins to coexist on the market; b) the relationship between the value of

9

goods and the weight of metal coins, and how the fluctuation of grain price might be maintained
within a certain range so as to benefit both agriculture and commerce; c) whether coinage should
be centralized; d) how to regulate the national economy through the circulation of money; e)
money’s social function; f) money’s origin and economic functions.
During this period, the main focus of discussion was the authority of coinage and the
relationship between money and commodity prices. After money came into being, people came
to realize that changes in money would affect commodity prices, a phenomenon which did not
occur earlier in times of pure barter exchanges. After the emergence of a monetary economy,
scholars’ attention naturally turned to the nature of money and the relationship between money
and commodity prices. These became the topics of the two earliest major theories on money in
ancient China, namely Shan Qi’s theory on the trade-off between mother and son coins, and
Guan Zhong’s theory on the weight of money.
During the politically united Qin and Han Dynasties, the focus shifted to the authority of
coinage. The reason for this has been briefly explained above: not only would regionalized
coinage pose a great threat to the central authority, but variations in the value of coins were also
likely to hinder economic development. After political unity was achieved, it seemed reasonable
that coinage should be centralized. However, there was still a heated debate between the use of a
laissez-faire economy and interventionism. Those in favour of the government’s monopoly over
coinage had many supporters. The debate lasted for a long time during the Western Han dynasty,
but after the authority of coinage was taken over by the state, theories in favour of the central
government taking control of money in regulating and interfering with the national economy
(with a profit to the government), became more popular.
During the Wei, Jin, Northern and Southern Dynasties, China was split into warring states.
The monetary system was consequently left in a divided, disorderly state, and people naturally
opted for commodity money for convenience’s sake. During this period, theories in favour of
commodity money gained influence. The most well-known monetary theory of this period can be
found in Lu Bao’s essay On the Money God, a vivid and philosophical satire on the worship of
money, which the author referred to as “Kong Fang Xiong” (“Brother Square-Hole”), a coinage
which had a lasting influence on the perception of money in China. The emergence of thinking
was in accordance with a cynical world view prevalent among intellectuals of the period, but it
also revealed the belief that the demand for money had always existed and always would, no
matter in what form it appeared.
During the Tang Dynasty, the circulation of money went through several phases. The

10

economy largely took the form of barter exchange during the early Tang Dynasty, and changed
into a monetary economy during the middle Tang Dynasty, experienced a serious inflation
followed by a deflation, and returned to barter exchange in the late Tang Dynasty. Monetary
theories, especially those centering on the relationship between commodity prices and the
quantity of money, were enriched as the demand for money increased with the development of
the monetary economy.
The system of paper money was officially introduced in the Song Dynasty. Both the birth
and subsequent development of paper money reflected the following economic conditions: a) the
highly developed economy of the Song Dynasty demanded more money which was easier to
carry about; b) various monetary areas had been formed across China after the Five Dynasties,
and as it was prohibited to take copper money out of the country, paper money not only provided
a common currency between different monetary areas, but also effectively prevented the outflow
of copper; c) iron money, which was big in size and small in value, was still utilized, causing
much inconvenience; d) paper money was also used to wipe out the deficit caused by the huge
military expense, as China was frequently harassed by foreign assaults during the Song Dynasty.
In addition, the invention of printing and the improvement in paper-making techniques provided
substantial technical support for the creation of paper money. This also explains why paper
money was utilized much earlier in China than it was in the West.
The emergence and development of paper money restructured the monetary system in China,
presented it with new situations and new problems, and signified a new stage in the study of
monetary issues. Basic monetary theories centering on paper money were formulated, as the
issue, circulation and administration of paper money which became the focus of attention and the
major topic of discussion. The main characteristics of the monetary theories of this period may
be summed up as follows: a) like European countries in the 15th century, the Song Dynasty had
long been faced with a severe monetary shortage due to the development of the commodity
economy; thus explanation of and solutions for this problem were important topics for monetary
theories; b) as paper money of the Song and the Yuan Dynasties was inconvertible, discussions
on the circulation law of paper money and ways to stabilize its value mainly focused on
inconvertible paper money; c) because the central government depended on issuing a large
amount of paper money to make up its deficit, the rate of inflation was constantly growing
during the Song Dynasty and much of the Yuan Dynasty; and therefore, dangers of increasing
inflation and solutions to it were a main concern; d) in addition, a large variety of topics were
discussed, such as the origin and function of money, differences and similarities between paper

11

money and metal money, the interplay between paper money and metal money, and the
difference between the circulation of paper money and of metal money. Moreover, theories
against foreign trade were in trend during the Southern Song Dynasty as there was a large trade
deficit in gold and silver due to inflation, a historical background similar to that behind the rise
of Mercantilism in the West.
The Ming and the Qing Dynasties saw further changes in the monetary system. During the
early Ming Dynasty, paper money still prevailed, whereas gold and silver money were banned.
But the use of silver gradually became widespread, and the use of paper money slowly faded out,
until its was officially replaced by silver in the first year of the reign of Zheng Tong (1436),
when the ban on silver money was lifted. This put an end to the use of paper money which had
prevailed since the Northern Song Dynasty, marking another major shift in the history of the
monetary system of ancient China. From then on until the first few years of the Republic of
China, silver was used along with paper money. Apart from a few discussions on paper money
during the early Ming Dynasty, monetary thought of this period might be said to have entered
“the age of silver”, as it mainly focused on the circulation of silver. It was precisely during this
period that the Western civilization made great advances thanks to the geological discoveries of
the 15th century, overtaking the old Chinese empire and casting it behind on the path to progress.
Chinese monetary thought, as well as the country itself, gradually faded out on the historical
stage.

5. Chinese Monetary Thought and the Structure of the State
According to Peng Xinwei (2007, p.14), a distinguished scholar of Chinese monetary history,
there were two major elements in the monetary theories of ancient China. The first of these is the
statist stance on money, which claims that money had no intrinsic value and that it was strictly
used as government-issued tokens. This theory is similar to the one proposed by G. F. Knapp.
Behind it lies the advocacy of a unified monetary system aimed at solving the problems caused
by a disorderly monetary system at any time. A second key element was the quantity theory of
money. Developed from the battle against inflation, it was viewed as a progressive theory at the
time. Discussions on money in ancient China mainly focused on monetary policies, e.g. on the
authority of coinage during the Han Dynasty, and on policies about paper money during the Song
Dynasty. In comparison, theories on the nature and value of money were mentioned as
supplementary comments to monetary policies.

12

These views have been summarized in the earlier part of our paper. Because the formulation
of monetary theories is greatly dependent on the development of a prior monetary economy, it
seems reasonable to argue that the highlights of monetary theory in ancient China were produced
mostly before the Yuan Dynasty, when China was one of the world’s most developed economies,
and before it was surpassed by Western countries. Similarly, Western monetary theories are
highly valued and widely studied today, because Western countries have become leading powers
in the world’s economy. Developing countries wish to learn from Western economic and
monetary systems, just as Japan learned extensively from China’s social systems during the Tang
Dynasty. (See Laidler (2004), Jevons (1899), Keynes (1972a,b,c,d), Laidler (1991), Ascheim and
Taylor (1996), Laughlin (1911), Skaggs (1999), and Dimond (2002).

6. Key Concepts in Chinese Monetary Thought
A. The Concept of and Role of Money
a. The origin of money
There are three main explanations for the origin of money in Western economic theory: 1)
the theory of invention, which believes that money was invented by the state or ancient sages; 2)
the theory of exchange convenience, which is also called “the theory of co-option”, for its belief
that money is chosen collaboratively as a solution to problems that occurred in barter exchanges;
3) the theory of wealth preservation, which maintains that money came into existence for the
sake of preserving, measuring and exchanging wealth. Similar theories existed in ancient China,
and were developed earlier than their counterparts in the West.
The dominant theory of the origin of money in ancient China was that money was created
by the sage-kings. Shan Qi (524 B.C.), a 6th-century politician, believed that money was
invented by one of the sage-kings in ancient times to protect refugees who had escaped from the
flood. Therefore, instead of being the product of commodity circulation, money was regarded as
reflecting the will of the ruler, its purpose being to measure the value of commodities. This
earliest version of this type of theory was also mentioned in Guan Zi (685 B.C.), an important
theoretical work on monetary theories, who also indicated that there were two devastating floods
during the reign of Yu and Tang. Seeing their people selling their sons and daughters to maintain
a living after the floods, Yu and Tang invented money so that people could redeem their children
with it. Shan Qi and Guan Zi were the earliest figures in the history of monetary thought in
ancient China, whose influence extended over the dynasties. Their theories on the origin of

13

money are regarded as canonical theories on this topic. There is also another reason why the
theory of invention gained such popularity: these kings were canonized in Confucianist works as
role models of virtue. Other theorists, such as Chao Cuo, a politician of the Western Han Dynasty,
Lu Zhi, a government official of the Tang Dynasty, Li Gou, a scholar of the Northern Song
Dynasty, and Qiu Jun, a government official of the Ming Dynasty, also held the same view.
Contrary to this view is the theory that money was created for convenience’s sake, a view
held by a comparatively smaller number of scholars. Among them, the most well-known are
Sima Qian, Luo Mi and Ye Shi. Sima Qian (104 B.C~91 B.C.) observed that money was the
product of commodity exchange and its emergence and prevalence are inseparable from the
circulation of commodities. This remarkable observation contrasted with the popular theory of
invention. Luo Mi (1165 A.D.~1173 A.D.), a historian of the Southern Song Dynasty, pointed out
that money was created to facilitate daily economic activities, and was only adopted by kings
later to rule their countries. These views that held money was born out of necessity, showing
independent influence from the theory of invention, were rare after Sima Qian. Ye Shi (1150
A.D.~1223 A.D.) who believed that money emerged in commodity exchanges and was related to
business activities. He explained that during the Pre-Qin Period, there was little need for money,
as the country was divided into separate states with self-sufficient natural economies, but the
demand for money increased significantly after the political unification of the Qin and Han
Dynasties, when commodity exchanges occurred on a national scale. This is the most important
elaboration on the “money for convenience’s sake” theory.
b. The nature of money
In Western studies, there have been two main types of theories on the nature of money: the
theory of metallic money and the theory of nominal money. Regarding money as a measure of
value, store of value and world currency, the metallic view of money equates money with
precious metal, assuming that money must have the content and value of metal, and that its value
is determined by the value of the metal. In comparison, the nominal view of money sees money
as a medium of exchange and medium of payment, a token without any intrinsic value.
In ancient China, both of these theories had their supporters. It may be inferred from the
dialogue between Shan Qi and King Jing of the Zhou Dynasty that Shan Qi was a supporter of
the theory of metallic money, for he argued against King Jing’s decision to make heavy coins and
abolish light coins, concerned that metal coins might depreciate. After Shan Qi, many theorists
maintained that money should be made of metal which had intrinsic value. The issue was further
complicated by the emergence of paper money.

14

Liu Dingzhi (1433 A.D.), a Ming Dynasty scholar, claimed that laws that applied to the
circulation of metal money and paper money were different. He observed that the exchange value
of metal money based on its weight could only remain stable when the intrinsic value of metal
money equalled the value of commodities, whereas the value of paper money, which was
determined by its quantity, could be stabilized when its supply met its demand. This was the first
clear analysis of the nature of metal money and paper money in historical Chinese monetary
thought. Qiu Jun (1487 A.D.), a Ming Dynasty government official, held a similar view. Xu Mei
and Xu Lian (1846 A.D.) of the Qing Dynasty also noted that the value of commodities,
including money, was determined by their quantity. Gold and silver were expensive because they
were scarce, whereas sand, stones and soil were cheap because they were abundant. As for paper
money, although it could not completely replace silver, it was also feasible to issue convertible
paper money backed by a full reserve, or else it would be a mere piece of paper. This is a typical
example of the metallic view of money.
However, the nominal view of money appears to have been more popular in ancient China.
Essay 73 “The State Economy” of Guan Zi, suggested that precious jewels, gold and knife coins
were used as money not because of their intrinsic value, but because the king decreed that it
should be so. “If a man holds them, they cannot make him warm; if he tries to eat them, they
cannot satisfy his hunger”. This sentence in Guan Zi became a frequently quoted expression on
the nominal view of money. A similar expression can be found in Chao Cuo’s argument (168
B.C.) which was written in the Western Han Dynasty: “One cannot eat it when he’s hungry, or
wear it when he’s cold” i.e., money had no practical use compared with grain and garments. Thus
he proposed that grain should replace money in such economic activities as collecting taxes,
paying government officials and paying off penalties. Zhou Xingji (1107 A.D.~1110A.D.), a
government official of the Northern Song Dynasty, believed that money had no measurable value,
unless it was exchanged with commodities. This is also a typical example of the nominal view of
money. Xin Qiji (1175 A.D.), a poet of the Southern Song Dynasty, remarked that although
copper coins might be “heavier” than paper money, it was similar to paper money for it had no
practical value. This was the first analysis in historical Chinese monetary thought of paper
money from the nominal point of view.
B. Monetary Circulation
a. Debate about the Authority of Coinage
As coinage was a prerequisite for monetary circulation during the time metal money was
used, discussions on the authority of coinage made up an important part of Chinese monetary

15

thought. There were at least four major debates on this issue.
The first one occurred in the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Wu of Han (175 B.C.),
when the “Ban on Private Coinage” was lifted. Private coinage, according to Jia Yi (179 B.C.),
was harmful in three ways, namely, it might lead to social instability, give rise to chaos in the
monetary system, and produce a negative effect on agricultural production. The best way to curb
private coinage, apart from monopolizing the authority of coinage, was for the state to
monopolize the material for making coins as well, especially copper. Jia Shan (179 B.C.)
compared the authority of coinage to the sceptre of the nation and the pivot of national interest:
“Money itself is useless, but when the ruler takes it in his hand like a sceptre, it’s endowed with
the power of distributing wealth among the people. Granting people the right to make money is
like allowing them to share the sceptre with the ruler, which should not be encouraged.”
A second debate happened during the Conference on Salt and Iron in the sixth year of the
reign of Emperor Zhao of Han (81 B.C.). Confucian government officials unleashed a violent
attack on the “five-zhu system” and demanded free coinage, whereas Sang Hongyang, the
finance minister, strongly opposed it, arguing that free coinage would induce people to abandon
farm work. In addition, if private coinage was permitted, “profit would be monopolized by the
rich and the powerful”, good money and bad money would co-exist on the market, causing chaos
in the monetary system, which would be disadvantageous to both the country and the people.
Sang advocated centralized coinage, for if the authority of coinage was not controlled by the
central government, officials of regional governments were likely to make bad money and earn
profit from it. This would not only reduce public revenue, but also boost the political and
economic power of regional governments, posing danger to the central government. On the
contrary, if coinage was monopolized by the central government, the value of metal coins would
be stabilized, as no bad money would be produced, and people would have faith in money and
monetary exchange. Seen from today, such an argument is still defensible, because theoretically
speaking, state credit is still the most reliable.
The third debate took place in the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu of Song during
the Southern Dynasties (457 A.D.). Shen Qingzhi, a minister of Emperor Xiaowu, proposed free
coinage in order to increase public revenue, for “the treasuries are half-empty. It is money that
both the government and people lack”. This proposal was strongly opposed by Yan Jun and Liu
Yigong, who argued that “there should be a proper way to carry out reforms”. According to them,
Shen Qingzhi’s plan would only result in chaos in the monetary system and a serious shortage of
money, because “although people may be rich, it would not help increase the public revenue”.

16

The fourth debate occurred in the 22nd year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang (734
A.D.), when Zhang Jiuling, the prime minister, proposed free coinage to ease the money shortage,
which met with opposition. Two typical counter-arguments were put forward by Liu Zhi in “The
Five Disadvantages of Free Coinage” and “The Four Advantages of Banning the Free Use of
Copper”. However, it was not until seventy years later, in the seventh year of the reign of
Zhenguan (793 A.D.), that Liu Zhi’s arguments were accepted by the central government, when a
regulation banning the free use of copper was issued in spite of heavy pressure. In the West, a
similar point, that the authority of coinage should remain with the monarch who had the utmost
credit and authority as representative of his or her country, was made by Nicole Oresme (1320
A.D.~ 1382 A.D.), a French clergyman and scholar, about 1500 years later than Jia Yi, and 600
years later than Liu Zhi.
b. Theories on monetary circulation
Chinese scholars’ elaborations on monetary circulation date back to very early times. It was
pointed out in Guan Zi that the state’s regulation on the quantity of money in circulation had a
twofold purpose: to make profit from it and to stabilize commodity prices. According to Guan Zi,
the following measures might be adopted in regulating monetary circulation: a) regulate
monetary circulation and thereby the economy by maintaining the equilibrium between “heavy”
money and “light” money; b) stabilize commodity prices by balancing supply and demand; c)
control the quantity of money in circulation. It is remarkable that these measures were proposed
more than 2000 years ago.
Monetary circulation in ancient China often went to two extremes. One was an excess of
money, when the total value of money in circulation far exceeded the total value of commodities,
or when some metal coins were not accepted because of their low purity, light weight or high
cost. Both situations were likely to result in “the lightness of money and heaviness of goods”, i.e.
inflation. In these cases commodity prices soared, consequently impeding normal economic
activities and threatening social and political stability. The other extreme is money shortage,
when there was a gap between the quantity of money in circulation and its actual demand,
typically the monetary shortage which occurred at the end of the Tang Dynasty, during the Song
Dynasty and the shortage of silver during the Ming and the Qing Dynasties. As a result of money
shortage, commodity prices would go down, “farmers would be put in a predicament whereas
trade would flourish day by day”, and normal economic order would also be affected.
Various Chinese scholars expressed views on these matters. It is notable that although
inflation occurred more frequently than deflation in Chinese history, more discussions focused

17

on the latter issue. This may be explained by the fact that a large proportion of Chinese
intellectuals who had the means to express their thoughts held posts in the government, whose
interest was closely associated with inflation, whereas ordinary people, who suffered badly from
inflation, lacked the means to voice their opinions. Therefore, criticism of and complaints about
inflation, if any, were seldom heard. On the contrary, because deflation and various forms of
money shortage occurred in many parts of China during the Song Dynasty and had profound
influence on the economy, it attracted more attention from Chinese scholars.
For example, Zhang Fangping (1068 A.D.~1085 A.D.) reasoned that there were mainly two
causes for the money shortage in the Northern Song Dynasty: one is the loss of money to
northern countries such as Khitan, Nuchen and the Western Xia; the other is money exported via
sea to Japan and Vietnam. Additionally, an increasing amount of copper coins were melted down
to make other objects after the ban on the free use of copper was lifted. Zhang Fangping also
observed that money stored in the Treasury would flow to the market through various expenses,
and would then return to the Treasury through public revenue, which he considered to be the law
of circulation. If collected taxes, such as the tax of scutage, were hoarded in the Treasury, the
normal flow of money would be impeded, which would give rise to money shortage.
Shen Kuo (1077 A.D.) listed several reasons for money shortage: a) the increase in
population led to an increase in various expenses, and consequently a rising demand for money;
b) a small proportion of money was gradually worn out in circulation; c) copper coins were
melted down to make other objects after the ban on the free use of copper was lifted; d) a large
amount of metal money was hoarded because people did not have confidence in “salt notes”; e)
the supply and variety of the source materials for making metal coins were severely limited; f)
hoarding money was a prevalent practice; g) a large amount of money was exported, and this was
to be reduced by imposing control on goods import; h) money shortage was specific to certain
areas, such as the north-western border. Shen Kuo also proposed corresponding solutions to these
problems, such as reforming the monetary system, enhancing the credibility of banknotes,
enlarging the variety of source materials, looking for special solutions for special areas, and
increasing the velocity of circulation.
Shen Kuo’s propositions were quickly adopted by the government. A number of measures
were taken, such as collecting objects made of copper and melting them down to make copper
coins, banning the free use of copper, imposing controls on copper export and limiting the legal
amount of money that might be hoarded. These measures eased money shortage to some extent.
However, the emergence of paper money brought new problems to monetary circulation.

18

Zhou Xingji (1107 A.D.~1110A.D.), a philosopher of the Northern Song Dynasty, pointed out
that the introduction of various forms of paper money such as Jiao Zi and Xiao Chao was
unsuccessful because they were irconvertible. Thus a certain proportion of reserves was required
for paper money to gain trust. Yet a full reserve was not necessary, because paper money was
prone to accidents such as flood, fire and robbery, and it would not be redeemed when it was still
in circulation. Therefore, Zhou Xingji suggested a reserve equal to 2/3 of the issued amount of
paper money. His proposal was the earliest discussion of the reserve for paper money in ancient
China. Ye Ziqi (1378 A.D.), a scholar of the Ming Dynasty, made a similar point. Using the
metaphor of a pond, he pointed out that the total value of paper money should not exceed the
capacity of market, just as a pond with the equal amount of water flowing in and flowing out
would be constantly refreshed, but a pond with only the inflow of water would become stale and
finally brim over. Similarly, the equilibrium of paper money in circulation could be maintained
only when it was flowing in and out at the same time. This metaphor bore a close resemblance to
the one used in Western economics.
The intellect of Chinese scholars was well reflected in their effort to ensure the smooth
circulation of paper money. “Regulation on the Circulation of Zhi Yuan Bao Chao”, the earliest
comprehensive regulation on paper money in China and the world, was drafted by Li Ye in the
Yuan Dynasty. Its fourteen clauses established the silver standard and defined Bao Chao as the
legal tender for collecting taxes, paying government officials, doing business and lending money.
The Regulation also determined the face value of paper money, fixed the exchange rate between
the Zhi Yuan new note and Zhong Tong old note, devised methods for issuing and redeeming the
Bao Chao, and laid down specific measures for setting the proportion of reserve and selling and
buying gold and silver. In order to consolidate Bao Chao’s status as the legal tender, there were
also highly detailed clauses for penalizing counterfeiting, bartering, doing transactions in gold
and silver and corruption of government officials, which showed close resemblance to relevant
laws in modern countries.
Among the discussions on monetary circulation, there was one theory which was
reminiscent of Gresham’s law. Ye Shi (1150 A.D.~1223 A.D.), a scholar of the Southern Song
Dynasty, noticed in the issue and circulation of paper money a major defect which drove paper
money out of the market, and led to monetary shortage. Before him, Jia Yi of the Western Han
Dynasty and Yan Jun of the Northern and Southern Dynasties made similar points to the
expression “bad money drives out good”, such as Jia Yi’s statement (179 B.C.) “Bad money is
flourishing day by day, whereas good money is dying out”, but neither of them surpassed Ye Shi

19

in the depth of their observations. However, unlike Gresham’s law, in which “good money” and
“bad money” both refer to metal money, these terms referred respectively to metal money and
paper money in Ye Shi’s theory, whereas Jia Yi’s theory was perhaps the earliest version of
Gresham’s law in the world. Yuan Xie (1208 A.D.), another scholar of the Southern Song
Dynasty, dealt with this topic from the perspective of the inflation and deflation of Chu Bi (a
name for paper money at the time), observing that copper coins were well circulated when they
are the only form of money in the market, but when they coexisted with Chu Bi, it was often
driven out by the latter, so that there was a shortage of copper coins. As Yuan Xie and Ye Shi,
who lived in roughly the same historical period, both had a basic understanding of Gresham’s
law, it may be concluded that it was not mere coincidence that thoughts similar to Western
monetary theories emerged earlier in China.
C.
The Quantity Theory of Money
The quantity theory of money, which explains the relationship between overall prices and
the quantity of money, is the most influential theory on commodity prices in Western economics.
Its theory in simple terms is that if the velocity and quantity of money were constant, then the
inflation rate would exactly equal the growth rate of the money supply.
a. Origin and development of the quantity theory of money in China
The quantity theory of money has a long history in China. It was the main theoretical basis
of Guan Zi (645 B.C.), which was also the earliest book in China which included discussions of
monetary issues. It was pointed out in this book that “goods are cheap when they are abundant,
and expensive when they are scarce”. After an analysis of three types of money, namely gold,
copper coins and grain, Guan Zi concluded that the quantity of money determined the rise and
fall of commodity prices, which in turn affected the purchasing power of money. Therefore, it
was the quantity of money that determined its purchasing power. Such a statement is not
dissimilar to the quantity theory of money in Western economics.
Expressing his view on commodity prices, Zhang Lin, the royal secretary during the years
of Yuan He in the reign of Emperor Zhang of Han (84A.D.~87A.D.), observed “all goods are
expensive, that’s why money is cheap” “when the quantity of money is small, goods are cheap”.
Kong Ji (482 A.D.) of the Southern Qi Dynasty associated the quantity of money with
commodity prices, remarking that “grain is inexpensive because the quantity of money is small”.
Both of them had a profound understanding of the relationship between the quantity of money
and commodity prices.
Reflecting upon the relationship between the quantity of money and its value, Liu Zhi (734

20

A.D.) of the Tang Dynasty noted that “Goods are heavy (expensive) when money is light (cheap).
This is caused by the excess of money. Therefore regulations should be made to reduce the
quantity of money, so that it will be heavy again.” As for the relationship between population and
the value of money, Liu Zhi reasoned that if the quantity of money did not increase in proportion
to population growth, it would fall short of the actual demand, and the value of money would rise.
According to him, as increased population would provide more labour forces for production, the
trade volume would expand, requiring a larger quantity of money. Therefore, in order to stabilize
the value of money, the quantity of money should be increased in proportion to population
growth. This was perhaps the first theory to associate the demand for money with population in
the evolution of monetary theory.
Drawing upon the traditional “theory on the weight of money”, Liu Zhi’s contemporary, Lu
Zhi (794 A.D.), clarified his understanding on the quantity of money: “Goods are cheap and
money is heavy when the quantity of money is small, so more money should be made to scatter it.
Goods are expensive and money is light when the quantity of money is large, so laws should be
made to accumulate it. Therefore, the prices of goods are determined by the quantity of money,
which could be controlled by the expanding or contracting policies of the government.” This
indicated that the quantity of money might be inferred from the price level. The state had the
power to regulate the value of money by releasing a certain amount of money to the market or
withdrawing it from the market.
Shen Kuo (1077 A.D.), a scientist of the Northern Song Dynasty, made a remarkable
contribution to the quantity theory of money by pointing out the impact of the velocity of money
on its total value: “Money benefits from circulation. If a city of ten households has a hundred
thousand unit of money, which is accumulated in one household, its total value will remain
unchanged in a hundred years. But if the same amount of money is circulated among ten
households, which will all benefit from it, then its total value will be a million. If it is perpetually
circulated, then its total value will be incalculable.” This may be the earliest statement of the
velocity of money in the world.
Zhou Xingji (1107 A.D.~1110A.D.) of the Northern Song Dynasty observed an intrinsic
homogeneity between money and the commodities it mediated. Basing his observation on the
“theory on the weight of money”, he argued: “Money has no value in itself; its value lies in the
commodities it commands. Money is neither light (low) nor heavy (high), its weight (value)
depends on and equals the value of commodities it commands.” Before him, theorists usually
regarded money as a means for measuring the value of commodities; Zhou Xingji was the first

21

one to propose an intrinsic homogeneity between money and commodities, expressing it in the
phrase “its weight depends on and equals the value of commodities it commands”. This equality
implies that there is a homogeneous quality in money and commodities, which renders them
comparable with each other. Although Zhou Xingji did not name this intrinsic quality, he did in
fact touch upon the basics of the labour theory of value.
He also drew the conclusion that the homogeneity of money and commodities came into
being on the market, where the growth in the money supply would lead to inflation, but the
inflation rate was higher than the growth rate of the money supply. Zhou Xingji’s explanation for
this, which has the same implications as the quantity theory of money, was that private coining
added to the money issued by the central government, and as the total value of commodities
equalled the total amount of money in circulation multiplied by the velocity of money, the
inflation rate was actually higher than the growth rate of the money issued by the central
government, but equalled the growth rate of the total amount of money in circulation.
Yuan Xie (1208 A.D.), a scholar of the Southern Song Dynasty, applied the traditional
quantity theory of money to the circulation of paper money, noting that when the quantity of
money was great, its value was low, and vice versa. By using various means to reduce the
quantity of money in circulation when the supply of money exceeded demand, the government
might stabilize the purchasing power of money and build up people’s confidence in it.
Thanks to these advanced theories, government regulations on the circulation of money
were highly sophisticated in ancient China. The “weight and exchange” policy of the Song
Dynasty was the earliest government measure for regulating the circulation of paper money in
the world. To “weight and exchange” was to exchange the excessive paper money in circulation
for metal money or such commodities as silk, tea and salt, so as to stabilize the value of paper
money. It was not until the 18th century that a similar method was devised in the West by John
Law (1705 A.D.). The “weight and exchange” method was developed out of experience. Many of
its practices for controlling the money supply were similar to the later selling of securities in the
open market operations of Western central banks.
After the Song Dynasty, Chinese monetary thought gradually fell behind economic theories
of Western countries. There was little development in the quantity theory of money, with the
exception of Qiu Jun (1487 A.D.) of the Tang Dynasty, who produced the most notable monetary
theory after the Song Dynasty. He contributed to the regulation on the money supply by
proposing that in order to stabilize the value of money and the price level, the money supply
should correspond to the total value of commodities. Emphasizing the state control over the

22

money supply, Qiu Jun suggested the adoption of the “balancing and measuring” policy, so as to
regulate commodity prices by controlling the quantity of money, a measure which is still used
today. He also emphasized the importance of maintaining the balance between paper money and
metal money, which could be achieved by the “weigh and exchange” method. If there was too
much metal money, the government should exchange paper money for metal money, so as to
reduce the quantity of metal money in circulation, and vice versa.
b. Characteristics of the quantity theory of money in ancient China
The quantity theory of money in ancient China has two characteristics which differentiate it
from later Western statement. First, it was formulated in an earlier time. For example, most of the
chapters in Guan Zi were written during the Spring and Autumn period (c. 600), whereas in
Europe, the quantity theory of money was first put forward by the French political philosopher
Jean Bodin in the 16th century, and was later developed by the English philosopher John Locke
in the 17th century, almost a thousand years after its statement in China. A related concept, the
velocity of money, was proposed by Shen Kuo in the 11th century. But it was not until 600 years
later, in the 17th century, that this concept was introduced in Europe by William Petty.
Secondly, in ancient China, the study of changes in commodity prices was based on the
relationship between the quantity of money and the quantity of commodities. Consequently, it
was proposed that commodity prices could be regulated by controlling the quantity of money in
circulation. For example, in Essay 93 “The State Economy” of Guan Zi, Guan Chong suggested
to the king that he could “control prices and maintain an equilibrium, according as commodities
become light or heavy”, so that “high and low prices might be evened up”. As minting was
usually under state control, the quantity theory of money in ancient China showed an inclination
towards government intervention by adopting administrative measures such as banning or
permitting free coinage, and banning or permitting the free use of copper, which became the
major source of intervention in China’s economic structure.
D. The Operation of Banks
A bank is a financial institution whose primary activity is to act as a payment agent for
customers and to borrow and lend money. It is an institution for receiving, keeping, and lending
money in hopes of repayment. Modern banks originated in Medieval Italy. The first bank in the
world, the Bank of Venice, was established in 1171, followed by banks in other cities of Italy and
in Germany and the Netherlands. The 18th and the 19th century saw the rise of large joint-equity
banks, which later evolved into the main types of Western banks. With the further development
of a credit economy and the government’s growing intervention of the economy, there was an

23

increasing demand for a central bank. In 1844, the restructured Bank of England became the
forerunner of central banks around the world, which were established in the later half of the 19th
century.
In ancient China, banking remained in elementary form despite a highly developed
monetary economy. A type of financial institution named “gui fang” existed in the Tang Dynasty,
and acted as an agent for customers to deposit valuable objects, but consensus has not been
reached on whether this kind of depositing service can be considered as the traditional sense of
deposit. The “dui fang”, another type of financial institution providing exchange service between
paper money and metal money, was prevalent during the Song Dynasty, but went out of business
when paper money was no longer used. The “qian zhuang” of the middle Ming Dynasty and
“piao hao” of the Qing Dynasty showed some characteristics of Western banks, but were still
vastly different from large joint-equity Western banks, being mainly private-owned institutions
with a small capital and few branches, offering a limited range of services. The first capitalist
bank in China was the China Merchants Bank founded in 1897. In 1905, China’s first state bank,
Bank of the Ministry of Revenue, was founded by the central government of the Qing Dynasty,
and functioned as the central bank.
a. Why banking in ancient China remained in its elementary form
In ancient China, there were few noteworthy discussions on banking due to the lack of
development in the banking business. The reasons for the slow development of banking in China
are multiple.
To begin with, one of the main services of banks, deposit, was not a common practice in
ancient China, because the Chinese tended to hoard their savings in their own cellars. Money
exchange, the origin of Western banks, was not popular in China. As Peng Xinwei (2007, p. 396)
suggested, exchange transactions were far less important in China than in Europe, because the
latter was an interconnected area of different countries utilizing various types of money. The
difference in the purity and weight of metal coins mattered much less in China, which utilized
copper coins, than in Europe, where coins made of precious metals such as gold and silver were
used. The value of all copper coins was often deemed as equal in ancient China.
Moreover, China was a unified state with a small proportion of foreign trade, so that foreign
currency was seldom used. Therefore, there was far less need for money exchange in ancient
China. The only service that flourished was loans. According to Zhou Li, state-run lending
institutions existed before the 6th century. After the Qin and the Han Dynasties, mercantile
capital and usury were so profitable that a few merchants of the Eastern Han Dynasty

24

accumulated enough wealth from lending money to compete with the kings. However, there was
little room for the development of non-government financial institutions, as private capital were
quite sufficient for handling loans, and the government kept the right to give loans in its own
hand.
Second, agriculture, the main industry in China since ancient times, had a profound
influence on the values of the Chinese. The Chinese had long been under the impression that
grain and its substitutes, including paper money and metal money, were always reduced by use.
Thus it was believed that their value was preserved by saving them, and the best way to do so
was hoarding. “The way to make the state wealthy is to cut down expenses, so as to benefit the
people, and keep the rest of wealth well preserved.” This quote epitomizes the view on money in
an agricultural society like China. Hoarding money has been a prevalent practice in China up till
the middle 20th century. Peng Xinwei believed that this phenomenon reflected people’s
preference for money to stay ready at hand in case of emergency, which he referred to as the
preference for fluidity. However, the amount of money required in emergency was relatively
small in actual situations, so contrary to people’s expectations, hoarded money gradually lost its
fluidity, which was both the cause and effect for the underdevelopment of deposit in ancient
China.
Finally, the traditional social structure and functions of the family in ancient China also
hindered the development of banks. According to Chen Zhiwu (2006, pp.34~37.), the family had
two major functions: reciprocal economic aid and emotional aid between family members. The
economic aid is a twofold function. First, there were potential financial contracts between family
members, e.g. children bore the potential responsibility of requiting parents’ “investment” on
them, siblings might borrow from each other, and one family might borrow from another family
of the same clan. Second, the idea of family bond, which held family members together with the
Confucian virtue of filial duty, considerably reduced the risk of financial transactions.
Consequently, the financial function of the family was greatly strengthened at the cost of the
demand for public financial resources. This was the social factor for the underdevelopment of
banking.
b. Wang Maoyin’s theory on the issue of paper money
Wang Maoyin, a government official of the Qing Dynasty, is also worth mentioning. He was
the only one Chinese person who mentioned in Karl Marx’s On Capital3. This indicates that
3

See: Zhao Jing. Continuation of the General History of Economic Thought in China. Beijing:
Peking Univ. Press. 2004. P.68.
25

Chinese monetary theory had clearly reached the West, not to mention the special status of Das
Kapital in contemporary China, which is a socialist country.
Wang Maoyin lived in the period around the Opium Wars, when there was a significant
outflow of silver which resulted in a silver shortage, subsequently giving rise to a series of
monetary problems. Reflecting upon the fact that the use of paper money never lasted long in the
history, Wang Maoyin proposed to “buttress one kind of nominal money with several kinds of
real money”, i.e. to strengthen paper money with several types of metal money. According to him,
the government should introduce tight controls on the issue of paper money to limit its quantity.
He also suggested that paper money should be issued and exchanged by yin hao (a financial
institution similar to a bank), and by government salt retailers or pawnshops in areas where there
were no yin hao. This suggestion, which is one of the few theories on the operation of banks in
ancient China, is reminiscent of Friedrich Hayek’s criticism on the state’s intervention on money.
E. Money and Commodity Prices
Studies of commodity price movements in ancient China have often met with difficulties
because of the lack of means and tradition to record the precise quantities of various
commodities. Records of commodity prices before the Ming Dynasty had little value for
economic studies, for they were mainly prices during special periods of time, such as a bumper
harvest, or a natural disaster. Besides, the Chinese academic tradition paid more attention to
reasoning and induction than to statistical analysis. Compared with the Western theoretical
tradition, monetary theories in ancient China had few records of statistics or equations, but were
abundant in theoretical discussions on the relationship between money and commodity prices.
But the following people and their theories are worth comment.
Shan Qi’s theory on the trade-off between the mother and the son money may be regarded as
either the quantity theory of money or the theory of metallic money, but it also touched upon the
relationship between money and commodity prices. Shan Qi (524 B.C.) noted that the weight of
metal coins should correspond to the actual need: if coins’ weight was too light and its
purchasing power too small, which would cause inconvenience in transactions, heavier coins
would have to be made. Thus the heavier coins would be called the “mothers”, and the lighter
ones the “sons”; the two types of coins were both to be used on the market. The purpose was to
balance the son coins with the mother coins. Conversely, if coins’ weight was too heavy and its
purchasing power too great, which would also cause inconvenience in transactions, lighter coins
would have to be made. Thus the lighter coins would be called the “sons”, and the heavier ones
the “mothers”; the two types of coins were both to be used on the market. The purpose was to

26

balance the mother coins with the son coins. That is to say, the weight of coins should be the
most convenient for circulation, so that the best trade-off between lighter and heavier coins
would be achieved at a certain exchange rate. When functioning as the measurement for the
market value of goods, money should have a proper weight which corresponded to the actual
price level.
It was mentioned in Essay 74 “State Regulation” and Essay 76 “National Economic
Stability” of Guan Zi that if the state withdrew a certain amount of money from the market, so as
to reduce the quantity of money in circulation, then the value of money would rise, and
commodity prices would fall. Conversely, if the state purchased a large quantity of goods so as to
increase the quantity of money in circulation, then the value of money would fall, and
commodity prices would rise. The quantity of money in circulation determined the change in the
value of money and the rise and fall of commodity prices, which in turn determined whether
money and goods were in good circulation. Therefore, Guan Zi demanded that in order to
regulate commodity prices, the state exercise effective control over the quantity of money in
circulation and goods on the market, and use these two powers alternatively to increase or reduce
the quantity of money in circulation, thereby changing the purchasing power of money. Guan Zi
also explained how the state should determine the quantity of metal coins which should be made.
As the price of grain, a daily necessity in ancient China, could be regulated by the quantity
money, the stability of the society might also be maintained by exerting control over money.
Private coinage was to be banned. The mining of gold and copper, two main materials for
making money, was to be monopolized by the state. Having centralized the making of money, it
would be possible for the state to estimate the demand for money according to the quantity of
grain that might be yielded. The price of grain could therefore be forecasted, and the
corresponding amount of money would be distributed across the country.
The Mohist Canons (468 B.C.~376 B.C.), another classic of the Pre-qin period, was also one
of the early books in China which discussed the relationship between money and commodity
prices. It pointed out that knife coins and grain represented each other’s price: if knife coins were
light, its purchasing power low, then grain would not be regarded as expensive even if its price
was high; if metal coins were heavy, its purchasing power high, then grain would not be regarded
as cheap even if its price was low. Even though the face value of knife coins remained stable, its
real value was constantly changing because the price of grain was different every year.
Fan Li (536 B.C.~448 B.C.), a historical figure in the Spring and Autumn period, made a
remark on the price level, which had profound influence on later understandings of the price of

27

grain. Fan Li held that a high price level would have a negative effect on agricultural production,
whereas a low price level would reduce the supply of money, and impede the development of the
economy. Only a price level between 20 and 90 (the unit remains to be verified) would benefit
both agricultural production and the economy. If the state wished to stabilize the price of grain, it
had to purchase grain at a higher price when grain was cheap, so as to check the fall of grain
price, store it for later use, and sell it at a lower price when it became expensive, so as to curb the
rise of its price. These measures relied on several functions of money such as the measurement of
value and the medium of exchange. The regulation of grain price was at the same time regulated
the purchasing power of money. Profit was ensured when money and goods were constantly
circulated.
Lu Zhi (794 A.D.), a government official of the Tang Dynasty, observed that the quantity of
money both determined commodity prices and was reflected in the latter. The state might
regulate the purchasing power of money by controlling the quantity of money in circulation.
Yang Wanli (1192 A.D.), a poet of the Southern Song Dynasty, innovated Shan Qi’s theory
of the trade-off between the mother and the son, by referring to copper coins and iron coins
which were prevalent in his time as the mother, and paper money such as huizi as the son. Thus,
the best trade-off was to be sought between the interdependent, inter-exchangeable metal money
and paper money, which was represented by metal money. The theory of the trade-off between
the mother and the son extended its influence over the history. After Yang Wanli, theorists of
later dynasties applied the same theory to the relationships between copper coins and iron coins,
between silver and paper money, between silver and copper coins, etc. Yuan Xie, a contemporary
of Yang, put forward the theory of the trade-off between real money and nominal money, which
may be regarded as an alternative version of Shan Qi’s theory. According to his definition, paper
money was the nominal money, and metal money was the real money and the specie backing the
former. Thus, the value of paper money might be maintained by regulating the quantity of metal
money in circulation.
Shan Qi’s theory was further developed by Ye Ziqi (1378 A.D.), a renowned scholar of the
Ming Dynasty, who suggested that commodity prices might be regulated by issuing convertible
paper money. Metal money was to be used as the mother, and paper money as the son. The
regulation of commodity prices was to be achieved by releasing money when prices were high,
and withdrawing money from the market when they were low. In this way the price level might
be stabilized.
Due to the lack of accurate data on the quantity of various commodities, scholars in ancient

28

China often turned to the change in commodity prices as the indicator of the quantity of
commodities on the market, so discussions about the supply of money were usually related to
commodity prices. Qiu Jun (1487 A.D.), a government official of the Ming Dynasty, explained
the interaction between commodity prices and the supply of money through the change in the
price of rice, one of the most important commodities at that time. He suggested that the Ministry
of Finance should adjust the supply of money according to the monthly report of the price of rice,
which was to be submitted by regional governments. Such a method had not been commonly
used in ancient China before.
F. The Role of Interest
In the history of man, exchanges of money and goods were often accompanied by the use of
credit, which was further developed after the emergence of money. Its product, interest, was a
center of debate in China and overseas in ancient times. The Chinese Confucian School,
represented by Mencius, dismissed earnings from interest as immoral. Aristotle opposed the
charging of interest because he regarded money as non-productive. In 344 BC, a law was passed
in Rome to prohibit the charging of interest. Compared with the strong opposition against
interest in Medieval Europe, Chinese scholars held a favourable attitude toward the charging of a
reasonable rate of interest.
As mentioned before, it was recorded in Zhou Li that government-run lending institutions
existed before the 6th century BC in China. Essay 74 “State Regulation” of Guan Zi proposed
that the government could control the price of grain by purchasing grain in advance with
agricultural loans, so that private capital and profiteering merchants would not be able to profit
from high interest. After the Han Dynasty, mercantile capital and usury became even more
prevalent. A special “loan market” existed in Chang’an during the Western Han Dynasty. Some
merchants in the Eastern Han Dynasty were as wealthy as kings with money earned from interest.
In the 1st century AD, Wang Mang, an official who seized the throne, came up with the
remarkable innovation of providing government loans with interest rate differentials.
Discussions on interest were scarce in the one or two thousand years that followed. A
noteworthy comment was made by Bai Juyi (806 A.D.), a poet of the Tang Dynasty, who
advocated abolishing government loans because the poor were made even poorer with the burden
of usury borrowed from intermediate agents. Even though the wealthy also got loans from these
agents, the high interest was still somehow exported to the poor. Additionally, the government
would not be able to collect the money from those who were unable to pay back. Bai Juyi’s
proposal was to replace usury with tax, so that the burden on debtors would be shared by the

29

entire society. This was quite an advanced thought in ancient China.
7. Concluding Remarks
That ancient China had rich monetary structure and experienced a wide range of debates on
monetary theory seems hardly in doubt, but has received little attention in Western research
output. How much of these discussions might have travelled the silk road and influenced the
evolution of later Western thought is hard to ascertain, but the suggestion that this may have been
in part the case is intriguing. And today, with rapidly maturing financial institutions in China this
history of debate in current China seems all the more significant. Our hope is that later work to
follow will flesh out many of these broader issues.

30

8. References
Ascheim, J. and G. S. Taylor, “Monetary Economics in Doctoral Perspective,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, Vol. 28, No. 3, August 1886, pp. 406-417.
Bai Juyi. Forests of Countermeasures, Volume 29. 806 A.D.
Ban Gu. “Biography of Jia Shan”, History of the Former Han Dynasty.88 A.D.~106 A.D.
Chao Cuo. Memorandum to the Emperor for Rising Grain’s Price. 168 B.C.
Chen Zhiwu. “The Ending of Filial Duty of Confucianism and the Rising of China’s Fiance”,
New Wealth. 2006.
Diamond, R. W., “Patinkin on Irving Fisher’s Monetary Economics,” 2002.
“Discourse of Zhou”, Volume Two. Discourses of the States. 947 B.C.~ 453 B.C.
Fang Xuanling. “Treatise on Food and Money”, Chronicles of the Jin Dynasty. 646 A.D.~648
A.D.
Guan Zi, 645 B.C.
Hicks, J. E., A Market Theory of Money, Oxford, Clarendon Press,

.

Huan Kuan. “Money”. Discourses on Salt and Iron. 48 B.C.~33 B.C.
Jevons, W. S., Investigations in Currency and Finance, MacMillan, 1894.
Jia Yi. “New Statements”. Anthology of Jia Yi. 179 B.C.
Keynes, J. M. “Alfred Marshall,” in Volume X, Essays in Biography, The Collected Writings of
John Maynard Keynes, MacMillan, 1972a.

31

Keynes, J. M., A Treatise on Money. The Pure Theory of Money, Volume V, The Collected
Writings of John Mayhard Keynes, MacMillan, 1972b.
Keynes, J. M., A Treatise on Money. The Applied Theory of Money, Volume VI, The Collected
Writings of John Maynard Keynes, MacMillan, 1972c.
Keynes, J. M., A Tract on Monetary Reform, Volume IV, The Collected Writings of John Maynard
Keynes, MacMillan, 1972d.
Kong Ji. Statement on Casting Coin and Equipoising money. 482 A.D.
Lacylin, J. L., Money and Business Cycles, 1911.
Laidler, D. E. W., The Golden Age of the Quantity Theory, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
N.J., 1991.
Laidler, D. E. W., “Chicago Monetary Traditions,” 2004.
Li Tao. Continuation of History Retold as a Mirror for Rulers, Volume 283. 1163 A.D~1177 A.D.
Liu Dingzhi. Countermeasures on Ten Subject, Volume Six.. 1433 A.D.
Liu Zhi. On Money. 734 A.D.
Lu Zhi. The Complete Works of Lu Xuan Gong, Volume Four. 794 A.D.
Luo Mi. “On the Origin of Money”, History of the Lu. 1165 A.D.~1173 A.D.
Ma Duanlin. “Money”, Part Two, General Study of Literary Records, Volume Nine. 1307 A.D.
Mohist Canons, Voulme 43. 468 B.C.~376 B.C.
Peng Xinwei. The History of China’s Money. Shanghai: Shanghai Renmin Press,2007.

32

Qiu Jun. “Copper Coin and Paper Currency”, More about the Great Learning Derivative. 1487
A.D.
Shen Yue. “Biography of Yan Jun”, Chronicles of the Sung in Southern Dynasty. 487 A.D.
Sima Qian, “ the Book on Counterpoise”, Shi Ji Historical Records. 104 B.C~91 B.C.
Skaggs, N. T., “Changing Views: Twentieth Century Opinion on the ?? School – Currency
School Controversym,” History of Political Economy, Vol. 31(2), 1999, pp. 361-391.
Xin Qiji. Memorandum to the Emperor for Applying the Money of Huizi. 1175 A.D.
Xu Mei. On Money. 1846 A.D.
Yang Wanli. “Memorandum to the Emperor for Begging to Suspend Ferruginous Coin and Huizi
Money in Jiangnan State”. Anthology of Cheng Zhai. 1192 A.D.
Ye Shi. “Financing”, Volume Two, Another Anthology of Shui Xin. 1150 A.D~1223 A.D.
Ye Ziqi. “Part of Various Institution”, Cao MU Zi. 1378 A.D.
Yuan Xie. Memorandum to the Emperor for People’s Convenience. 1208 A.D.
Zhang Fangping. Statement on Money and Banning Copper. 1068 A.D.~1085 A.D.
Zhang Jiaxiang. The History of Monetary Thought in China. Wuhan: Hubei Renmin Press,2001.
Zhou Xingji. “Statement to the Emperpr”, Volume Two. Anthology Fuzhi. 1107 A.D.~1110A.D.

33

