NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCOME INEQUALITY, THE MEDIAN VOTER, AND THE SUPPORT FOR PUBLIC
EDUCATION
Sean Corcoran
William N. Evans
Working Paper 16097
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16097

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

This research is supported by a grant from the Russell Sage Foundation as part of their special program
on the Social Dimensions of Inequality, and by the National Science Foundation. We wish to thank
Robert Schwab, Caroline Hoxby, Howard Rosenthal, Jon Sonstelie, Sheila Murray, Amy Harris, Jennifer
Godwin, Wally Oates, and participants in the NBER Economics of Education program for a number
of helpful suggestions. All errors are solely our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Sean Corcoran and William N. Evans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Income Inequality, the Median Voter, and the Support for Public Education
Sean Corcoran and William N. Evans
NBER Working Paper No. 16097
June 2010
JEL No. H72,I21,I22
ABSTRACT
Using a panel of U.S. school districts spanning 1970 – 2000, we examine the relationship between
income inequality and fiscal support for public education. In contrast with recent theoretical and empirical
work suggesting a negative relationship between inequality and public spending, we find results consistent
with a median voter model, in which inequality that reduces the median voter’s tax share induces higher
local spending on public education. We estimate that 12 to 22 percent of the increase in local school
spending over this period is attributable to rising inequality.

Sean Corcoran
New York University
Institute for Education and Social Policy,
Suite 805
665 Broadway
New York, NY 10012
sean.corcoran@nyu.edu
William N. Evans
Keough-Hesburgh Professor of Economics
Department of Economics and Econometrics
447 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
wevans1@nd.edu

1. Introduction
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, inequality in household income as measured by the
Gini coefficient rose more than 20 percent from 1969 to 2006, an increase driven largely by income
growth in the top half of the distribution (Gottschalk 1997; Goldin and Katz 2001; Piketty and Saez
2003; Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2008).1 This surge has prompted two important and related strands
of research. The first has sought explanations for the growth in inequality, focusing primarily on
changes in the distribution of wages and earnings.2 A second has sought to assess the social and
economic consequences of growing inequality, including effects on mortality and health (Kawachi,
Kennedy, and Wilkinson 1999; Deaton 2001; Mellor and Milyo 2002) crime (Kelly 2000; Fajnzylber,
Lederman, and Loayza 2002), civic engagement and trust (Alesina and La Ferrara 2000, 2002; Costa
and Kahn 2003), and economic growth (Benabou 1996; Forbes 2000).
Related to this second strand is a growing literature on the impact of inequality on the
demand for public goods and income redistribution. The recent literature in this field has found that
inequality and population heterogeneity more broadly defined tend to be associated with a lower level
of redistribution and support for public services, both across nations and within sub-national
jurisdictions (Goldin and Katz 1997; Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly 1999; Alesina, Glaeser, and
Sacerdote 2001; Luttmer 2001; Lind 2007; Fernandez and Levy 2008).

The Gini coefficients of household income in 1969, 1979, 1989, 1999, and 2006 were 0.391, 0.404, 0.431,
0.458, and 0.470 (U.S. Census Bureau 2008a). Gini coefficients for family income in these same years were
0.349, 0.365, 0.401, 0.429, and 0.444—consistently smaller, but increasing at a faster rate over time. The U.S.
is not unique in this trend—other industrialized nations witnessed a similar rise in inequality over this
period—but few experiences match that of the United States in terms of magnitude (Gottschalk and
Smeeding 1997; Kenworthy and Pontusson 2005).
2 One group of results suggests that skill-biased technological change, and—to a lesser degree—globalization
and trade are the primary forces driving earnings inequality (Katz and Autor 1999; Autor, Katz, and Kearney
2008) while a competing group of papers argues that institutional factors such as the minimum wage and
declining unionization have driven the rise in inequality (Card and DiNardo 2002; Dinardo, Fortin, and
Lemieux 1996).
1

1

This literature often stands in sharp contrast to the basic predictions of standard voting
models. In a classic set of papers, Meltzer and Richard (1981, 1983) proposed that under majority
rule, income inequality can result in greater public spending whenever mean income rises relative to
that of the median voter. In this model, growing wealth at the top of the income distribution lowers
the tax price of raising revenue, allowing the median voter to obtain greater public services at a
lower cost to them. Empirically, this model has met with mixed success over the years (Meltzer and
Richard 1983; Husted and Kenny 1997; Gouveia and Masia 1998; Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote
2001; Borge and Raatsø 2003; Kenworthy and Pontusson 2005).
One plausible explanation for the mixed evidence in favor of the Meltzer-Richard hypothesis
is that most of its empirical tests are applied in settings where the model’s assumptions are unlikely
to hold. The voting model in these papers presumes direct or representative democracy in which
voting is over a single-dimensional policy space and voters have single-peaked preferences over
policy options (Borck 2007). These assumptions are more likely to be approximated in local
government than in national ones, yet the Meltzer-Richard hypothesis is most often examined in a
national context (Turnbull and Mitias 1999; Fischel 2001; Mueller 2003).
In this paper, we draw upon a balanced panel of more than 10,300 local school districts
spanning 1970 – 2000 to explore the relationship between rising income inequality and fiscal support
for public elementary and secondary education. In contrast with recent theoretical and empirical
work suggesting a negative relationship between inequality and public spending, we find results more
consistent with the Meltzer and Richard hypothesis—rising income inequality appears to be
associated with higher per-student expenditure in local school districts, driven primarily by an
increase in revenues from local sources. Given the redistributive nature of education, our results
suggest that some of the potentially negative consequences of rising social inequality may have been

2

counteracted by local government’s ability to raise additional funds from growing incomes at the top
of the distribution.
The empirical relationship between inequality in income and spending on public education is
an important one for several reasons. First, K-12 education is a significant component of the public
budget. It comprised upwards of 29 percent of aggregate state and local government expenditure in
2006, a larger share than any other general expenditure category (U.S. Census Bureau 2010). If any
public service were likely to be affected by changes in the income distribution, education should.
Second, not all households directly benefit from the quality and quantity of publicly provided
education. Households without school age children, the elderly, and families with children in private
schools may only indirectly benefit from investments in public education. As a result, the income
and demographic composition of the electorate will play an important role in the overall support for
public education (Cutler, Elmendorf, and Zeckhauser 1993; Poterba 1997; Harris, Evans, and
Schwab 2001). Third, the level and distribution of school spending has historically been tightly
linked with income (Goldin and Katz 1997; Hoxby 1998; Fernandez and Rogerson 2001). Much has
been written about the effects of income inequality on spending disparities across jurisdictions, but
less is known about the consequences of rising inequalities within districts. Fourth, theoretical work
has highlighted an important mechanism by which inequality can affect educational spending when
there are private alternatives: a coalition of the “ends against the middle” that reduces public school
spending (Epple and Romano 1996). This hypothesis has received insufficient empirical attention.
Finally, public education has an important redistributive aspect to it (Besley and Coate 1991; Hoxby
2003), and heterogeneity in income and hence school spending has implications for the level and
dispersion of income in subsequent generations (Benabou 1996).
In our analysis, we begin by examining the relationship between income inequality within
school districts and local spending on K-12 education. Given the nature of education spending and

3

our data set, we are able to address omitted variables to a much greater degree than in previous
work. Our use of panel data allows us to control for fixed characteristics of localities that would
contaminate cross-sectional analyses, and the fact that we have multiple observations per state per
year allows us to control for state-specific time varying shocks to school spending. We use variation
in spending brought about by court-ordered education finance reform to deal with the potential
endogeneity of intergovernmental grants. Further, we exploit the strong predictions of the median
voter model to construct arguably exogenous variation in income inequality, generated by changes in
the skewness of the income distribution.
Estimating the relationship between within-district income inequality and local education
spending introduces several challenges. First, proponents of the Tiebout (1956) model might suspect
a relatively low level of income inequality in local districts, to the extent the demand for education is
related to income and households have the ability to sort into communities in line with their
preferences for school spending. In fact, we show that the lion’s share of income inequality in
metropolitan areas is within school districts, rather than between them, a feature of MSAs that
changed little over this period (see also Rhode and Strumpf 2003). Still, we address sorting in part
through the use of a within-group estimator that relies on changes in income inequality within
districts over time. Second, education finance during the 1970 – 2000 period was characterized by a
steady shift away from local funding and toward greater state funding, fueled in part by courtordered finance reforms (Murray, Evans, and Schwab 1998; Hoxby 2001; Corcoran and Evans
2008). On the one hand, this shift has diminished the importance of variation in local dollars, as
states have sought to equalize school spending. On the other hand, greater centralization may have
weakened pressures to sort by income (Aaronson 1999; Nechyba 2003). Among other things, our
models of local spending include controls for intergovernmental grants, as well as state-specific time
effects to account for the level effects of state finance reforms.

4

We next consider the relationship between within-district income inequality and the level of
expenditure and state aid per student. In making public spending decisions, local households are
concerned with both their local tax burden and the overall level of per-student expenditure. In the
U.S., education is a shared responsibility between local, state, and federal governments, and in many
cases, the structure of state aid programs influence the tax price of local spending (Hoxby, 2001).
Our models of expenditure per student thus capture the net effect of growing inequality on overall
expenditure per student. Finally, we examine the relationship between within-district income
inequality and rates of private school enrollment. We hypothesize that private enrollment will
respond to income inequality through several channels: families’ enrollment response to fiscal
changes brought about by changes in income inequality, to changes in the peer composition of
schools that accompanies higher inequality, or both.

2. Theoretical Framework
a. Inequality and Public Finance
In recent years a growing literature in public finance has examined how inequality and
population heterogeneity impact the demand for public goods. Much of this literature attempts to
explain differences in government size and income redistribution policies across nations and within
countries over time. In a classic set of papers, Meltzer and Richard (1981, 1983) proposed a simple
model where the electorate votes via majority rule on a system of income redistribution funded by a
proportional income tax. They showed that changes in the relative position of the decisive (median)
voter in the income distribution can affect the level of redistribution and thus the size of
government. Specifically, they showed that growth in mean income relative to the median lowers the
“tax price” of redistribution facing the median voter, who rationally votes for greater government

5

spending.3 The Meltzer-Richard model has been tested empirically in multiple contexts, with mixed
results. In the United States, Husted and Kenny (1997) found that extension of the voting franchise
led to greater state welfare spending as the income of the median voter fell relative to statewide
income.4 In contrast, cross-national comparisons of government spending in developed countries
have been less supportive of the Meltzer-Richard hypothesis (Perotti 1996; Benabou 1996).
Comparing U.S. and European welfare policies, Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote (2001) note that
pre-tax income inequality is considerably higher in the U.S. than in European countries, while it is
Europe that has larger welfare systems on average.5
An outgrowth of this literature asks whether racial and ethnic heterogeneity influences
support for public spending, if perhaps for different reasons. Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote (2001)
found that racial heterogeneity can explain much of the variation in redistributive spending across
developed countries. Within the U.S., Luttmer (2001) modeled individual preferences for welfare
spending as dependent upon the share of beneficiaries from the same socioeconomic or ethnic
group. His analysis of the General Social Survey showed that while individual support for
redistribution decreases in the number of area welfare recipients, support increases with the fraction
of local recipients who are of the same race (see also Lind 2007). Similarly, Alesina, Baqir, and
Easterly (1999) showed in a cross-section of U.S. metropolitan areas that public expenditure on
education, roads, libraries, sewers, and trash pickup is negatively related to within-MSA ethnic
fragmentation. Cutler, Elemendorf, and Zeckhauser (1993) found analogous results at the county

This assumes a non-symmetric, positively skewed income distribution. Technically, the tax price of local
public goods—the cost to a taxpayer of an additional unit of services—is a function of more than just the tax
share (the proportion of the total tax base held by the taxpayer). In the case of education, the tax price will
also include the number of students per taxpayer, the per-student labor cost of teachers, and the like.
4 See Gouveia and Masia (1998), Borge and Raatsø (2003), and Perotti (1993) for contrasting evidence. Borck
(2007) provides a review of voting models of redistribution and empirical evidence on these models.
5 More recently, however, Kenworthy and Pontusson (2005) show that nations that experienced the largest
increases in inequality in the 1980s and 1990s experienced the greatest increases in redistribution.
3

6

level, and demonstrated that the effects of population characteristics on public spending differ
considerably between levels of government (see also Turnbull and Mitias 1999).

b. Inequality and the Support for Public Education
How income inequality and heterogeneity impact spending on public education is a
particularly interesting question, for several reasons. First, as mentioned previously, it is the largest
expenditure category in most state and local government budgets. Second, education is often
characterized as a publicly provided private good, where benefits are targeted disproportionately to a
minority of the population. To the extent interpersonal preferences for redistribution of the type
exemplified in Luttmer (2001) exist, they may be particularly important in education. Finally, the
presence of private alternatives to public education may alter the balance of political support for
public schooling in more heterogeneous populations.
Epple and Romano (1996) provided an intriguing example of the latter. They argued that for
public goods like education where private options exist, the likely majority voting equilibrium will be
one in which there are two opposing coalitions of voters—one comprised of high- and low-income
households who prefer a low level of expenditure on public education, and another made up of
middle-income households who prefer a high level of school spending. This coalition of high and
low income families oppose greater education spending for different reasons: the low income group
prefers lower taxes and a greater level of consumption, while high income families opt for private
schools. In this case, greater income inequality increases the likelihood of an “ends against the
middle” result, with lower spending on public education and higher rates of private schooling.6
Evidence favoring the “ends against the middle” hypothesis can be found in the expansion
of secondary schooling in the United States in the early 20th century, as demonstrated by Goldin and
See Glomm and Ravikumar (1998) for an alternative model with private schooling options, where the
median voter is decisive.

6

7

Katz (1997). They found that communities which supported the expansion of secondary education
were more likely to have relatively equal income distributions, as well as populations more
homogeneous in religious affiliation or ethnic background. The more heterogeneous communities
lagged behind in the growth of secondary schooling.
Dimensions of community heterogeneity other than income have also been shown to play
an important role in the political support for public education. A commonly cited example is the age
distribution. Poterba (1997) found that states with higher growth in the fraction of residents over
age 65 experience slower rates of growth in per-child educational expenditure, an observation
consistent with a preference to vote down public programs the elderly do not benefit from
themselves. He found the effect is magnified to the extent the elderly population is racially
incongruent with the school-age population. Others who have tested for effects of a growing elderly
share on local, as against state, support for education have found a less stark relationship—in part
because the elderly benefit from schools through their property values (Ladd and Murray 2001;
Harris, Evans, and Schwab 2001; Hilber and Mayer 2007).

c. Local Population Heterogeneity and the Tiebout Model
The Tiebout (1956) model is the workhorse economic model of local public good provision.
In the standard Tiebout framework, households sort into homogenous communities offering their
preferred level of public services and taxation. While the pure Tiebout model has restrictive and
generally unrealistic assumptions, it has enjoyed much success over the years (Ross and Yinger 1999;
Fischel 2001). In particular, empirical research has found that local taxes and school quality are
capitalized into property values, a key implication of the Tiebout model (Black 1999).
Our effort to estimate the impact of income inequality on the support for local public
schools is complicated if the pure Tiebout model is a correct characterization of the real world. First,

8

one might wonder: given Tiebout sorting, why would local communities have heterogeneous
populations? Second, one must be concerned that because of mobility across jurisdictions, withindistrict income inequality is responsive to the level of public spending.
The Tiebout model predicts homogeneity of demand for local public goods within
communities, not necessarily homogeneity in observable population characteristics (Epple and Platt
1998). In practice, we do not observe preferences but rather correlates with demand for public
goods, such as income, wealth, age, race, ethnicity, home ownership, and the like. Yet even if these
observable characteristics represent noisy measures of preferences, communities are often much
more heterogeneous than Tiebout might predict. This should not be too surprising. While
metropolitan areas in the U.S. exhibit features of the Tiebout model to varying degrees, in practice,
few come close to its ideal, given barriers to perfect sorting. Communities may also be willing to
tolerate population heterogeneity in exchange for economics of scale in the production of public
goods (Alesina, Baqir, and Hoxby 2000). Ultimately, the weaker are Tiebout forces, the more likely
conflicting household demands for public goods will be resolved through the political process.
Rhode and Strumpf (2003) found that Tiebout sorting—that is, movement due to local tax
and spending policies—may be of only second order importance in the locational decisions of U.S.
households. Juxtaposed against dramatically falling transportation, commuting, and communication
costs—all of which in theory should increase sorting and heterogeneity across communities—they
found less stratification of observable household characteristics and policy outcomes across
municipalities over the 1850 – 1990 period. In their analysis of the Boston Metropolitan Statistical
Area (MSA)—often held up as an archetype of Tiebout competition—they found no evidence of
increased sorting in the post World War II period. Within-municipality income distributions in
suburban Boston have changed little, and the between-community component of income inequality
in Boston has risen only slightly since 1949. Along the same lines, Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (1999)

9

and Kremer (1997) found that sorting between neighborhoods has remained constant or declined in
recent decades
We should stress that none of this research refutes the Tiebout hypothesis, and it is certainly
the case that local public goods and taxation are important factors in household locational decisions.
The results above, however, suggest that forces other than Tiebout sorting have been important
enough to maintain a relatively high level of within-community heterogeneity—a condition that is
key to our analysis. We do take the potential endogeneity of the income distribution seriously, and as
we outline below, attempt to reduce or eliminate any omitted variables bias through our choice of
estimation strategies.

3. Data and Empirical Strategy
a. Data Sources
Our analysis draws upon a balanced panel of demographic and financial data from more
than 10,300 local school districts spanning 1970 – 2000. The district panel was constructed by
merging eight large national databases: the Census of Population and Housing special school district
tabulations for 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 (U.S. Census Bureau 1973, 1982, 2002a; U.S. Department
of Education 1994), the Census of Governments: School Districts for 1972, 1982, and 1992 (U.S. Census
Bureau 1987, 1992, 1993), and the F-33 Annual Survey of School Finances for 2002 (U.S. Census Bureau
2002b).7 The Census tabulations provide detailed information about household income and
demographics within each school district, while the Census of Governments and Annual Surveys of School

7 Similar matched panel datasets of school districts were used by Hoxby (1996, 2001) and Harris, Evans, and
Schwab (2001). Prior to 1989-90, school district financial data was only available from the Census of
Governments in years ending in a two or five. We thus match the 1970 and 1980 cross-sections of Census
data to financial data from the 1972 and 1982 fiscal years. For consistency across the four cross-sections, we
match the 1990 and 2000 Census data to financial data from the 1992 and 2002 fiscal years.

10

Finances represent the primary historical source of school finance data in the United States. These
eight databases are supplemented by a number of others, as described in the Data Appendix.
The construction of a matched panel database of school districts spanning more than three
decades presents a number of challenges. First, some school district boundaries changed over this
period as a result of consolidations, splits, and unifications (a merger of separate elementary and
secondary districts). We identified these district changes primarily by contacting all state departments
of education where such changes occurred. All of our districts are defined based on their 2002
geographic definitions, such that if District A and District B merged or unified in 1995, we have
combined the data from these two districts in all prior years for comparability with 2002.8 Districts
involved in splits have been dropped from the panel, though there were very few of these cases.
Second, we lose a number of school districts due to missing data in 1970 and 1990. In the 1970
Census, districts with fewer than 300 students were aggregated into one pseudo-district in each of 39
affected states, accounting for a loss of roughly 1,500 mostly rural districts. In the 1990 Census, a
small number of counties in California did not participate in the special school district mapping,
accounting for a loss of 196 districts. After excluding districts with outlying values of per-pupil
expenditure, our balanced panel contains 10,359 school districts observed in four years, for a total of
41,436 observations.9 While this panel comprises only 75.6 percent of existing elementary and

For our regression models, we have assigned an indicator variable to be equal to one for all school districts
involved in a merger or unification between 1972 and 2002. When an elementary and secondary district
covering the same geographic territory consolidate to form a unified (K-12) district, we do not aggregate
Census data from the two districts—this would be double-counting—but rather use Census data from the
larger area (usually, the secondary district).
9 School districts are excluded if their per-student local revenues are more than twice the 95th percentile
nationwide, or less than 25 percent of the 5th percentile nationwide, in any year. Alaska, Hawaii, and the
District of Columbia are also excluded (the latter two consist of only a single school district).
8

11

unified school districts in 2002, these districts account for 95.2 percent of elementary and unified
enrollment in that year.10
Income inequality measures are generally not available at geographic levels smaller than
states. Accordingly, we use Census data on the counts of families falling into ordered income
categories to calculate inequality measures for every school district in each panel year.11 To do this,
we assume a flexible functional form for the CDF of family income in each district, and use the
grouped income data to estimate the parameters of this distribution via maximum likelihood. With
these parameters, we can then generate estimates of various measures of income inequality.
The procedure is implemented as follows. Suppose in a particular year there are K income
groups and nik is the number of families in income group k in district i. The K groups are families
with incomes ≤ a1, (> a1 and ≤ a2), …, (> aK-2 and < aK-1), and > aK-1 where a1 < a2 < …. < aK-1. Let y
represent income and the CDF of the income distribution Pr(y ≤ a) = F(a|βi), where βi are the
parameters of the assumed distribution of income for district i. Let Pik be the probability of
observing income in group k, where Pi1 = F(a1|βi), Pi2 = F(a2|βi) - F(a2|βi), … PiK-1 = F(aK-1|βi) - F(aK2

|βi), and PiK = 1 - F(aK-1|βi). Therefore, the likelihood function for district i in this year is Li =

Σknikln(Pik) which is maximized through the choice of βi.
Based on McDonald (1984), we elected to fit a three-parameter Dagum (1980) distribution,
also known as the Burr Type III distribution. In his paper, McDonald fit a series of statistical
distributions to U.S. income in 1970 and 1980 and concluded that the Dagum distribution outperformed all other three-parameter models, as well as some four-parameter models, in terms of fit.
This distribution also has the advantage of having a straightforward, closed-form solution for its
10 According to the F-33 Annual Survey of School District Finances (U.S. Department of Education 2002b) there
were 13,685 elementary and unified districts in operation in 2001-02. These districts had a total enrollment of
46 million, and 78 percent of these were unified districts. Our sample districts in 2002 had a total enrollment
of 44 million. In our panel, 90 percent of districts are unified.
11 We use family income as opposed to household income due to the 1970 Census, which only reports the
income of families and “unrelated individuals.”

12

moments. For reasons described in the next section, our primary inequality measure of interest is the
ratio of mean to median family income. Both the mean and median are straightforward to calculate
given the estimated parameters of the Dagum distribution. For comparability, we also compute
alternative measures of income inequality, including the Gini coefficient, Theil index, and natural log
of the ratios of the 95th to 50th, and 50th to 5th percentiles of family income.12
Although the income data we use in this project is categorical, the procedure outlined above
generates accurate estimates of income inequality. Evans, Hout, and Mayer (2004) used categorical
data on family income at the state level from various census years to estimate the parameters of the
Burr III distribution for each state, and then compared the implied Gini coefficient from these
estimates with those reported by the Census from the entire long form sample. The correlation
coefficients from the computed state-level Ginis in family income and the reported values for the
1970, 1980, and 1990 census were 0.998, 0.996, and 0.980, respectively.
School district demographics are taken from the special Census tabulations, described in the
Data Appendix. From the Census data on race, we calculate a standard index of racial heterogeneity
as one minus the sum of the squared population shares of four race categories: white, black,
Asian/Pacific Islander, and other (following Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly 1999; Vigdor 2002; Alesina
and La Ferrara 2002). This index ranges from a lower bound of zero (perfect homogeneity) to an
upper bound of 0.75 (maximum heterogeneity with four groups).
Descriptive statistics for our district panel are provided in Table 1. All observations have
been weighted by public school enrollment, such that these statistics can be thought of as
characterizing the school district in which the average public school student resides. Several trends
are worth noting. Average local education revenues per pupil rose 62 percent in real terms from

The number of income categories reported in the Census varies over time. However, as we show in the
Data Appendix, changes in the number of categories do not materially affect our estimates of income
inequality, nor do they create a systematic bias.
12

13

1972 to 2002, at the same time local funds as a share of overall per-student spending fell from an
average of 54.5 percent to 42.3 percent. Real median family incomes rose an average of 18 percent
over the sample and at the same time, all measures of within-district income inequality increased
considerably. Within the standard median-voter model, the inverse tax share is typically measured by
the mean to median income; as the dispersion of income increases, the tax price of raising funds
falls. In this case the inverse tax share falls by 9 percent. Other measures of within-district inequality
in family income show much larger changes. The Gini coefficient increased 15 percent from 1970 to
2000, while the average Theil index rose a more sizable 39 percent. As was true nationally, income
inequality grew more in the top half of the distribution: the rise in the average (log) ratio of the 95th
to 50th percentile of income was 18 percent as compared with an 11 percent increase in the average
(log) 50th to 5th ratio, implying the log(95th/5th) ratio increased 29 percent. We elaborate more on this
growth in income inequality within school districts in later sections.
Notably, school districts became considerably more racially diverse from 1970 to 2000, as
evidenced by the near doubling of the mean index of race fractionalization, and the doubling of the
mean percent nonwhite over this period. The elderly share in the average district rose almost three
percentage points, from 9.5 to 12.1.

b. Empirical Strategy
Our goal is to examine how rising income inequality has affected the fiscal support for
public elementary and secondary education. We begin our analysis by examining the relationship
between within-school district income inequality, and locally raised revenues for public schools. Our
empirical model is similar in spirit to the demand function for local public goods introduced by
Borcherding and Deacon (1972) and Bergstrom and Goodman (1973). In these models, observed
expenditure on local public goods reflects the level desired by the median voter, which in turn is a

14

function of the median voter’s income, tax share, and taste for public spending. In this instance, the
public good measure is local education revenues per pupil. “Taste” for local public services is
typically proxied by a vector of population characteristics thought to be associated with demand for
these services: age, race, educational attainment, school attendance, homeownership, and median
family income are frequent examples (Rubinfeld and Shapiro 1989; Harris, Evans, and Schwab 2001;
Hoxby 2001).
Within a median voter framework, the tax share is the fraction of tax revenues that are paid
for by the decisive (median) voter. This is a simple measure of the cost of raising an additional dollar
in revenues and typically, as costs decline, local spending will rise. In the case of education spending,
if the outcome of interest is spending per pupil, all families have one child, and all income is taxed at
a constant proportional rate, then the tax share of raising an additional dollar to the median voter is
simply the median over mean income. While the true tax price of local spending on education is
more complex, this simple model helps illustrate the role of rising income inequality on local
spending. For example, suppose that inequality increases because of a rise in income in the top of
the distribution. The median will remained unchanged, but because aggregate income (as measured
by the mean) has increased, the cost of an additional dollar has declined for the median voter,
encouraging greater public spending.
In our initial models, we use the inverse tax share or the within-district mean to median ratio
of family income. This is also a measure of inequality, in that distributions of income are more
unequal as the inverse tax share rises.
Households choose communities in part based on unobserved preferences for taxes and
school quality, and as such, observable proxies may insufficiently control for these preferences. In
our model, we exploit the panel nature of our data and incorporate school district fixed effects to

15

capture time-invariant household sorting on the fixed characteristics of school districts.13 District
fixed effects will also account for permanent features of the local tax base that determine the median
voter’s tax share, such as the presence of taxable commercial property or natural resources.
Our basic empirical specification for local education revenues per student in school district i
in state j in year t (yijt) is given by:

(1)

yijt = Xijtβ + inequalityijt*γ + IGijt*θ + δi + δjt + uijt

where Xijt is a vector of population and housing characteristics in school district i in year t (which
includes median family income, percent of the population below the poverty line, percent of adults
who are college graduates, percent school aged (5-17), percent aged 65 and older, percent living in
an urbanized area, percent of housing units that are owner-occupied, percent nonwhite, and the
index of racial heterogeneity), inequalityijt is a measure of income inequality in district i in year t, IGijt is
the sum of all intergovernmental grants to district i in year t (from state and federal sources), δi is a
school district fixed effect, and δjt is a state-by-year effect intended to capture state-specific time
trends. uijt is an idiosyncratic error term representing all other time-varying determinants of local
spending in district i not accounted for by the model. All regressions are weighted using total public
enrollment, so that results can be interpreted for the district attended by the typical public school
student.
Our coefficient of interest in equation (1) is γ, the impact of within-school district income
inequality on local per-student education revenues, holding constant certain observable district
characteristics, time-varying shocks at the state level, and intergovernmental aid. Our use of district

It is also the case that much of the variation in local revenues is between districts—not within districts over
time. In a regression of real local revenues per student on district fixed effects and year dummies alone, the R2
is 0.79 (adjusted R2 = 0.72).
13

16

fixed effects implies that we are using a within-group estimator, where variation within school
districts over time is used to identify γ and other coefficients in the model. Aside from the inclusion
of income inequality in the model, equation (1) is a relatively straightforward extension of the
Borcherding and Deacon (1972) and Bergstrom and Goodman (1973) approach.14 As discussed in
Section 2, the role of income inequality in this model is as a proxy for the tax share facing the
median voter. If the “ends against the middle” voting model dominates, our estimated γ will pick up
the effects of these opposing income coalitions on local spending.
It is important to note that public education has traditionally relied heavily on property
wealth, rather than income, as its primary tax base. Unfortunately, complete data on property wealth
by school district over this period is not available. In a series of robustness checks in Section 4c, we
re-estimate equation (1) for a subset of school districts for which we have information about
inequality in owner-occupied housing wealth.15
Local revenues represent a sizable fraction of overall spending on public education in the
United States, but the local share varies significantly across states and over time (Table 1 and
Corcoran and Evans 2008). School districts in Vermont, for example, provided only 6.1 percent of
K-12 education revenues in 2004-05, while local districts in Pennsylvania contributed 53.9 percent to
school spending in that year. Thirty years earlier, Vermont localities provided a significantly higher
57.9 percent of revenues, while Pennsylvania districts contributed a lower 46.2 percent (U.S.
Department of Education 2008). Among other things, this variation reflects differences in revenue-

We are not the first include income inequality in a model of local education spending—see, for example,
Brown and Saks (1985), Hoxby (2000, 2001), and Urquiola (2000). However, income inequality is rarely an
explanatory variable of primary interest in these papers. For example, Hoxby (2000) included measures of
income inequality and racial and ethnic heterogeneity in her district-level regressions assessing the impact of
school district competition on school expenditure. These variables were intended to serve as controls,
however, and she did not discuss her empirical findings on these measures.
15 These models will still fail to incorporate information about local commercial and industrial property
wealth. Unfortunately, school district-level data on this form of property wealth is generally not available over
this period.
14

17

sharing practices across states, legislative and court-ordered finance reforms altering the state-local
balance over time, and economic shocks impacting local districts’ ability to raise revenue. Our
inclusion of state-specific year effects δjt accounts for fixed differences across states in the size of the
local contribution, and the effects of temporal changes in school funding policy and economic
conditions on average local spending in each state. Still, it is likely that temporal changes in state aid
policies impacted local spending in ways that varied systematically with district characteristics. For
example, school finance reforms in the 1980s and early 1990s often used state aid as a means to
equalize spending, or to relieve tax burdens in low-wealth districts. In these cases, low-wealth
districts in reform states received more generous infusions of aid than high-wealth districts, or were
offered more compensatory aid formulas (Murray, Evans, and Schwab 1998; Hoxby 2001). To the
extent districts with growing income inequality were more likely to benefit from finance reforms
through greater aid or a lower tax price, we may improperly attribute the effects of these changes to
income inequality.
We include state and federal aid per student (IGijt) as a covariate to capture the effects of
intergovernmental aid on local revenues; however, state aid will typically be endogenous to local
spending in cases where aid is not administered as a flat grant. Thus, in many specifications of model
(1), we instrument for intergovernmental aid in district i using an interaction of dummy variables for
court-ordered school finance reform at the state level and district i’s initial position in its state’s
income distribution in 1970. Equation (2) shows the first stage of this regression:

3

(2)

IG ijt   overturn jt * incomeq ijk , 70k + XijtΠ + inequalityijt*λ + θi + θjt + εijt
k 1

18

where overturnjt is a dummy variable that equals one if state j experienced a court-ordered school
finance reform prior to year t and the incomeqijk,70 are dummy variables that equal one if district i was
in quartile k of income in state j in 1970 (k = 1, 2, 3). Most existing research has made a strong case
for the exogeneity of court-ordered finance reforms: Card and Payne (2002), Figlio, Husted, and
Kenny (2004), and Baicker and Gordon (2006) all demonstrate that state supreme court rulings
affecting school funding systems are quite difficult to predict. Consequently, most empirical research
has treated court-mandated reforms as exogenous events, and we make this assumption here as well.
Finally, one might be concerned that changes over time in local income inequality are itself
endogenous to the policies or performance of local school districts. High-income households
without children, for example, who perceive school taxes to be too high in one district may relocate
to a neighboring district, potentially affecting the income distribution in both the sending and
receiving district (Fernandez and Rogerson, 1996). School finance equalization and the number of
area jurisdictions may also influence the level of income sorting between and income inequality
within school districts (Aaronson 1999; Urquiola 2000).
Identifying exogenous variation in inequality in this context is problematic at best. We need
to isolate a factor that alters within-district inequality but has no direct impact on local school
spending. Unfortunately, most of the candidate reasons for changing inequality (e.g. skill-biased
technical change, globalization, and institutional factors such as the decline in unions or the real
minimum wage) directly impact the level of income as well as its distribution.
As one strategy for addressing such changes in inequality, we use higher moments of the
local income distribution as instruments for the mean-to-median ratio of income. In the strict form
of the median voter hypothesis, the median voter’s tax share is defined as the ratio of median to
mean income. As inequality in the top half of the distribution increases, the tax share falls and the
price of local public goods to the median voter declines. To the median voter, the distribution of

19

income that determines the tax share is irrelevant—what is important is the tax price of local
services. To illustrate this, consider two districts with the same mean and median income, but
District A has a more positively skewed income distribution than District B, perhaps driven by a
larger share of income coming from the top few percentiles of income. In this simple case, holding
all else constant the median voter model would predict the same level of spending on local goods in
Districts A and B, since the tax share is identical for the decisive voter. However, in a cross-section
of districts we would anticipate that as the skewness of income rises, the mean rises faster than the
median and the tax share will fall. Subsequently, if the median voter model is correct, then the
skewness of income should be a valid instrument for the tax share. In the median voter model (and
holding mean income constant to eliminate income effects) an increase in skewness in the income
distribution will only increase spending through a reduction in the tax share. In this situation, a
change in skewness will only change the burden of who pays for local public goods.
In addition to estimating equation (1) for local revenues per student, we estimate an
analogous model for per student current operating expenditures (which excludes capital expenditure)
and state aid per student. In these cases the model is identical, but for the exclusion of
intergovernmental grants. Here we control directly for the impact of exogenous school finance
reforms on expenditure and aid by including interactions between a court-ordered finance reform
and the district’s quartile of median income in 1970 (overturnjt x incomeqijk,70).

4. Results
a. Income Inequality in School Districts

Table 2 provides some descriptive statistics for income inequality within and between U.S.
school districts over the 1970 – 2000 period. Panel A shows the distribution of 1970 – 2000 income
inequality growth as measured by percent changes in the mean to median ratio, the Gini coefficient

20

and Theil index, for the 10,358 school districts in our panel. The numbers are weighted by school
enrollment which better represents the level of income inequality experienced in the typical student’s
school district.16 Panel B shows the average level and growth of income inequality at the
metropolitan area level for the same period, again weighted by school enrollment. In this panel, we
also decompose the MSA Theil index of income inequality into its within- and between- district
components, and present average within and between shares over MSAs.17
We find that most U.S. school districts experienced growth in income inequality between
1970 and 2000. Over 90 percent of all districts saw an increase in income inequality as measured by
the mean to median ratio, and this number is around 70 percent for the Gini and Theil indices. The
average (median) student was enrolled in a school district that witnessed a 9.0 (8.1) percent rise in
income inequality as measured by the mean to median ratio, a 15.6 (15.7) percent rise according to
the Gini coefficient, and a 42.5 (39.2) percent rise as measured by the Theil index.18 More than one
in five districts saw increases of 20 percent or more, as measured by the Gini. Thus, the vast
majority of students were in districts where income inequality rose, and a substantial fraction lived in
districts where inequality increased by 25-30 percent or more.
To examine changes in within- versus between-district income inequality, we look at
inequality in MSAs in Panel B. We observe a similar overall increase in income inequality in MSAs,

We use 2000 K-12 enrollment in public schools as weights. Weighting using 1970 enrollment does not
substantially affect these empirical distributions.
17 School districts are mapped to MSAs based on their 2002 MSA assignment in the NCES Common Core of
Data (N=329 MSAs). Thus a district i that was not a part of MSA m in 1970 but joined that MSA before 2002
would be counted as part of that MSA for the entire period. For a given MSA, our Theil decomposition is
calculated as follows:
m
m
nk yk 
nk yk   yk 

T  TW  T B 
T

 k

 ln  
y 
y   y 
k 1  n
k 1  n
where TW is the within-school district component of income inequality in that MSA and TB is the betweenschool district component. m is the number of districts within the MSA, n and nk are total enrollment in the
MSA and district k respectively. y k is mean income in district k, while y is mean income in the MSA.
18 Nationally, the Gini coefficient for family income grew by 17.1 percent (see footnote 1).
16





21

with mean increases of 10.1, 17.1 and 44.3 in the mean/median ratio, Gini, and Theil, respectively.
Decomposing the Theil index into its within- and between-school district components, we find
that—for the average MSA—89 percent of income inequality was within school districts in 2000,
while only 11.3 percent was between districts. This latter fraction has increased since 1970, when an
average of 7.9 percent of MSA-level inequality was between districts.19
Taken together, we find that the surge in income inequality documented at the national level
is reflected in the income distributions of most local school districts. This finding is not tautological.
With close to 15,000 local districts in the United States, Tiebout sorting by income could have had,
in theory, a strong moderating effect on the growth of income inequality within local jurisdictions.
Instead, we find that the average student attended a district in which income inequality rose
anywhere from 9 to 42 percent, depending on the index. A substantial fraction of students attended
districts in which income inequality rose 25 percent or more. Even in metropolitan areas—where the
greatest opportunities for Tiebout sorting exist—we observe relatively low between-district income
inequality over the full 1970 to 2000 period. There is little doubt that Tiebout sorting by income
exists, and to a greater degree in MSAs with a larger number of available districts. But forces other
than income sorting appear to have been sufficiently important to maintain a relatively high level of
within-community heterogeneity, an observation key to our analysis that follows.

b. The Relationship between Income Inequality and Education Revenues and Expenditures

In 2000 the MSA with the highest share of inequality between districts was Newark, NJ, where 31.7 percent
of the overall Theil index was due to between-district inequality. As one might expect, the between-district
component and the number of school districts in the MSA are highly correlated, reflecting greater
opportunities to sort by income. For example, in 2000, Cleveland (75 area districts), Chicago (258), and St.
Louis (113) had relatively high between-district Theil indices, while Miami, Las Vegas, and Shreveport—all
comprised of only one or several districts—had low between-district inequality. Unlike Rhode and Strumpf
(2003), we do find a small but steady increase over time in the between-school district component in Boston
and several other large MSAs. However—like those authors—we estimate the between-district component to
be small relative to the within-district component (¼ the size or less).
19

22

Table 3 presents our baseline estimates of the relationship between income inequality, local
revenues per pupil for K-12 education, current operating expenditures per pupil, and state aid per
pupil. We begin in the first column by estimating a standard demand function for local spending per
student, excluding any measure of income inequality. Then, in columns (2) we add the ratio of mean
to median income as our primary measure of income inequality; we examine alternative measures in
Table 5. Column (3) estimates the analogous model for operating expenditures per pupil, and (4) the
model for state aid. All models are estimated using ordinary least squares, with district and state-byyear effects, as described in section 3b. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses.
Our estimated coefficients in column (1) are generally of the expected sign, and similar to
those found in other empirical estimates of local demand functions for education. Per-student
revenues increase with median family income, with a $1,000 rise in income associated with a $29
increase in local per student spending.20 Revenues tend to be higher in districts with high poverty
rates, higher proportions of college graduates, higher proportions of renters, and a higher elderly
share. Revenues tend to be lower in more urbanized districts, districts with larger school-aged
cohorts, and greater racial heterogeneity, though the latter is statistically insignificant.21 Consistent
with the flypaper effect literature, local revenues are lower in districts receiving greater aid, though
the reduction is not one-for-one. (Later, we account for the endogeneity of state aid).
As a direct test of the Meltzer-Richard hypothesis, in column (2) we add the ratio of mean to
median family income to this model. Consistent with that hypothesis, our estimated coefficient on
the mean/median ratio is positive and statistically significant at conventional levels, suggesting that a

This implies an approximate income elasticity for local spending of 0.5 at the mean.
See Poterba (1997) for evidence on cohort size effects on school spending, and Oates (2005) for a survey
of the “renter effect” literature. The renter effect found here is sizable: we estimate that a one standard
deviation decrease in the fraction of housing units that are owner-occupied (about 0.146) is associated with a
$154 increase in per-student revenues, almost 1/10 of a standard deviation in local revenues per student.
20
21

23

lower tax share can induce greater local spending. Our estimated effect is also economically
significant. The average 1970 to 2000 growth in the ratio of mean to median income was 0.10, with a
standard deviation of 0.11. This implies that districts with one standard deviation above-average
growth in the mean/median ratio would be predicted to have $197 higher local revenues per
student—substantial when compared against the standard deviation of local revenue growth of
$1,486. To put these results in a different light, if the average 1970 – 2000 growth in the
mean/median ratio generated $179 higher local revenues per student; this would make it responsible
for roughly 12 percent ($179/$1,486) of the overall growth in local funding per-student over this
period.
Because education is a shared responsibility of local and state government, this increase in
local taxes for public schools may not translate into greater spending per student, if these revenues
are offset by a similar reduction in state aid. It may also be the case that the increase in local
spending associated with inequality is actually a reflection of falling tax prices in those districts,
through state aid. If state aid formulas were re-written during this period to provide more generous
matching grants to poor districts, for example, and these districts were also experiencing rising
inequality, our finding may simply be picking up the effects of a lower tax price.
Column (3) of Table 3 looks at the net effect of income inequality on current expenditure
per student. All of the same covariates are included as in the model of column (1), though we also
control directly for the effects of school finance reform at each quartile of the district income
distribution. We find that, on net, rising income inequality was associated with higher per student
spending, though the magnitude is attenuated from that found in model (1). The results of column
(4) suggest that the correlation between inequality and local spending is unlikely to be due to the
influence of favorable tax price due to state aid. We find that rising income inequality within districts
to be associated with lower state aid per student rather than more, which would be expected if state

24

aid programs were driving our result. On average, a relative reduction in state aid appears to have
accompanied the rise in local taxes.
In Table 4 we address two shortcomings of our OLS models, the endogeneity of
intergovernmental aid and the influence of inter-district sorting on our estimate of the coefficient on
income inequality. Because local taxes are responsive to state aid programs, and state aid is affected
by local spending, our aid variable should not be considered exogenous. In column (2), we present
two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates where the level of real state and federal aid is instrumented
using interactions between a dummy variable indicating years following a court-ordered finance
reform and the district’s 1970 position within its state income distribution. Because our model
contains district fixed effects as well as state-year interactions, only three of the income quartile
interactions are uniquely identified. The first-stage estimates for this model are reported in column
(1) of Appendix Table 1. Consistent with Evans, Murray, and Schwab (1997), the first stage
demonstrates that court-ordered finance reform increased intergovernmental aid the most among
the poorest districts. Our results indicate that after reform, state and federal revenues per pupil
increased by $1,659, $702, and $326 in the lowest three income quartiles, relative to what happened
in the top income quartile group. All of these results are statistically significant at conventional
levels, and the first-stage F-test that the excluded instruments are all zero is 70 indicating that finite
sample bias is not a concern (Bound, Jaeger, and Baker, 1995). Note that the 2SLS estimates in
column (2) differ little from OLS estimates repeated in column (1), save for a lower local elasticity to
state and federal grants (a greater “flypaper effect”) and a larger standard error.
An additional concern in our OLS model is the possibility that households sort into or out
of districts in response to changes in school spending (and in particular, local taxes). To the extent
this mobility varies by income, such sorting will affect the income distribution. To illustrate, suppose
an initially heterogeneous district witnesses a rise in inequality through growth at the top of the

25

income distribution. The median voter responds to this change in tax price through greater local
spending (our observed correlation between inequality and local revenue). High-income households,
however, may respond over time to the rise in taxes by moving to another district, which reduces
income inequality in the sending district. Such a response would tend to bias our estimate of the
coefficient on income inequality toward zero. This example also generates a prediction that the
effect of income inequality on local spending should be greatest in districts with the least
opportunity for sorting, a point we return to in a later section.
Column (3) presents two stage least squares using the skewness of family income as an
instrument for the mean to median income ratio. The first stage estimates for these three models are
reported in columns (2) - (3) of Appendix Table 1. In this model, we have two endogenous variables
(real state and federal revenues per pupil, and income inequality) so we include as instruments in all
models the finance reform/income quartile dummies and the instrument for inequality. In the
appendix table, the first stage dependent variable is real state and federal revenues per student, and
the three reform/income quartile instruments generate estimates nearly identical to the baseline in
column (1). In column (3), the dependent variable is the within-district mean/median ratio of
income. As expected, the skewness in income is positively correlated with the mean/median ratio,
and the t-statistic on this instrument is greater than 21. In columns (2) – (3), the F-statistic for the
null hypothesis that the coefficients on the identifying instruments in the first stage are all zero are
of a size so as to make finite sample bias not a concern.
The resulting two-stage least squares estimate in column (3) of Table 4 is nearly twice as
large as that found in columns (1) and (2), and is statistically significant. We cannot, however, reject
the null hypothesis that the OLS estimate in column (1) and the 2SLS estimate in column (3) are the
same. For districts one standard deviation above the mean in income inequality, we estimate that
local revenues per student are almost $327 higher, on average, or 22% of growth in local spending

26

per student over this period.22 In this case, the first stage is large and precise; the p-value on the test
of over-identifying restrictions is large as well, and the results with and without controlling for
endogeneity are statistically indistinguishable.
In Table 5, we experiment with alternative measures of within-district income inequality: the
Gini coefficient, Theil index, natural logarithm of the ratio of 95th to 5th percentiles of income, and a
measure that divides overall income inequality into two components—inequality in the top half of
the distribution (the log 95/50 ratio) and inequality in the bottom half of the distribution (the log
50/5 ratio). Estimates in columns (2) and (4) are two-stage least squares estimates of the effects of
income inequality on local revenues for education, using the Gini and Theil index respectively, and
the skewness of income as an instrument for inequality.
As in Table 3, all estimated coefficients on income inequality have positive signs, excepting
the log 50/5 ratio, which has a negative relationship with spending. All are statistically significant,
with the exception of the log 95/5 ratio. Our point estimate based on the Gini coefficient an effect
comparable to that found using the mean to median ratio in Table 3: districts where growth in
income inequality was one standard deviation higher than average (5.0) spent about $172 more per
student on average ($689 based on the 2SLS estimate).
The pattern of estimated coefficients in column (6)—where income inequality is measured
using two components—is also consistent with the Meltzer and Richard model. Changes in income
inequality that increase mean income relative to the median should lower the tax share of the median
voter (promoting higher spending), while changes that decrease mean income relative to the median
should raise the tax share (promoting lower spending). We find exactly this pattern here. As the 95th
percentile of income rises relative to the median within a district, we observe increases in per-pupil
spending, on average. As the 5th percentile of income falls relative to the median, we observe
22

The first stage coefficient on the skewness statistic (in thousands) is 5.1E-6 with a t-statistic of 21.15.

27

decreases. Given the standard deviation of growth in these variables of 15 and 28 points,
respectively, one standard deviation higher growth in the log 95/50 ratio is associated with $136
higher spending per pupil, and one standard deviation higher growth in the log 50/5 ratio is
associated with $53 lower spending per pupil.
Of course, a one percentage point rise in the log 95/50 ratio will not have an equivalent
effect on the tax share as a percentage point fall in the log 50/5 ratio. Because households at the top
of the income distribution earn a disproportionate share of aggregate income, an increase in the log
95/50 ratio will do more to increase mean income than an equivalent decline in the log 50/5 ratio.
To compare the magnitudes of our coefficient estimates on these inequality measures, we did the
following: using our estimated parameters of the income distribution in each district, we compute
the fraction of total district income earned by the bottom quartile (ℓ(0.25), where ℓ(x) is the Lorenz
curve for an individual district), and the fraction of total district income comprised by the top
quintile (1 - ℓ(0.75)). In the average district over all years, the top quartile earned 48.5 percent of
total income, while the bottom quartile earned 7.9 percent of income. Thus, for the average district,
a hypothetical increase in income of 10 percent in the top quartile (resulting in a 10 percent rise in
the 95/50 ratio) will increase mean income by 4.9 percent.23 Similarly, a rise in income of 10 percent
in the bottom quartile (resulting in a 10 percent fall in the 50/5 ratio) will increase mean income by
0.8 percent. Thus a proportional income change at the top of the distribution will have an effect on
mean income that is roughly 6.1 times that of a proportionally equivalent income change at the
bottom of the distribution. This ratio is not far from the 4.2 ratio of our two regression coefficients
in column (4), suggesting that our coefficient estimates, in relative terms, are reasonable.

Mean income can be written as a weighted average of income across the four quartiles, where the weights
are the income shares. Holding constant the 0.485 income share for the top quartile, a 10 percent increase in
top quartile income translates into a 4.85 percent increase in mean income (0.485*0.10 = 0.0485).
23

28

c. Extensions and Robustness Checks

Empirical tests of the median voter model as an explanation for the growth of government
and redistribution almost exclusively use income inequality as a measure of the median voter’s tax
share. Public education, however, has traditionally relied heavily on the property tax.24 To the extent
school districts rely on property taxes, it is unclear how an increase in income inequality will
significantly lower the tax price of public spending without a corresponding change in the
distribution of housing wealth. Econometric specifications of demand functions for public
education often include a property wealth measure of the tax share when available, such as the ratio
of mean to median housing wealth (e.g. Bergstrom and Goodman 1973). Unfortunately, consistent
data on property values by school district is not available for all years of our analysis. The 1970,
1990, and 2000 Census school district tabulations do, however, provide counts of owner-occupied
homes falling into ordered valuation categories, which permit us to calculate measures of housing
wealth inequality comparable to the income inequality measures used above. (They do not,
unfortunately, provide information about local commercial and industrial property wealth). To do
this, we again fit the three-parameter Dagum distribution to the housing value data in each districtyear, in the manner described in Section 3.
Our calculated measures of inequality in owner-occupied housing wealth (as measured by the
mean to median housing value ratio and the Gini coefficient) are consistently lower on average than
inequality in income, although the variation across districts is larger for property wealth inequality
than income inequality (Table 1). The two inequality measures are strongly correlated, at 0.45, 0.53,
and 0.70 in the case of the mean to median ratio in 1970, 1990, and 2000, and 0.60, 0.62, and 0.61 in
in the case of the Gini coefficient.
Among fiscally independent school districts in 2001-02, an average of 72 percent of locally raised revenues
were raised from property taxes (author’s calculations using U.S. Census Bureau 2002b). Aggregating to the
state level, the proportion of local revenues accounted for by the property tax ranged from a low of 35 – 40
percent in Alabama, Louisiana, and Vermont, to a high of 90 percent in New Jersey and Texas.
24

29

Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 present the results of our baseline regression, with our
income inequality measure replaced by the mean to median ratio of housing wealth. (Due to missing
data in 1980 and for select districts in other years, our sample size drops to 29,391). We find that
growth in housing wealth inequality is also positively related to local spending per student, and its
coefficient is also comparable with that for income inequality. Here, districts one standard deviation
above the mean in 1970 – 2000 growth in housing wealth inequality (0.137) are found to spend $108
to $120 more per student on average. The estimated coefficient is quite similar when using
instrumental variables for state and federal grants (column (2)).
The presence of rigid equalization programs that in some states impose a high tax price on
local school spending (Hoxby 2001) may cast doubt that our observed relationship between income
inequality and revenues reflects changes in the median voter’s preferred level of spending. The
textbook case is California’s Serrano v. Priest ruling (1971), which effectively ended the practice of
local finance in that state and centralized spending decisions at the state level (Brunner and Sonstelie
2006). Since Serrano, the California legislature has fixed the level of local school expenditure through
the use of “revenue limits,” to which the state and local school districts contribute. Due to property
tax limitations set by Proposition 13 (1978), local districts collect property taxes at a fixed rate of 1
percent, while the state fills the remaining gap between property taxes and the revenue limit.25
Given restrictions imposed by the California school finance system, one would not expect
the median voter model to apply at the local level in that state. Because localities have little to no
leeway in determining per-student expenditure, median voters have no opportunity to respond to
changes in the local income distribution through higher (or lower) taxes. Because California

25 The system is actually more complex than this, and there is considerably more spending inequality in
California than is commonly believed. This is due in part to a local override option, which allows districts to
exceed the revenue limit, and the practice of raising funds through private educational foundations (see
Brunner and Sonstelie 2006). Still, the vast majority of spending on public education is dictated by the
revenue limits.

30

represents a sizable share of the districts in our panel, we re-estimated our baseline OLS and 2SLS
models excluding California. The results are presented in columns (3) and (4) of Table 6. Their
exclusion has a very minor effect on our estimates.
In an additional specification, shown in column (5) of Table 6, we interact our income
inequality measure with an indicator of the extent of between-district sorting opportunities: the
number of districts per student within a 25-mile radius (see Hoxby, 2000). We divide districts into
quartiles based on the number of available districts per student, as measured in 2000, with the lowest
(omitted) quartile representing the least district choice. Districts in the lowest quartile tend to be in
states with a relatively small number of geographically large districts (such as the South and West),
while those in the highest quartile tend to be in states with many community-based districts (such as
the Northeast and Midwest). We find that the largest coefficient on income inequality is indeed
among districts with the fewest sorting opportunities. The effect for districts in all other quartiles is
substantially smaller, and these differences, compared to the lowest quartile, are statistically
significant at conventional levels.
We have estimated a number of alternative specifications not shown here. For example, we
re-estimated our baseline model of Tables 3 and 4 using local revenues per school aged child, rather than
per public school student. This allows for the possibility that increases in spending associated with
income inequality are a reflection of movement into private schools which mechanically reduces
public enrollment and inflates public spending per student, if resources are slow to adjust. We find a
point estimate that is only marginally smaller than that found in our original model. In addition, we
have estimated models that (1) restrict the sample to unified (K-12) districts, (2) use monetary
variables measured in natural log units, (3) omit enrollment weights, (4) use a measure of household
income inequality as opposed to inequality in family income (which precludes the use of 1970), and

31

(5) restrict our panel to 1980 – 2000 (which recaptures approximately 2,600 districts). The results of
these models are qualitatively similar to those found in our baseline case.26

d. The Relationship between Income Inequality and Private School Enrollment

In our look at the impact of rising income inequality on public school expenditure, we have
found little evidence favoring the “ends against the middle” hypothesis in which rich and poor
households jointly oppose educational spending. Rather, we find results more consistent with a
median voter model in which a lower tax price stimulates higher public spending. However, it may
be still be the case that growing income inequality affects support for public education in other
ways—in particular, through enrollment in private schools. In Table 7 we use our school district
panel to look directly the relationship between within- district income inequality and enrollment in
private school. Our empirical model for the percent of school-aged children enrolled in private
school (privateijt) roughly mirrors that presented earlier in equation (1):

(3)

privateijt = Xijtβ + inequalityijt*γ + EXPijt*θ + δi + δjt + uijt

where Xijt and inequalityijt are defined as in Section 3b and EXPijt is the level of current operating
expenditures for public K-12 education in school district i in year t. As before, we include school
district (δi) and state-by-year fixed effects (δjt) to capture fixed differences across districts in private
schooling rates and temporal changes at the state level.27 Of course, it is likely that public
expenditure is responsive to private schooling rates, so in column (2) we instrument for current
operating expenditure per student using our school finance reform/income quartile interactions

Results are available from the authors upon request.
In a regression of the proportion of K-12 enrollment in private school on district fixed effects and year
dummies alone, the R2 is 0.85 (adjusted R2 = 0.80).

26
27

32

introduced above, relying solely on variation in expenditure that occurs through exogenous changes
in school funding formulas. We present results using two measures of income inequality: the mean
to median ratio of income, and the Gini coefficient.
Our OLS estimates in column (1) and (3) find a positive but statistically insignificant
relationship between within-district income inequality and private schooling rates. Private schooling
is found to rise on average with median family income, and fall with district poverty, the percent
nonwhite, and the size of the school-aged population. Holding these variables constant, we also
observe a positive and statistically significant relationship between racial fractionalization and private
school enrollment that is meaningful in size. A standard deviation higher 1970 – 2000 growth in
racial fractionalization (0.157) is associated with a 0.5 percentage point higher rate of private
schooling—significant given a baseline private enrollment rate of 10 percent.
Our estimated positive coefficient on expenditures per student in columns (1) and (3) is
somewhat counter-intuitive if we believe expenditure is linked to public school quality (admittedly a
tenuous assumption). However, expenditures may in part be a response to past school performance,
where poor or under-performing school districts receive an infusion of new spending designed to
improve outcomes. These districts also may be more likely to have high rates of private schooling.
As might be expected, our point estimate changes sign in our 2SLS estimates (columns (2) and (4)):
here, districts with higher spending on average have lower rates of private schooling.
In our 2SLS estimates, both point estimates of the coefficient on inequality increase in size,
and in the case of the Gini coefficient becomes statistically significant. In the latter case, our estimate
of 0.055 implies that districts with one standard deviation above average growth in the Gini
coefficient (5.0) are estimated to have private schooling rates that are 0.28 percentage points higher
on average. While modest in size, it falls short of the effect implied by our coefficient on race
fractionalization. Here we find that a standard deviation higher 1970 – 2000 growth in racial

33

fractionalization is associated with a 0.43 to 0.45 point higher private schooling rate—an effect
nearly twice as large.
Finally, in columns (5) and (6) of Table 7 we interact our income inequality measure with the
quartile measures of district sorting opportunities (as measured by districts per student within a 25mile radius). One would expect the relationship between inequality and private schooling to be
moderated in districts were greater sorting opportunities exist. In the case of the Gini coefficient
(column (6)), we do find that the point estimate on income inequality is largest among districts in the
lowest quartile of district choice (0.082), but the difference is only statistically significant between the
1st and 2nd quartile. A similar pattern exists for the mean to median measure, but the point
estimates do not statistically differ from zero.

5. Conclusion

As income inequality has risen in the U.S. and its population has grown more racially and
ethnically diverse, scholars have begun to ponder whether this growing heterogeneity will alter the
extent to which governments provide basic public services and a social safety net. Recent theoretical
and empirical work suggests that public goods provision and the generosity of welfare benefits are
lower in more racially and ethnically diverse jurisdictions. Models specific to public education
suggest a similar outcome. With respect to income, growing income inequality may encourage a
battle of the “ends against the middle,” where high income families opt out of public schooling into
the private sector and lower income groups choose lower taxes and greater private consumption
over investments in public education. As a result, forces at the ends of the income distribution may
reduce support for public schools in economically diverse populations.
In contrast, growing income inequality may have unanticipated effects on local public good
provision. In a simple voting model like that of Meltzer and Richard, growing wage inequality at the

34

top of the distribution reduces the tax price of public goods to the median voter, thereby
encouraging greater spending on government services. We examined the impact of growing income
inequality on local support for public schools using panel data for over 10,000 school districts over
the 1970 – 2000 period. In contrast to other recent literature, our results suggest that the median
voter model is a more accurate description of the experience in this governmental sector. As income
inequality has grown in local school districts, so too have local dollars into elementary and secondary
education. Our results indicate that 12 percent of the growth in local per-student revenues over the
past 30 years can be explained by a decline in the tax share facing the median voter, a consequence
of rising income inequality concentrated in top of the distribution.
The Meltzer-Richard hypothesis has been extensively tested in the past, in a number of
settings, with conflicting results. The strength of the results in this paper may be driven by a number
of factors. First, much of the previous work has used national or state level data while our analysis
focuses on local school districts. Common wisdom in the public finance literature suggests that the
collective choice process in local government is much more likely to approximate the assumptions
of the median voter model assumptions (Fischel 2001; Mueller 2003). Second, we examine changes
in spending in more than 10,000 school districts during a period of rapidly changing income
inequality, giving us tremendous statistical power. Third, the panel nature of our data allows us to
limit our exposure to potentially contaminating omitted variables bias.
Given the important redistributive nature of education, our results suggest that some of the
potentially negative consequences of rising social inequality may have been counteracted by local
government’s ability to raise additional funds from growing incomes at the top of the distribution.
The long term benefits of such a transfer are beyond the scope of this paper, but are obviously an
important topic for future discussion.

35

Data Appendix
A.1. Sources – District Panel

Our balanced panel of school districts consists of matched demographic and financial data
on U.S. school districts from 1970 to 2000. We constructed this panel by merging eight large
national databases: the Census of Population and Housing school district tabulations for 1970, 1980,
1990, and 2000 (U.S. Census Bureau 1973, 1982, 2002a; U.S. Department of Education 1994), the
Census of Governments: School Districts for 1972, 1982, and 1992 (U.S. Census Bureau 1987, 1992, 1993),
and the F-33 Annual Survey of School Finances for 2002 (U.S. Census Bureau 2002b).
These eight databases were supplemented by a number of others. First, because the 2000
Census school district tabulation (U.S. Census Bureau 2002a) failed to include a table for public and
private school enrollment, we used Census tract level data to compute private enrollment in every
school district. This procedure required overlaying boundary files for census tracts with those for
unified and elementary school districts, and aggregating enrollment counts to the district level.28
While tracts are almost always smaller than school districts, they are not necessarily contained
entirely within the boundaries of one district. In cases where tracts crossed district boundaries, we
allocated public and private enrollment to districts based on the fraction of tract land area in each
district. Of course, this method only works well when enrollment is uniformly distributed over the
tract—a less plausible assumption in rural, suburban or geographically diverse areas. In densely
populated urban areas, tracts are usually contained in only one district. Thus, measurement error in
our private school variable is likely to be highest in districts with the smallest populations. The use
of enrollment weights in our analysis should ameliorate at least some of this error.
Second, all of our court rulings on state school finance systems are taken from Corcoran and
Evans (2008), which updates Murray, Evans, and Schwab (1998) and others. Only rulings from the
highest state court on the constitutionality of school funding are included. Finally, all school district
consolidations, splits, and unifications (a merger of separate elementary and secondary districts)
between 1970 and 2002 were researched individually, using dozens of sources, including official state
documents, news accounts, minutes from school board meetings, and school district websites. All of
school district observations are based on their 2002 geographic definitions, such that if District A
and District B merged or unified in 1995, we have combined the data from these two districts in all
earlier years, for comparability with 2002. Data was combined by aggregating across districts, or by
taking a weighted average of component district characteristics as appropriate. Districts involved in
splits have been dropped from the panel, although there were very few of these cases.
A.2. Inequality Measures

As described in section 3, we fit the 3-parameter Dagum (or Burr Type III) distribution to
Census grouped income data in local school districts to calculate measures of income inequality. For
Boundary files can be downloaded from http://www.census.gov/geo/www/cob/ bdy_files.html (last
accessed August 9, 2003). The 2000 School District Tabulation does include one table (PCT23) that reports
school enrollment for males and females age three and older, by various age categories: 3-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-17,
18-19, etc., with no public-private distinction. Together with K-12 public enrollment counts from the Common
Core of Data, it would be possible to use the residual (census enrollment – CCD public enrollment) as an
estimate of the number of children enrolled in private school. This would, however, require the use of two
different data sources in the construction of one variable, as well as critical assumptions about the fraction of
five-year olds in kindergarten and the fraction of 15-17 and 18-19 year olds in secondary school.
28

36

a random variable z, the cumulative distribution function for the three-parameter Dagum
distribution is as follows, for z ≥ 0 and (a, b, p) > 0:
(4)

  b a 
F ( z )  1    
  z  

p

Given the parameters a, b, and p, the rth moments of this distribution are defined as:
(5)

 r 
 r 
E[ z r ]  pb r   1   , p     ,
 a 
 a

where β(.) is the complete beta function. The cth percentile of the income distribution is found
using:
(6)





x c  b c 1 p   1

 1 a

.

Dagum (1980) showed that the Gini coefficient can be calculated directly as:
(7)

Gini  1 

 ( p, p )

  p , p  1/ a 

,

and values of the Lorenz curve ℓ(x) calculated as:
(8)

1
1
ℓ(x) = I  p  ,1  , x 1/ p  ,


a



a

where I(.) is the incomplete beta function. Finally, for the Dagum distribution the Theil index (or
generalized entropy 1) is calculated as (McDonald, 1984):
1
a




1
a




  p    1  

(9)

Theil 

a



a

1
1


  p     1      p   1 ,
a
a



where ψ(z) is the digamma function  

  z 
.
 z 

In addition to its high level of accuracy at the state level (Evans, Hout, and Mayer 2004), we
were also interest in seeing how this procedure would perform in smaller geographic areas. Using
the same maximum likelihood procedure, we estimated county-specific parameters of the Dagum
distribution for 1970, 1980 and 1990. While the Census does not report Gini coefficients at the
county level, they do report several other aggregate measures of the income distribution. For
example, in 1990 the Census reports the fraction of families in each county earning $50,000 or more.
We compared these fractions to the same fraction calculated with our estimated Dagum parameters
(i.e. 1 – F(50,000; a,b,p)). Again, the correlation between these values is high: 0.996 for 1990.
Analagously, we calculated average family income in each county using the moment generating
37

function for the Dagum distribution, and compared these to the average family income reported by
the Census. The correlation between the actual and predicted values in this case was 0.997. On the
whole, it appears our maximum likelihood procedure performs remarkably well.
Finally, we were concerned that changes in the number of income categories reported over
time in the Census might affect our estimates of income inequality. To test for this possibility, we
collapsed the 16 income groups reported in the 2000 Census to 8, and re-estimated the Dagum
parameters and Gini coefficients. In a regression of Gini_16 (the Gini coefficient estimated using 16
income groups) on Gini_8 (the Gini estimated using 8 groups), we estimate an intercept of 0.01 and
a slope of 0.96, but cannot reject the null hypotheses that the intercept is zero and the slope is one.
This implies that there is no systematic bias in using a smaller number of income groups (a smaller
number of groups creates classical measurement error).
References
Aaronson, Daniel, "The Effect of School Finance Reform on Population Heterogeneity," National Tax
Journal, 52 (1999), 5-29.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara, "Participation in Heterogeneous Communities," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115 (2000), 847-904.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara, "Who Trusts Others?" Journal of Public Economics, 85 (2002), 207-234.
Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, "Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 114 (1999), 1243-1284.
Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and Caroline Hoxby, "Political Jurisdictions in Heterogeneous Communities,"
Journal of Political Economy, 112 (2004), 348-396.
Alesina, Alberto, Edward Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote, "Why Doesn't the United State Have a EuropeanStyle Welfare State?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2 (2001), 187-254.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney, "Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising the
Revisionists," Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (2008), 300-323.
Baicker, Katherine, and Nora Gordon, "The Effect of State Education Finance Reform on Total Local
Resources," Journal of Public Economics, 90 (2006), 1519-1535.
Benabou, Roland, "Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic Implications of Community
Structure and School Finance," American Economic Review, 86 (1996), 584-609.
Benabou, Roland, "Inequality and Growth," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 11 (1996), 11-74.
Bergstrom, Theodore C., and Robert P. Goodman, "Private Demands for Public Goods," The American
Economic Review, 63 (1973), 280-296.
Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate, "Public Provision of Private Goods and the Redistribution of Income,"
American Economic Review, 81 (1991), 979-984.
Black, Sandra E., "Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education," The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 114 (1999), 577-599.
Borcherding, Thomas E., and Robert T. Deacon, "The Demand for the Services of Non-Federal
Governments," The American Economic Review, 62 (1972), 891-901.
Borck, Rainald, "Voting, Inequality, and Redistribution," Journal of Economic Surveys, 21 (2007), 90-109.
Borge, Lars-Erik, and J. Jørn Rattsø, "Income Distribution and Tax Structure: Empirical Test of the MeltzerRichard Hypothesis," European Economic Review, 48 (2004), 805-826.
Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina M. Baker, “Problems with Instrumental Variables When the
Correlation between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory Variable is Weak,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 90 (1995), 443-50.
Brown, Byron W., and Daniel H. Saks, "The Revealed Influence of Class, Race, and Ethnicity on Local
Public-School Expenditures," Sociology of Education, 58 (1985), 181-190.
Brunner, Eric J., and Jon Sonstelie, "California's School Finance Reform: An Experiment in Fiscal
Federalism," in William A. Fischel, ed., The Tiebout Model at Fifty: Essays in Public Economics in Honor of
Wallace Oates (Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, 2006), pp. 55-99.

38

Card, David, and Abigail Payne, "School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School Spending, and the
Distribution of Student Test Scores," Journal of Public Economics, 83 (2002), 49-82.
Corcoran, Sean P., and William N. Evans, "Equity, Adequacy, and the Evolving State Role in Education
Finance," in Helen F. Ladd, and Edward B. Fiske, eds., Handbook of Research in Education Finance and
Policy (New York: Routledge, 2008).
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn, "Understanding the American Decline in Social Capital, 1952-1998,"
Kyklos, 56 (2003), 17-46.
Cutler, David M., Douglas W. Elmendorf, and Richard Zeckhauser, "Demographic Characteristics and the
Public Bundle," Public Finance, 48 (1993), 178-198.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor, "The Rise and Decline of the American Ghetto,"
Journal of Political Economy, 107 (1999), 455-506.
Dagum, Camilo, "Inequality Measures Between Income Distributions with Applications," Econometrica, 48
(1980), 1791-1803.
Deaton, Angus, "Relative Deprivation, Inequality, and Mortality," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper Series, No. 8099 (2001).
de Bartolome, Charles A. M., "What Determines State Aid to School Districts? A Positive Model of
Foundation Aid as Redistribution," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 16 (1997), 32-47.
Epple, Dennis, and Glenn J. Platt, "Equilibrium and Local Redistribution in an Urban Economy When
Households Differ in Both Preferences and Incomes," Journal of Urban Economics, 43 (1998), 23-51.
Epple, Dennis, and Richard E. Romano, "Ends Against the Middle: Determining Public Service Provision
When There Are Private Alternatives," Journal of Public Economics, 62 (1996), 297-325.
Evans, William, Sheila Murray, and Robert Schwab, “School House, Court Houses, State Houses after
Serrano,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 16 (1997), 10-31.
Evans, William N., Michael Hout, and Susan Mayer, "Assessing the Effect of Income Inequality," in Kathryn
M. Neckerman, ed., Social Inequality (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2004), pp. 933-968.
Fajnzylber, Pablo, Daniel Lederman, and Norman Loayza, "Inequality and Violent Crime," The Journal of Law
and Economics, 45 (2002), 1-39.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Gilat Levy, "Diversity and Redistribution," Journal of Public Economics, 92 (2008), 925943.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Richard Rogerson, "Income Distribution, Communities, and the Quality of Public
Education," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (1996), 135-164.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Richard Rogerson, "The Determinants of Public Education Expenditures: LongerRun Evidence from the States," Journal of Education Finance, 27 (2001), 567-584.
Figlio, David N., Thomas A. Husted, and Lawrence W. Kenny, "Political Economy of the Inequality in
School Spending," Journal of Urban Economics, 55 (2004), 338-349.
Fischel, William A., The Homevoter Hypothesis: How Home Values Influence Local Government Taxation, School Finance,
and Land-Use Policies (Harvard University Press, 2001).
Forbes, Kristin J., "A Reassessment of the Relationship between Inequality and Growth," American Economic
Review, 90 (2000), 869-887.
Glomm, Gerhard, and B. Ravikumar, "Opting Out of Publicly Provided Services: A Majority Voting Result,"
Social Choice and Welfare, 15 (1998), 187-199.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz, "Why the United States Led in Education: Lessons from Secondary
School Expansion, 1910 to 1940," NBER Working Papers (1997).
Goldin, C., and L. F. Katz, "Decreasing (and Then Increasing) Inequality in America: A Tale of Two HalfCenturies," in Finis Welch, ed., The Causes and Consequences of Increasing Inequality (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2001), pp. 37–82.
Gottschalk, Peter, "Inequality, Income Growth, and Mobility: The Basic Facts," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
11 (1997), 21-40.
Gottschalk, Peter, and Timothy M. Smeeding, "Cross-National Comparisons of Earnings and Income
Inequality," Journal of Economic Literature, 35 (1997), 633-687.
Gouveia, Miguel, and Neal A. Masia, "Does the Median Voter Model Explain the Size of Government?
Evidence from the States," Public Choice, 97 (1998), 159-177.

39

Harris, Amy Rehder, William N. Evans, and Robert M. Schwab, "Education Spending in an Aging America,"
Journal of Public Economics, 81 (2001), 449-472.
Hilber, Christian A. L., and Christopher J. Mayer, "Why Do Households Without Children Support Local
Public Schools? Linking House Price Capitalization to School Spending," Working Paper (London
School of Economics, 2007).
Hoxby, Caroline Minter, "How Teachers' Unions Affect Education Production," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
111 (1996), 671-718.
Hoxby, Caroline M., "How Much Does School Spending Depend on Family Income? The Historical Origins
of the Current School Finance Dilemma," American Economic Review, 88 (1998), 309-314.
Hoxby, Caroline M., "Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?" American
Economic Review, 90 (2000), 1209-1238.
Hoxby, Caroline M., "All School Finance Equalizations Are Not Created Equal," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
116 (2001), 1189-1231.
Hoxby, Caroline Minter, "Our Favorite Method of Redistribution: School Spending Equality, Income
Inequality, and Growth," Working Paper (Harvard University, 2003).
Husted, Thomas A., and Lawrence W. Kenny, "The Effect of the Expansion of the Voting Franchise on the
Size of Government," The Journal of Political Economy, 105 (1997), 54-82.
Katz, Lawrence F., and David H. Autor, "Changes in the wage structure and earnings inequality," in C.
Ashenfelter Orley, and Card David, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics (Elsevier, 1999), pp. 1463-1555.
Kawachi, Ichiro, Bruce P. Kennedy, and Richard G. Wilkinson, The Society and Population Health Reader. Income
Inequality and Health Volume 1 (New York: New Press ; W.W. Norton [distributer], 1999).
Kelly, Morgan, "Inequality and Crime," Review of Economics and Statistics, 82 (2000), 530-539.
Kenworthy, Lane, and Jonas Pontusson, "Rising Inequality and the Politics of Redistribution in Affluent
Countries," Perspectives on Politics, 3 (2005), 449-471.
Kremer, Michael, "How Much Does Sorting Increase Inequality?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (1997),
115-139.
Ladd, Helen F., and Sheila E. Murray, "Intergenerational Conflict Reconsidered: County Demographic
Structure and the Demand for Public Education," Economics of Education Review, 20 (2001), 343-357.
Lind, Jo Thori, "Fractionalization and the Size of Government," Journal of Public Economics, 91 (2007), 51-76.
Luttmer, Erzo F. P., "Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistribution," Journal of Political Economy, 109 (2001),
500-528.
McDonald, James B., "Some Generalized Functions for the Size Distribution of Income," Econometrica, 52
(1984), 647-664.
Mellor, Jennifer M., and Jeffrey Milyo, "Income Inequality and Health Status in the United States: Evidence
from the Current Population Survey," Journal of Human Resources, 37 (2002), 510-539.
Meltzer, Allan H., and Scott F. Richard, "A Rational Theory of the Size of Government," Journal of Political
Economy, 89 (1981), 914-927.
Meltzer, Allan H., and Scott F. Richard, "Tests of a Rational Theory of the Size of Government," Public
Choice, 41 (1983), 403-418.
Mueller, Dennis C., Public Choice III (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003).
Murray, Sheila E, William N Evans, and Robert M Schwab, "Education-Finance Reform and the Distribution
of Education Resources," American Economic Review, 88 (1998), 789-812.
Nechyba, Thomas J., "Centralization, Fiscal Federalism, and Private School Attendance," International Economic
Review, 44 (2003), 179-204.
Oates, Wallace E., "Property Taxation and Local Public Spending: The Renter Effect," Journal of Urban
Economics, 57 (2005), 419-431.
Perotti, Roberto, "Growth, Income Distribution, and Democracy: What the Data Say," Journal of Economic
Growth, 1 (1996), 149-187.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez, "Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 118 (2003), 1-39.
Poterba, James M., "Demographic Structure and the Political Economy of Public Education," Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 16 (1997), 48-66.

40

Rhode, Paul W., and Koleman S. Strumpf, "Assessing the Importance of Tiebout Sorting: Local
Heterogeneity from 1850 to 1990," American Economic Review, 93 (2003), 1648-1677.
Ross, Stephen, and John Yinger, "Sorting and Voting: A Review of the Literature on Urban Public Finance,"
in Paul Cheshire, and Edwin S. Mills, eds., Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics. North-Holland,
1999), pp. 2001-2060.
Rubinfeld, Daniel L., and Perry Shapiro, "Micro-estimation of the Demand for Schooling: Evidence from
Michigan and Massachusetts," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 19 (1989), 381-398.
Tiebout, Charles M., "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," The Journal of Political Economy, 64 (1956), 416424.
Turnbull, Geoffrey K. and Peter M. Mitias, “The Median Voter Model across Levels of Government,” Public
Choice, 99 (1999), 119-138.
Urquiola, Miguel, "Demand Matters: School District Concentration, Composition, and Educational
Expenditure," Working Paper (Washington, DC: The World Bank, 2000).
U.S. Census Bureau, Department of Commerce. 1973. Census of Population and Housing, 1970: Special Fifth Count
Summary Tapes, machine-readable data file. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census
[producer], Washington, DC; U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and
Improvement, National Center for Educational Statistics [distributor].
U.S. Census Bureau, Department of Commerce. 1982. Census of Population and Housing, 1980: Summary Tape File
3F, school districts, machine-readable data file. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census
[producer and distributor], Washington, DC.
U.S. Census Bureau, Department of Commerce. 2002a. Census of Population and Housing, 2000: School District
Tabulation (STP2). U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census [producer], Washington,
DC, and United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics
[distributor].
U.S. Census Bureau, Department of Commerce. 1992. U.S. Census 1992 Annual Survey of Local Government
Finances: Public Elementary-Secondary Education Finance Data, machine-readable data file. U.S. Department of
Commerce, Bureau of the Census [producer and distributor], Washington, DC.
U.S. Census Bureau, Department of Commerce. 2002b. U.S. Census 2002 Annual Survey of Local Government
Finances: School Systems, machine-readable data file. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census
[producer and distributor], Washington, DC.
U.S. Census Bureau, Department of Commerce. 2003. Census of Population and Housing, 2000: Summary Tape File
3, machine-readable data file. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census [producer and
distributor], Washington, DC.
U.S. Census Bureau, Department of Commerce. 1987. Census of Governments, 1982: Finance Summary Statistics
[Computer file]. 2nd ICPSR release. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the
Census [producer], 1985. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research [distributor].
U.S. Census Bureau, Department of Commerce. 1993. Census of Governments, 1972: Government Employment and
Finance Files [Computer file]. ICPSR ed. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and
Social Research [producer and distributor].
U.S. Census Bureau. 2008. Historical Income Inequality Tables H-4 and F-4. Retrieved June 14, 2008 from
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/histinc/ineqtoc.html.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2010. The 2010 Statistical Abstract. Table 424: State and Local Governments—Revenue and
Expenditures by Function: 2006. Retrieved May 25, 2010 from
http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2010/tables/10s0424.pdf.
U.S. Department of Education. 1994. 1990 Census School District Special Tabulation, School District Data Book
[CD-ROMs]. U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement,
National Center for Education Statistics [producer and distributor], Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Education. 2008. Digest of Education Statistics, 2007. NCES 2008-022, by Thomas D.
Snyder, Sally A. Dillow, and Charlene M. Hoffman. National Center for Education Statistics,
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, Washington, D.C.

41

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, Panel of U.S. School Districts 1970 – 2000
1970/
72
2385
1824
3476
54.5
10.5

1980
/82
2400
2608
4424
45.9
8.8

Means
1990
/92
3323
3665
6166
45.2
10.2

2000
/02
3776
4909
7494
42.3
10.4

70-00
Change
1486
3077
3841
-11.0
1.1

Real median family income (x1000)
Percent of households below poverty
Mean to median ratio of family income
Gini coefficient of family income (x 100)
Theil index of family income (x 100)
Log(95/5) ratio in family income
Ln(95/50) ratio in family income
Ln(50/5) ratio in family income
Mean to median housing value
Gini coefficient of housing value

47.3
13.7
1.13
33.8
20.1
2.37
0.88
1.49
1.13
28.0

49.8
12.4
1.14
35.1
21.7
2.48
0.91
1.57
---

51.7
13.5
1.19
37.3
25.1
2.64
0.99
1.65
1.15
28.7

55.6
12.4
1.23
38.8
28.0
2.67
1.06
1.61
1.16
28.3

8.7
-1.3
0.10
5.0
7.8
0.29
0.18
0.11
0.03
0.02

51.1
13.0
1.17
36.3
23.8
2.54
0.96
1.58
1.15
28.3

15.5
8.0
0.11
5.5
9.3
0.45
0.18
0.31
0.12
7.2

Percent college graduates or higher
Percent school aged (5 – 17)
Percent aged 65 and older
Percent of homes owner occupied
Percent of population nonwhite
Percent of population in urbanized areas
Index of race fractionalization (x 100)

10.6
26.7
9.5
65.9
15.7
71.3
16.5

13.8
34.9
11.4
66.9
19.8
57.7
22.1

21.0
26.4
12.2
65.7
23.9
72.8
26.2

23.7
19.3
12.1
67.3
30.9
78.3
32.9

13.0
-7.6
2.7
0.3
15.3
11.0
17.5

17.3
26.5
11.3
66.4
22.7
70.4
24.5

11.2
6.7
4.3
14.6
22.2
37.4
19.9

Real local revenues per student
Real state and federal aid per student
Real current expenditures per pupil
Percent of revenues from local sources
Percent of enrollment in private school

Full sample
Standard
Mean Deviation
2985
1957
3269
1798
5501
2216
47.0
19.3
10.0
6.8

Notes: authors’ calculations using a balanced panel of elementary and unified school districts (N=10,359 in each year). District
observations are weighted by public K-12 enrollment. Districts in Alaska, Hawaii, and D.C. are excluded. All monetary values
measured in 2002 dollars.

42

Table 2: Income Inequality in School Districts and Metropolitan Areas – 1970 to 2000
A. Change in income inequality within school districts, 1970 to 2000 (weighted by district size)
Percent change in income
inequality:
Mean
10th percentile
25th percentile
Median
75th percentile
90th percentile
Mean income inequality in 1970
Mean change in income inequality, 1970-2000
Standard deviation of change in inequality, 1970-2000

Mean/
Median
Ratio
8.96
0.42
4.22
8.09
12.23
18.95

Gini
Coefficient
15.60
-2.30
6.25
15.69
24.93
32.66

Theil
Index
42.50
-4.20
15.86
39.17
63.77
89.03

1.13
0.10
0.11

33.8
5.0
4.6

20.1
7.8
10.0

B. Income inequality within metropolitan areas (weighted by MSA enrollment)
1970

1980

1990

2000

% Change

Mean/median ratio
Gini coefficient (x 100)
Theil index (x 100)
% within school districts
% between school districts

1.14
34.7
20.8
92.1
7.9

1.15
36.1
22.6
92.1
7.9

1.20
38.5
26.2
89.1
10.9

1.25
40.6
30.1
88.7
11.3

10.1
17.1
44.3
-3.7
43.6

Mean number of districts

16.3

18.8

18.6

18.9

Source: authors’ calculations using a balanced panel of elementary and unified school districts (N=10,358 in each year; 331
MSAs in Panel B, except 1990 where 328 MSAs are included). Notes: Panel A uses same sample selection criteria as Table 1;
Panel B makes use of the full (unbalanced) panel of school districts.

43

Table 3: OLS Estimates of Real Local Revenues per Pupil, Real Expenditures per Pupil,
and Real State Revenues per Pupil
Dependent Variable:
Real median family
income, in thousands

Expenditures
per pupil
(3)
-10.63**
(3.95)

State revenues
per pupil
(4)
-42.15***
(3.536)

1787.9***
(449.7)

1198.10***
(299.7)

-702.8***
(213.0)

7.65*
(3.26)

18.04***
(3.77)

Local revenues per pupil
(1)
(2)
28.51***
33.51***
(5.34)
(4.70)

Ratio of mean to median
family income
Percent of population
below poverty line

12.98***
(3.68)

3.46
(3.61)

Real state and federal
revenues per pupil

-0.372***
(0.022)

-0.366***
(0.021)

Percent college graduates
or higher

45.80***
(5.99)

35.98***
(5.01)

21.48***
(3.91)

-22.66***
(3.53)

Percent school aged
(5-17)

-57.64***
(5.05)

-59.12***
(4.97)

-58.63***
(4.08)

0.618
(4.391)

Percent aged 65 and older

15.77*
(7.14)

15.31*
(7.04)

-28.33***
(6.50)

-65.59***
(6.00)

Percent of housing units
owner-occupied

-10.47*
(5.24)

-12.21*
(5.25)

6.89*
(2.80)

16.99***
(2.74)

Percent nonwhite

2.13
(2.77)

0.743
(2.694)

11.18***
(2.14)

-0.927
(3.352)

Index of race
fractionalization

-234.8
(400.9)

15.28
(400.1)

-294.6
(197.0)

-24.39
(343.8)

Percent living in
urbanized area

-2.68***
(0.43)

-2.17***
(0.41)

-1.36***
(0.31)

0.796*
(0.320)

41,436
0.908

41,422
0.908

41,422
0.952

41,422
0.891

Observations
R-squared

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05). All models include school
district fixed-effects plus state x year fixed-effects. In models (3) and (4), we also include interactions between
the within-state quartiles in median family income in 1970 times a dummy for whether the state has a courtordered education finance reform in effect that year.

44

Table 4: OLS and 2SLS Estimates Real Local Revenues per Pupil Equation
Real median family
income, in thousands

(1)
33.51***
(4.70)

(2)
37.647***
(5.601)

(3)
41.96***
(6.58)

Ratio of mean to median
family income

1787.9***
(449.7)

1825.8***
(449.86)

3271.0***
(603.1)

Percent of population
below poverty line

3.46
(3.61)

3.26
(3.67)

-4.46
(4.22)

Real state and federal
revenues per pupil

-0.366***
(0.021)

-0.301***
(0.057)

-0.293***
(0.057)

Percent college graduates
or higher

35.98***
(5.01)

38.10***
(5.28)

30.32***
(6.56)

Percent school aged
(5-17)

-59.12***
(4.97)

-59.10***
(4.98)

-60.23***
(4.97)

Percent aged 65 and older

15.31*
(7.04)

21.44**
(8.22)

21.44**
(8.26)

Percent of housing units
owner-occupied

-12.21*
(5.25)

-13.92*
(5.48)

-15.42**
(5.84)

Percent nonwhite

0.743
(2.694)

0.329
(2.784)

-0.791
(2.704)

Index of race
fractionalization

15.28
(400.1)

55.71
(405.0)

261.0
(395.1)

Percent living in
urbanized area

-2.17***
(0.41)

-2.20***
(0.41)

-1.78***
(0.41)

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

74.8
0.163
(2)

61.8
115.7
0.106
(2)

41,422

41,422

Instrument for:
State and federal revenues
Mean/median income ratio
1st stage F-test: Instruments=0
Real state+federal revenues
Mean to median family income
P-value, test of over-identifying
restrictions (DOF of test)
Observations
R-squared

41,422
0.909

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05). All models include school
district fixed-effects plus state x year fixed-effects. In models (3) and (4), the instruments for real state +
federal revenues are interactions between the within-state quartiles (2nd through 4th) in median family income
times a dummy for whether the state has a court-ordered education finance reform in effect that year. In
model (4) the instrument for the mean/median ratio is family income is the skewness in within-district family
income.

45

Table 5: OLS and 2SLS Estimates of Real Local Revenues per Pupil Equation
with Alternate Measures of Income Inequality

Income inequality measure:
Income inequality

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Gini

Gini

Theil

Theil

34.43***
(9.19)

137.8***
(22.73)

17.92***
(5.43)

37.08***
(7.24)

(5)

(6)
Ln(95/50)
and
Ln(95/5) ln(50/5)
28.67
(104.6)

Ln(95/50) ratio of family income

904.2***
(223.6)

Ln(50/5) ratio of family income

-213.0*
(99.60)

Real median family
income, in thousands
Instrument for:
State and federal revenues
Income inequality measure
1st stage F-test: Instruments=0
Real state+federal revenues
Mean to median family income
P-value, test of over-identifying
restrictions (DOF of test)
Observations
R-squared

31.51***
(4.90)

46.40***
(7.00)

31.39***
(4.87)

38.63***
(6.32)

No
No

Yes
Yes

No
No

Yes
Yes

98.9
61.8
0.244
(2)
41,422
0.908

41,422

No
No

No
No

0.908

41,422
0.908

83.3
61.8
0.010
(2)
41,422
0.908

41,422

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05). All models include school
district fixed-effects, state x year fixed-effects, plus the demographic covariates used in Table 3. In models (2)
and (4), the instruments for real state + federal revenues are interactions between the within-state quartiles
(2nd through 4th) in median family income times a dummy for whether the state has a court-ordered education
finance reform in effect that year. Th instrument for the inequality measures is the skewness in within-district
family income.

46

Table 6: Extensions and Robustness Checks.
OLS and 2SLS Estimates of Real Local Revenues per Pupil Equation

Real median family
income, x 1000)

(1)
25.47***
(7.20)

(2)
38.73***
(8.32)

Mean/median family
income (x100)
Mean/median of housing
value (x100)

Exclude
CA
(3)
34.50***
(5.20)

Exclude
CA
(4)
39.0***
(6.75)

1557.9** 3103.8***
(510.6)
(671.5)
794.8*
(386.7)

(5)
32.19***
(4.30)
2257***
(356.2)

879.9*
(402.9)

Mean/median family income (x 100)
x 2nd quartile of districts per student

-2142.3***
(631.8)

x 3rd quartile of districts per student

-1815.1***
(384.0)

x 4th quartile of districts per student
-1350.1***
(374.7)
Instrument for:
State and federal revenues
Mean/median income ratio
1st stage F-test: Instruments=0
Real state+federal revenues
Mean to median family income
P-value, test of over-identifying
restrictions (DOF of test)
Observations
R-squared

No
No

Yes
No

No
No

53.0

29,062

No
No

70.0
91.0
0.244
(2)

0.059
(2)
29,391
0.854

Yes
Yes

39,505
0.880

39,505

40,710
0.911

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05). All models include school
district fixed-effects, state x year effects, and the demographic covariates used in Table 3. Columns (1) – (2)
replace the measure of income inequality with the within-district mean/median ratio in self-reported housing
values. Columns (3) and (4) estimate models excluding data for California.

47

Table 7: Effect of Income Inequality on Private Schooling
Inequality measure:
Real median family
income, in thousands
Inequality measure

Mean/
Mean/
Mean/
Median Median
Gini
Gini
Median
Gini
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.109*** 0.109*** 0.110*** 0.108*** 0.107*** 0.105***
(0.012)
(0.017)
(0.012)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.015)
2.114
(1.413)

0.082**
(0.031)

Inequality measure x 2nd quartile of
districts/student

-3.932
(2.457)

-0.119*
(0.057)

Inequality measure x 3rd quartile of
districts/student

2.034
(1.747)

-0.008
(0.037)

Inequality measure x 4th quartile of
districts/student

0.526
(1.601)

-0.010
(0.035)

-0.030
(0.017)

-0.041*
(0.017)

Percent of population
below poverty line

0.053
(0.600)

1.866
(0.964)

0.013
(0.017)

-0.053***
(0.013)

-0.032
(0.017)

-0.058***
(0.014)

Real current expenditures per pupil
(in thousands)

0.195*
(0.086)

-1.580***
(0.448)

0.193*
(0.085)

Percent college graduates
or higher

0.016
(0.014)

0.036
(0.018)

0.014
(0.014)

0.055*
(0.024)

-0.044*
(0.017)

-1.543*** -1.575*** -1.489***
(0.438)
(0.436)
(0.420)
0.034
(0.018)

0.037*
(0.018)

0.032
(0.017)

Percent school aged
(5-17)

-0.049** -0.139*** -0.049** -0.135*** -0.138*** -0.130***
(0.015)
(0.028)
(0.015)
(0.027)
(0.028)
(0.026)

Percent aged 65 and older

0.059*
(0.023)

0.033
(0.030)

0.057*
(0.024)

0.027
(0.031)

0.028
(0.029)

0.021
(0.029)

Percent of housing units
owner-occupied

-0.010
(0.011)

-0.000
(0.014)

-0.010
(0.012)

0.001
(0.015)

0.003
(0.014)

0.006
(0.013)

Percent nonwhite

-0.054*** -0.038*** -0.054*** -0.039*** -0.043*** -0.048***
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.013)

Index of race
Fractionalization

3.168**
(1.103)

2.891**
(1.055)

3.186**
(1.112)

2.717*
(1.076)

3.442**
(1.125)

3.499**
(1.155)

Percent living in
urbanized area

0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

38,052
0.851

37,867

38,052
0.851

37,867

37,191

37,192

Instrument for expenditures
1st stage F-test: Instruments=0
P-value test of overid. restrictions
Observations
R-squared

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05). Dependent
variable measured as the percent of K-12 enrollment in private schools. Regressions weighted using
total K-12 enrollment (public + private). All models include school district fixed-effects and state x
year effects.
48

Appendix Table 1: First-Stage Estimates for 2SLS Models from Tables 4, 5, 6 and 7
First-stage estimates
corresponding to:
Endogenous covariate:
Instruments:
Court-ordered finance reform x withinstate quartile of mean district family
income
x quartile 1
x quartile 2
x quartile 3

Table 4
Col. (2)
S+F
(1)

First-stage estimates
corresponding to:
Endogenous covariate:
Instruments:
Court-ordered finance reform
x within-state quartile of mean district
family income
x quartile 1
x quartile 2
x quartile 3

Table 5,
Column (4)

Gini
(4)

Theil
(5)

1495.3***
(114.8)
526.7***
(74.3)
477.0***
(126.0)
-0.010**
(0.0022)

0.0183**
(0.0047)
0.0130**
(0.0043)
0.0125*
(0.0062)
5.1E-6***
(2.4E-7)

0.164
(0.138)
-0.215
(0.124)
-0.188
(0.161)
1.2E-4***
(6.2E-6)

1.815***
(0.356)
0.973**
(0.333)
0.839
(0.463)
4.4E-4***
(2.5E-5)

41,422
74.8

41,422
61.8

41,422
115.7

41,422
98.9

41,422
83.3

0.856

0.857

0.743

0.833

0.769

Table 6
Col. (2)
S+F
(6)

Table 6, Column (4)
Mean/
S+F
Median
(7)
(8)

Table 7
Col. (2)
S+F
(9)

1685.4***
(137.1)
496.2***
(102.6)
442.9***
(126.6)

1659.2***
(120.2)
702.2***
(84.2)
326.5***
(70.3)
-0.013***
(0.0024)

0.014**
(0.0051)
0.011*
(0.046)
0.006
(0.0044)
5.0E-6***
(2.6E-7)

618.8***
(52.8)
431.2***
(63.0)
431.5
(138.4)

29,062
53.0

39,505
70.0

39,505
91.0

37,867
50.0

0.880

0.857

0.713

0.917

Skewness of family income
Observations
1sr stage F-test: Instruments are jointly
zero
R2

Table 5,
Column (2)

1546.8***
(114.8)
573.7***
(74.4)
508.4***
(120.8)

Skewness of family income
Observations
1sr stage F-test: Instruments are jointly
zero
R2

Table 4, Column (3)
Mean/
S+F
Median
(2)
(3)

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05). S+F represents real state +
federal revenues per pupil. Mean/media in columns (3), (4), (5) and (8) and the within-district family income
mean/median ratio. In column (6), mean/median is within-district mean/median housing price ratio. The
first-stage estimates for S+F from Table 5 columns (2) and (4) are identical to those from Table 4, column
(3). All models include school district fixed-effects, plus state x year effects. Demographic covariates shown
in Table 3 are also included in these regression models. Columns (1) – (5) only use district observations from
1970, 1990, and 2000 (the only years for which we have Census housing values). Column (6) uses only
observations from 1970, 1990 and 2000. Columns (7) and (8) use exclude data from California districts from
1970 – 2000. Column (9) includes the sample from the private schooling results in Table 7.

49

