NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES COMPETE HEAD TO HEAD
IN HIGH-TECH?
Lawrence Edwards
Robert Z. Lawrence
Working Paper 16105
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16105

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

This paper is based on research undertaken for a book Rising Tide: Is Growth in Emerging Markets
Good for the United States? to be published by the Peterson Institute for International Economics.
We thank the Sloan Foundation, the Center for Economic Development at Harvard, Economic Research
Southern Africa, (ERSA) and the National Research Foundation of South Africa for financial support.
We are indebted for research assistance to Pandey Bibek and Sounman Hong. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Lawrence Edwards and Robert Z. Lawrence. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Developed and Developing Countries Compete Head to Head in High-tech?
Lawrence Edwards and Robert Z. Lawrence
NBER Working Paper No. 16105
June 2010
JEL No. F1,F11,J3
ABSTRACT
Concerns that (1) growth in developing countries could worsen the US terms of trade and (2) that increased
US trade with developing countries will increase US wage inequality both implicitly reflect the assumption
that goods produced in the United States and developing countries are close substitutes and that specialization
is incomplete. In this paper we show on the contrary that there are distinctive patterns of international
specialization and that developed and developing countries export fundamentally different products,
especially those classified as high tech.
Judged by export shares, the United States and developing countries specialize in quite different product
categories that, for the most part, do not overlap. Moreover, even when exports are classified in the
same category, there are large and systematic differences in unit values that suggest the products made
by developed and developing countries are not very close substitutes—developed country products
are far more sophisticated.
This generalization is already recognized in the literature but it does not hold for all types of products.
Export unit values of developed and developing countries of primary commodity–intensive products
are typically quite similar. Unit values of standardized (low-tech) manufactured products exported
by developed and developing countries are somewhat similar. By contrast, the medium- and high-tech
manufactured exports of developed and developing countries differ greatly.
This finding has important implications. While measures of across product specialization suggest China
and other Asian economies have been moving into high-tech exports, the within-product unit value
measures indicate they are doing so in the least sophisticated market segments and the gap in unit values
between their exports and those of developed countries has not narrowed over time.
These findings shed light on the paradoxical finding, exemplified by computers and electronics, that
US-manufactured imports from developing countries are concentrated in US industries, which employ
relatively high shares of skilled American workers. They help explain why America’s nonoil terms
of trade have improved and suggest that recently declining relative import prices from developing
countries may not produced significant wage inequality in the United States. Finally they suggest that
inferring competitive trends based on trade balances in products classified as “high tech” or “advanced”
can be highly misleading.
Lawrence Edwards
School of Economics
Cape Town University
Cape Town Rep of South Africa
Lawrence.Edwards@uct.ac.za

Robert Z. Lawrence
JFK School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Peterson Institute for International Economics
and also NBER
robert_lawrence@harvard.edu

4

Do Developed and Developing Countries Compete Head-to-Head in High Tech?
INTRODUCTION
Recently, distinguished economists have raised doubts about the size and distribution of
America’s gains from trade as a result of its increasing trade with developing countries.
On the one hand, in an article that attracted considerable attention, Paul Samuelson
(2004) used a conventional Ricardian model to show how growth in developing countries
such as China could reduce America’s gains from trade. His argument is that as a result of
productivity growth these countries could move up the technology ladder sufficiently to
provide important competition for US exports. This could induce a decline in America’s
terms of trade and therefore its gains from trade.2
On the other hand, Paul Krugman raised concerns about the effect of growing
trade with developing countries on wage inequality: in a column in 2007 he wrote “It’s
no longer safe to assert that trade’s impact on the income distribution in wealthy
countries is fairly minor. There’s a good case that it is big and getting bigger.” As in
Samuelson’s case, Krugman’s reasoning is based on conventional trade theory. The crux
of the concern is that the goods produced by developing countries whose relative prices
have declined are close substitutes for those produced by unskilled labor in developed
countries and therefore exert downward pressure on the relative wages of unskilled
workers.
Actually, in the conventional two-by-two Heckscher-Ohlin trade theory
framework, Samuelson and Krugman cannot both be correct. If the United States
specializes in skill-intensive products, declining terms of trade will reduce skill premiums
and more equal wages. But in both cases, these concerns reflect the presumption that
developed and developing countries compete head to head i.e., that they occupy similar
cones of diversification.
The empirical work on these concerns is, however, riddled with paradoxes. The
evidence of substantial losses in US high-tech competitiveness is hard to square with
America’s improving nonoil terms of trade, and the evidence of increased manufactured
2

Gomory and Baumol (2000) use a model with economies of scale to reach a similar conclusion.

4

5
imports from developing countries in skill-intensive sectors is hard to square with
conventional Heckscher-Ohlin theory.
Support for Samuelson’s concern does seem to come from the data on trade in
“High-technology Products,” reported annually by the US National Science Foundation
(NSF) in its Science Indicators and in the data on trade in “Advanced Technology
Products” reported in the monthly trade release of the US Department of Commerce.
These data show major declines in the world market share of US high technology
industries, from 20 percent in the early 1990s to 12 percent in 2005, primarily reflecting
losses in industries producing communications equipment, office machinery, and
computers. By contrast China’s share in high-tech exports rose from 8 percent in 1999 to
19 percent in 2005 to make it by far the world’s largest exporter of high-technology
products. In addition, America’s historically strong trade balance in “advanced
technology products” shifted from surplus to deficit in 2002, driven by US trade with
developing countries such as China, Mexico, Malaysia, and Indonesia (NSF.
Other research also appears to provide corroborating evidence. Schott (2008)
finds that China’s export overlap with the OECD is much greater than one would predict
given its low wages.3 Similarly, Rodrik (2006) finds that China’s exports are associated
with a productivity level that is higher than what would be expected given its income.
Despite this apparent support for Samuelson’s concern, however, excluding oil,
the terms of trade in manufactured goods of the United States, Germany, and Japan have
all actually improved since the mid-1990s—the period when import growth from the
developing countries accelerated.4 Moreover since US nonagricultural export prices have
increased as much as the prices of US manufactured goods imported from industrial
countries, the source of the US (nonoil) terms of trade improvement is the declining
relative prices of manufactured imports from developing countries.
While the evidence of declining relative prices of manufactured imports from
developing countries may give some comfort with regard to Samuelson’s concern, it
seems to provide support for Krugman’s worry about declining prices of unskilled labor–
intensive products. But here too there are problems with the straightforward explanation.
3

See also Kiyota (2008) who compares US, EU, and Chinese exports to Japan.
Edwards and Lawrence (2010a) show that even when the trade deficit is taken into account, the US nonoil
terms of trade have improved since the mid-1990s.
4

5

6
In apparent contradiction to conventional trade theory, the most disaggregated six-digit
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) data indicate that US
manufacturing industries with high shares of manufactured imports from developing
countries are actually more skill intensive than the industries with high shares of imports
from developed countries (Edwards and Lawrence 2010a, 2010b). The rapid growth in
imports of computers and electronics from developing countries exemplifies this
contradiction. Three-quarters of US imports in this sector come from developing
countries, yet it is the most skill intensive in US manufacturing.
There are numerous possible explanations for this puzzling result. The first,
favored by Krugman (2008), is that aggregation bias conflates imported unskilled labor–
intensive components and more skilled labor–intensive finished domestic products. This
therefore disguises the detrimental impact of outsourcing unskilled-labor processes to
developing countries on the wages of US workers who are either displaced or engaged in
unskilled labor–intensive activities within US industries.5
Four other hypotheses with different implications for wage inequality than posited
by Krugman are also worth considering. The first is “factor-intensity-reversals”: US
imports from developing countries may be produced abroad with unskilled labor–
intensive methods, but in the United States firms have automated and upgraded and thus
use skilled labor–intensive methods to produce the same products. A second possibility is
that given the increased global mobility of capital and technology, contrary to the
implications of Heckscher-Ohlin theory, developing countries have acquired comparative
advantages in some skill-intensive goods. This certainly is the impression left by the NSF
Science and Commerce data cited above. A third possibility is that because of
international supply chains, much of the value in the products deemed as from developing
countries is actually produced in developed countries. In particular, imports that may
arrive in the United States from developing countries like China are actually skill
intensive because they contain large amounts of skill-intensive components and designs
produced in more developed countries (such as Japan or the United States). A fourth
possibility, though, is within category specialization: Domestic and imported goods are

5

See also Blinder (2006) on the offshoring of business services that sparked considerable concern about the
loss of US services jobs.

6

7
simply not close substitutes. Developing countries produce less skill-intensive varieties,
while the United States and other developed countries produce more skill-intensive
varieties. We have moved to a multicone world with more complete specialization than is
assumed by conventional theory.6
In this paper we will resolve these paradoxes and distinguish among these
explanations. We provide considerable support for the multicone explanation. We will
deal with the problem of aggregation bias by using highly disaggregated trade data.
Fortunately, these data distinguish very clearly between raw materials, intermediate
components, and finished products and are therefore not as subject to aggregation bias.
They are also reported as values and quantities, (e.g., in dozens or pounds) allowing for
rough comparisons of prices differentials. Disaggregated data also allow a better
understanding of the factors that could explain the fact that US imports from developing
countries are concentrated in US industries that are relatively skilled labor intensive. In
addition, since the first four explanations all assume that developed and developing
country exports (or tasks) are similar (perfect substitutes) we will use disaggregated unit
value data to help us distinguish the fifth explanation—imperfect substitutes—from the
others.
One method we will use to determine head-to-head product competition in our
effort to resolve these questions is to calculate a “similarity index” that captures the
degree to which products share the same detailed classification categories. This allows us
to explore across-product specialization in trade flows. Fortunately we can compile very
fine-grained measures of similarity because the United States reports trade data in highly
disaggregated 6- and 10-digit Harmonized Tariff System (HTS) categories. For example,
the 10-digit HTS import category number 6103106030 contains values of “cotton
waistcoats imported as parts of suits.”
However, even at the 10-digit HTS level the data still reflect aggregation of
products of different quality. For example, cotton waistcoats are not all created equal.
Indeed, some may have much higher quality and different product attributes (e.g., silver
versus gold buttons) than others. These differences should be reflected in different prices.
Accordingly, we use a second method, ratios of average unit values at the most
6

Support for this conclusion can be found in Schott 2003.

7

8
disaggregated level (typically either 10- or 6-digit HTS level) to distinguish between
products even more precisely. This measure captures within-product specialization.
Data
To undertake this examination we concentrate on US trade in manufactured goods,
(NAICS 331–333) dropping refined petroleum products from the data. We use the US
trade data provided by Feenstra, Romalis, and Schott (2002) and the United States
International Trade Commission. The data are highly disaggregated. There are about
9,000 export codes and approximately 12,000 import numbers. To exploit the US data
we assume that the goods foreigners export to the United States that are captured in US
import data are representative of the goods they generally export to the rest of the world.
We also assume that the goods the US exports are representative of goods manufactured
in the United States.
Results
We will show in this paper that there are distinctive patterns of international
specialization that suggest developed and developing countries produce fundamentally
different products. Judged by export shares, the US and developing countries specialize
in quite different product categories that for the most part do not overlap. Moreover, even
when they do overlap and exports are classified in the same category, there are large and
systematic differences in unit values that suggest the products made by developed and
developing countries are not very close substitutes—developed country products are far
more sophisticated.
This generalization does not hold for all types of products. We find that export
unit values of primary commodity-intensive products are typically quite similar and unit
values of standardized manufactured products exported by developed and developing
countries are not very different. But the medium- and high-tech manufactured exports of
developed and developing countries differ greatly. In these product categories export unit
values rise with per capita incomes and there is little evidence of substantial convergence

8

9
over time. This suggests that, especially in these products, developed and developing
countries are not competing through producing goods that are close substitutes.7
Measures of across-product specialization suggest China and other Asian economies have
been moving into high-tech exports, but the within-product measures indicate they are
doing so in the least sophisticated market segments.
The findings have important implications for our concerns. They bolster the
argument that the United States and the developing countries are not competing head to
head in export markets. They shed light on the paradoxical finding, exemplified by
computers and electronics, that US-manufactured imports from developing countries are
concentrated in industries that employ relatively high shares of skilled American workers
and help explain why recently declining relative import prices from developing countries
have not produced significant wage inequality (Lawrence 2008).
Other research provides support for these conclusions. Peter Schott in particular
has been a major contributor to this type of work. He argues that international patterns of
specialization are incompatible with the assumption, common in traditional trade theory,
that countries all produce the same products. Instead, there are different cones of
specialization that reflect differences in factor endowments (Schott 2003). He also finds
that the differences in unit value of exports to the United States between developed and
developing countries are systematic and can be ascribed to differences in factor
endowments and factor production intensities (Schott 2004).8 Schott (2008) finds that the
overlap between China’s exports to the United States and OECD exports to the United
States exceed what one would expect given its wage rate, but that its unit values are
substantially lower than those of OECD exports again suggesting a high degree of withinproduct specialization. Liu (2006) and Kiyota (2008) have both used similar
disaggregated data to directly explore competition between US and Chinese exports in
world and Japanese markets and reach similar conclusions: the United States and China
occupy different parts of the export market.

7

The product cycle theory of Vernon (1966) is one way to explain these findings.
This result is also consistent with research by Harrigan (2000) showing that US producer prices did not
fall substantially as a result of the Asian financial crisis, which lowered the world prices of many laborintensive goods.

8

9

10
Export Overlap
We first explore the overlap between US exports and foreign exports to the United States
using the data on commodity shares for 1990, 2000, and 2006. Like Schott (2008) in his
analysis of the rising sophistication of Chinese exports to the United States, we measure
the overlap in trade flows using indices of similarity at various levels of disaggregation.
Whereas Schott benchmarks the composition of developing country exports to the United
States against OECD exports to the United States, we extend this by also comparing the
similarity of US exports and foreign exports to the United States.
The similarity index first involves calculating shares of each commodity and then
summing the absolute difference in these shares.9 If Xi is the share of commodity i in X
and Yi the share of commodity i in country Y then we first calculate the absolute
difference in the share of each commodity.
i.e., │Xi – Yi │
We then sum these differences and divide by two to provide a similarity index SIXY
between X and Y, which is equal to 100 when the two series are completely different and
equal to zero when they are completely similar.
SIXY = ∑│Xi – Yi │/2
i
Consider, for example if there were just two commodities and two countries. If each fully
specialized in exporting one of the products, the columns would be (0, 100) and (100, 0)
and the index would measure 100 indicating no overlap. If both specialized in the same
product, the columns would be (100, 0) and (100, 0) and the index would register zero
indicating complete similarity.

9

An alternative approach developed by Finger and Kreinin (1979) sums the minimum share for each
commodity and produces an index in which confusingly 100 implies complete similarity and zero implies
no overlap. See also Sun and Ng (2000).

10

11
One weakness in the measure is that it is sensitive to the level of disaggregation.
Both countries might have half their exports in clothing, for example, and a measure at
this level would indicate complete similarity, but one country might only be exporting
shirts while the other only exports pants and this difference would show up if more
disaggregated data was to be used. Accordingly we have calculated these indices at the
most disaggregated level possible. The comparison of developing-country exports to the
United States with aggregate high-income OECD exports to the United States is based on
a time consistent 10-digit HTS classification constructed using the concordance mapping
of Pierce and Schott (2009).10 The comparison of foreign exports with aggregate US
exports is based on 6-digit Harmonized System (HS) code as the 10-digit US export and
import codes are not directly comparable.11
Table 1 reports the various export similarity indices for a selection of developed
and developing countries in 1990, 2000, and 2006. We compare US imports from these
countries with US imports from high-income OECD countries. We also compare the
similarity of US imports with aggregate US exports. The two different comparisons yield
remarkably similar results both in terms of the level and trend of the indices. Looking at
the data for 2006, it is clear that in the sample Vietnamese exports are the most different
from those of the United States and high-income OECD countries. Next most different
are those from Hong Kong and then India. China and the category of other developing
countries occupy intermediate positions, while developed countries such as Germany,
Japan, and the category of “other developed countries” have the most similar structure to
US exports.
The ordering of export similarity is broadly consistent with GDP per capita with
exports from low-income countries displaying the least overlap with OECD exports and
aggregate US exports, but exceptions are evident.12 Surprisingly, Hong Kong’s export

10

The HTS classification has been revised on numerous occasions to reflect the development of new
products. To ensure comparability across time, we convert all the HTS data to a time-consistent code using
the concordance map developed by Pierce and Schott (2009).
11
The HS code is converted to the 1988/1992 revision to ensure comparability over time.
12
Highly disaggregated econometric estimates by Schott (2008) reveal a statistically significant association
between GDP per capita and export similarity with the OECD. In his simple regressions, China’s export
similarity to the OECD is greater than what would be predicted on the basis of its income per capita.
However, China is no longer found to be an outlier after jointly controlling for size and level of
development.

11

12
similarity with the OECD and the United States was very low in 2006 despite incomes
per capita similar to those in developed economies. The composition of Korea’s and
Mexico’s exports to the United States was more similar to aggregate OECD exports than
France’s export bundle (and the United Kingdom in the case of Korea) in 2006, but this
ordering is reversed in the comparison with aggregate US exports.
The change in similarity over time is also interesting. The export similarity of
China, India, and Korea with the OECD and United States rose rapidly from 1990 to
2006 (see also figure 1). China, for example, rose from a low similarity position in 1990
to an intermediate position in 2006, but nevertheless remains more similar to other
developing economies than developed countries including the United States. Schott
(2008) also estimates that the rise in China’s export similarity with the OECD is not
exceptional and is consistent with predictions based on its size and level of development.
A further observation is that almost the entire increase in China’s export similarity took
place between 1990 and 2000, with very little change in similarity from 2000 to 2006—a
period in which US imports from China rose dramatically. Exports from Korea and India,
in contrast, showed a steady increase in similarity with the OECD and aggregate US
exports in both periods.
Overall, the similarity indices reveal a rising export similarity between many
developing countries and the OECD and the United States. These trends are nevertheless
not fully supportive of Samuelson’s concerns. The rising similarity is broadly consistent
with improvements in per capita growth in these countries and does not reflect
exceptional increases in competition with US exports in recent years. Further,
developing-country export similarity with the United States continues to be lower than
for developed countries. Even developed countries show a fairly high degree of
dissimilarity with US exports (typically around 50).
A comparison of cumulative import shares in table 2 corroborates this finding.
China has been the focus of considerable attention in the debate on the effect of emerging
economies on US welfare. We have therefore ranked products according to their shares in
Chinese exports to the United States in 2006 and then sorted the other trade data by these
rankings. Finally we cumulate the shares accounted for at each percentile of Chinese

12

13
rankings. Table 2 compares China’s manufacturing exports to the United States with
those of other countries according to these cumulative shares.
The data reveal the weak overlap in the export bundles of developing countries
with the United States and other developed countries. Products that accounted for 50
percent of US imports from China in 2006 made up just 8 percent of US imports from
high-income OECD countries and 11 percent of US exports. In contrast, these products
accounted for 52 percent of US imports from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN-4) category, 37 percent from Vietnam, but less than 10 percent from India and
the category for “other developing countries.” Interestingly, these products made up 27
(Hong Kong) to 56 (Singapore) percent of US imports from selected high-income Asian
economies suggesting Chinese export growth to the United States may be at the expense
of exports from these countries rather than other high-income economies, including the
United States.
A similar story is evident if we look at products accounting for 80 percent of
Chinese imports. These constituted just 21 percent of US imports from high-income
OECD countries and 23 percent of US exports in 2006, but up to 76 percent of US
imports from the ASEAN-4 and over 47 percent from the selected high-income Asian
economies. It is clear from these results that by and large the goods the United States
imports from China are very different from those that it exports or that are exported to the
United States by high-income countries outside of Asia. Most Chinese exports are not
competing with US or other developed-country exports.
Unit Values
Another indicator of similarity is unit values. If US exports or imports from developed
countries are similar to exports from developing countries in quality, composition, and
price we would expect them to have similar unit values. In this section we investigate the
similarity in unit values across countries using the highly disaggregated data drawn on in
the earlier analysis.13 As we will show, unit values of US imports from developing

13

There are a number of data quality issues that arise in using this data. Errors in measurement can result in
highly volatile unit value measures. The units of measurement are also not applied consistently over all

13

14
countries are substantially lower than those of equivalent products imported from highincome OECD countries and products exported by the United States. Further, unlike the
export similarity indices that indicate rising across-product similarity in the export bundle
of developing countries with aggregate US exports, the unit value analysis finds no such
convergence. All told, these results convey a picture in which developed and developing
countries tend to specialize in exporting different types of products.
The analysis is based on annual data from 1990 to 2006. Unit values of imports
from foreign countries are compared to import unit values from high-income OECD
countries as well unit values of aggregate US exports. In the comparison with the OECD,
we first calculate the ratios of unit values using 10-digit data. We then weight the 10-digit
unit value ratios by the annual share of each product in total US imports from highincome OECD countries.14 For the comparison with US export unit values, we use 6-digit
HS data and annual US export values as weights. The advantage of using OECD import
unit values as the reference price is that we are able to present a much finer resolution of
the relative price relationship.
Even at the ten-digit level, unit values are imprecise measures. In particular,
relatively high values could indicate higher prices for similar products, higher quality, or
within any category, a larger share of products with higher unit values. Nonetheless, as
reported in table 3 below the results are quite remarkable, and correlate very strongly
with levels of development.
Our selected countries are clearly grouped into two categories, particularly when
import unit values are compared against US exports. The import unit values of highperiods and across countries. In what follows, we deal with outliers in unit values by eliminating the top
and bottom 1 percent of data ranked according to price level. In constructing relative unit values, we also
ensure that we only compare products measured using the same units. Note that in doing so, we eliminate
the measurement units and hence are able to aggregate up the relative unit value indicator.
14
This measure therefore also captures the effect of changes in the US import bundle over time. The
alternative is to use trade weights for a fixed period, but this leads to the elimination of all products not
exported in all years. This potentially eliminates a high proportion of trade from the calculation, if growth
occurs through exports of new products rather than increased exports of existing products. There is some
evidence for this effect. Product market penetration (share of total products exported) by developing
countries into the US market rose rapidly from 1990 to 2006. For example, the share of products (at 6-digit
HS level) exported by China rose from 53 percent in 1990 to 90 percent in 2006. The equivalent share for
the ASEAN-4 and India rose from 42 percent and 32 percent in 1990 to 64 percent and 69 percent in 2006,
respectively. However, the extensive growth arising from exports of new products accounted for between 5
to 6 percent of overall export growth in these periods, except for India where it accounted for 17 percent of
export growth. The implication is that the weighted average, using annual export values as weights, does
not differ substantially from those using fixed weights.

14

15
income countries—such as the United Kingdom, France, the category for “other
developed countries,” Japan, and Germany—on average equal or exceed US export unit
values by up to 60 percent (see figure 2). There is some movement in their relative price
ratios over time, but in most cases the price relative to US exports is not too dissimilar in
2006 from 1990. US import unit values from Singapore are the exception rising from 64
percent of US export unit values in 1990 to 119 percent in 2006.
Looking at unit values relative to high-income OECD imports, we also see
relative prices in excess of 1 for most high-income countries, but in this case we see a
slight decline in the relative price over the period 1990–2006, perhaps reflecting rising
convergence of prices within European countries who account for a high proportion of
high-income OECD trade. Engel and Rogers (2004), for example, find that retail prices
converged in European markets, particularly in the 1990s.
The second grouping covers the low and middle-income countries as well as some
of the high-income Asian economies such as Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong. Looking
first at China, it is striking that Chinese import unit values at the product level have
hardly changed relative to OECD imports and aggregate US exports over the entire
period. On average, Chinese import unit values were 43 percent of OECD import values
and 34 percent of US export unit values in 2006, which is insignificantly different from
the relative unit values in the early 1990s. The rising similarity in across-product
composition of Chinese exports to the OECD and the United States is therefore not
replicated in the relative price data, an observation also found by Schott (2008).
Unit values of imports from India, Mexico, and countries in the ASEAN-4
relative to the high-income OECD category and the United States are also low and
relatively stable over time, ranging from 40 percent to 60 percent of the price of US
exports. Surprisingly, relative unit values of imports from Taiwan, Korea, and especially
Hong Kong are similar to the selected low- and middle-income countries, despite their
relatively high incomes per capita. These newly industrialized Asian economies have
therefore faced a rising similarity in exports to the United States with China, which has
been combined with relative prices similar to those of developing Asian countries. This
raises the possibility that that Samuelson’s concerns about the effect of developing-

15

16
country growth on welfare is being played out within newly industrialized Asian
economies rather than industrialized Europe and North America.
The relative similarity in unit values amongst Asian developing and new
industrialized Asian economies may also explain why production fragmentation and
outsourcing has not raised the export unit values of developing Asian economies.
According to our data, widespread relocation of production from industrialized Europe or
North America to Asia would be expected to raise within-product unit values in these
countries. In contrast, production fragmentation—being driven by the relocation of
production from newly industrialized Asian economies to their developing neighbors—
would have a much smaller impact on within-product unit values in the developing
countries.
Another exception is the category for “other developing countries.” Import unit
values from other developing countries are very similar to US export unit values in all
periods and show a slight increase relative to high-income OECD imports. This reflects a
product composition effect. As shown in table 2, there is a very low overlap in imports
from other developing countries and China. Additional disaggregated analysis reveals
that imports of nonpetroleum manufactures from other developing countries are
concentrated in textiles and clothing (27 percent) and base metals (23 percent). These
products show relatively little variation in prices across countries including relative to US
exports. The primary source of price differences across countries is in the machinery,
transport, and specialized equipment sectors. We explore this further in the disaggregated
analysis presented later.
Finally, we formally test for the relationship between exporter income and withinproduct price variation by regressing the weighted average unit value relative to the
United States (Ln(Pc/PcUS)) on the log of GDP per capita (in constant 2000 purchasing
power parity prices) (ln(GDPPC)c) using 2000 data and 152 countries. Our results
presented below are consistent with those of Schott (2004).15
ln(Pc/PcUS) = –4.4 + 0.42 ln(GDPPC)c , R2 = 0.49, Obs = 152

15

The regression is weighted by the 2000 share of each country in US imports. The standard errors are
robust to heteroskedasticity.

16

17
se

(0.72) (0.07)

and
ln(Pc/PcUS) = –3.5 + 0.33 ln(GDPPC)c –0.51 Dchina, R2 = 0.56, Obs = 152
se

(0.65) (0.06)

(0.16)

We find a positive and statistically significant association between a country’s GDP per
capita and its weighted average price of exports to the United States relative to aggregate
US exports. We also reestimate the equation but include a dummy variable for China to
identify whether its relative prices differ significantly from predictions. Like Schott
(2008) we find that Chinese products trade at a substantial discount (51 percent) given its
GDP per capita. However, once we include population, the dummy variable is no longer
significant, as is also found by Schott (2008).
All told, these results convey a picture in which developed and developing
countries tend to specialize in exporting different types of products. Nevertheless, by
looking at averages of all the data, we are perhaps missing some of the important insights
that would be better obtained by focusing on more disaggregated classifications of the
data. We therefore shift our focus to a more disaggregated analysis. In the following
section we evaluate developing country exports to the United States according to various
measures of product sophistication. We then look more closely at the top 50 NAICS sixdigit level exports of China to the US in 2006.
The conclusions already drawn do not change. While the sophistication of
developing-country exports to the US has risen, price levels of these sophisticated
products remain a fraction of US export prices. Much of the action in terms of import
penetration by developing countries, and China in particular, occurs within the NAICS
category 334 Computer & Electronic Product Manufacturing. Nonetheless, the average
Chinese unit value within these products was around a third of the average for the United
States. Other top exports from China were also only a fraction of the price of US exports.
This provides further evidence of a high degree of within-product specialization by
developing and developed countries.
Product Composition According to Level of Sophistication

17

18

The concern about emerging-economy exports to the United States is not only that they
are becoming more similar to US exports in general, but that the rising similarity has
been driven by rapid increases in exports in the same “sophisticated” products exported
by the United States.
If production and export of sophisticated products stimulates an acceleration in
overall growth of the economy and supply of these very products, as is argued by Lall
(2000) and Hausmann, Hwang, and Rodrik (2007), then the sophistication of the current
structure of exports is a foreshadow of competitiveness pressures that are to come.
What is meant by sophistication is often not clear and can cover the use of
sophisticated production processes to produce a good or the export of goods that embody
sophisticated goods. Even the highly disaggregated product classification used by the US
International Trade Commission is insufficient to perfectly isolate the production process
from product composition. Further, as shown in the relative price analysis, there is
substantial within-product variation in quality. We nevertheless draw on two measures of
sophistication: a product technology classification developed by Lall (2000) and an
export productivity measure developed by Hausmann, Hwang, and Rodrik (2007).
Our first indicator of the sophistication of foreign exports to the United States
draws on the technological classification of exports developed by Lall (2000) which is
described in table 4. Resource-based (RB) manufactures tend to be simple and labor
intensive or intensive in use of natural resources. Low-technology (LT) manufactures tend
to be undifferentiated products that compete on price (hence labor costs are important)
and are produced using stable, well-diffused technologies. Medium-technology (MT)
products comprise the bulk of skill- and scale-intensive technologies in capital goods and
intermediate products and tend to have complex technologies with moderately high levels
of R&D, advanced skill needs, and lengthy learning periods. Finally, high-technology
(HT) products have advanced and fast-changing technologies with high R&D
investments and require sophisticated technology infrastructures and high levels of
specialized technical skills.
In all categories there are exceptions (e.g., amongst RB products the synthesis of
fuel from coal requires skill-intensive technologies), but in general the skill requirements

18

19
tend to rise with the degree of technological complexity. Lall (2000) also argues that the
potential for productivity-led growth, as opposed to growth through factor accumulation,
rises with the degree of technological complexity. He, for example, argues that
technology-intensive trade structures offer better prospects for future growth as their
products grow faster in trade and have larger spillover effects in terms of generating
capabilities that can be used in other activities. His argument is therefore similar to that of
Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) and Hausmann, Hwang, and Rodrik (2007), who use a
different measure of sophistication.
Table 5 outlines the 1990 and 2006 share structure of US manufacturing imports
for China, other low- and middle-income countries, and high-income OECD countries
according to the technological classification. The table reveals the diverse patterns of
specialization across regions as well as the remarkable shift in the composition of US
imports from low- and middle-income countries toward medium- and high-technology
products. High-income countries’ exports to the United States are concentrated in
medium- and high-technology manufactures and there has been little change in this
structure over the full period.
Contrast this with Chinese exports to the United States. In 1990, 74 percent of US
imports of manufactured goods from China were accounted for by low-technology
products (mainly clothing) and only 7 percent by high-technology products. By 2006,
high-technology products accounted for 35 percent of US imports of manufactured goods
from China with all of the increase attributable to electronics and electrical products. The
share of high-technology products in US imports from the category other low- and
middle-income countries also rose, but at a slower pace from 18 to 25 percent.
The sophistication of Chinese export bundles to the United States appears to be
exceptional. This is also the conclusion of Rodrik (2006) who finds that China’s export
profile to the world is especially skewed toward products where high-income countries
have a comparative advantage.16 Replicating his approach using foreign exports to the
United States (figure 3), we also find that Chinese manufactured exports were associated

16

He also argues that China’s composition of exports reflects production- and technology-oriented policies,
not comparative advantage.

19

20
with an income level (EXPY)17 that was six times higher than its GDP per capita in
2000.18 In 1990, the income level associated with its export bundle was 10 times its GDP
per capita, but rapid growth (relative to growth in EXPY) reduced this to a factor of 3.7
by 2006. Thus while Chinese growth is converging on the income level associated with
its export bundle to the United States, the gap nevertheless remains sizable and
suggestive of substantial additional capacity for economic growth.
China is not alone in the exceptional sophistication of its export bundle to the
United States. Figure 3 reveals that the export profile of many other emerging and newly
industrialized economies is more sophisticated than what is predicted on the basis of their
per capita income. These countries include Thailand, Mexico, Malaysia, Korea, and less
so India and Indonesia. All these countries, including China, experienced rising income
levels associated with their export bundles from 1990 to 2006, reflecting a shift in the
composition of exports to the United States toward higher productivity sectors.
The rising technology intensity of emerging and newly industrialized country
exports to the United States appear to confirm Samuelson’s concerns about head-to-head
competition with the United States in those products where the United States has a
comparative advantage. However, as discussed earlier, rising sophistication of exports, as
measured using trade value data, may obscure a high degree of within-product
specialization. We therefore reevaluate the apparent rise in sophistication of emerging
and newly industrialized country exports to the United States using unit value data.
We present three diagrams of the weighted average unit value of US imports
relative to US exports for manufactured goods over the period 1990–2006. Figure 4
17

Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) developed a measure, termed EXPYc of the productivity level associated
with country c’s export bundle. This indicator is an export share–weighted average of commodity level
measures of productivity (PRODYi), which in turn reflect the weighted average incomes of the countries
exporting that commodity. Therefore, products which account for a high share of exports by high income
per capita countries will be characterized by a high PRODY. In a subsequent paper Hausmann, Hwang, and
Rodrik (2007) show that their measure of EXPY is also a good predictor of future growth.
18
Commodity level PRODY is calculated using UNComtrade data for 2000 and 2001. The indices are
calculated at the HS six-digit level using the H0 1988/1992 revision. GDP per capita, measured in constant
2000 purchasing power parity prices, is used as the income variable and is obtained from World
Development Indicators. Countries are only used if trade data are available in both periods. A total of 147
countries are used. Only manufactured products (NAICS 31–33) are used to calculate PRODY. EXPY of
mUSA
is the share of product l in
country j is calculated as EXPY jUSA   jl PRODYl where mUSA
M USA
jl
j
USA
l M j
country j’s total manufacturing exports to the United States.

20

21
focuses on US imports from China, figure 5 focuses on the aggregate import unit values
from low- and middle-income countries, while figure 6 looks at import unit values from
high-income OECD countries. In all cases, relative prices are first calculated at the sixdigit HS level and then aggregated according to their technology classification using
annual US export values as weights. We are therefore comparing average within-product
price differences assuming that the structure of trade reflects that of US exports. Note that
we therefore do not account for across-product specialization and these weighted average
relative unit value measures therefore underrepresent the overall degree of specialization.
We first look at Chinese and low- and middle-income country import unit values
relative to US exports. The relative price measures are neatly grouped into two
categories. The relative price of resource-based and low-technology products ranges
between 0.5 and 1.2 for China and 0.8 and 1.2 for all developing economies. This is
expected as these products, particularly resource-based products, tend to be relatively
undifferentiated. Product differentiation is not a key determinant of the competitiveness
of these products.
This is contrasted by medium- and high-technology products. The unit values of
US import from China of these products lies between 15 and 30 percent of the equivalent
products exported by the United States. Further, remarkably, there has been no significant
movement in these relative prices over the entire 16 years covered in the sample. Looking
at the average for all low- and middle-income countries, the level of relative prices is
slightly higher than for China alone, but there is also no change in the trend over time.
Contrast these diagrams with figure 6 comparing the unit values of high-income
OECD imports with aggregate US exports. US imports of medium- and high-technology
manufactures from high-income OECD countries are on average 80 percent of the unit
value of the equivalent product exported by the United States. Resource-based and lowtechnology import unit values are 30 to 90 percent higher (and increasing over time for
resource-based products) than the equivalent aggregate US export price.
These findings are not a particular outcome of our choice of technology
classification or reference price. We replicate these findings if we compare foreign unit
values to US import unit values from high-income OECD countries as opposed to
aggregate US export prices. Classifying products according to the sophistication measure

21

22
of Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) leads to the same conclusion. The unit values of US
imports of low productivity products (PRODY) from low- and middle-income countries
(and China alone) are between 80 to 100 percent of aggregate US export unit values in
2006. Amongst high productivity products (top 20 percent) unit values are 30 to 40
percent of the equivalent US export unit value.
Such vast and sustained differences in US export prices and import prices of
medium- and high-technology products from low- and middle-income countries are
indicative of a high degree of within-product specialization. These are also the products
that accounted for the dramatic rise in the technological intensity of developing-country
exports to the United States and the increases in the export similarity indices shown
earlier. These results imply that much of the growth and the apparent rise in
sophistication of developing-country exports to the United States have been driven by the
export of different products to what is currently being exported by the US (and other
high-income OECD countries). The rise in sophistication of developing-country exports
suggested by their rising technology intensity of trade volumes is thus exaggerated.
Disaggregated Analysis
Next we drill down even further. We have assembled six-digit NAICS data for Chinese
imports to the United States, high-income OECD imports to the United States, and US
exports for 2006. We then rank these according to their share in US imports from China
in 2006, and report the top 50 industries, which accounted for about 58 percent of all USmanufactured imports from China. Table 6 presents a comparison of unit values, relative
unit values, and cumulative trade shares for these top 50 products.
Electronics sectors feature very prominently: Four of the top five Chinese
industries and 9 out of the top 50 industries come from the NAICS category 334 that
covers computer and electronic products.19 In the short space of six years, Chinese
exports of 334 products increased from $24.2 billion in 2001 to $108.3 billion in 2007,
with their share in overall US imports of these products rising from 12 to 37.2 percent.
19

They include: audio and video equipment (334310)—6.6 percent of 2006 exports; electronic computers
(334111)—6 percent; other computer equipment (334119)—5.1 percent; and wireless communications
equipment (334220)—4.4 percent.

22

23
Indeed, the $84.1 billion increase in US imports from China constituted almost all of the
$88.4 billion growth in US imports from all countries.
Apparel, textiles, and footwear products also feature prominently, making up 16
of the top 50 industries and 14 percent of the value of Chinese exports to the US in 2006.
The remaining industries are diverse covering, amongst others, machinery, electrical
equipment, transport equipment, chemicals, wood products, and fabricated metal
products.
The disaggregated data reinforces our earlier observation of substantial acrossproduct and within-product specialization of Chinese exports to the United States.
Computer and electronic products (334) constitute a sizable share of total US
manufacturing exports (16.5 percent in 2006). Yet few of the large US export industries
in the electronics sector are also prominent export industries from China. The strongest
US performance in electronics was in semiconductors (334413), which constituted 4.3
percent of US exports in 2006 but only 0.6 percent of Chinese exports to the United
States in 2007. The only other US industry within the top 50 Chinese export industries
that accounted for more than 1 percent of US manufacturing exports in 2006 is iron and
steel mills (1.3 percent). Altogether these top 50 industries only made up 16.1 percent of
US manufacturing exports in 2006. Similarly, the overlap of these 50 industries with
high-income OECD exports to the United States is low, accounting for 16.5 percent of
the exports to the United States. The prominent export industries of China are therefore
very different from those that dominate the export bundle of the United States and highincome OECD countries.
In addition, the prices of goods within these top 50 Chinese export industries is
consistently lower than the equivalent price of goods exported by the United States and
high-income OECD countries. For example, the average price per unit of audio and video
equipment (334310), the top import industry from China in 2006, was $89. The
comparable price of US exports in this industry was $198 and $424 for high-income
OECD imports. There are very few instances where the Chinese price exceeds that of the
United States (10 times) and the OECD (4 times). If we weight up the relative price data
using Chinese import values as weights, we find that products from these top 50
industries are, on average, 32 percent of the price of equivalent high-income OECD

23

24
imports and 49 percent of the price of equivalent US exports. Such vast differences in
prices suggest that China exports very different products than those exported by highincome OECD countries and the United States.
CONCLUSIONS
Samuelson and Krugman raised various concerns about the impact of developing
countries on US welfare and wage inequality. In this paper we assess the evidence using
highly disaggregated trade data and reasons to question both positions. The reason is the
high degree of international specialization in trade flows that suggests that aside from
natural resource–intensive products such as steel, manufactured goods produced and
exported by the United States and other developed countries are very different from those
exported by developing countries in general and China in particular.
Our findings suggest that great caution is required when using of measures of
“advanced-technology” trade that are routinely produced by the US Department of
Commerce in its monthly trade release to track performance. When imports from
developing countries are important, the trade balances in particular high-tech products are
not likely to capture competitiveness in similar products (or intermediates). This is
especially the case for information technology products.
The large differences in prices we find are indicative of a high degree of
specialization. US imports from developing countries are not close substitutes for US
exports or US imports from OECD countries. This explains both why the US terms of
trade have improved as developing countries have expanded their exports and why the
wages of unskilled US workers have not experienced the downward pressures that would
have been expected if they were still producing goods that were similar to those made by
developing countries.
The paradoxical finding that US imports from developing countries are
concentrated in US industries in which skilled rather than unskilled workers have
relatively high payroll shares is predominantly the result of intraindustry international
specialization along the lines of skill. The large and persistent differences in the unit
values of exports from developed and developing countries in highly disaggregated data

24

25
are inconsistent with other explanations for the paradox that assumes perfect substitution.
These include factor-intensity reversals, aggregation bias, and claims that inputs from
developed countries account for much of the value added contained in imports from
developing countries.

25

26

REFERENCES
Blinder, Alan S. 2006. Offshoring: The Next Industrial Revolution? Foreign Affairs 85,
no. 2 (March/April): 113–128.
Boorstein, Randi, and Robert C. Feenstra. 1991. Quality Upgrading and Its Welfare Cost
in US Steel Imports, 1969–74. In International Trade and Trade Policy, eds. Elhanan
Helpman and Assaf Razin. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Broda, Christian, and David Weinstein. 2006. Globalization and the Gains from Variety.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 2: 541–585.
Diewert, W. Erwin. 1976. Exact and Superlative Index Numbers. Journal of
Econometrics 4: 115–145.
Edwards, Lawrence, and Robert Z. Lawrence. 2010a. Rising Tide: Is Growth in
Emerging Economies Good for the United States? Forthcoming, Washington: Peterson
Institute for International Economics.
Edwards, Lawrence, and Robert Z. Lawrence. 2010b. US Trade and Wages: The
Misleading Implications of Conventional Trade Theory. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers. 2004. European Product Market Integration after the
Euro. Economic Policy 39: 347–384.
Feenstra, Robert C. 1988. Quality Change under Trade Restraints in Japanese Autos.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 103: 131–146.
Feenstra, Robert C. 1994. New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
Prices. American Economic Review 84: 157–177.
Feenstra, Robert C. 2004. Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis, and Peter K. Schott. 2002. US Imports, Exports, and
Tariff Data, 1989–2001. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9387.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Finger, J. Michael, and Mordechai E. Kreinin. 1979. A Measure of “Export Similarity”
and Possible Uses. The Economic Journal 89: 905–912.
Gomory, Ralph E., and William J. Baumol. 2000. Global Trade and Conflicting National
Interests. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

26

27
Harrigan, James. 2000. The impact of the Asia crisis on US industry: an almost-free
lunch? Economic Policy Review. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Sep: 71–81.
Harrigan, James, and Geoffrey Barrows. 2009. Testing the Theory of Trade Policy:
Evidence from the Abrupt End of the Multifiber Arrangement. The Review of Economics
and Statistics 91, no. 2: 282–294.
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Dani Rodrik. 2003. Economic Development as Self-Discovery.
Journal of Development Economics 72, no. 2: 603–633.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Jason Hwang, and Dani Rodrik. 2007. What you Export Matters.
Journal of Economic Growth 12, no. 1: 1–25,
Kiyota, Kozo. 2008. Are US Exports Different from China’s Exports? Evidence from
Japan’s Imports. University of Michigan, Research Seminar in International Economics
Discussion Paper 576 (April).
Krugman, Paul R. 2007. Trade and Inequality, Revisited. Available at http://voxeu.org
(accessed on June 15, 2007).
Krugman, Paul R. 2008. Trade and Wages, Reconsidered. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity (Spring): 103–137.
Lall, Sanjaya. 2000. The Technological Structure and Performance of Developing
Country Exports, 1985–1998. Queen Elizabeth House Working Paper 44. Oxford
University: Queen Elizabeth House.
Lawrence, Robert Z 2008 Blue-Collar Blues: Is Trade to Blame for Rising US Income
Inequality? Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics
Liu, Zhou. 2006. The Economic Interdependence of China and the World. Harvard
University PhD Dissertation.
Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott. 2009. Concording US Harmonized System
Categories over Time. US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Working Paper
09-11.
NSF (National Science Foundation). 2008 Science Indicators
http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind08/c6/c6h.htm
Rodrik, Dani. 2006. What's So Special about China's Exports? National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 11947. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.

27

28
Samuelson, Paul A. 2004. Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and Confirm Arguments of
Mainstream Economists Supporting Globalization. Journal of Economic Perspectives 18,
no. 3: 135–146.
Sato, Kazuo. 1976. The Ideal Log-Change Index Number. Review of Economics and
Statistics 58: 223–228.
Schott, Peter K. 2003. One Size Fits All? Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization in Global
Production. The American Economic Review 93, no. 3: 686–708.
Schott, Peter K. 2004. Across-product Versus Within-product Specialization in
International Trade. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 2: 646–677.
Schott, Peter K. 2008. The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports. Economic Policy
23, no. 53: 5–49.
Sun, Guang-Zhen, and Yew-Kwang Ng. 2000. The Measurement of Structural
Differences between Economies: An Axiomatic Characterization. Economic Theory 16,
no. 2: 313–321.
Vartia, Yrjö. 1976. Ideal Log-Change Index Numbers. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics
III: 121–126.
Vernon, Raymond. 1966. International Investment and International Trade in the Product
Cycle. Quarterly Journal of Economics 80 (May): 190–207.
Wang, Zhi, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2008. What Accounts for the Rising Sophistication of
China's Exports? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13771.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

28

29

29

30

Table 1: Export similarity indices for manufactured goods, ranked by similarity with high-income OECD in 2006
Export similarity with high-income OECD country
exports to US
Export similarity with US exports,
hs10 digit data (100 is completely different)
6-digit data
Change
Change
1990
2000
2006 90-06
1990
2000
2006 90-06
Vietnam
0.97
0.92
0.96
0.93
Hong-Kong
0.78
0.81
0.82
0.04
0.79
0.79
0.80
0.01
India
0.92
0.87
0.82
-0.11
0.91
0.85
0.79
-0.12
Singapore
0.82
0.82
0.81
-0.01
0.78
0.76
0.76
-0.03
ASEAN4
0.82
0.77
0.81
-0.02
0.83
0.74
0.76
-0.07
China
0.85
0.75
0.75
-0.10
0.89
0.76
0.74
-0.14
Taiwan
0.73
0.72
0.74
0.01
0.73
0.67
0.69
-0.04
Other Developing
0.78
0.76
0.74
-0.04
0.78
0.77
0.73
-0.05
France
0.69
0.67
0.68
-0.01
0.62
0.61
0.60
-0.02
Mexico
0.67
0.59
0.61
-0.06
0.70
0.63
0.63
-0.07
UK
0.59
0.56
0.57
-0.02
0.55
0.53
0.57
0.02
Korea
0.72
0.66
0.56
-0.15
0.77
0.70
0.66
-0.12
Japan
0.39
0.40
0.45
0.05
0.58
0.54
0.60
0.02
Germany
0.50
0.46
0.44
-0.06
0.59
0.53
0.53
-0.06
Other Developed
0.33
0.29
0.26
-0.07
0.54
0.50
0.48
-0.06
Note: Processed petroleum products are excluded. Similarity indices based on high-income OECD countries use time consistent HS10 code constructed using the
concordance mapping of Pierce and Schott (2009). The indices based on US exports are calculated using time-consistent code based on the 1988/92 Revision of
HS.
ASEAN4 consists of Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand. Other developing consists of other low and middle-income countries.

30

31

Table 2: Overlap in export bundle with China, 2006.
Low and middle-income countries
exports to US

ASEA Mexic
N4
o
India

China

Vietna
m

Oth
er

High-income Asian country exports
to US
High-income
HighIncom
e
OECD
export US
Hong
Singap
Korea Kong
ore
Taiwan s to US exports

5

10

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

10

13

2

0

0

1

13

1

4

5

2

1

15

21

3

0

3

1

19

2

20

14

3

2

20

24

12

1

3

1

21

3

20

19

4

2

25

25

15

1

11

2

21

3

21

19

4

3

30

32

15

1

12

2

22

5

39

20

4

4

35

38

17

3

19

3

22

10

40

22

5

4

40

40

18

3

22

3

23

11

42

25

6

5

45

50

20

4

30

4

31

14

55

37

7

9

50

52

23

6

37

9

33

27

56

44

8

11

55

56

27

21

45

14

36

48

56

47

11

13

60

64

29

22

47

15

37

53

58

50

12

14

65

67

33

26

53

17

41

56

59

54

14

16

70

69

36

33

57

21

42

63

59

59

15

17

75

73

41

39

63

24

43

66

60

62

17

18

80

76

48

42

70

29

47

74

62

67

21

23

85

79

52

46

77

35

50

77

63

71

24

28

90

84

56

68

84

43

56

85

65

79

31

35

95

89

64

77

93

52

62

92

73

86

40

43

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Notes: Overlap using hs6 (Rev. 88/92) digit data.

31

32

Table 3: Average unit values relative to High-income OECD exports to the US and aggregate US exports, ranked by price relative to
OECD in 2006

UK
Singapore
Germany
Japan
Other developed
Other developing
France
ASEAN4
Korea
Mexico
Taiwan
India
China
Vietnam
Hong-Kong

Unit values relative to
OECD exports
1990
2000
2006
1.66
1.20
1.30
1.04
0.96
1.19
1.38
1.02
1.07
1.13
1.11
1.05
1.17
1.07
1.04
0.74
0.89
1.00
1.50
1.03
0.83
0.53
0.63
0.65
0.59
0.62
0.59
0.64
0.68
0.59
0.47
0.43
0.52
0.58
0.34
0.48
0.46
0.39
0.43
0.17
0.37
0.65
0.41
0.32

Relative to US exports
1990
2000
2006
1.28
1.16
1.30
0.64
0.93
1.19
1.20
0.97
1.06
1.02
1.06
1.08
1.08
1.09
1.13
0.97
0.95
1.08
1.53
1.19
1.29
0.44
0.42
0.40
0.46
0.52
0.61
0.50
0.50
0.44
0.38
0.34
0.39
0.50
0.34
0.50
0.25
0.25
0.34
0.19
0.31
0.46
0.42
0.35

32

33

Table 4: The Technological Classification of Exports
PRIMARY PRODUCTS

Fresh fruit, meat, rice, cocoa, tea, coffee, wood, coal, crude
petroleum, gas, metals

MANUFACTURED PRODUCTS
Resource-based manufactures (RB)
RB1: Agro/forest-based products
RB2: Minerals-based products

Prepared meats/fruits, beverages, wood products, vegetable
oils
Ores & concentrates, petroleum/rubber products, cement,
cut gems, glass

Low-technology manufactures (LT)
LT1: ‘Fashion cluster’
LT2: Other low-technology

Textile fabrics, clothing, headgear, footwear, leather
manufactures, travel goods
Pottery, simple metal parts/structures, furniture, jewellery,
toys, plastic products

Medium-technology manufactures (MT)
MT1: Automotive products
MT2: Process industries
MT3: Engineering industries

Passenger vehicles and parts, commercial vehicles,
motorcycles and parts
Synthetic fibres, chemicals and paints, fertilisers, plastics,
iron, pipes/tubes
Engines, motors, industrial machinery, pumps, switchgears,
ships, watches

High-technology manufactures (HT)
HT1: Electronics and electrical products
HT2: Other high-technology
“SPECIAL” TRANSACTIONS

Office/data processing/telecommunications equip, TVs,
transistors, turbines, power generating equipment
Pharmaceuticals, aerospace, optical/measuring instruments,
cameras
Electricity, cinema film, printed matter, art, coins, pets, nonmonetary gold

Source: Lall (2000)

33

34

Table 5: Share structure of US Manufacturing imports by Technology Classification (percent)

Resource-based manufactures
RB1: Agro/forest based products
RB2: Other resource based
products
Low-technology manufactures
LT1: ‘Fashion cluster’
LT2: Other low technology
Medium-technology manufactures
MT1: Automotive products
MT2: Process industries
MT3: Engineering industries
High-technology manufactures
HT1: Electronics and electrical
products
HT2: Other high technology
Other

Chin
a
2006
5
3

Other
low- &
middleincome
2006
13
8

Highincome
OECD
2006
18
11

6
14
7
7
53
30
6
17
15

2
38
23
15
22
2
3
17
35

5
29
22
7
33
14
7
13
25

7
9
3
7
56
34
8
15
17

14
2
1

34
1
1

23
1
1

9
9
1

China
1990
3
1

Other low& middleincome
1990
20
13

Highincome
OECD
1990
17
12

2
74
56
18
17
0
2
14
7

7
36
29
7
26
7
5
13
18

6
1
0

17
1
1

34

35

Table 6: Prices, relative prices and cumulative trade shares of top 50 Chinese export industries in 2006
Chinese price Cumulative share total
Prices (US$) per Unit
relative to:
trade values (US$ mill)
HighHighHighincome US
income
US
income US
China OECD exports Mexico OECD exports China OECD exports

NAICS
code
Description

Units

334310 Audio & video equipment

NO

89

424

198

614

0.21

0.45

7

1

0

334111 Electronic computer

NO

652

1901

2490

706

0.34

0.26

13

1

1

334119 Other computer peripheral equipment

NO

113

508

907

221

0.22

0.12

18

2

2

334220 Radio, TV broadcasting & wireless equip

NO

96

164

493

105

0.58

0.19

22

3

3

316214 Women's footwear (except athletic)

PRS

8

52

19

25

0.15

0.43

24

3

3

333313 Office machinery

NO

84

1939

757

15

0.04

0.11

26

3

3

335211 Electric housewares & household fan

NO

12

86

77

16

0.14

0.15

28

4

3

315239 Women's & girls' cut & sew outerwear

DOZ

82

247

73

81

0.33

1.12

30

4

3

316219 Other footwear

PRS

8

37

15

13

0.23

0.55

31

4

3

331111 Iron & steel mills

KG

315232 Women's & girls' cut & sew blouse & shirt DOZ

1

1

2

1

0.75

0.58

32

6

4

84

143

29

28

0.59

2.89

33

6

4

314129 Other household textile product mills

NO

5

11

7

5

0.41

0.64

34

6

4

316991 Luggage

NO

3

53

8

9

0.07

0.41

36

6

4

316213 Men's footwear (except athletic)

PRS

14

53

35

40

0.26

0.39

37

6

4

334112 Computer storage device

NO

35

211

1495

1097

0.17

0.02

38

6

5

332999 Other misc. fabricated metal products

KG

3

8

7

4

0.58

0.40

39

7

5

337127 Institutional furniture

NO

37

105

103

75

0.36

0.35

40

7

5

100

804

95

85

0.12

1.03

40

7

5

315234 Women's & girls' cut & sew suit, coat, skirt DOZ
334418 Printed circuit assembly (electronic)

NO

30

58

28

36

0.52

1.08

41

7

5

335129 Other lighting equipment

NO

3

76

36

20

0.04

0.08

42

8

5

334419 Other electronic component

NO

9

52

126

51

0.17

0.07

43

8

6

336399 All other motor vehicle parts

NO

12

7

49

10

1.54

0.25

44

10

6

335121 Residential electric lighting fixture

NO

10

100

46

5

0.10

0.22

44

10

6

326211 Tire (except retreading)

NO

39

78

89

48

0.50

0.44

45

10

6

335221 Household cooking appliance

NO

73

293

344

245

0.25

0.21

46

10

6

334210 Telephone apparatus

NO

39

365

963

57

0.11

0.04

46

10

6

325199 All other basic organic chemical

KG

7

31

4

3

0.22

1.52

47

12

9

334413 Semiconductor & related device

NO

2

4

3

1

0.56

0.82

47

14

14

337121 Upholstered household furniture

NO

85

206

114

198

0.41

0.74

48

14

14

35

36

316992 Women's handbag & purse

NO

7

145

24

25

0.05

0.30

49

14

14

339932 Game, toy, & children's vehicle

NO

2

2

5

2

1.05

0.44

49

14

14

315228 Men's & boys' cut & sew other outerwear

DOZ

108

340

47

82

0.31

2.29

50

14

14

315231 Women's/girls' lingerie & nightwear

DOZ

40

113

13

34

0.35

3.10

50

14

14

333415 AC, warm air heating & refrig equip

NO

116

728

1920

340

0.16

0.06

51

14

14

332510 Hardware

KG

4

8

10

7

0.46

0.42

51

14

14

339920 Sporting & athletic goods

NO

10

54

63

34

0.24

0.26

52

14

14

314999 All other misc. textile product mills

NO

1

2

16

1

0.42

0.05

52

14

14

333991 Power-driven handtool

NO

31

181

174

65

0.17

0.18

53

14

15

315291 Infants' cut & sew apparel

DOZ

23

78

43

36

0.30

0.54

53

14

15

335312 Motor & generator

NO

22

473

1845

32

0.05

0.01

54

15

15

337124 Metal household furniture

NO

23

151

51

0.15

54

15

15

315999 Other apparel accessories & other apparel

DOZ

11

125

17

22

0.11

0.64

55

15

15

315223 Men's/boys' cut & sew shirt

DOZ

86

148

25

37

0.58

3.39

55

15

15

332911 Industrial valve

NO

7

20

72

8

0.33

0.15

55

15

16

336991 Motorcycle, bicycle, & parts

NO

68

5064

6768

52

0.02

0.01

56

16

16

339999 All other miscellaneous

NO

3

6

36

2

0.60

0.37

56

16

16

322223 Plastics, foil, & coated paper bag

KG

3

4

5

2

0.80

0.61

57

16

16

321211 Hardwood veneer & plywood

M3

488

692

433

503

0.70

1.13

57

16

16

339115 Ophthalmic goods

DOZ

24

308

126

4

0.08

0.19

57

16

16

315233 Women's & girls' cut & sew dress

DOZ

158

982

126

87

0.16

1.25

58

17

16

Note: Products are classified according to multiple units, even within the NAICS 6-digit classification. The unit corresponding to the largest Chinese trade flow is
used to select the units for the dollar price per unit. Price levels at the 6-digit NAICS level are constructed by weighting up unit values at the 10-digit level using
trade values as weights.
For relative prices, the import weighted average (Chinese imports as weights) for each 6-digit category is presented. The relative price presented therefore differs
slightly from those that can be calculated using the price levels. The denominator (OECD price) used in the relative price calculation is the import weighted
average unit value of high-income OECD countries.

36

37

37

38
Figure 1: Export similarity with aggregate US Manufacturing exports
Export similarity with US exports

Vietnam
HongKong

1.00

India

0.90

ASEAN4

0.80

Singapore

0.70

China

0.60

Other Developing

0.50

T aiwan
Korea

0.40

Mexico

0.30

France

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

Germany

1996

0.00

1994

UK

1992

Japan

0.10
1990

0.20

Other Developed

Notes: Calculated using hs6 (Rev. 88/92) digit data.

Figure 2: Weighted average unit values relative to US exports
Weighted average unit values relative to US exports
1.80

UK

1.60

France
Singapore

1.40

Other developed

1.20

Japan

1.00

Other developing
Germany

0.80

Korea

0.60

India
Mexico

0.40

ASEAN4

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

Hong-Kong
1992

0.00

1991

Taiwan
1990

0.20

China

Notes: Calculated using hs6 (Rev. 88/92) digit data and annual US exports as weights.

38

39

10

Figure 3: Relationship between manufacturing EXPY and per-capita incomes in 2000
SINGAPR
TAIWAN
KOREA_S
MALAYSIA
MEXICO

CHINA

ln(EXPY) 2000
9
9.5

THAILAND
HONGKONG

8.5

INDONES
INDIA

4

6

8
ln(GDP/Capita) 2000

10

12

Figure 4: China’s export prices relative to US exports
Chinese unit values relative to US exports
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

High technology

Low technology

Medium technology

Resource based

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

0.0

1990

0.2

Notes: Own calculations based on 6-digit HS data. Individual country average calculated using total US
exports as weights. Weighted average for region calculated by aggregating the country level average using
total bilateral import values as weights. Manufactures classified as primary products in the Lall technology
classification are excluded from these diagrams.

39

40
Figure 5: Low- and middle-income export prices relative to US exports
Low and middle-income country export prices relative to US exports
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
High technology

Low technology

Medium technology

Resource based

Notes: As in Figure 4.

Figure 6: High-income OECD export prices relative to US exports
High-income OECD export prices relative to US exports
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1990 1992 1993 1994 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
High technology

Low technology

Medium technology

Resource based

Notes: As in Figure 4.

40

