                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MARKETS FOR ANTHROPOGENIC CARBON WITHIN THE LARGER CARBON
                              CYCLE

                                         Severin Borenstein

                                        Working Paper 16104
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16104


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




My thanks to Max Auffhammer, Jim Bushnell, Lucas Davis, Meredith Fowlie, Don Fullerton, Richard
Muller, Wolfram Schlenker and Catherine Wolfram for helpful comments and discussions. I am particularly
grateful to Margaret Torn for taking the time to explain to me some of the science of the carbon cycle.
 Any remaining errors are my responsibility alone. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Severin Borenstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Markets for Anthropogenic Carbon Within the Larger Carbon Cycle
Severin Borenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 16104
June 2010
JEL No. H23,Q54

                                             ABSTRACT

Human activity has disrupted the natural balance of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and is causing
climate change. Burning fossil fuels and deforestation result directly in about 9 gigatons of carbon
(GtC) emissions per year against the backdrop of the natural carbon flux -- emission and uptake --
of about 210 GtC per year to and from oceans, vegetation, soils and the atmosphere. But scientific
research now indicates that humans are also impacting the natural carbon cycle through less-direct,
but very important, mechanisms that are more difficult to monitor and control. I explore the challenges
this presents to market or regulatory mechanisms that might be used to reduce greenhouse gases: scientific
uncertainty about these indirect processes, pricing heterogeneous impacts of similar human behaviors,
and the difficulty of assigning property rights to a far larger set of activities than has previously been
contemplated. While this does not undermine arguments for market mechanisms to control direct
anthropogenicrelease of greenhouse gases, it suggests that more research is needed to determine KRZ
and whetherthese mechanisms can be extended to address indirect human impacts.


Severin Borenstein
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
borenste@haas.berkeley.edu
I. Introduction
   Among climate scientists, there is a strong consensus that carbon emissions from hu-
man activity are increasing atmospheric CO2 concentration and causing climate change.
Among economists, there is a strong consensus that the most eﬃcient way to reduce such
anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions is to price them, through either a tax or a tradable
permit system. CO2 emissions from burning fossil fuels and deforestation, however, are
small compared to the earth’s natural carbon ﬂux. These human activities produce about
9 gigatons of carbon (GtC) emissions per year against the natural carbon ﬂux backdrop
— emission and uptake — of about 210 GtC per year, to and from oceans, vegetation, soils
and the atmosphere. Human activities, however, aﬀect the natural carbon cycle in many
ways that have not been incorporated in plans for pricing greenhouse gas emissions. This
in no way suggests that human activity is not the primary cause of climate change, but it
does suggest that establishing markets and property rights to control these emissions may
be more challenging than standard models for tradable pollution permits imply.

   In this paper, I explore the implications for pricing carbon emissions when human im-
pacts on the natural carbon cycle are numerous, heterogeneous, and likely to be quanti-
tatively signiﬁcant beyond the direct greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel combustion
and deforestation. Because the natural carbon ﬂux between oceans, vegetation, soils, and
the atmosphere is so large, even small anthropogenic perturbations in it can signiﬁcantly
alter the impact of human activity on climate. Nearly all of the available economic analysis
has treated anthropogenic emissions as a separate and measurable process distinct from the
natural carbon cycle. Under certain conditions, this may be a valid approach, but climate
science suggests that these condition do not hold and may not even be a good approxima-
tion. Thus, it is useful to consider more explicitly the interaction between human activity
and the natural carbon cycle, as well as implications for the appropriate boundaries of a
market for greenhouse gas emissions.


II. A Very Brief Review of the Carbon Cycle
  Prior to the mid-19th century when large-scale anthropogenic CO2 emissions began, the
oceans, vegetation and soils are estimated to have released about 210 GtC of carbon into
the atmosphere in the form of CO2 every year and absorbed the same amount on average.
About 90 GtC was transferred to/from the ocean and 120 GtC is transfered to/from
vegetation and soils.2 Atmospheric levels of CO2 remained in the range of 260-280 parts

2   My characterization of the carbon cycle is based on Houghton (2007), Canadell et al (2007b), and
    Sarmiento & Gruber (2002).

                                                  1
per million (ppm), equivalent to approximately 550-590 GtC in the atmosphere.3

   Nearly all of these natural processes, however, are aﬀected by changes in atmospheric
carbon and the climate. For instance, increases in atmospheric CO2 cause plants to grow
faster and absorb more carbon, and cause ocean uptake of carbon to increase; higher
average temperatures and other changes in climate alter the rate at which plants decompose
and release CO2 ; and changes in ocean temperature aﬀect its uptake of carbon. Prior to
the fossil fuels era, this seems to have been part of the natural resilience of the biosphere
that maintained fairly stable atmospheric CO2 concentrations for millenia.

  Since the mid-19th century, direct anthropogenic impact on the carbon cycle has steadily
increased, primarily through fossil fuel combustion — averaging about 7.6 GtC per year
during 2000-2006 — but also through human-caused deforestation and changes in land use
— estimated to be about 1.5 GtC per year during 2000-2006.4 The deforestation and land
use change impacts are known with considerable less certainty than fossil fuel combustion,
because the full process of carbon ﬂux between vegetation/soils and the atmosphere is not
understood nearly as well as the combustion of oil, coal and natural gas.

   Anthropogenic carbon emission must go somewhere. About 45% shows up as an increase
in atmospheric concentration of CO2 . Scientists are conﬁdent that the residual carbon ends
up in vegetation, soils, and the ocean, but attempts to measure these changes directly are
imperfect. Carbon is mixed much less uniformly in the ocean than in the atmosphere, so
its concentration is more diﬃcult to measure. Concentration in vegetation and soils varies
even more and is an even greater measurement challenge. The best estimates are based
on widespread sampling of ocean waters to estimate ocean uptake, then attributing the
residual to vegetation and soils. This approach suggests that ocean uptake accounts for
about 24% of anthropogenic carbon emissions and 30% goes to vegetation and soils. How-
ever, the processes of ocean and vegetation/soils carbon uptake are not well understood.
Estimates of these components — often referred to as the “residual ﬂux,” or, somewhat less
accurately, the “unidentiﬁed sink” — total about 5 GtC per year.

    Figure 1 is a simpliﬁed representation of the carbon cycle from the U.S. Department of


3   If it were absorbed entirely into the atmosphere, 1 GtC would raise atmospheric level of CO2 by slightly
    less than 0.5 ppm.
4   See Canadell et al (2007b), table 1. The CO2 release attributed to fossil fuels includes the release from
    heating calcium carbonate in cement production. Non-CO2 forms of carbon in the atmosphere, such
    as methane, play a signiﬁcant role in climate change, but are a very small fraction of the carbon cycle.
    Atmospheric concentration of methane is approximately 1.8 ppm.

                                                      2
Energy, with estimates of the anthropogenic carbon emissions and terrestrial and ocean
uptake updated based on ﬁgures from Canadell et al (2007b) (in white boxes). While
there is some disagreement about the estimates of carbon uptake of vegetation, soils and
the ocean, there is widespread agreement that these have been large net carbon sinks over
the last two centuries, oﬀsetting a considerable share of the direct anthropogenic carbon
emissions.

   There is some evidence that the carbon uptake share of non-atmospheric sinks is de-
clining over time, a larger proportion is remaining in the atmosphere.5 This suggests that
the non-atmospheric sinks, both identiﬁed and unidentiﬁed, may have started to become
saturated. To date, climate change models have handled ocean and terrestrial sinks fairly
mechanically, assuming that they will continue to absorb about the same share of anthro-
pogenic carbon as has been estimated from residual sink calculations for recent years, or
assuming that the share will change in some gradual and linear way. This is a source of
signiﬁcant uncertainty because both the carbon uptake capacities of these sinks and the
impact of human activities on their capacities are not well understood.



III. Markets for Carbon Emissions
   If the human contribution to atmospheric CO2 were completely distinct from the natural
carbon cycle, setting and enforcing a cap on CO2 released from fossil fuel combustion and
deforestation would obviously address the carbon cycle imbalance. In that case, reduction
of CO2 emissions would translate one-for-one to reductions in atmospheric CO2 . From the
description of the carbon cycle in the previous section, however, it is clear that this is not
at all an accurate representation of the anthropogenic impact.

   Apart from burning fossil fuels, most human activity that releases greenhouse gases is
interacting with the natural carbon cycle on a short time scale. Cutting a virgin forest
likely causes the trees to decompose and release carbon more quickly than would have
occurred absent human interaction, in years rather than decades. Human-caused forest
ﬁres do so even faster. Agriculture raises many of the same issues, as tilling and crop
management alters the soil release and uptake of CO2 . Livestock cultivation by humans
also disrupts CO2 uptake of soils and vegetation, as well as directly contributing signiﬁcant
quantities of methane. Nitrogen fertilizer, both at the location it is applied by humans and
after it migrates through soils and water, interacts with CO2 in complex ways to aﬀect


5   See Le Quéré et al (2009)

                                              3
the growth of vegetation and its properties as a carbon sink.6 Atmospheric anthropogenic
nitrogen also seems likely to be signiﬁcantly altering the carbon uptake of oceans as well
as increasing emissions of nitrous oxide, potentially reducing the net carbon sink impact
of oceans by more than half.7 Man-made local air pollutants also interact with the natural
carbon cycle: tropospheric ozone, a local pollutant created by the chemical interaction
of man-made emissions and sunlight, disrupts the carbon sink eﬀect of forests and other
vegetation.8

   Proposals for market mechanisms to control CO2 emissions include restrictions on com-
bustion of all types of fossil fuels, though usually with signiﬁcant geographic and sectoral
limits. Some proposals include limited applications to forestry and agriculture. Through
oﬀset programs, inclusion of some additional agriculture and livestock cultivation is of-
ten suggested, though it has played an extremely small role in the Clean Development
Mechanism.9 The impacts of nitrogen fertilization on vegetation, soils and ocean uptake
is invariably excluded, as is the impact of local air pollution. Many other ways in which
human behavior impacts the natural carbon cycle to exacerbate or reduce atmospheric
concentration of CO2 are excluded from the functioning and proposed market mecha-
nisms. The omissions are not because these are understood to be small factors. Some are
estimated to be large, though none is estimated very precisely.

Climate feedback eﬀects are a special case of interaction with the natural carbon cycle

   Market mechanisms do not explicitly incorporate aggregate interaction eﬀects, known
as feedback eﬀects, in which the total planetary anthropogenic release of greenhouse gases
causes changes in the non-anthropogenic carbon ﬂux. Such eﬀects are a function of ag-
gregate anthropogenic emissions because CO2 and other greenhouse gases mix nearly uni-
formly around the earth’s atmosphere: increased atmospheric CO2 concentration causes
an increase in the carbon uptake of oceans, vegetation and soils; it contributes directly
to higher average temperatures and faster decomposing of dead vegetation which releases
more greenhouse gases; higher average temperatures cause faster melting of ice sheets,
which then releases methane and also reduces the albedo of the earth. Warming also in-
creases water evaporation and the concentration of atmospheric water vapor, which mag-

6   See Reay et al (2008).
7   See Duce et al (2008).
8   See Canadell (2007a).
9   See Grubb et al (2010).

                                             4
niﬁes the greenhouse eﬀect. Climate scientists attempt to account for these eﬀects in
modeling the relationship between atmospheric greenhouse gases and global temperature
changes.

   Conceptually these aggregate interactions are straightforward to handle within a market
mechanism, though practical application faces substantial uncertainty about the magni-
tude of their climate impact. If the goal is to stabilize atmospheric carbon at a certain
level, aggregate interaction eﬀects would be incorporated into a cap-and-trade program by
changing the total direct anthropogenic carbon emissions. The net eﬀect of all aggregate
interaction eﬀects would determine a scale parameter, θ, that would change the cap on di-
rect anthropogenic carbon emissions so as to meet the same level of atmospheric carbon as
would be the target if θ = 1 and there were no interaction eﬀects. A θ < 1 would indicate
that the natural carbon cycle damps anthropogenic shocks, a net negative feedback eﬀect,
and a θ > 1 would indicate that it exacerbates the shocks, a net positive feedback eﬀect.
The fact that about half of anthropogenic carbon is being absorbed by vegetation, soils,
and the ocean suggests a θ well below one, but acceleration of vegetation decomposing and
ice melting indicates the opposite. More importantly, a great deal of uncertainty remains
about the longer run θ, though it seems likely to rise if the terrestrial and ocean sinks are
becoming saturated and/or melting ice might accelerate the release of greenhouse gases
and change the planet’s albedo. Nonetheless, for any scientiﬁc model of these aggregate
interaction eﬀects, the cap on anthropogenic emissions can be adjusted in order to achieve
(in expectation) any speciﬁed target for atmospheric carbon and climate change. Though
the potential scientiﬁc impact of feedback eﬀects is quite worrisome, they complicate mar-
ket mechanisms much less than the idiosyncratic indirect impacts on which I have focused
here.



IV. From Incomplete Science to Incomplete Markets and Property Rights
   Market mechanisms to address climate change have been aimed predominantly at reduc-
ing the greenhouse gas emissions from burning fossil fuels. Besides the enormous size of
the fossil fuels industry, this focus is likely based on the fact that the scientiﬁc connection
between fossil fuel combustion and greenhouse gas release is well established, and the fact
that it is relatively easy to monitor fossil fuel consumption. While it is well understood
that human behavior is aﬀecting the natural carbon cycle, those eﬀects are less direct, the
relationship is less precisely established, and the emissions are more diﬃcult to monitor.
In the last decade, scientists have made important steps in understanding these relation-
ships, but because the impacts are indirect and idiosyncratic it is likely that the links to

                                              5
greenhouse gas emissions will never be understood as precisely as the CO2 release from
burning a gallon of gasoline. For example, the greenhouse gas impact of nitrogen fertilizer
appears to depend very much on where it is used, how it is applied, and how much escapes
to neighboring soils and water.

   Over time, the challenge of establishing scientiﬁc causality will transition to a challenge
of establishing markets and property rights for the externalities created. Some empowered
institution will have to determine a process for price setting and the initial allocation of
the property rights. These appear to be particularly challenging tasks in the case of human
impacts on the natural carbon cycle.

  The heterogeneity and idiosyncrasy of these indirect impacts will pose a challenge for
price setting. Of course, many government-regulated markets face a trade-oﬀ between
precise cost-based pricing of each sale and the expense of implementing complex pricing
schemes. The problem is present in congestion pricing of roads, diﬀerentiated time and
locational impacts of criteria air pollutants10 , and time and location varying cost of sup-
plying electricity. In nearly all of these cases, prices vary much less than the underlying
economic costs, usually based on appeals to equity and/or simplicity.

   Such an outcome could be very ineﬃcient in this case. While science does not yet provide
complete answers, it seems likely that the variation in impact on the natural carbon cycle
could be enormous for seemingly similar human activities. The impact of agricultural
activities, for instance, depends not just on soil composition and alternative land use, but
also on the quantities of fertilizers used and their ultimate disposition. Likewise, criteria
air pollution has very diﬀerent impacts on the natural carbon cycle depending on where
the pollution is released. Due to the interaction with the natural carbon cycle, it seems
quite possible that an activity could raise greenhouse gases if undertaken in some locations
and lower it if the same activity is undertaken in other locations.

   The idiosyncrasy of human impacts on the natural carbon cycle is also likely to greatly
increase the complexity of allocating property rights and monitoring outcomes. Indirect
impacts on the natural carbon cycle are likely to be diﬃcult to monitor by their very na-
ture, and large variation in impact from seemingly similar activities will make simplifying
approaches less reliable — for example, a standard assumption about the carbon impact of
releasing one pound of atmospheric nitrogen. Likewise, because property rights allocation
will be concerned with distributional issues, diﬃculty in determining a participant’s prob-


10   See Tietenberg (1995).

                                              6
able liability under a proposed price schedule could slow the political process and raise
costs.

   Scientiﬁc uncertainty is also likely to compound the diﬃculties of reaching agreements
on property rights. Previous debates over the costs of environmental degradation — health
impacts of criteria air pollutants, ozone depletion caused by CFCs, and fossil fuels causing
climate change — suggest that potential losers in the allocation of property rights will
appeal to residual scientiﬁc uncertainty as a reason to postpone creation of the market.
Indirect impacts on the natural carbon cycle seem likely to be particularly vulnerable to
these delay strategies.11

   Ultimately, the value of incorporating human impact on the natural carbon cycle as
part of carbon markets also depends on the potential for price incentives to change that
interaction. In this dimension, it seems that the value is likely to be high. The human
activities that science has already identiﬁed — including land management, use of nitrogen
fertilizers, and control of criteria air pollutants — are generally thought to be responsive
to economic incentives, certainly likely to be as responsive as energy demand. These are
empirical questions, however, that remain to be addressed.

Can carbon oﬀsets better address interactions with the natural carbon cycle?

   The eﬀects that I am discussing here are similar in practice to excluding a sector of the
economy, or region of the world, under cap-and-trade. Carbon oﬀsets are often presented
as a way to reduce emissions from an excluded sector or region, as described by Bushnell
in another chapter of this volume. But the political, jurisdictional and distributional
concerns that give rise to sectoral or regional exclusion are not the primary impediments
to incorporating interactions with the natural carbon cycle. Rather, uncertain science
and costly monitoring of the human behavior that causes the interaction have led to the
exclusion of these emissions from market mechanisms. Carbon oﬀsets do not address either
of these problems. If these barriers were remediated, policy makers still might run into the
concerns that are addressed by carbon oﬀsets depending on the location of the activity and
people involved in it. There is, however, no obvious reason to think that the range of human
activities that constitute interaction with the natural carbon cycle are more amenable to
control through carbon oﬀsets than through direct inclusion in a market mechanism such


11   Recent arguments over life-cycle analyses of petroleum products and corn-based ethanol in California,
     including the impact of indirect land-use changes, are certainly consistent with this view. The parties
     that would have been harmed by recognizing indirect land-use eﬀects argued that because considerable
     uncertainty about their magnitude existed, they should be counted as zero.

                                                      7
as cap-and-trade or a carbon tax.


V. Conclusion
   Climate scientists have determined that many diﬀerent human activities impact the levels
of atmospheric greenhouse gases, not just burning fossil fuels. Many of these interactions
are not well understood, but they are almost surely both heterogeneous and important
in addressing climate change. Recent research suggests that human-caused air pollution,
fertilizer dispersion, soil disruption, and other activities are having a signiﬁcant eﬀect on
the net carbon uptake of vegetation, soils and oceans. To date, market mechanisms for
reducing greenhouse gases have largely ignored these interactions between human activity
and the natural carbon ﬂux.

  My goal in this paper is to argue that the scientiﬁc research on these interactions has
matured to the point that it is time for economists and policy makers to take note, to
consider whether market mechanisms for greenhouse gases need to be extended to incor-
porate these complexities. Such extensions would be very challenging. The heterogeneity
and idiosyncrasy of human impact on the natural carbon cycle would make appropriate
pricing quite diﬃcult, and the remaining scientiﬁc uncertainty about these interactions
would likely impede eﬀorts to assign property rights. Addressing some interactions would
require determining property rights for a much broader range of activities than has ever
before existed.

  The costs of extending carbon markets in this direction must be weighed against the
potential beneﬁts. The beneﬁts will depend on the magnitude of the interaction eﬀects,
which is the domain of natural scientists, and the price elasticities of the human activities
that cause them, the determination of which should be economists’ comparative advantage.

  Finally, while I have focused here on market mechanisms — taxes or tradeable permits —
the same concerns of heterogeneous and idiosyncratic interactions with the natural carbon
cycle would apply to any attempt to address greenhouse gases with command and control
regulation. Just as many more prices and property rights determinations are needed in a
market setting due to indirect impacts on the natural carbon cycle, many more regulations
would be needed under a command and control approach.




                                             8
                                        References
Bushnell, James B. “The Economics of Carbon Oﬀsets,” in Don Fullerton & Catherine
    Wolfram eds., The Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy, University of
    Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Canadell, Josep G., Miko U.F. Kirschbaumb, Werner A. Kurz, María-José Sanz, Bernhard
   Schlamadinger, and Yoshiki Yamagata. “Factoring out natural and indirect human ef-
   fects on terrestrial carbon sources and sinks,” Environmental Science & Policy, Vol. 10,
   2007(a), pp. 370-384.
Canadell, Josep G., Corinne Le Quéré, Michael R. Raupach, Christopher B. Field, Erik T.
   Buitenhuis, Philippe Ciais, Thomas J. Conway, Nathan P. Gillett, R. A. Houghton,
   and Gregg Marlandi. “Contributions to accelerating atmospheric CO2 growth from
   economic activity, carbon intensity, and eﬃciency of natural sinks,” Proceedings of the
   National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 104(47), November 20, 2007(b), pp. 18866-18870.
Duce, R. A. et al. “Impacts of atmospheric anthropogenic nitrogen on the open ocean,”
    Science, Vol. 320, 2007, pp. 893897.
Grubb, Michael, Tim Laing, Thomas Counsell, and Catherine Willan. “Global carbon
   mechanisms: lessons and implications,” Climatic Change, 16 January 2010.
Houghton, R.A. “Balancing the Global Carbon Budget,” Annual Review of Earth and
   Planetary Sciences, Vol. 35, 2007, pp. 313-347.
Le Quéré, Corinne, Michael R. Raupach, Josep G. Canadell, Gregg Marland et al. “Trends
    in the sources and sinks of carbon dioxide,” Nature Geoscience, Vol. 2, December 2009,
    pp. 831-836.
Reay, Dave S., Frank Dentener, Pete Smith, John Grace and Richard A Feely. “Global
    nitrogen deposition and carbon sinks,” Nature Geoscience, Vol. 1, July 2008, pp. 430-
    437.
Sarmiento, Jorge L. and Nicolas Gruber. “Sinks for Anthropogenic Carbon,” Physics
    Today, Vol. 55(8), 2002, pp. 30-36.
Tietenberg, Tom. “Tradeable Permits for Pollution Control when Emission Location Mat-
    ters: What have We Learned?” Environmental and Resource Economics, Vol. 5, 1995,
    pp. 95-113.
Wara, Michael W. and David G. Victor, “A Realistic Policy on International Carbon
   Oﬀsets,” PESD Working Paper #74, Stanford University, 2008.




                                            9
                                 4

                                       9

      3



123                                                                    2
                      120                            92                    90




      3                                                                2




                                     Figure 1
          (source: U.S. Department of Energy and Canadell et al (2007b))
