NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TWINS OR STRANGERS? DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES BETWEEN INDUSTRIAL
AND ACADEMIC SCIENCE
Henry Sauermann
Paula E. Stephan
Working Paper 16113
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16113

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

We thank participants in seminars and workshops at the Georgia Institute of Technology, Harvard
Business School, and the Collegio Carlo Alberto (Turin, Italy) for their feedback. We thank especially
Wes Cohen, Paul David, Lee Fleming, Chiara Franzoni, Richard Freeman, Aldo Geuna, Kostas Grigoriou,
Jerry Thursby, Marie Thursby, and John Walsh. Henry Sauermann thanks the Ewing Marion Kauffman
Foundation for their financial support. We thank the National Science Foundation for providing the
restricted-use SESTAT data employed in our empirical analysis. However, “the use of NSF data does
not imply NSF endorsement of the research methods or conclusions contained in this report.” The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Henry Sauermann and Paula E. Stephan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Twins or Strangers? Differences and Similarities between Industrial and Academic Science
Henry Sauermann and Paula E. Stephan
NBER Working Paper No. 16113
June 2010
JEL No. J31,J44,O31,O32,O34
ABSTRACT
Some scholars view academic and industrial science as qualitatively different knowledge production
regimes. Others claim that the two sectors are increasingly similar. Large-scale empirical evidence
regarding similarities and differences, however, has been missing. Drawing on prior work on the
organizationof science, we first develop a framework to compare and contrast the two sectors along
fourkeydimensions:(1) the nature of research (e.g., basic versus applied); (2) organizational characteristics
(e.g., degreeof independence, pay); (3) researchers’ preferences (e.g., taste for independence); and
(4) the use ofalternative disclosure mechanisms (e.g., patenting and publishing). We then compare
the two sectorsempirically using detailed survey data from a representative sample of over 5,000 life
scientists andphysical scientists employed in a wide range of academic institutions and private firms.
Building onprior work that has emphasized different “research missions”, we also examine how the
Qature of researchis related to other characteristics of science within and across the two sectors.
Our results paint a complex picture of academic and industrial science. While we find significant industryacademiadifferences with respect to all four dimensions, we also observe remarkable similarities. For
example,both academic institutions and private firms appear to allow their scientists to stay actively
involvedin the broader scientific community and provide them with considerable levels of independence
intheir jobs. Second, we find significant differences not just between industrial and academic science
but also within each of the two sectors as well as across fields. Finally, while the nature of research
is a significant predictor of other dimensions such as the use of patenting and publishing, it does not
fully explain the observed industry-academia differences in those dimensions. Overall, our results
suggest that stereotypical views of industrial and academic science may be misleading and that future
work may benefit from a richer and more nuanced description of the organization of science.

Henry Sauermann
Georgia Institute of Technology
College of Management
800 W. Peachtree St.
Atlanta, GA 30308
henry.sauermann@mgt.gatech.edu
Paula E. Stephan
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
pstephan@gsu.edu

1

Introduction
Scholars of science as well as the general public often consider industrial and academic

science as two distinct knowledge production regimes designed to perform different types of
research. In particular, basic research, the domain of academia, is seen as best supported by a
research organization that provides scientists with considerable freedom and emphasizes open
disclosure in the form of publications (Dasgupta & David, 1994; Merton, 1973). Applied
research, on the other hand, is seen as the domain of industrial science, where the research
environment is more structured and results are kept secret or disclosed in the form of patents
(Aghion, Dewatripont, & Stein, 2008; Cohen, Nelson, & Walsh, 2000). Moreover, assuming that
all scientists share a “taste for science”, it has been argued that industry must compensate applied
scientists for a lack of freedom and the ability to publish by providing higher salaries than
academia (cf. Aghion et al., 2008).
Recent studies suggest, however, that this abstract view of academic and industrial
science may be misleading and that the mapping from the nature of research to organizational
setting and disclosure mechanisms is far from straightforward. For example, academic scientists
increasingly pursue research characterized by direct applications, while some firms are said to
pursue “open science” approaches (Ding, 2010; Slaughter & Rhoades, 2004; Vallas & Kleinman,
2008). There is also considerable evidence that scientists in industry publish and scientists in
academia patent, and that the “same” piece of knowledge can be disclosed in different ways
(Cockburn & Henderson, 1998; Gans, Murray, & Stern, 2008; Hicks, 1995). The lines between
academic science and industrial science may have become particularly blurred in the biomedical
sciences (Murray, 2006; Vallas et al., 2008).
While there is a growing recognition of the need for a nuanced view of industrial and
academic science, our knowledge of the differences between the two sectors, as well as our
understanding of the relationships between the nature of research and the organization of
research within the two sectors lacks a firm empirical foundation. For example, data on the basic
versus applied nature of research is often inferred from characteristics of patent and publication
output (e.g., Ding, 2006; Thursby & Thursby, 2009b), which may confound the nature of
research and the mechanisms used to disclose research results. Similarly, measures of
nonpecuniary job attributes such as researchers’ freedom are typically not available. While wage
differentials may be interpreted as reflecting differences in nonpecuniary job attributes this
2

approach is unlikely to differentiate among different kinds of nonpecuniary job attributes and
does not account for potential selection effects (Killingsworth, 1987; Roach & Sauermann, 2010;
Rosen, 1986; Stern, 2004).
In this paper, we use a unique data set to compare and contrast industrial and academic
science along four key dimensions: the basic versus applied nature of research, organizational
characteristics (e.g., freedom provided to researchers), scientists’ preferences, and the use of
different disclosure mechanisms. Building on prior work that has emphasized different “research
missions” of industry and academia, we also examine how the nature of research is related to
other characteristics of science both across and within the two sectors.
Our empirical analysis exploits detailed data for a nationally representative sample of
over 5,000 PhD-level life and physical scientists. The strength of our data is that the same survey
instrument was administered to researchers working in industry and academia, allowing us to
make direct comparisons between the two sectors and across fields. Among others, our data
include a novel measure of the basic versus applied nature of research that is not conditioned by
sector or by the disclosure strategy. The data also include measures of pecuniary and nonpecuniary job attributes as well as measures of scientists’ preferences.
Our results paint a complex picture of academic and industrial science. On the one hand,
we find significant differences between the two sectors with respect to the nature of research, the
use of various disclosure mechanisms, organizational characteristics, and scientists’ preferences.
Despite significant differences, however, we also find remarkable similarities. To wit, while
industrial scientists appear to enjoy less independence than academic scientists, over 50% of
industrial scientists indicate that they are “very satisfied” with their level of independence.
Similarly, scientists in both sectors publish extensively, with 60% of scientists in industry having
published in a 5-year span. Over the same period, 16% of academics have applied for a patent.
Many of the differences between sectors are smaller in the life sciences than in the physical
sciences, suggesting that scholars should remain cautious about generalizing insights based on
data from the life sciences to other fields. Moreover, our analyses also point to important
differences within each of the two sectors, indicating that the broad industry versus academia
distinction may obscure important nuances.
Consistent with the view that different “research missions” shape the organization of
science in the two sectors, we find significant relationships between the basic versus applied
3

nature of research on the one hand and the other three dimensions of science (organizational
characteristics, scientists’ preferences, and disclosure mechanisms) on the other. However,
differences in the nature of research between sectors do not fully explain differences in the
organization of research, scientists’ preferences, or in the use of various disclosure mechanisms.
Our work makes several contributions. First, a growing body of theoretical work
examines the division of labor between industry and academia, often focusing on differences in
researcher freedom, pay, and the basic versus applied nature of research (Aghion et al., 2008;
Lacetera, 2009; Murray & O'Mahony, 2007a). We complement this work by providing unique
data on these key constructs and by empirically examining the relationships between them.
Second, our observation that differences in patenting are not explained by differences in the
nature of research provides indirect evidence of the important role that other factors—such as
organizational norms—play in shaping scientific disclosure in the two sectors (Bercovitz &
Feldman, 2008; Cohen et al., 2000; Gans et al., 2008). At the same time, our finding of quite
weak relationships between the nature of research and disclosure mechanisms suggests that
future work should be cautious in using patent- or publication-based measures as proxies for the
nature of the underlying research. Third, we provide rare direct evidence of differences in nonpecuniary (independence) as well as pecuniary job attributes (pay) across sectors and
organizations and find support for the notion that scientists make trade-offs between these factors
(Aghion et al., 2008; Roach et al., 2010; Stern, 2004). Finally, our results may have important
implications for managers and policy makers concerned with interactions between industrial and
academic science and with the management of knowledge workers within each of the two
sectors.
Our research plan is as follows. In Section 2 we review prior work and develop a
conceptual framework to compare industrial and academic science. In Section 3 we discuss our
data and measures. In section 4, we present descriptive data on similarities and differences
between industrial and academic science (“industry-academia gaps”) and also examine
differences in industry-academia gaps between the life sciences and the physical sciences. In
section 5, we use regression analysis to examine the relationships between the nature of research
and other characteristics of science and we also explore differences in key variables within each
of the two sectors. A summary and discussion follow in Section 6.

4

2
2.1

Background
Academic Science
According to the conventional view, the research mission of academia is the conduct of

basic research, i.e., research resulting in fundamental insights. Knowledge resulting from basic
research has characteristics of a public good and typically has little commercial value. As a
consequence, financial incentives and a price-based market system fail to produce an efficient
amount of such research (Arrow, 1962; Nelson, 1959; Stephan, 1996). To address these
particular characteristics of basic research, academic science has developed a distinct incentive
system that encourages the production and sharing of research findings based on non-financial
incentives such as peer recognition from the scientific community (Dasgupta et al., 1994;
Merton, 1973; Stephan, 1996). Recognition can only be achieved by making one’s research
publicly available, which makes active involvement in the scientific community and the rapid
disclosure of research results via publications and presentations at conferences one of the
defining characteristics of academic science. The timely and widespread disclosure of research
results, in turn, fosters the accumulation of knowledge over time (Murray et al., 2007a; Sorenson
& Fleming, 2004).
The basic character of research in academia is also linked to distinct ways in which
research is organized in universities. In particular, academic scientists enjoy high levels of
freedom in choosing which problems to attack, how to approach them, and how to disclose their
results. In recent theoretical work, Aghion et al. (2008) argued that scientists derive utility from
this freedom itself, thus accepting lower wages in return. While high levels of independence
allow researchers to pursue promising research questions, the low wage levels ensure that they
do so at relatively low costs, making academia the ideal place for exploratory research.1
While this abstract characterization may be useful to parsimoniously describe key
characteristics of the academic sector, it appears overly simplistic. First, American universities
have always been engaged not only in basic research but also in applied work; in fact, some
academic institutions were founded with an explicit charge to assist their regional economies
through applied work (cf. Furman & MacGarvie, 2007; Rosenberg & Nelson, 1994; Stokes,
1

Stinchcombe (1994) provides fascinating evidence of a relationship between the nature of work and the freedom given to
workers in a very different context. Applying an agency theory perspective, he found that slaves in the Carribean who were
assigned tasks “that required the slave’s consent and enthusiasm as a trusted agent” (e.g., pearl fishers or mistresses) were given
significantly more freedom than slaves working on tasks that did not (e.g., plantation workers).

5

1997). Moreover, recent years have seen increasing patenting activities in academia (Henderson,
Jaffe, & Trajtenberg, 1998; Jensen & Thursby, 2001; Mowery, Nelson, Sampat, & Ziedonis,
2001), which some scholars fear may jeopardize the basic research mission and the open
disclosure of research results (Murray & Stern, 2007b; Slaughter et al., 2004). One key challenge
of empirical research on these issues is that micro-level measures of the basic versus applied
nature of research tend to rely on patent or publication metrics and are thus contingent on the
disclosure mechanism chosen. The link between disclosure mechanism and the nature of
research may be weak, however, especially if research creates both fundamental insights and
solutions to applied problems, i.e., if it lies in “Pasteur’s Quadrant” (Stephan & Levin, 1996;
Stokes, 1997).
The stereotypical view of academic science may also inaccurately reflect the
organizational context in which academic scientists work. In particular, researchers in most fields
rely extensively on funding from government agencies or from industry and these funding
sources often pursue particular research agendas. Scientists seeking to obtain funding may have
to adjust to these external constraints, which effectively limits their research freedom (Hackett,
1990; Vallas et al., 2008). Similarly, funding agencies often consider researchers’ track record in
a particular research area when making funding decisions, limiting scientists’ ability to change
research trajectories. Thus, while academia offers high levels of independence in theory, a
variety of constraints may limit that freedom in practice.
Much of the discussion around academic science considers academia as a rather
homogeneous sector, but we expect considerable heterogeneity within the academe. First,
increasing patenting rates as well as other aspects of the “commercialization of science” have
been studied primarily in the life sciences. It is likely that the physical sciences show a
somewhat different picture. Moreover, the academic sector is populated by different types of
institutions, including not only top tier research institutions, but also lower tier institutions and
medical schools with a potentially very different organization of research. Finally, there may be
significant heterogeneity among individual scientists within a given institution because not all
academics run their own lab. Staff scientists also make important contributions to academic
science but are often supported on “soft money” and work for others, resulting in little freedom.
This group of “unfaculty” scientists, to use a term of Hackett’s (1990), has grown considerably
in recent years and they “…populate an academic ‘never-never land’ made possible by the
6

availability of research support but made miserable by the difficulty of obtaining such support
and by their ambiguous status in the university” (pp. 252-253). Overall, it is likely that academic
science comes in different shades and insights into this heterogeneity may significantly increase
our understanding of the scientific enterprise.
2.2

Industrial Science
Industrial R&D has been studied extensively in prior decades (e.g., Miller, 1976; Pelz &

Andrews, 1976; Ritti, 1968) and has received renewed interest in recent years. “Ideal type”
industrial science, as portrayed by the earlier literatures and in some theoretical models, focuses
on generating knowledge with direct commercial potential, i.e., applied research and
development. In order to appropriate the financial returns to that knowledge, firms rely on
secrecy and patenting and discourage researchers from publishing. Firms use a hierarchical
research organization with little freedom for individual researchers. The scientists employed in
industry, however, are thought to be heavily influenced by their academic training, resulting in a
strong need for autonomy as well as the desire to publish and to develop a reputation in the larger
field (Gouldner, 1957; Kornhauser, 1962; Miller, 1976; Stern, 2004). As a result, there is a
mismatch between the organization of research in industry and the preferences of industrial
scientists, which should result in compensating differentials in the form of higher wages. These
higher wages, in turn, give academia an advantage in (labor intensive) basic research and
reinforce industry’s focus on more profitable applied research (Aghion et al., 2008).
While firms clearly focus on applied work that promises financial returns, some firms
also devote resources to basic research because such research may increase their ability to absorb
external knowledge or may result in longer-term financial payoffs (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990;
Rosenberg, 1990). Moreover, some firms have shifted towards a more “academic” approach by
allowing scientists to publish and by encouraging scientists’ participation in the broader science
community. This is especially the case in the life sciences (Cockburn et al., 1998; Henderson,
1994; Hicks, 1995; Rhoten & Powell, 2007; Stern, 2004; Vallas et al., 2008). Case evidence also
suggests that PhD-trained life scientists working in industry have considerable freedom in
choosing concrete lines of research (Copeland, 2007; Vallas et al., 2008) and some companies
offer their R&D employees official or unofficial bootleg time to work on projects of their own
choosing (Augsdorfer, 2008).

7

Again, there may be significant heterogeneity within the industrial sector. In particular,
many startup firms have academic roots (i.e., they were founded by academics or graduate
students) and may therefore provide scientists with more freedom and publishing opportunities
than established firms (Ding, 2010; Gittelman & Kogut, 2003; Owen-Smith & Powell, 2004;
Zucker, Darby, & Armstrong, 2002). Startups may also benefit more than other firms from
disclosing research in the form of patents and papers because such disclosures serve as valuable
signals to outside stake holders (cf. Hsu & Ziedonis, 2007).
While prior work suggests that industrial science may be more “academic” than reflected
in the stereotypical view, individual researchers in industry may be less “academic” than
commonly thought. Roach and Sauermann (2010) surveyed graduate students regarding their
preferences and career choices and found that students who planned to pursue a research career
in industry reported significantly lower preferences for independence and publishing than did
those preferring to stay in academia. Similarly, earlier work raises the notion of
“accommodation” whereby industrial scientists are socialized to become less academic and more
commercially oriented over time (Allen & Katz, 1992; Kornhauser, 1962). Such differences in
scientists’ preferences across sectors are particularly interesting because they imply that the wage
premium necessary to compensate industrial scientists for restrictions on basic research,
publishing, or freedom may be lower than if all scientists shared the same preferences (Aghion et
al., 2008; Rosen, 1986; Sauermann & Roach, 2010a).
2.3

Framework for Comparing Academic and Industrial Science
The abstract stereotypes of academic and industrial science paint a stark contrast between

the two sectors. A more nuanced view suggests several similarities and perhaps even a further
“convergence” over time. Before we examine similarities and differences between industrial and
academic science empirically, it is useful to consider in more detail possible dimensions for such
a comparison as well as the relationships between these dimensions.
Drawing on our review of prior work, we can distill four dimensions that capture the key
features of science while also highlighting important conceptual differences. The first dimension
is the nature of the research being done, in particular, whether research is basic or applied
(Aghion et al., 2008; Rosenberg, 1990). We expect that academic scientists are more heavily
engaged in basic research than their colleagues in industry, who tend to work on applied
questions. A second dimension are organizational characteristics, including factors such as the
8

degree of freedom afforded to researchers and financial compensation provided (Aghion et al.,
2008; Dasgupta et al., 1994; Merton, 1973). As discussed earlier, a common argument is that
academia and industry have developed different organizational and institutional characteristics to
best fulfill their basic versus applied research missions (Dasgupta et al., 1994; Merton, 1973;
Stephan, 1996). Accordingly, we expect that industry offers higher wages and less freedom than
academia. Moreover, such differences in organizational characteristics should be explained by
differences in the nature of research.2
A third dimension relates to characteristics of the individual scientists, in particular how
scientists vary in terms of preferences for certain job characteristics such as research
independence or money, or more generally in terms of a “taste for science” (Aghion et al., 2008;
Allen et al., 1992; Sauermann, Roach, & Zhang, 2010b; Stern, 2004). We expect systematic
differences in scientists’ preferences between sectors because scientists with heterogeneous
preferences likely self-select into the sector which they expect to best satisfy these preferences
(Roach et al., 2010; Rosen, 1986). Moreover, differences in scientists’ preferences may be
reinforced by socialization processes, i.e., when individuals who enter a particular employment
sector change their preferences in response to the actual characteristics of their employing
organizations (Allen et al., 1992; Gundry, 1993; Harrison & Carroll, 1991). Because of both
selection and socialization, we expect industrial scientists to have weaker preferences for
independence and stronger preferences for money than academics.
The final dimension of our framework relates to the mechanisms by which research
results are disclosed and protected, including formal mechanisms such as patenting and
publishing as well as more informal avenues such as personal interactions at conferences and in
professional associations (Gans et al., 2008; Merton, 1973; Murray et al., 2007a; Sorenson et al.,
2004). It is likely that differences in the nature of research across sectors are responsible for
differences in the use of disclosure mechanisms, e.g., because knowledge resulting from basic
research does not meet the criteria for patentability or because applied research loses much of its
commercial value if openly disclosed in the form of publications (Merton, 1973; Stephan et al.,
1996). At the same time, even the “same” type of knowledge can be patented as well as
published, and some research results are disclosed using both mechanisms (Ducor, 2000; Gans et

2

While we follow prior work in focusing on freedom and pay as key organizational characteristics, this dimension could be
expanded to include other organizational factors such as the size of research teams, funding mechanisms, etc.

9

al., 2008). Disclosure decisions may also be shaped by various objectives of individuals and
institutions and by different functions of patents and publications such that the nature of research
alone may not fully explain industry-academia differences in patenting and publishing (Cohen et
al., 2000; Murray, 2006; Sauermann, Cohen, & Stephan, 2009).
Figure 1 summarizes our framework for analysis, highlighting the central role of
differences in the nature of research as a direct or indirect driver of differences in organizational
characteristics, characteristics of scientists, and disclosure mechanisms.
Figure 1: Framework to Compare Academic and Industrial Science

ACADEMIC SCIENCE
Nature of Research
 E.g., basic vs. applied

Organizational Characteristics
 E.g., level of freedom, pay

3
3.1

INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE
Differences?
Similarities?

Nature of Research
 E.g., basic vs. applied

Organizational Characteristics
 E.g., level of freedom, pay

Scientists’ Characteristics
 E.g., desire for freedom,
income

Scientists’ Characteristics
 E.g., desire for freedom,
income

Disclosure Mechanisms
 E.g., publishing, patenting,
conferences

Disclosure Mechanisms
 E.g., publishing, patenting,
conferences

Data and Measures
Data
Our empirical analysis is based on restricted-use data from the 2003 Scientists and

Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT) provided by the National Science Foundation
(NSF, 2003). The sampling population of the SESTAT surveys includes all individuals living in
the United States in the reference week (week of October 1, 2003) who either have a degree in a
10

science or engineering (S&E) field or who are working in a science and engineering occupation
and hold a degree in a non S&E field. The sample was drawn to be nationally representative and
we use the sampling weights provided by NSF. Data were collected primarily via selfadministered mail survey, supplemented by online surveys and computer-assisted interviews.
Response rates for the SESTAT surveys were well over 70%.3
For this study, we use only data on respondents who hold a PhD degree in a science field
and who work in industry or academia; i.e., we exclude scientists working in government and
non-profits. Included in the “industry” subsample are respondents whose employer is classified
as a private-for-profit, non-educational entity. Included in the “academia” group are respondents
whose employer is classified as a 4-year college or university or as a medical school. Given our
interest in science, we restrict our sample to individuals who are research active, i.e., who report
that basic research, applied research, or development is either their most important or second
most important work activity (see below for details). We exclude postdoctoral fellows because
postdoctoral positions are by design temporary and may be followed by employment in either
industry or academia (Davis, 2005; Regets, 1998).
Our sample includes 5,018 scientists; 1,831 (36%) are employed in industry and 3,187
(64%) are employed in academia. Industrial employment spans a range of industries including
scientific R&D services (42% of industrial scientists), pharma (15%), and chemicals (12%). The
majority of industrial scientists work in large established firms (more than 5000 employees, older
than 5 years; 52%), smaller numbers work in startups (fewer than 100 employees, younger than 6
years; 8 %) and other firms (40%).
Of the academics, 43% are employed in Carnegie I and II institutions, 28% in medical
schools, and 29% in other academic institutions (e.g., doctorate granting, comprehensive, and
liberal arts). 51% are tenured, 23% are on the tenure track but not tenured, and 26% are not on
the tenure track.4

3

Detailed information on the SESTAT data file is available at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/sestat/.
Academics could be not on the tenure track either because the employing institution does not have a tenure system or because
an existing tenure system does not apply to the individual’s particular position. A closer look at these cases shows that they are
primarily employed in tier 1 academic institutions and the preponderance of non-tenure track individuals in our sample are likely
working as staff scientists and research faculty.

4

11

3.2

Measures
Table 1 provides a summary of our key measures.
Table 1: Measures

VARIABLE NAME
Classification
variables
Employment sector
INDUSTRY
Field of occupation

MEASURE DESCRIPTION
Dummy variable indicating whether respondent works in industry
(=1) or academia (=0).
Based on respondents’ own classification using occupational codes
provided by the NSF, we split the sample into respondents working
in the life sciences and in the physical or related sciences. We also
use more detailed field dummies to control for 11 different fields in
our regression analyses.5

Dimensions of
Science
Type of R&D
BASIC, APPLIED,
DEVELOPMENT

The survey asked respondents to indicate which of a list of work
activities were most important / second most important in terms of
time spent. The survey instrument provided a list of work activities,
including the following three R&D activities and their definitions:
 “Basic research - study directed toward gaining scientific
knowledge primarily for its own sake”
 “Applied research - study directed toward gaining scientific
knowledge to meet a recognized need”
 “Development - using knowledge gained from research for the
production of materials, devices”
We coded three dummy variables indicating whether a particular
activity was the most important R&D activity.
Salary
Respondents reported the amount of their basic annual salary
(SALARY)
received at their current employer.
Satisfaction with
The survey asked respondents to rate on a 4-point scale how
independence and
satisfied they were at their current employer with salary and
income
independence. We use these measures as proxies for organizational
SAT_IND, SAT_SAL characteristics, where higher levels of satisfaction with a particular
job attribute should reflect higher availability of that particular job
attribute (see below for a discussion). Given the prevalence of high
ratings, we dichotomized these measures such that 1 indicates “very
satisfied” and 0 indicates a rating lower than “very satisfied”.
Scientists’
Respondents used a 4-point scale to rate their preferences for salary
preferences for
and independence in response to the following question: “When
independence and
thinking about a job, how important is each of the following factors
income
to you . . .”. Since responses are clustered at the higher end of the
5

In the life sciences, these fields include agricultural and food sciences (5.9% of total), biomedical sciences (36.6%), biomedical
engineering (1.2%), health sciences (7.3%), and other life sciences (0.7%). In the physical sciences, these fields include
chemistry (16.7%), earth sciences (6.26%), mathematics (8.15%), physics (7.0%) and other physical sciences (0.6%). We also
include a separate dummy for individuals who self-classified as “R&D management”.

12

IMP_IND, IMP_SAL
U.S. Patent
applications
USPAPP, USPAPP01

Publications
PUBS, PUBS01

Attendance at
professional meetings
PROFMEET

scale (anchors “somewhat important” and “very important”), we
dummy coded these measures such that 1 indicates “very important”
and 0 indicates a rating lower than “very important”.
Each respondent reported the number of U.S. patent applications in
which he or she was named as an inventor over the last 5 years prior
to the survey (USPAPP). We created a dummy variable coded as 1 if
the respondent had at least one patent application in the 5-year
period (USPAPP01). Our empirical analysis focuses on this
indicator variable rather than patent counts because our main interest
is in the question whether scientists are generally willing to disclose
research findings in the form of patents and whether their employing
organizations allow them to patent. Thus, we are less interested in
the quantity or value of patent output than in its existence. Our
patent measure should capture all patents applied for by academic
scientists, whether or not these patents are assigned to universities,
and is thus more comprehensive than patent measures based on data
provided by university officials (cf. Thursby, Fuller, & Thursby,
2009a). Note that NSF confidentiality restrictions prevent us from
matching the SESTAT data to other data sources such as patent
citations.
Each respondent reported the number of (co)authored articles that
have been accepted for publication in a refereed professional journal
over the last 5 years (PUBS). We focus our analysis on a dummy
variable coded as 1 if the respondent had at least one publication in
the 5-year period (PUBS01), indicating that an individual is willing
to publish and that the employer allows the individual to publish.
Respondents indicated whether they had attended any professional
society or association meetings or professional conferences in the
past year (PROFMEET=1 if yes). While attendance at meetings
does not necessarily mean that a scientist communicates with others
about his/her research, we interpret this measure as relating to
“disclosure mechanisms”.
Respondents indicated the number of professional societies or
associations they currently belong to. We interpret this measure as
relating to “disclosure mechanisms”.

Memberships in
professional societies
PROFSOCIETIES
Control Variables
Experience
Time since obtaining highest degree, in years.
(YRS_GRAD)
Ability
We matched each respondent’s PhD-granting institution and the
(PHD_NRC_SCORE) PhD field to the National Research Council’s evaluation of PhD
program quality (Goldberger, Flattau, & Maher, 1995), using the
rating of “program effectiveness in educating research scholars and
scientists”. The scale ranges from 0 (“not effective”) to 5
(“extremely effective”). This measure formally captures the quality
of graduate education, but may also reflect innate ability to the
extent that high-ability individuals self-select or are selected into

13

Number of
individuals
supervised
(LN_SUPDIR)
Firm type
(STARTUP,
OTHERFIRM,
ESTABLISHED)
Type of academic
institution
(CARN12,
LOWTIER,
MEDSCHOOL)
Academic position
(TENURED,
TENTRACK,
NONTENTRACK)
Race/Ethnicity
(RACE)
Gender (MALE)
U.S. citizen
(USCITIZEN)
3.3

high-quality PhD programs.
Respondents indicated how many people they supervised directly in
their jobs. We interpret this (logged) measure as a proxy for
managerial status and, for those scientists running their own labs, as
a proxy for the size of the laboratory.
The survey contains data on the age and size of the employer. We
created three dummy variables indicating startups (smaller than 100
employees, younger than 6 years), large established firms (larger
than 5000 employees, older than 5 years), and all other firms.
Applies only to industry sample.
We distinguish academic institutions using the Carnegie
classification provided by NSF: Carnegie 1 and 2 institutions, lowertier institutions (e.g, doctorate granting, liberal arts) and medical
schools. Applies only to academic sample.
Dummy variables indicating whether an academic scientist was
tenured, on tenure track but not tenured, or not on the tenure track.
Applies only to academic sample.
Dummies for white, Asian, and other.
MALE =1 if respondent is male
USCITIZEN =1 if respondent is U.S. citizen

Measurement Issues
The measure of the nature of R&D is critical to our analysis and deserves further

discussion. As described earlier, respondents indicated the type of work that occupied the most
of their time in a typical work week, including basic research, applied research, and
development. Each of the R&D related options was defined in the NSF instrument and the
definitions were the same regardless of employment sector. Among the few studies that have
measured the nature of the work of individual researchers, a common approach is to classify
research based on the publication outlet, on citation patterns, or on terms appearing in
publications (e.g., Ding, 2006; Narin, Pinski, & Gee, 1976; Thursby et al., 2009b). While this
approach has many benefits, the choice of disclosure mechanisms may be endogenous to the
nature of R&D and bibliometric measures of the nature of R&D may provide only limited
insights into the relationships between the nature of R&D and disclosure mechanisms. A key
advantage of our measure is that it is not contingent on the disclosure mechanism or on
disclosure per se. Moreover, our measure captures the nature of the work a researcher typically
14

does, rather than the nature of only a particular piece of knowledge produced (e.g., a particular
publication) and our measure captures both successful and unsuccessful research effort. At the
same time, we cannot rule out that researchers in academia and industry apply the NSF
definitions in slightly different ways, although it is difficult to sign any potential bias.6 Despite
its limitations, our measure provides a unique perspective and complements prior work based on
other measures of the nature of research.
While we have an objective measure of the salary offered by the employing organization,
we rely on a satisfaction measure as a proxy for the level of independence offered. Our rationale
is that a positive relationship between the actual level of an attribute and individuals’ satisfaction
with that attribute has been widely documented in the literature, including in the R&D context
(Cable & Edwards, 2004; Idson, 1990; Wood & LeBold, 1970). Because an individual’s
satisfaction with independence may depend not only on the actual level of independence but also
on the individual’s preference for independence we estimate satisfaction models with scientists’
preferences as a control. 7
A general concern with survey data is the possibility of social desirability bias (SDB).
More specifically, the concern is that individuals might inflate ratings of preferences that they
think are socially desirable and give artificially low scores to preferences that may seem less
socially desirable (Moorman & Podsakoff, 1992). SDB that applies to both industrial and
academic scientists should not affect our results regarding comparisons between the two groups.
However, it is conceivable that SDB affects the two groups differently. In particular, academic
scientists may think that they are expected to care more strongly about independence than
industrial scientists, and the latter may think it is less problematic to state a strong preference for
income, effectively inflating an industry-academia gap in preferences. Any descriptive data on
preferences we present should be interpreted in light of the possibility of such a bias. More
importantly, however, SDB should be less of a concern regarding measures of satisfaction,
measures of the nature of R&D, and measures of disclosure mechanisms.
6

It is possible that academics draw on established stereotypes and have a bias towards classifying their work as basic while
industrial scientists may be more likely to see the applied aspects of their work. In that case, our measure should overstate true
differences in the nature of research. On the other hand, if academic research is generally basic while industrial research tends to
be applied, a particular project may appear relatively basic to an industrial scientist while an academic would consider it
relatively applied, which may result in a downward bias in the measured industry-academia gap in the nature of research.
7
Our salary measures provide additional support for the suggested relationships between actual job attributes, preferences for
attributes, and satisfaction. Those scientists who are “very satisfied” with their salary earn an average of $111,050, while those
who are not very satisfied earn an average of $78,515. In a regression context, salary has a large positive impact on the
satisfaction with salary; moreover, the interaction between salary and the importance of salary is positive and significant.

15

A final important concern is that relationships between variables may reflect common
methods bias, i.e., that relationships between variables may be inflated if similar scales are used
for dependent and independent variables (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, & Lee, 2003). In our context,
the fact that academic and industrial scientists received the same survey instrument could also
lead them to give similar answers, biasing estimated industry-academia gaps downwards.
However, a closer examination of our measures suggests that common methods bias should be
limited because the survey used a variety of different question formats, most of which are
objective and quantitative.

4
4.1

Descriptive Analysis of Industry-Academia Gaps
Basic Sector Comparisons
Table 2 compares the means of our key variables for industry and academia and

computes the “industry-academia gap”. The table also shows significance levels for the industryacademia gaps, based on regressions models most appropriate for a given dependent variable.8
First, we find that only 6% of industrial scientists report being engaged primarily in basic
research, compared to 70% of academic scientists, resulting in an industry-academia gap of 64
percentage points. On the other hand, 58% of industrial scientists are engaged in applied
research, compared to 28% in academia. Development is the primary activity for 36% of
industrial scientists, compared to 2% of academics. We examine differences across fields (life
sciences versus physical sciences) below.
With respect to organizational characteristics, we find a salary gap of approximately
25,000 USD, which is consistent with a significantly higher satisfaction with salary reported by
industrial scientists. On the other hand, academics report significantly higher satisfaction with the
level of independence in their jobs: 78% of academics are “very satisfied” with their degree of
independence compared to 51% of industrial scientists who are “very satisfied” with their
independence. While the gap in satisfaction is significant, it is also remarkable that slightly more
than half of all industrial scientists are very satisfied with independence; this contrasts with the
common stereotype that industry provides very low levels of independence.9
8

For example, we test differences in the nature of R&D by regressing the R&D type dummies on the INDUSTRY dummy using
probit regression.
9
While our results suggest that higher pay is a key advantage of employment in industry, there may be other characteristics that
make industrial science attractive. In particular, Roach and Sauermann (2010) found that PhD students associated industrial R&D
with higher levels of access to cutting-edge equipment and resources for research.

16

Scientists’ preferences also vary across sectors. Industrial scientists find money more
important than academics; in contrast, 81% of academics rate independence as “very important”,
while only 61% of industrial scientists do so. Whether these differences appear small or large
depends on one’s priors; however they do suggest that not all scientists share the same
preferences and that systematic differences in scientists’ preferences may need to be considered
in future work on industrial versus academic science.
Finally, we also observe significant industry-academia gaps in disclosure mechanisms.
50% of all industrial scientists have at least one patent application in a five-year span, with an
average count of 2.9. In contrast, only 16% of academics report one patent application, with an
average count of 0.5. The industry-academia gap in publishing has the opposite sign – 92% of
academics have at least one publication in five years, with an average of 12 publications. This
compares to 62% publishing scientists in industry, with an average of 3.5 publications. Again,
while the gaps in publishing and patenting are significant and large, these numbers also show
that both sectors employ both disclosure mechanisms.10
Disclosure and “openness” in a more general sense may also be reflected in conference
attendance and interactions in professional associations. We find that 87% of academics have
attended at least one professional meeting in the prior year, compared to 74% of industrial
scientists. Similarly, we find an average of 3 memberships in professional societies among
academics, compared to 1.9 among industrial scientists. These comparisons show industrial
scientists to have a remarkable level of engagement in the broader scientific community, even if
that engagement does not reach the levels observed among academics.11
4.2

Industry-Academia Gaps in the Life Sciences versus the Physical Sciences
Our analysis thus far has focused on differences between industrial and academic science

broadly. However, most of the prior work on “academic” features in industry and “commercial”
aspects in academic science has been done in the life sciences. Thus, it is important to examine
whether industry-academia gaps are smaller in the life sciences than in the physical sciences.
10

In interpreting patent and publication counts, it has to be kept in mind that we focus on PhD trained scientists who are research
active. Numbers of patents and publications are likely to be lower for non-PhDs (e.g., BS and MS degrees) or for individuals who
are not research active (e.g., teaching faculty).
11
We do not have data on the specific conferences and professional associations and we cannot tell to what extent scientists from
the two sectors interact at conferences/in professional associations. However, many important professional associations such as
the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) have large numbers of members from industry as well as academia, suggesting that professional associations as well as
conferences (which are often organized by those organizations) may provide important venues for industry-academia
interactions.

17

Table 3 reports means and industry-academia gaps separately for the life sciences and the
physical sciences. A first observation in table 3 is that industry-academia differences in the
nature of research are significantly smaller in the life sciences. Figure 2 visualizes these gaps in
the nature of research and also reveals that two sources contribute to the smaller gap in the life
sciences: (1) academics in the life sciences are more likely to be engaged in applied work than
their colleagues in the physical sciences and (2) life scientists in industry are more likely to be
engaged in basic research than their colleagues in the physical sciences. These patterns are
consistent with the notion that there is more of an overlap between basic and applied research in
the life sciences than in the physical sciences (“Pasteur’s Quadrant”).
Figure 2: Nature of R&D, by Sector and Field
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

0.77
0.66

0.60

0.56
0.40
0.32

0.32
0.21

0.08

Life Sci.

0.04

Phys. Sci.

Basic research

0.02

0.01

Life Sci.

Phys. Sci.

Applied Research
Industry

Life Sci.

Phys. Sci.

Development

Academia

The industry-academia gaps with respect to organizational characteristics are, however,
similar in the life sciences and the physical sciences. Specifically, we find no significant field
difference in the salary premium reported by industrial scientists or in the relative advantage
academia has in providing independence. Consistent with this result, we also do not observe
differences in the industry-academia gap in scientists’ preferences.
However, we observe smaller publishing and patenting gaps in the life sciences than in
the physical sciences. Figure 3 illustrates these patterns by showing the probability of patenting
and publishing across fields and sectors. We see that the industry-academia gap in patenting is
smaller in the life sciences for two reasons: (1) life scientists in academia are more likely to
patent than physical scientists in academia and (2) life scientists in industry are less likely to
18

patent than physical scientists in industry.12 The gap in publishing is smaller in the life sciences
primarily because life scientists in industry are more likely to publish than physical scientists in
industry (71% vs. 54%). Overall, these results are consistent with the notion that industrial
science is more “open” in the life sciences than in the physical sciences. But again, even physical
scientists in industry show a remarkable level of publishing activity (as well as conference
attendance, see table 3).
Figure 3: Probability of Patenting and Publishing, by Sector and Field
0.94

1.00

0.90

0.90
0.71

0.80
0.70

0.55

0.60
0.50

0.54

0.43

0.40
0.30

0.19

0.11

0.20
0.10
0.00
Life Sciences

Physical Sciences

Life Sciences

Patenting 0/1

Publishing 0/1
Industry

5

Physical Sciences

Academia

Relationships between Dimensions of Science and Differences within
Sectors
We now use regression analysis to examine industry-academia differences in more depth.

First, we examine the relationships between the nature of research on the one hand and
organizational characteristics, scientists’ preferences, and disclosure mechanisms on the other. In
so doing, we address the earlier conjecture that different “research missions” of academia and
industry may explain differences in other dimensions. Second, we consider the possibility that
there may be systematic differences within each sector, e.g., between academics of different
tenure status within academia or between startups and established firms in industry.
12
Lower patenting rates in the life sciences might seem surprising given prior work showing that patents tend to be more
effective in protecting intellectual assets in the life sciences than in the physical sciences. However, inventions in the life sciences
tend to be less complex, likely resulting in fewer patents for a given invention. Moreover, firms in complex industries such as
semiconductors and electronics (which tend to draw on the physical sciences) patent extensively for several strategic reasons,
further increasing the role of patents (cf. Cohen et al., 2000). We discuss these issues in more detail below.

19

5.1

Model Specifications
We begin by regressing the focal dependent variable on the INDUSTRY dummy using

the full sample. The coefficient on INDUSTRY reflects the mean difference in the dependent
variable between the two sectors, i.e., the “industry-academia gap”.13 For example,
Patentsi = f (α + βINDUSTRYi + εi).

(1)

Next, we additionally include the measures of the type of R&D:
Patentsi = f (α + βINDUSTRYi + γRANDi + εi),

(2)

where RAND is a vector of dummies indicating the nature of research (BASIC,
DEVELOPMENT; APPLIED is omitted). The coefficients on these dummies indicate
differences in the dependent variable across types of R&D. Moreover, a reduction in the absolute
magnitude of β suggests that differences in the nature of R&D (partially) explain the industryacademia gap in the dependent variable.
Next, we estimate regression models separately by sector and field and include a range of
additional sector-specific controls. For example, the regressions for the industry sub-sample
include dummies indicating the firm type (e.g., startup and established firm), and the academia
regressions include dummies indicating the type of academic institution as well as tenure status
of the scientist (e.g., medical school or Carnegie I+II institution; tenure track vs. not on the
tenure track). These regressions also include additional individual-level controls and detailed
sub-field dummies. For example,
Patentsi = f (α + γRANDi + δCONTROLSi + εi),

(3)

where CONTROLS is a vector of sector- and individual-specific controls. These split sample
regressions provide additional insights into differences within sectors, providing a more nuanced
view of industrial and academic science than the basic sector comparisons reported above.
Finally, we use the coefficients from split-sample regressions to predict the likelihood
that a given individual patents or publishes in industry and academia, respectively, holding the
nature of research as well as control variables constant. This approach more accurately reflects
industry-academia differences in disclosure mechanisms than equation (2) because it effectively
allows independent variables to have different coefficients in the two sectors. Any remaining
difference in predicted values would arguably reflect effects of other determinants of disclosure
13

Note that we are concerned with differences across sectors and not with any “causal” effects of sector on the dependent
variables.

20

mechanisms, e.g., different organizational norms regarding patenting and publishing or different
functions of patents in the two sectors.
5.2

Organizational Characteristics
Table 4 shows the results using our two measures of organizational characteristic, salary

and independence, as dependent variables. Model 1, which regresses log salary on the
INDUSTRY dummy using OLS, shows a large and significant industry-academia gap in salary.
The coefficient is reduced once we include BASIC and DEVELOPMENT in model 2
(Chi2(1)=3.33, p=0.068), but it remains large and significant. We also find that individuals
engaged in basic research earn somewhat less than those in applied research. Models 3 and 4 use
only the industry sample. We find no significant pay differences between basic and applied
researchers, although employees in development earn somewhat less. Consistent with prior work
(e.g., Oi & Idson, 1999), we find that large established firms pay more than “other” firms that are
not startups, that salary increases with experience, and that salary increases with management
responsibilities. Using the academic sample only (models 5 and 6), we observe that academic
scientists engaged in basic research earn significantly less than those primarily engaged in
applied research once all controls are included. This finding suggests that compensating wage
differentials may exist not only between industry and academia (Aghion et al., 2008) but also
within academia.
Models 7-15 examine differences in the level of independence and are of particular
interest in light of the growing body of theoretical work surrounding independence in industry
versus academia (e.g., Aghion et al., 2008; Lacetera, 2009). Model 7 shows a large and
significant industry-academia gap; in model 8 we observe that scientists involved in basic
research have somewhat more independence than those involved in applied research, and the
composition of research explains a small but significant (Chi2(1)=4.09; p=0.043) part of the
observed industry-academia gap. We find no significant differences in independence between
basic and applied research for those working in industry (model 9). One potential interpretation
is that, given the heterogeneity in firms’ activities (e.g., R&D, marketing, and production),
different types of R&D are relatively similar from the firm’s perspective and are thus organized
in similar ways. In contrast, we find some evidence that independence differs across types of
research activities in academia, with somewhat higher levels for scientists in basic research and

21

somewhat lower level for academics in development (model 11).14 While this result may reflect
that downstream work in academia is often tied to funding from industry or other agencies that
may limit researcher independence, the differences across types of R&D virtually disappear once
we control for a broader set of controls (model 12). Regarding other differences within academia,
we find significantly higher levels of independence in tier I+II institutions than in lower-tier
institutions. We also find much lower levels of independence for scientists who are not on the
tenure track, likely reflecting that these individuals tend to work for other scientists and tend to
have a lower status within the institution. Similarly, independence increases with the number of
individuals an academic supervises, i.e., with the size of the researchers’ laboratory. Our results
regarding independence hold when we additionally control for scientists preferences for
independence to account for the possibility that a given level of (objective) independence results
in higher levels of satisfaction (or utility) for those individuals who care strongly about having
independence. 15
5.3

Scientists’ Preferences
Table 5 reports regressions for scientists’ preferences, starting with the preference for

salary. We find that industrial scientists care significantly more about salary than academics
(model 1), which is to some extent explained by the fact that scientists engaged in basic research
assign a lower importance to salary than those engaged in applied research or development
(model 2). We find little heterogeneity in the salary preferences within the industry sample.
However, among academics, those engaged in basic research and those trained at higher-rated
PhD institutions tend to report somewhat weaker preferences for salary, while those at medical
schools report somewhat stronger salary preferences. Somewhat surprisingly, academics engaged
in development report significantly lower salary preferences. The number of cases in this cell is
very small, but assuming that scientists engaged in development have lucrative options in
14
Note that the number of academics primarily engaged primarily in development is quite small (n=56) and any results for that
sub-sample should be interpreted with caution.
15
The joint observation of higher salaries and lower independence in industry raises the question whether these gaps are causally
connected, i.e., whether higher salaries are used to compensate industrial scientists for lower levels of independence (Aghion et
al., 2008). In that case, we would expect a negative correlation between salary and independence also at the level of the
individual. We examined these relationships but generally found either no or weak positive correlations between salary and
independence. Moreover, in a regression context, differences in independence across sectors do not explain differences in salary.
Our earlier findings regarding differences within sectors provide an explanation: certain scientists (e.g., tenure-track faculty and
managers) tend to enjoy higher levels of both salary and independence, while others receive low levels of both factors. As
pointed out by Stern (2004), compensating differentials should be studied for a given individual and (unobserved) heterogeneity
limits the insights that can be gained from a cross-sectional analysis. Thus, while the aggregate industry-academia gaps are
consistent with compensating differentials, different data are needed to clearly establish the existence and size of these
differentials at the level of the individual (cf. Sauermann et al., 2010a; Stern, 2004).

22

industry, this finding could reflect that only those with low preferences for money decide to work
in academia.
With respect to the desire for independence (models 7-12), we observe a large industryacademia gap, consistent with the gap in levels of actual independence. However, we observe no
significant difference in preferences among scientists involved in different kinds of R&D and the
industry-academia gap changes relatively little once we control for the type of R&D.
Overall, we find significant industry-academia differences with respect to individuals’
preferences, and these differences are broadly consistent with the differences in organizational
characteristics. As discussed earlier, both selection effects (scientists with particular preferences
self-select into sectors offering the desired organizational attributes) as well as socialization
effects (organizations change employees’ preferences) may be responsible for these patterns.
Unfortunately, our cross-sectional data do not allow us to disentangle selection and socialization
mechanisms because we cannot separately identify cohort and aging effects (cf. Levin &
Stephan, 1991).
5.4

Disclosure Mechanisms
It is often assumed that basic research is disclosed primarily in the form of publications,

while applied research and development are disclosed in the form of patents (or kept secret). To
the extent that this mapping between the nature of research and disclosure mechanisms holds,
higher rates of publications in academia could be explained by the fact that academics are more
likely to be engaged in basic research, while higher patenting rates in industry could be the result
of a larger share of applied research and development being done in industry. Because our
measure of the nature of research is independent of the disclosure mechanism, we are able to
examine the validity of this assumption.
Our analysis is reported in table 6. Models 1-6 focus on USPAPP01, indicating whether a
scientist had at least one patent application in the prior 5 years. Models 7-12 examine PUBS01,
indicating whether a scientist had at least one peer-reviewed publication. As discussed in the
measurement section, we use indicators rather than counts because we are interested in scientists’
decision to become involved in patenting/publishing and in organizations’ policies towards these
activities rather than a scientists’ productivity conditional upon engaging in a particular form of
disclosure.

23

Model 1 uses the pooled sample and shows a large industry-academia gap in patenting.
When we include BASIC and DEVELOPMENT (model 2), we find that scientists engaged in
development are less likely to patent than those in applied research. A potential explanation for
the negative DEVELOPMENT coefficient is that results of development projects are less likely
to be sufficiently novel to be patentable. We do not observe a difference in patenting between
basic and applied research. Interestingly, the coefficient on INDUSTRY increases slightly once
we include DEVELOPMENT, suggesting that once we control for the fact that industry does
more development and development is less likely to be patented, the industry-academia gap in
patenting is even larger than reflected in a simple mean comparison.
Next, we estimate split regressions for academia and industry, separately for the life
sciences and the physical sciences. The negative coefficient on DEVELOPMENT is stronger in
the life sciences than in the physical sciences, particularly among industrial scientists. We find
no significant differences between basic and applied research in the life sciences, which is
consistent with the view that the two types of research overlap to a significant degree (“Pasteur’s
Quadrant”). In the physical sciences, however, academics engaged in basic research are much
less likely to patent than those engaged in applied work.
We also see other interesting differences in patenting within sectors. In the life sciences,
scientists in startups are significantly more likely to have a patent than those in established firms,
perhaps reflecting that life sciences startups use patents as a signal of scientific capability and
commercial potential (Hsu et al., 2007). Patenting among industrial scientists also increases with
the ranking of the PhD granting institution, possibly reflecting an effect of ability on the quality
of research.16 In the academic life sciences, patenting rates are significantly lower in lower-tier
institutions and significantly higher in medical schools, compared to Carnegie I/II institutions.
Models 7-12 focus on the likelihood of publishing. We find no significant differences in
publishing between basic and applied scientists, but scientists engaged in development are much
less likely to publish. Once we control for the nature of research, the industry-academia gap in
publishing decreases significantly; industrial scientists are less likely to publish partly because
they are more often engaged in development work which is less likely to result in a publication.

16

Our interpretation of patent and publication counts as “disclosure mechanism” implicitly assumes that all individuals have
generated research results that can be disclosed. While we know that all individuals in our sample are research active, we do not
have an independent measure of their research productivity. Control variables for ability (PHD_NRC_SCORE) and experience
(YRS_GRAD) should capture a significant share of the unobserved variation in underlying research productivity.

24

Our split sample regressions show that the lower likelihood of publishing for scientists in
development is driven primarily by scientists in industry. We also find that industrial scientists
trained at highly ranked institutions are more likely to publish. However, the likelihood of
publishing decreases with time since graduation, i.e., younger industrial scientists are more likely
to have a publication than older scientists. This result may reflect the fact that newly-minted
scientists arrive with a stock of research findings ready for publication or a recent shift on the
part of firms towards more open science by hiring more “academic” types of scientists. It could
also reflect that scientists become less interested in publishing over time due to socialization.17
5.5

Publishing and Patenting by a “Standardized Individual”
The regressions using the pooled sample showed that large industry-academia gaps in

publishing and especially patenting remain even if we control for the nature of R&D. However,
these regressions constrained the coefficients of the nature of work to be the same across sectors
and fields and did not control for a range of individual-level variables such as gender or ability.
We, therefore, estimated regressions separately by sector and field (similar to models 3-6 and 912, but excluding sector-specific controls) and use the results of these to predict the probability
that a “standardized individual” patents or publishes when working in industry versus academia.
Using this method, we effectively predict the industry-academia gap for a given type of research
and a given individual, allowing for different effects of the nature of R&D and of characteristics
of the individual on the focal outcome across sectors and fields. This approach provides the best
estimates of differences in the use of disclosure mechanisms that can be attributed to the sectors
per se, rather than to differences in the nature of work or in scientists’ characteristics. For the
most part, we use the median or mean values in our sample to define the “standardized
individual.” In the life sciences, this “standardized individual” is a biomedical scientist who is
engaged in applied research, graduated 10 years ago (HDTENURE=10) from an average PhD
program (PHD_NRC_SCORE=3.45), supervises two other people, and is white, male and a U.S.
citizen. In the physical sciences, the “standardized individual” is a physicist who otherwise has
the same characteristics as the biomedical scientist.
Figure 5 gives the predicted probabilities of patenting and publishing. We find large
predicted industry-academia gaps in the probability of patenting for both the biomedical scientist
17

When we drop individuals who graduated within 5 years, the negative effect of time since graduation is reduced but remains
significant, especially in the life sciences.

25

and the physicist. However, the predicted industry-academia gaps in the probability of publishing
are much smaller than those for patenting, and the publishing gap is insignificant for the
biomedical scientist (0.88 vs. 0.94). The large remaining gaps in the probability of patenting
even controlling for the nature of research likely reflect different norms regarding disclosure and
different functions of patenting across sectors. For example, it is well known that firms use
patents for purposes other than the protection of the focal invention, i.e., to build patent fences or
to obtain bargaining power in cross-licensing negotiations (Cohen et al., 2000). Such uses are
less relevant in academia. Moreover, such strategic uses are particularly important in industries
such as semiconductors and electronics, which may explain why the remaining gap is larger in
the physical sciences than in the life sciences.
Our data do not allow us to clearly identify strategic disclosure, norms, or other
mechanisms underlying the remaining industry-academia gaps in the use of disclosure
mechanisms. However, by separating out differences associated with the nature of research and
scientists’ characteristics, we provide estimates of the potential magnitude of these effects and
our results suggest that such factors are more important with respect to patenting than with
respect to publishing.
Figure 5: Predicted Probabilities of Patenting and Publishing for a “Standardized Individual” Engaged in
Applied Research

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

0.88

0.97

0.94
0.84

0.70
0.48

0.18

0.12

Biomedical
scientist

Physicist

Patenting 0/1
Industry

Biomedical
scientist

Physicist

Publishing 0/1
Academia

26

6

Summary and Discussion
The stereotypical view of academic and industrial science depicts the two sectors as

qualitatively different. Recent evidence, however, suggests many similarities and, perhaps,
increasing convergence. Unfortunately, a sound empirical basis to assess similarities and
differences between the two sectors has been missing. Moreover, we have a limited
understanding of the relationship between the nature of research, which is often seen as the key
driver of sectoral differences, and other characteristics of industrial and academic science.
Drawing on prior theoretical and empirical work on industrial and academic science, we
develop a framework of comparison involving four key dimensions of science: the nature of
work (e.g., basic versus applied), organizational characteristics (e.g., level of freedom),
scientists’ characteristics (e.g., preference for freedom), and disclosure mechanisms (e.g.,
publishing and patenting). We then use detailed survey data from a representative sample of over
5,000 life scientists and physical scientists working in industry and academia to compare the two
sectors along the four dimensions. We also examine differences within each sector and the
relationships between the four dimensions of science. With respect to the latter, we are
particularly interested in the extent to which differences in the nature of research explain
differences in other characteristics of science.
We find significant industry-academia differences with respect to all four dimensions.
But we also find remarkable similarities. For example, while 78% of academics are very satisfied
with their level of independence, more than 50% of industrial scientists are very satisfied as well.
Similarly, over 60% of industrial scientists publish, compared to 92% in academia. Our data
allow us to quantify differences and similarities such as these along all four dimensions, painting
an unusually nuanced and representative picture of academic and industrial science. Moreover,
our analyses also show important differences within each sector, e.g., between top tier versus
lower tier academic institutions, between scientists with different tenure statuses, or between
startups and large established firms.
Our econometric analyses show several significant relationships between the nature of
research and the other dimensions of science. However, differences in the nature of research do
not fully explain differences in those other dimensions. For example, a higher likelihood of
patenting in industry is not explained by the fact that industrial research tends to be more
downstream.
27

Our paper makes several contributions. First, although prior work has questioned
simplistic views of industrial and academia science, empirical studies typically focus on a limited
set of attributes (e.g., publishing) or on only one sector (e.g., either academia or industry). Here
we compare industrial and academic science directly along four key dimensions using a large
representative sample. Prior work suggests that our findings of significant differences and
remarkable similarities have important implications. For example, Aghion et al. (2008) and
Lacetera (2008) show theoretically that differences in the level of freedom granted to scientists in
industry and academia directly affect important issues such as wages, the division of labor across
sectors, or collaborative relationships between sectors. While our finding of higher levels of
freedom in academia suggest that the mechanisms proposed by Aghion et al. and Lacetera may
indeed be operating, our findings that the majority of industrial scientists are very satisfied with
their level of freedom suggests that the difference in freedom may be less pronounced than their
models assume. Overall, and returning to our title question, our results suggest that industrial and
academic science may be better characterized as “siblings” rather than “twins” or “strangers”.
However, neither of these simple labels may sufficiently describe the relationship between the
two sectors since we find different industry-academia gaps across the four dimensions of science
as well as a significant amount of heterogeneity even within each sector.
Second, our results provide novel evidence regarding the relationships between the nature
of R&D and the use of different disclosure mechanisms across the two sectors. In particular, we
find that the significantly higher level of patenting activity in industry is not explained by the fact
that industrial R&D is more downstream than academic research – indeed, the industry-academia
gap in patenting slightly increases when we account for the nature of research because
development work, which is more common in industry, is less likely to be associated with
patenting than basic or applied research. One interpretation of the remaining patenting gaps is
that industry and academia are characterized by very different norms and incentives regarding
patenting, or by different functions and uses of patents. On the other hand, we find that an
individual working on the “same” type of research is almost as likely to have a publication in
industry as in academia (though counts of publications remain much lower), suggesting that the
two sectors are more similar with respect to the drivers of publishing.
Third, our findings provide support for the notion that scientists make trade-offs between
pecuniary and nonpecuniary job attributes (cf. Stern, 2004). We find that academics earn
28

objectively less and are less satisfied with salary than their colleagues in industry but they are
more satisfied with their level of independence. While prior work has documented pay
differences across sectors, we also document offsetting differences in nonpecuniary job
attributes. However, our finding of weaker preferences for nonpecuniary factors in industry
suggests that the observed salary premium in industry may be smaller than what would be
necessary to induce a randomly selected scientist to work in industry (cf. Aghion et al., 2008;
Rosen, 1986). Our descriptive results also inform research on scientific labor markets. Roach &
Sauermann (2010) asked current PhD students about their perceptions of scientific careers in
industry and academia and found that students perceived the sectors to be dramatically different
with respect to factors such as independence, salaries, and publishing opportunities. Our results
suggest that actual differences between industrial and academic science may be smaller than
those expected by students, potentially leading to suboptimal career decisions.
Fourth, our findings may have important implications for research on academia-industry
interactions and technology transfer. One possible interpretation of our findings is that the
significant differences across sectors could inhibit industry-academia interactions, e.g., if
academic collaborators are more interested in working independently on challenging projects,
while industrial collaborators are more interested in financial payoffs, or if academics get
rewarded for publishing while industrial scientists get rewarded for patents. However, a different
interpretation is that the remarkable similarities between sectors, e.g., regarding scientists’
preferences and publishing activities, may actually facilitate collaboration. Similarly, our finding
of high levels of conference attendance and memberships in professional associations among
industrial as well as academic scientists complements prior evidence suggesting that such
“informal” knowledge channels may be important mechanisms for knowledge exchange within
as well as across sectors (cf. Cockburn et al., 1998; Cohen, Nelson, & Walsh, 2002).
Finally, our work goes beyond qualitative comparisons and provides quantitative
estimates of differences and similarities, opening up the possibility of using such quantities as
independent variables in future work. For example, future studies could examine whether the
“distance” between industrial and academic science explains important outcomes such as
academic entrepreneurship or labor mobility. Moreover, longitudinal studies employing
quantitative measures of the “industry-academia gap” could provide a more rigorous basis for
assessing the “convergence” between the industrial and the academic sector over time.
29

Our findings suggest several areas for future research. First, while we provide rich data
on differences and similarities between sectors, we have made only limited progress in
explaining the observed differences. Future work is needed to examine the underlying
mechanisms, including institutional norms and incentives as drivers of differences in patenting
and publishing. Second, longitudinal studies are needed on changes in the four dimensions.
While changes in the four dimensions are interesting per se, longitudinal studies may also inform
us about the relative importance of selection effects and socialization effects in driving observed
industry-academia gaps in scientists’ preferences. Given universities’ increasing interest in
commercialization and firms’ increasing interest in tapping into the benefits of open science, the
question of how and how much individuals’ preferences can change to support those strategies is
particularly relevant from a policy and management perspective.
Our study is not without limitations. First, while our measure of the nature of R&D has
several unique benefits, a more fine-grained measure that can explicitly identify research in
“Pasteur’s Quadrant” would be desirable. Second, we had to rely on scientists’ satisfaction with
independence as a proxy of actual independence. While satisfaction gaps were robust to the
inclusion of various controls, it would be desirable to assess industry-academia gaps in
organizational characteristics using more direct measures. Third, while our data allow us to
compare and contrast academic and industrial research along a wide range of dimensions, they
do not capture all potentially relevant attributes. For example, it would be interesting to compare
the two sectors with respect to organizational characteristics such as the role of teams and access
to resources for research or with respect to the impact and value of the knowledge generated.
Finally, most of our measures were obtained from survey questionnaires and are self-reported by
respondents; NSF confidentiality restrictions prevented us from matching our data to external
data sources. While self-reports using the same survey instrument facilitate comparisons across a
wide range of individuals and institutions, future work should also employ secondary data
sources such as patent statistics.
Despite these limitations, our study provides novel insights into the scientific enterprise
and may also help decision makers in their efforts to improve research effectiveness in industry
and academia and to foster productive relationships between the two sectors.

30

REFERENCES
Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M., & Stein, J. 2008. Academic freedom, private-sector focus, and the process
of innovation. RAND Journal of Economics, 39(3): 617-635.
Allen, T. J. & Katz, R. 1992. Age, education and the technical ladder. IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management, 39(3): 237-245.
Arrow, K. J. 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. In R. R. Nelson (Ed.),
The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: NBER / Princeton University Press.
Augsdorfer, P. 2008. Managing the unmanageable. Research-Technology Management, 51(4): 41-47.
Bercovitz, J. & Feldman, M. 2008. Academic entrepreneurs: Organizational change at the individual
level. Organization Science, 19: 69-89.
Cable, D. M. & Edwards, J. R. 2004. Complementary and supplementary fit: A theoretical and empirical
integration. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(5): 822-834.
Cockburn, I. M. & Henderson, R. M. 1998. Absorptive capacity, coauthoring behavior, and the
organization of research in drug discovery. Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2): 157-182.
Cohen, W. M. & Levinthal, D. A. 1990. Absorptive Capacity - a New Perspective on Learning and
Innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1): 128-152.
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., & Walsh, J. P. 2000. Protecting their intellectual assets: Appropriability
conditions and why U.S. manufacturing firms patent (or not), NBER Working Paper.
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., & Walsh, J. P. 2002. Links and impacts: The influence of public research
on industrial R&D. Management Science, 48(1): 1-23.
Copeland, R. 2007. Biomedical careers in industry: A few tips for the newcomer. ASBMB Today,
January 2007.
Dasgupta, P. & David, P. A. 1994. Toward a New Economics of Science. Research Policy, 23(5): 487521.
Davis, G. 2005. Doctors without orders. American Scientist, 93(3, supplement).
Ding, W. W. 2006. Does Science Chase Money? The Impact of Industry Research on the Selection of
Research Topics Among Academic Scientists, Working Paper.
Ding, W. W. 2010. The impact of founder professional education background on the adoption of open
science by for-profit biotechology firms, Working Paper.
Ducor, P. 2000. Coauthorship and coinventorship. Science, 289(5481): 873-875.
Furman, J. L. & MacGarvie, M. J. 2007. Academic science and the birth of industrial research
laboratories in the U.S. pharmaceutical industry. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 63(4): 756-776.
Gans, J., Murray, F., & Stern, S. 2008. Patents, papers, pairs & secrets: Contracting over the disclosure of
scientific knowledge, Working Paper.
Gittelman, M. & Kogut, B. 2003. Does good science lead to valuable knowledge? Biotechnology firms
and the evolutionary logic of citation patterns. Management Science, 49(4): 366-382.
Goldberger, M. L., Flattau, P., & Maher, B. A. 1995. Research-Doctorate Programs in the United States:
Continuity and Change: National Academy Press.
Gouldner, A. W. 1957. Cosmopolitans and Locals: Toward an Analysis of Latent Social Roles. I.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 2(3): 281-306.
Gundry, L. K. 1993. Fitting into Technical Organizations - the Socialization of Newcomer Engineers.
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 40(4): 335-345.
Hackett, E. J. 1990. Science as a vocation in the 1990s. Journal of Higher Education, 61(3): 241-279.
Harrison, J. R. & Carroll, G. R. 1991. Keeping the Faith - a Model of Cultural Transmission in Formal
Organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly, 36(4): 552-582.
Henderson, R. 1994. The evolution of integrative capability: Innovation in cardiovascular drug discovery.
Industrial and Corporate Change, 3(3): 607-630.

31

Henderson, R., Jaffe, A., & Trajtenberg, J. 1998. Universities as a Source of Commercial Technology: A
Detailed Analysis of University Patenting, 1965-1988. Review of Economics and Statistics, 80: 119127.
Hicks, D. 1995. Published papers, tacit competencies and corporate management of the public/private
character of knowledge. Industrial and Corporate Change, 4: 401-424.
Hsu, D. & Ziedonis, R. 2007. Patents as quality signals for entrepreneurial ventures, Working Paper.
Idson, T. L. 1990. Establishment Size, Job-Satisfaction and the Structure of Work. Applied Economics,
22(8): 1007-1018.
Jensen, R. & Thursby, M. 2001. Proofs and prototypes for sale: The licensing of university inventions.
American Economic Review, 91(1): 240-259.
Killingsworth, M. 1987. Heterogeneous preferences, compensating wage differentials, and comparable
worth. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(4): 727-742.
Kornhauser, W. 1962. Scientists in industry: Conflict and accommodation. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Lacetera, N. 2008. Academic entrepreneurship, Working Paper.
Lacetera, N. 2009. Different missions and commitment power in R&D organizations: Theory and
evidence on industry-university alliances. Organization Science, 20(3): 565-582.
Levin, S. G. & Stephan, P. E. 1991. Research Productivity Over the Life Cycle: Evidence for Academic
Scientists. American Economic Review, 81(1): 114-132.
Merton, R. K. 1973. The sociology of science : Theoretical and empirical investigations. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Miller, G. A. 1976. Professionals in Bureaucracy: Alienation among Industrial Scientists and Engineers.
American Sociological Review, 32(5): 755-768.
Moorman, R. H. & Podsakoff, P. M. 1992. A Metaanalytic Review and Empirical-Test of the Potential
Confounding Effects of Social Desirability Response Sets in Organizational-Behavior Research.
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 65: 131-149.
Mowery, D., Nelson, R., Sampat, B., & Ziedonis, A. 2001. The growh of patenting and licensing by US
universities: An assessment of the effects of the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980. Research Policy, 30: 99119.
Murray, F. 2006. The Oncomouse that roared: Resistance & accommodation to patenting in academic
science, Working Paper.
Murray, F. & O'Mahony, S. 2007a. Exploring the foundations of cumulative innovation: Implications for
Organization Science. Organization Science, 18(6): 1006-1021.
Murray, F. & Stern, S. 2007b. Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow of scientific
knowledge? Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 63: 648-687.
Narin, F., Pinski, G., & Gee, H. 1976. The structure of biomedical literature. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science: 24-45.
Nelson, R. R. 1959. The simple economics of basic scientific research. Journal of Political Economy,
67(3): 297-306.
NSF. 2003. Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System. http://sestat.nsf.gov/.
Oi, W. Y. & Idson, T. L. 1999. Firm size and wages. In O. Ashenfelter & D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of
Labor Economics, Vol. 3B: 2165-2214. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Owen-Smith, J. & Powell, W. W. 2004. Knowledge networks as channels and conduits: The effects of
spillovers in the Boston biotechnology community. Organization Science, 15(1): 5-21.
Pelz, D. C. & Andrews, F. M. 1976. Scientists in Organizations : Productive Climates for Research and
Development (Rev. ed.). Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, J. Y., & Lee, J. Y. 2003. Common methods bias in behavioral research: A
critical review and recommended remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5): 879-903.
Regets, M. 1998. What follows the postdoctorate experience? Employment patterns of 1993 postdocs in
1995, NSF SRS Issue Brief.

32

Rhoten, D. & Powell, W. W. 2007. The frontiers of intellectual property: Expanded protetction versus
new models of open science. Annual Review of Law and Social Science: 345-373.
Ritti, R. 1968. Work Goals of Scientists and Engineers. Industrial Relations, 8: 118-131.
Roach, M. & Sauermann, H. 2010. A taste for science? PhD scientists' academic orientation and selfselection into research careers in industry. Research Policy, 39(3): 422-434.
Rosen, S. 1986. The theory of equalizing differences. In O. Ashenfelter & R. Layard (Eds.), Handbook of
Labor Economics: 641-692: North-Holland.
Rosenberg, N. 1990. Why do firms do basic research (with their own money)? Research Policy, 19(2):
165-174.
Rosenberg, N. & Nelson, R. 1994. American universities and technical advance in industry. Research
Policy, 23: 323-348.
Sauermann, H., Cohen, W. M., & Stephan, P. E. 2009. Complementing Merton: The motives, incentives,
and innovative activities of academic scientists and engineers, Working Paper.
Sauermann, H. & Roach, M. 2010a. Which scientists pay to be scientists - and why?, Working Paper.
Sauermann, H., Roach, M., & Zhang, W. 2010b. What does science "taste" like? Individuals' preferences
and the organization of science, Working Paper.
Slaughter, S. & Rhoades, G. 2004. Academic Capitalism and the New Economy: Markets, State, and
Higher Education. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Sorenson, O. & Fleming, L. 2004. Science and the diffusion of knowledge. Research Policy, 33(16151634).
Stephan, P. E. 1996. The economics of science. Journal of Economic Literature, 34(3): 1199-1235.
Stephan, P. E. & Levin, S., G. 1996. Property rights and entrepreneurship in science. Small Business
Economics, 8: 177-188.
Stern, S. 2004. Do scientists pay to be scientists? Management Science, 50(6): 835-853.
Stinchcombe, A. 1994. Freedom and oppression of slaves in the eighteenth-century Carribean. American
Sociological Review, 59(6): 911-929.
Stokes, D. 1997. Pasteur's Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution Press.
Thursby, J., Fuller, A., & Thursby, M. 2009a. US faculty patenting: Inside and outside the university.
Research Policy, 38: 14-25.
Thursby, J. & Thursby, M. 2009b. University licensing: Harnessing or tarnishing faculty research?,
Working Paper.
Vallas, S. P. & Kleinman, D. L. 2008. Contradiction, convergence, and the knowledge economy: The
confluence of academic and commercial biotechnology. Socio-Economic Review, 6(283-311).
Wood, D. A. & LeBold, W. K. 1970. The Multivariate Nature of Professional Job Satisfaction. Personnel
Psychology, 23: 173-189.
Zucker, L. G., Darby, M. R., & Armstrong, J. S. 2002. Commercializing knowledge: University science,
knowledge capture, and firm performance in biotechnology. Management Science, 48(1): 138153.

33

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics and Mean Comparisons Across Sectors

Dimension

Variable

Variable Type

Nature of R&D

Basic research
Applied Research
Development

Dummy
Dummy
Dummy

Organizational
characteristics

Actual salary
Satisfaction salary
Satisfaction independence

Continuous
Dummy
Dummy

Preferences

Importance of salary
Importance of independence

Disclosure
mechanisms

U.S. patent applications
U.S. patent applications yes/no
Publications
Publications yes/no
Professional meetings attendance
Professional societies memberships

Industry
N=1831
Mean
SD

Academia
N=3187
Mean
SD

Ind‐Acad
Gap

0.06
0.58
0.36

0.23
0.49
0.48

0.70
0.28
0.02

0.46
0.45
0.13

‐0.64 **
0.30 **
0.35 **

106,081
0.41
0.51

53,248
0.49
0.50

81,326
0.26
0.78

42,179
0.44
0.42

24,755 **
0.15 **
‐0.27 **

Dummy
Dummy

0.47
0.61

0.50
0.49

0.37
0.81

0.48
0.39

0.10 **
‐0.20 **

Count
Dummy
Count
Dummy
Dummy
Count

2.91
0.50
3.49
0.62
0.74
1.90

6.82
0.50
6.09
0.49
0.44
1.68

0.51
0.16
12.00
0.92
0.87
3.09

2.58
0.36
13.89
0.27
0.33
2.23

2.41
0.34
‐8.50
‐0.30
‐0.13
‐1.19

**
**
**
**
**
**

Male
Dummy
0.81
0.41
0.76
Years since graduation
Count
15.03
9.12
17.18
NRC PhD program ranking score
Continuous
3.41
0.71
3.47
People supervised
Count
2.77
3.47
3.71
Startup
Dummy
0.08
Large established firm
Dummy
0.40
Other firm
Dummy
0.52
Not tenure track
Dummy
0.25
Tenure track not tenured
Dummy
0.21
Tenured
Dummy
0.54
Carnegie I, II
Dummy
0.43
Medical school
Dummy
0.28
Lower tier
Dummy
0.29
*=significant at 5%; **=significant at 1%. Significance based on regressions with INDUSTRY dummy as RHS variable.

0.45
10.35
0.73
7.42

0.05
‐2.15
‐0.06
‐0.93

**
**
**
**

Controls

34

Table 3: Means and Industry-University Gaps by Field of Occupation

Dimensions

Variable

Type of R&D

Basic research
Applied Research
Development

Organizational
characteristics

Actual salary
Satisfaction salary
Satisfaction independence

Preferences

Disclosure
mechanisms

Industry
N=848
Mean

Life Sciences
Academia
Ind‐Acad
N=1993
Mean
Gap

Industry
N=983
Mean

Physical Sciences
Academia
Ind‐Acad
N=1194
Mean
Gap

Diff. in Gaps

0.08
0.60
0.32

0.66
0.32
0.01

‐0.59 **
0.28 **
0.30 **

0.04
0.56
0.40

0.77
0.21
0.02

‐0.72 **
0.34 **
0.38 **

0.14 **
‐0.06 *
‐0.08 n.s.

107,052
0.42
0.52

84,063
0.27
0.79

22,989 **
0.15 **
‐0.27 **

105,256
0.39
0.51

76,739
0.24
0.76

28,517 **
0.15 **
‐0.26 **

‐5,527 n.s.
0.00 n.s.
‐0.01 n.s.

Importance of salary
Importance of independence

0.49
0.63

0.39
0.82

0.10 **
‐0.18 **

0.46
0.59

0.34
0.79

0.12 **
‐0.20 **

‐0.02 n.s.
0.02 n.s.

U.S. patent applications
U.S. patent applications yes/no
Publications
Publications yes/no
Professional meetings attendance
Professional societies memberships

2.23
0.43
3.94
0.71
0.81
2.07

0.60
0.19
12.02
0.94
0.87
3.32

1.63
0.24
‐8.08
‐0.23
‐0.06
‐1.25

3.50
0.55
3.10
0.54
0.67
1.76

0.35
0.11
11.95
0.90
0.87
2.70

3.14
0.45
‐8.85
‐0.36
‐0.19
‐0.94

‐1.51
‐0.21
0.77
0.13
0.14
‐0.31

**
**
**
**
**
**

**
**
**
**
**
**

**
**
*
*
**
n.s.

*=significant at 5%; **=significant at 1%.

35

Table 4: Organizational Characteristics
Full sample
Industry
Academia
1
2
3
4
5
6
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
ln_salary ln_salary ln_salary ln_salary ln_salary ln_salary
Industry 0.266** 0.233**
[0.020]
[0.026]
Basic research
‐0.048*
‐0.089
0.005
‐0.040 ‐0.070**
[0.024]
[0.058]
[0.058]
[0.027]
[0.025]
Development
0.003
‐0.004
‐0.071*
0.041
0.053
[0.033]
[0.036]
[0.034]
[0.062]
[0.051]
Imp. Independence
Startup
Other firm
Lower tier
Medical school
Not tenure track
Tenured
Field
PhD_NRC_Score

Full sample
7
8
probit
probit
sat_ind
sat_ind
‐0.738** ‐0.663**
[0.040]
[0.055]
0.121*
[0.052]
0.004
[0.062]

Industry
9
10
probit
probit
sat_ind
sat_ind

‐0.050
[0.134]
0.038
[0.065]

‐0.043
[0.063]
‐0.069*
[0.033]

‐0.023
[0.139]
0.003
[0.067]

0.181
[0.123]
0.121
[0.066]
‐0.164**
[0.028]
0.160**
[0.027]
‐0.177**
[0.029]
0.024
[0.028]
incl.
0.031*
[0.014]
0.017**
[0.001]
0.000
[0.000]
0.111**
[0.012]
0.089**
[0.027]
0.024
[0.044]
incl.
10.541**
[0.088]
3187
0.228

incl.
0.040
[0.024]
Yrs since grad
0.022**
[0.002]
Yrs grad _sq
‐0.001**
[0.000]
ln_Supdir
0.074**
[0.020]
Male
‐0.001
[0.040]
U.S. Citizen
0.011
[0.062]
Race
incl.
Constant 11.165** 11.199** 11.438** 10.863** 11.193**
0.766** 0.683**
0.018
[0.012]
[0.021]
[0.021]
[0.118]
[0.023]
[0.026]
[0.045]
[0.040]
Observations
5018
5018
1831
1831
3187
5018
5018
1831
R‐squared
0.038
0.039
0.001
0.145
0.001
Robust standard errors in brackets; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Omitted categories are Applied Research, Large established firm, Carnegie I+II institution, Tenure track but not tenured

incl.
‐0.006
[0.045]
0.000
[0.004]
0.001**
[0.000]
0.084*
[0.043]
‐0.164*
[0.081]
‐0.014
[0.113]
incl.
0.294
[0.249]
1831

Full Sample Industry Academia
Academia
11
12
13
14
15
probit
probit
probit
probit
probit
sat_ind
sat_ind
sat_ind
sat_ind
sat_ind
‐0.565**
[0.056]
0.128*
0.092
0.109*
0.028
0.089
[0.058]
[0.066]
[0.053]
[0.142]
[0.067]
‐0.442*
‐0.426*
0.020
0.027
‐0.401*
[0.190]
[0.189]
[0.063]
[0.068]
[0.182]
0.710** 0.604** 0.707**
[0.045]
[0.065]
[0.065]
0.147
[0.124]
0.136*
[0.067]
‐0.205**
‐0.198**
[0.072]
[0.073]
‐0.014
0.006
[0.075]
[0.077]
‐0.469**
‐0.392**
[0.083]
[0.085]
‐0.126
‐0.131
[0.090]
[0.092]
incl.
incl.
incl.
0.029
‐0.004
0.010
[0.039]
[0.045]
[0.040]
0.006
‐0.001
0.005
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.004]
0.000
0.001**
0.000
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
0.107**
0.057
0.086*
[0.035]
[0.044]
[0.035]
‐0.073
‐0.139
‐0.050
[0.064]
[0.083]
[0.065]
0.278**
‐0.010 0.300**
[0.095]
[0.115]
[0.095]
incl.
incl.
incl.
0.686**
0.419*
0.145*
‐0.133
‐0.004
[0.048]
[0.200]
[0.057]
[0.260]
[0.208]
3187
3187
5018
1831
3187

36

Table 5: Scientists’ Preferences

Industry
Basic research
Development
Startup
Other firm
Lower tier
Medical school
Not tenure track
Tenured
Field
PhD_NRC_Score

Full Sample
1
2
probit
probit
imp_sal imp_sal
0.259** 0.174**
[0.039]
[0.053]
‐0.126*
[0.049]
0.015
[0.061]

Industry
3
4
probit
probit
imp_sal imp_sal

‐0.160
[0.136]
0.070
[0.065]

‐0.187
[0.137]
0.058
[0.067]
‐0.116
[0.125]
‐0.085
[0.066]

Academia
5
6
probit
probit
imp_sal imp_sal

‐0.145**
[0.053]
‐0.565**
[0.203]

‐0.105
[0.060]
‐0.557**
[0.210]

‐0.042
[0.065]
0.136*
[0.068]
0.026
[0.076]
0.153
[0.080]
incl.
‐0.111**
[0.035]
0.006
[0.004]
0.000
[0.000]
0.034
[0.030]
0.079
[0.058]
‐0.190*
[0.093]
incl.
‐0.085
[0.186]
3187

Full Sample
7
8
probit
probit
imp_ind imp_ind
‐0.592** ‐0.525**
[0.041]
[0.058]
0.076
[0.056]
‐0.052
[0.063]

Industry
9
10
probit
probit
imp_ind imp_ind

‐0.217
[0.135]
‐0.056
[0.066]

incl.
‐0.034
[0.044]
Yrs since grad
‐0.009*
[0.004]
Yrs grad _sq
0.000
[0.000]
ln_supdir
0.062
[0.043]
Male
0.156
[0.081]
U.S. Citizen
‐0.130
[0.113]
Race
incl.
Constant ‐0.325** ‐0.238**
‐0.082*
‐0.087 ‐0.215**
0.872** 0.821** 0.314**
[0.024]
[0.042]
[0.040]
[0.248]
[0.045]
[0.027]
[0.048]
[0.041]
Observations
5018
5018
1831
1831
3187
5018
5018
1831
Robust standard errors in brackets; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Omitted categories are Applied Research, Large established firm, Carnegie I+II institution, Tenure track but not tenured

‐0.206
[0.139]
‐0.095
[0.068]
0.180
[0.125]
‐0.039
[0.067]

incl.
‐0.013
[0.045]
0.004
[0.004]
0.000
[0.000]
0.129**
[0.044]
‐0.146
[0.083]
‐0.024
[0.114]
incl.
0.596*
[0.257]
1831

Academia
11
12
probit
probit
imp_ind imp_ind

0.123*
[0.061]
‐0.250
[0.199]

0.038
[0.070]
‐0.196
[0.206]

0.793**
[0.051]
3187

‐0.095
[0.074]
‐0.093
[0.078]
‐0.447**
[0.083]
0.008
[0.091]
incl.
0.092*
[0.042]
0.007
[0.005]
0.000
[0.000]
0.117**
[0.035]
‐0.128
[0.067]
‐0.031
[0.106]
incl.
0.3
[0.217]
3187

37

Table 6: Patenting and Publishing
Full

industry
academia
Full
industry
phys
life
phys
life
phys
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
probit
probit
probit
probit
probit
probit
probit
probit
probit
probit
uspapp01 uspapp01 uspapp01 uspapp01 uspapp01 uspapp01
pubs01
pubs01
pubs01
pubs01
Industry 0.986**
1.017**
‐1.113** ‐0.845**
[0.042]
[0.058]
[0.047]
[0.062]
Basic research
‐0.044
0.053
0.014
0.096 ‐0.527**
0.087
0.357
0.360
[0.056]
[0.186]
[0.227]
[0.091]
[0.142]
[0.064]
[0.243]
[0.238]
Development
‐0.173** ‐0.317**
‐0.131
‐0.262
‐0.144
‐0.599** ‐0.422** ‐0.576**
[0.062]
[0.106]
[0.094]
[0.346]
[0.367]
[0.063]
[0.107]
[0.094]
Startup
0.468**
0.286
0.082
0.235
[0.163]
[0.219]
[0.194]
[0.212]
Other firm
0.001
‐0.162
‐0.188
‐0.110
[0.101]
[0.094]
[0.106]
[0.095]
Lower tier
‐0.516** ‐0.552**
[0.121]
[0.145]
Medical school
0.083
0.037
[0.084]
[0.259]
Not tenure track
0.052
‐0.261
[0.108]
[0.207]
Tenured
‐0.010
‐0.301
[0.116]
[0.209]
Field
incl.
incl.
incl.
incl.
incl.
incl.
PhD_NRC_Score
0.278**
0.132*
0.039
‐0.020
0.149 0.192**
[0.074]
[0.060]
[0.058]
[0.086]
[0.077]
[0.062]
Yrs since grad
0.006
0.003
0.014*
0.011
‐0.040** ‐0.043**
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.010]
[0.007]
[0.006]
Yrs grad _sq
‐0.002** ‐0.002**
‐0.001*
‐0.001
0.001* 0.002**
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.000]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.000]
Ln_supdir
0.308**
0.152* 0.320** 0.218**
0.160*
0.104
[0.071]
[0.062]
[0.045]
[0.064]
[0.073]
[0.058]
Male
0.265*
0.272*
0.112
0.036
0.249*
‐0.121
[0.114]
[0.128]
[0.082]
[0.168]
[0.122]
[0.136]
U.S. Citizen
0.123
‐0.210
0.126
‐0.256
‐0.172
‐0.292
[0.172]
[0.166]
[0.154]
[0.207]
[0.194]
[0.173]
Race
incl.
incl.
incl.
incl.
incl.
incl.
Constant ‐0.993** ‐0.959** ‐1.759**
‐0.093 ‐1.872**
0.312 1.413** 1.367**
0.01
0.401
[0.028]
[0.049]
[0.352]
[0.409]
[0.282]
[0.620]
[0.034]
[0.055]
[0.362]
[0.424]
Observations
5018
5018
848
983
1993
1194
5018
5018
848
983
Chi‐square 556.334
565.229
71.575 126.686 135.284 112.146 573.386 654.384 100.563 146.614
df
1
3
17
17
19
19
1
3
17
17
Robust standard errors in brackets; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Omitted categories are Applied Research, Large established firm, Carnegie I+II institution, Tenure track but not tenured
life

academia
life
phys
11
12
probit
probit
pubs01
pubs01

0.121
[0.122]
‐0.497
[0.296]

‐0.012
[0.142]
‐0.244
[0.368]

‐0.706**
[0.124]
0.010
[0.127]
‐0.038
[0.151]
0.118
[0.160]
incl.
0.072
[0.067]
‐0.016*
[0.008]
0.000
[0.000]
0.150*
[0.061]
0.078
[0.107]
0.108
[0.209]
incl.
1.356**
[0.314]
1993
87.999
19

‐0.695**
[0.132]
0.645
[0.493]
‐0.540**
[0.206]
‐0.075
[0.211]
incl.
0.167*
[0.069]
‐0.037**
[0.010]
0.001
[0.000]
0.281**
[0.084]
0.142
[0.148]
0.178
[0.198]
incl.
0.918
[0.499]
1186
81.923
18

38

