NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING HETEROGENEOUS TREATMENT EFFECTS OF MEDICAID EXPANSIONS
ON TAKE-UP AND CROWD-OUT
John C. Ham
I. Serkan Ozbeklik
Lara Shore-Sheppard
Working Paper 16112
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16112

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

We are grateful to Steven Cosslett, Curtis Eberwein, Ingmar Prucha, Geert Ridder, Sergio Urzúa, Frank
Vella and seminar participants at Ohio State University and Georgetown University for comments.
This research has been supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (SES-0136928 and
SES-0627968) and the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (R01 HD39369-01A1).
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by John C. Ham, I. Serkan Ozbeklik, and Lara Shore-Sheppard. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects of Medicaid Expansions on Take-up and Crowd-out
John C. Ham, I. Serkan Ozbeklik, and Lara Shore-Sheppard
NBER Working Paper No. 16112
June 2010
JEL No. H42,I1,I38
ABSTRACT
Economists have devoted considerable resources to estimating local average treatment effects of expansions
in Medicaid eligibility for children. In this paper we use random coefficients linear probability models
and switching probit models to estimate a more complete range of effects of Medicaid expansion on
Medicaid take-up and crowd-out of private insurance. We demonstrate how to estimate, for Medicaid
expansions, the average effect among all of those eligible, the average effect for a randomly chosen
person, the effect for a marginally eligible child, and the average effect for those affected by a nonmarginal
counterfactual policy change. We then estimate the average effect of Medicaid expansions among
all eligible children and the average effect for those affected by a nonmarginal counterfactual Medicaid
expansion since these are likely to be the most useful for policy analysis. Estimated take-up rates among
average eligible children are substantially larger than take-up rates for those made eligible by a counterfactual
Medicaid expansion, moreover both of these effects vary widely across demographic groups. In terms
of crowd-out, we find statistically significant, though small, effects for all eligible children, but not
for those affected by a counterfactual policy change.

John C. Ham
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
ham@econ.umd.edu

Lara Shore-Sheppard
Department of Economics
Williams College
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER
lshore@williams.edu

I. Serkan Ozbeklik
The Robert Day School of Economics and Finance,
Claremont McKenna College
500 E. Ninth Street
Claremont, CA 91711
serkan.ozbeklik@cmc.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16112

1. Introduction
In recent years, eligibility for public health insurance among children has expanded substantially, leading
to a burgeoning of research on the implications of such expansions for public insurance participation, private
insurance crowd-out, and overall levels of health insurance coverage. A common approach to these questions is to
estimate a linear probability model of participation (or private or overall insurance coverage) where a dummy
variable for eligibility for the program is an endogenous explanatory variable (see Cutler and Gruber (1996), Currie
and Gruber (1996a, 1996b), LoSasso and Buchmueller (2004), Hudson, Selden, and Banthin (2005), Ham and
Shore-Sheppard (2005), and Shore-Sheppard (2008), among others.) This model permits the estimation of a local
average treatment effect—the average effect of eligibility on insurance coverage for (unobserved) families who are
responsive to changes in the instrument used for identification. This approach, while quite useful, has three
drawbacks. First, it provides an estimate of the policy effect applying to a group of families where the composition
of the group is unobserved by the researcher. Second, it provides no information about which groups have low
take-up rates. As we demonstrate below, observable groups vary dramatically in their take-up response to
Medicaid expansions, and it would be very helpful for policy makers to know how responses differ when designing
outreach programs. Third, it may lead to misleading predictions of the effects of non-marginal (large) expansions if
non-marginal newly eligible families have different characteristics, and thus different take-up rates, from families at
the margin.
Recently the empirical public economics literature has seen a number of papers that explicitly estimate
observable heterogeneous treatment effects for different groups, and thus have the potential to be much more
informative for policy analysis. The majority of these effects have been estimated within the education and
training literature (see, e.g., Aakvik, Heckman, and Vytlacil (2005), Blundell, Diarden, and Sianesi (2005), Card and
Payne (2003), Heckman, Smith, and Clemens (1997), and Moffitt (2007)), although there are other applications
(see, e.g., Angrist (2004) for treatment effect heterogeneity in the effects of childbearing on marital dissolutions,
poverty status, and welfare participation). One popular approach in this literature is to use a random coefficients
framework (where the coefficients are a function of demographic variables) to estimate marginal effects for

1

different demographic groups. Another approach is to use a switching probit framework and to predict the effect
of changing eligibility on the basis of observables and unobservables. 1
In this paper we first show that the random coefficients framework, as well as the switching probit
framework, can be used to estimate a number of important effects for Medicaid take-up that are not available in
the current Medicaid literature. Specifically, we first demonstrate how to estimate, for Medicaid expansions and by
demographic group, marginal effects (i.e. the effect of an expansion that makes a relatively small number of
individuals eligible), average effects for a randomly chosen child, the effect of eligibility on the eligible, and the
effect of a policy expansion that makes a large number of children eligible for Medicaid (i.e. a non-marginal
change) on the take-up of public insurance, participation in private insurance, and crowd-out (defined as the
change in the probability of private coverage due to a change in eligibility status). We then estimate the average
effect of Medicaid expansions among all eligible children and the average effect for those affected by a
nonmarginal counterfactual Medicaid expansion, since these are likely to be the most useful for policy analysis.
Estimated take-up rates among average eligible children are substantially larger than take-up rates for those made
eligible by a counterfactual Medicaid expansion, moreover both of these effects vary widely across demographic
groups. In terms of crowd-out, we find statistically significant, though small, effects for all eligible children, but
not for those affected by a counterfactual policy change. These policy effects of Medicaid expansions have not
previously been estimated using either the random coefficients framework or the switching probit framework.
(The latter also permits the estimation of these policy effects while also allowing for differences in unobservables
across families.) We compare the estimates from these two frameworks. Finally, to maximize both the usefulness
of our approach to other researchers and the ease of replicating our estimates, we restrict ourselves to estimators
that can be implemented using preprogrammed commands in Stata, an econometric package commonly used by
researchers in this area.

1

The first approach is used by Blundell et al. (2005) and Card and Payne (2003) while the second is used by Aakvik et al.
(2005). The approach introduced in Moffitt (2007) can be considered a combination of the two, since he allows treatment
effects to depend on both observables and unobservables that are correlated with the error in the outcome of interest within a
random coefficients framework. Heckman et al. (1997) use propensity score matching while allowing for treatment
heterogeneity, while Angrist (2004) uses an IV framework to show the relationship between a local average treatment effect
and an average treatment effect under certain assumptions.

2

In the next section we review the Medicaid program and some previous studies that have used a twoequation linear probability model to estimate the insurance responses to the Medicaid expansions. In Section 3, we
outline this standard approach to public health insurance take-up and private insurance crowd-out. We then
discuss our use of random coefficient models and switching regression models, as well as the policy effects we
estimate. After discussing our data briefly in Section 4, in Section 5 we use these two methods to present new
estimates of (heterogeneous) treatment effects of the actual Medicaid expansions and a counterfactual expansion.
With one exception noted below, these effects are precisely estimated and statistically significant. The take-up rate
for the newly eligible is much lower than for all of the previously eligible, and, for the sample as a whole, is
comparable to the (local average treatment effect) estimates from a standard linear probability model. Further, we
find that groups vary dramatically in terms of their take-up behavior for Medicaid; our estimated take-up rates for
the counterfactual Medicaid expansion range from 0.06 to 0.63. In terms of crowd-out, when we look at
demographic groups within the sample of previously eligible children we find a positive and statistically significant
crowd-out effect, with significant differences across groups. However, we find very noisy estimates of crowd-out
among those made newly eligible in our counterfactual experiment. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2. Medicaid Expansions and Previous Literature
Medicaid was first established as a public health insurance program for welfare recipients and low-income
aged and disabled individuals. This focus largely remained until the late 1980s, when expansions in eligibility first
permitted, and then required, states to cover pregnant women and children with family incomes that made them
ineligible for cash welfare. Following the federally mandated eligibility expansions of 1989 and 1990, states were
required to cover children age 6 or younger with family incomes up to 133% of the poverty line and children born
after September 30, 1983 with family income up to 100% of the poverty line. States were also given the option to
increase their eligibility thresholds up to 185% of the poverty line. As these eligibility limits were far more
generous than the eligibility limits applying to cash welfare (at the time, Aid to Families with Dependent Children,
or AFDC), the link between Medicaid eligibility and AFDC eligibility greatly diminished for young, low-income
children. By 1996, of the approximately 30% of children age 19 and younger who were eligible for Medicaid, only

3

about half came from typically welfare-enrolled families (Selden, Banthin, and Cohen 1998). While families who
enrolled in cash welfare programs were also automatically enrolled in Medicaid, newly eligible children were not.
Consequently the establishment of a new route to Medicaid eligibility raised an important policy question: to what
extent did expanded eligibility lead to increased health insurance coverage for the targeted population of children?
Moreover, since newly eligible children were less poor than previously eligible children were and hence more likely
to have access to private insurance, another important policy question was whether and to what extent expanded
eligibility led to “crowding out” of private health insurance by public insurance availability.
There has been a substantial amount of research on these questions, and a non-exhaustive list includes
Currie and Gruber (1996a, 1996b), Cutler and Gruber (1996), Dubay and Kenney (1996), Thorpe and Florence
(1998), Yazici and Kaestner (1999), Shore-Sheppard (2000), Blumberg, Dubay, and Norton (2000), Ham and
Shore-Sheppard (2005), and Shore-Sheppard (2008). Further, there is also research on the related question of how
the further public health insurance expansions of the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) affected
coverage and crowd-out (LoSasso and Buchmueller (2004), Hudson, Selden, and Banthin (2005), Gruber and
Simon (2008)). The papers in this literature have provided estimates of a variety of behavioral parameters related
to the responsiveness of children’s insurance coverage to expanded eligibility. The most common approach used
for estimating effects of expanded eligibility, the instrumental variable linear probability model that we describe in
more detail below, produces estimates of the average take-up and private coverage for a group of families
(unknown to the researcher) who are responsive to changes in the instrument used for identification, and these are
often referred to as “marginal” effects. They are not the same as the average take-up rate or private coverage loss
among all eligible children (that is, including those children who were eligible prior to the expansion being
studied). Moreover, they do not necessarily reflect the change that would occur in take-up or private coverage
from a medium sized or large change in eligibility. These distinctions have often been missed in the literature.
Definitions of “crowd-out”—loosely, the effect of public insurance availability on the propensity to have private
coverage—are particularly diverse in the literature. For expositional purposes we will focus on one definition, but
our methodology is easily generalized to other definitions. In this paper, we estimate a host of additional effects for
take-up and crowd-out.

4

Since our aim in this paper is to extend previous results rather than summarizing the literature, here we
focus on two of the studies that use the now standard approach. An important study using this approach is the
seminal paper of Cutler and Gruber (1996) (CG hereafter). CG use the method outlined below in Section 3.1 and
data on children from the March Current Population Survey (CPS) from 1988 to 1993 to estimate the effect of
imputed Medicaid eligibility on insurance status, controlling for demographics and state and year effects. They use
an instrumental variables approach since eligibility is likely to be endogenous. This potential endogeneity arises for
several reasons. First, unobservable factors affecting eligibility are likely to be correlated with unobservable
individual and family characteristics that determine the response to eligibility. Second, eligibility may serve as a
proxy for family income if income, which is also likely to be endogenous, is not included as an independent
variable. Finally, parental wages, which in turn determine eligibility, are likely to be correlated with fringe benefits
(including private health insurance) of the parent. Since these benefits are unobserved, they are part of the error
term, thus providing an additional factor necessitating treating eligibility as endogenous. To address the
endogeneity of the eligibility variable, CG suggest an instrument (which we denote FRACELIG hereafter) that is
the fraction of a random sample of 300 children of each age imputed to be eligible according to the rules in each
state in each year. This instrument, which is essentially an index of the expansiveness of Medicaid eligibility for
each age group in each state and year, is correlated with individual eligibility for Medicaid but not otherwise
correlated with the demand for insurance, assuming that changes in a state’s Medicaid provisions are not correlated
with changes in the state’s availability of private insurance, which are unobservable to the researcher.2 CG estimate
that the average take-up rate for those affected by the expansions was 23.5% and that the average reduction in
private coverage for those affected by the expansions was about 7%. These IV estimates should be thought of as
local average treatment effects, i.e. the average effect of eligibility on families whose eligibility status is sensitive to
small changes in FRACELIG.
Ham and Shore-Sheppard (2005) use data from Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)
covering the period from October 1985 to August 1995 to replicate CG’s analysis. Their estimates are marginal

2

One attractive feature of this approach is that FRACELIG is an extremely strong instrument. This is very helpful since
when we obtain precisely estimated marginal treatment effects for many demographic groups using FRACELIG times the
demographic variables as instruments; this is not always the case in estimating such a model, see, e.g. Blundell et al (2005).

5

effects in the same sense that CG’s are, and thus the results of both papers are comparable. They find a smaller
average take-up rate of 11.8% for those affected by the expansions, as well as a smaller level of private coverage
reduction or crowd-out, than CG. Ham and Shore-Sheppard attribute some of the differences between their
results and CG’s to different samples and recall periods in SIPP and the CPS. Ham and Shore-Sheppard also
modify the CG instrument by using all sample observations of children of a given age in a SIPP wave except for
those from the state for which the instrument is being calculated. Since this instrument is created using a larger
sample, it is theoretically superior to the version using a random sample, but in practice it makes very little
difference to the results. We use the data and instrument of Ham and Shore-Sheppard in our estimation of
heterogeneous treatment effects and predicted effects from a counterfactual nonmarginal policy experiment below.

3. Approaches for Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
3.1. Allowing Treatment Effects to Depend on Observable Demographic Variables
As noted above, the approach to evaluating the effect of public health insurance eligibility changes that
has become standard in the literature involves estimating simultaneous equation linear probability models (LPMs).
The LPM for participation in a public insurance program is given by

pubi =X i 1   1elig i  u1i ,

(1a)

where X i is a vector of demographic variables for child i, eligi is a dummy variable coded one if the child is
eligible for public insurance and zero otherwise, u1i is an error term, and pubi  1 if child i participates in a public
insurance program while pubi  0 otherwise. The LPM for private insurance coverage is given by

priv i =X i  2   2elig i  u 2 i ,

(1b)

where priv i  1 if child i has private insurance coverage and priv i  0 otherwise.
The LPM determining public insurance eligibility is

elig i  Zi   e i ,

(2)

6

where Zi  ( X i , FRACELIGi ) , and e i is an error term. From the discussion in CG, it is clear that they interpret
the coefficients γ as average treatment effects for families whose eligibility is affected by marginal changes
in FRACELIGi . While this estimated average treatment effect parameter provides a useful summary statistic, it
may be quite a bit less useful for predicting the effect of an eligibility change that affects children with different
characteristics or for estimating average take-up rates among the currently eligible.
To address these limitations, we first consider a random coefficient model which consists of a linear
probability model with interactions (RCLPM) for participation in public insurance (see, e.g., Blundell et al. (2005)).
Specifically, we interact elig i with each of the K elements of X i to obtain3
K

pubi =X i 1  ( elig i X i )1  u1i   X ik ( 1k  1k elig i )  u1i .

(3a)

k 1

We follow the same approach to obtain the following RCLPM for private insurance participation
K

priv i =X i  2  ( elig i X i ) 2  u 2 i   X ik (  2 k   2 k elig i )  u 2 i .

(3b)

k 1

The natural vector of excluded instruments in (3a) and (3b) for the K by 1 vector of endogenous variables

( elig i X i ) is the K by 1 vector ( FRACELIGi * X i ). 4
We can use this model to approximate the average take-up rate among the eligible, i.e. the average
treatment effect on the treated (ATET hereafter) as
ATRE lpm 

 [ X ˆ

elig i 1

i

1

 X iˆ1 ]/N e ,

(4a)

where ˆ1 and ˆ1 are parameter estimates from (3a) and N e is the number of eligible children. Note that this is
an approximation since it takes into account the distribution of the independent variables among the eligible, but
does not take into account the fact that those not on the margin of eligibility will necessarily have the same

An alternative approach would be to use ( X i *( Zi ˆ ) ) as our vector of instruments, where ˆ is estimated by (2) – see
Amemiya (1985). However, for comparability with other studies, we follow the procedure in the text.
4
If one had a very large data set, one could parameterize the model in terms of mutually exclusive demographic cells, but our
data set is not large enough for us to do this.
3

7

response as those on the margin. We denote the set of children eligible for Medicaid in demographic group j by
G j . Then we approximate the average take-up rate among the eligible for group j as
ATRE lpm

j

 [ X ˆ
i

i G j

1

 X i ˆ1 ]/N ej ,

(4b)

where N ej is the number of eligible children in group j. In this calculation we exploit the fact that a child cannot
participate in public insurance if ineligible. We can measure the average private insurance coverage rate among
those who are eligible for Medicaid as
PITE lpm 

 [ X ˆ

elig i 1

i

2

 X i ˆ2 ]/N e ,

(4c)

and the counterfactual average private insurance coverage rate among those eligible if they were not eligible as
PITNE lpm 

 [ X ˆ

elig i 1

i

2

(4d)

]/N e ,

where ˆ2 and ˆ2 are the estimated values of  2 and  2 respectively from (3b). We define crowd-out for a child as
the probability that the child has private insurance when not eligible for Medicaid minus the probability the child
has private insurance when eligible for Medicaid. Thus we measure average crowd-out among all those eligible as
COE lpm  PITNE lpm  PITE lpm    [ X i ˆ2 ]/N e .

(5a)

elig i 1

To measure crowd-out among those eligible in group j we use
COE lpm
   [ X i ˆ2 ]/N ej .
j

(5b)

i G j

Since the measures in (4a)-(5b) are linear functions of regression coefficients, one can calculate their standard
errors using preprogrammed commands in Stata. (Details on this calculation and our Stata programs to implement
all approaches used in the paper are given in our Online Appendix A.5)
Take-up for a randomly chosen person, i.e. the average treatment effect (ATE hereafter), can be estimated
using
5

The Online Appendix is available at http://econ.williams.edu/people/lshore.

8

N

ATR lpm  [ X i ˆ1  X i ˆ1 ]/N ,

(5c)

i 1

where the summation is over the whole sample and N is the sample size. As with the ATET above, and for the
same reason, this is an approximation of the ATE. Similarly, the approximate crowd-out for a randomly chosen
person can be estimated using
CO lpm  [ X i ˆ2 ]/N e .

(5d)

i 1

The extension of (5c) and (5d) to different demographic groups is straightforward and omitted to save space.
In addition, it is possible to estimate the take-up response and crowd-out effect of further marginal and
non-marginal expansions for both all of the newly eligible and the newly eligible in different demographic groups.
To calculate the effect of a marginal expansion, we can increase the income limits a relatively small amount (e.g.
1%-2%). Next, we determine which children would become newly eligible under the expansion, denoting this
group as New . Then a natural means of measuring the marginal take-up effect when considering all of the newly
eligible is
TNEW lpm 

 [ X ˆ

i New

1

i

 X i ˆ1 ]/ N new ,

(6a)

where N new is the number of newly eligible. Next, determine which children become newly eligible in demographic
group j under the expansion, and denote this group as Newj . (One may need a larger expansion in the income
limits to generate a positive number of observations in each cell.)
Then we can estimate the marginal take-up in group j as
TNEW jlpm 

 [ X ˆ

i Newj

i

1

 X i ˆ1 ]/ N newj ,

(6b)

where N newj is the number of newly eligible in group j. We can estimate the marginal crowd-out effect among all
the newly eligible as

CNEW lpm    [ X i ˆ2 ]/ N new ,

(7a)

i New

9

and the marginal crowd-out effect among the newly eligible in demographic group j as
CNEW jlpm  

 [ X ˆ ]/ N

i Newj

i

2

newj

.

(7b)

The marginal effects for the whole sample obtained using (6a) and (7a) are comparable to the estimates of  1 and

 2 from the LPM estimates of (1a) and (1b).
Finally, note that (6a)-(7b) can be used in an analogous fashion to calculate the effects of non-marginal
increases in the income limits that result in a large number of newly eligible children, and indeed we carry out this
calculation for a counterfactual 10% increase in Medicaid income limits below. Compared to the standard
approach, our approach also has the advantage that it is clear who the marginal families are.

3.3 Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Using Switching Probit Models

Our second approach uses the switching probit model (SPM) developed by Quandt (1958, 1960, 1972)
and Heckman (1979), which has been applied in the bivariate probit with selection case by van de Ven and van
Praag (1981), and in the program evaluation context by Aakvik, Heckman, and Vytlacil (2005) (hereafter AHV).
This model allows us to estimate policy effects based on observables and unobservables once we make a
distributional assumption.6 A joint switching probit model for participation in public insurance, participation in
private insurance, and public insurance eligibility is quite complicated to estimate since it requires trivariate
integration, and there is no preprogrammed routine in Stata to estimate this model.7 Fortunately, it is
straightforward to show that all parameters can be estimated consistently by separately considering two likelihood
functions: one containing the parameters for eligibility and for public insurance participation and one containing
the parameters for eligibility and for private insurance participation. This allows us to estimate all necessary
parameters using preprogrammed routines in Stata.
We first consider the likelihood function containing the parameters for eligibility and for public insurance
participation. We assume that the index function for eligibility is
6

The SPM also has the advantages that it explicitly precludes anyone from obtaining Medicaid if they are ineligible for it and,
of course, that estimated probabilities are always in the unit interval.
7
The computation is simplified if one uses the factor structure in AHV.

10

Elig i*  Zi   e i .

(9)

Next, we assume that for a randomly chosen (in terms of unobservables) individual, the index function for
participation in public insurance once being made eligible is
PPub i*  X i    i ,

(10)

 1
where (  i , e i ) ~ iid N (0,V pub ) and V pub  
   ,e

 
,e

 . Following the econometrics literature, it is natural to write
1 

the index function for take-up for a randomly chosen (in terms of  i ) child—this index function models how a
randomly chosen individual would behave after being exogenously assigned Medicaid eligibility; otherwise one
cannot do counterfactual policy analysis. However, it is worth emphasizing that unless  ,e  0 , those actually
eligible will not be a randomly chosen subgroup of the population. Below we take this into account when we
calculate take-up rates.
The appropriate log likelihood for eligibility and participation in public insurance is
L



elig 1 pub 1

log  2 [( X i  , Zi  ,   ,e ] 



elig 1, pub  0

log  2 [ X i  , Z i  ,    ,e ] 

 log  [  Z  ],

elig  0

1

i

(11)

where  2 [ , ,  ,e ] is the bivariate standard normal distribution function and 1 ( ) is the univariate standard
normal distribution function. For Medicaid take-up calculations we will only need the parameters estimated by
maximizing (11).
For crowd-out calculations, we also need to consider participation in private insurance, so we now
consider the likelihood function containing the parameters for eligibility and for private insurance participation.
We assume that for a randomly chosen individual, the index function for participation in private insurance given
eligibility for public insurance is

Priv _ elig *i  X i  e  u ei .

(12a)

We define the observed outcome variable priv _ elig i  1 if Priv _ elig *i  0 and zero otherwise, since this will be
useful below. (Note that we use upper case (first letters) and stars to denote index functions and lower case to

11

denote observed (realized) outcomes.) Further, we assume that for a randomly chosen individual the index
function for participation in private insurance given ineligibility for public insurance is

Priv _ nelig *i  X i  ne  u nei ,

(12b)

and we define priv _ nelig i  1 if Priv _ nelig *i  0 and zero otherwise. Finally we assume

12

1

  12
 13

( u ei , u nei ,e i ) ~ iidN (0,V priv ) and V priv

1

 23

13 
 23  .

(12c)

1

The appropriate log likelihood is



L

elig 1, priv 1



elig  0, priv 1

log  2 [( X i  e , Z i  , n 13 ]





elig 1, priv  0

log  2 [( X i  ne ,  Z i  ,  n 23 ] 



log  2 [ X i  e , Zi  ,  n 13 ] 

elig  0, priv  0

(13)
log  2 [ X i  ne ,  Zi  ,  n 23 ].

Unfortunately, even though this likelihood function involves only bivariate integration, there is no preprogrammed
routine in Stata to estimate this model. Instead, we randomly divide the sample into two subsamples. On the first
subsample we maximize
L1 



elig 1, priv 1

log  2 [( X i  e , Zi  , n 12 ] 



elig 1, priv  0

log  2 [ X i  e , Zi  ,  n 12 ] 

 log  [  Z  ].

elig  0

1

i

(14)

Next, on the other subsample maximize

L2 



elig  0, priv 1

log  2 [( X i  ne , Z i  ,  n 13 ] 



elig  0, priv  0

log  2 [ X i  e , Z i  , n 13 ]   log 1[Z i  ].

(15)

elig 1

Note that since we randomly chose the subsamples, parameter estimates from (14) and (15) are independent. Also
note that as is common in this type of problem (e.g. estimation of the union and nonunion wage structures), n 23
is not identified even if we were to use (13) for estimation, since we never see anyone eligible and not eligible for
public insurance at the same time.
The cost of the SPM versus the LPM would seem to be the need for a normality assumption, but
interestingly this is not what available Monte Carlo evidence suggests. Angrist (2001) conducts Monte Carlo
experiments for a linear probability model with a discrete endogenous regressor estimated by instrumental

12

variables. He finds estimated treatment effects that are very close to those from a properly specified simultaneous
equation bivariate probit model. In other words, the simultaneous equation LPM does well with normally
distributed errors. However, Bhattacharya et al. (2006) show that the simultaneous equation LPM does not do well
when the error terms are not normally distributed. In fact, based on their Monte Carlo evidence, Bhattacharya et al.
(2006) argue in favor of using simultaneous equation bivariate probit, rather than the linear probability model,
when the error terms are not normally distributed. Thus it appears that the LPM estimates are actually more
dependent on the normality assumption than are estimates from the simultaneous equation bivariate probit model.
Of course it would be ideal to eliminate the need to make any distributional assumptions, but unfortunately Shaikh
and Vytlacil (2005) show that, in general, only bounds on the average effect of treatment can be identified in this
case. Further, AHV stress the need for making a distributional assumption for the treatment effects considered
below once the relevant parameters have been estimated. Of course, researchers are free to estimate the model
with a different distributional assumption, e.g. assume that the error terms are drawn from a mixture of normals
(see e.g., Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003)). We do not adopt this approach since it would force us to
violate our commitment to using prewritten Stata modules
As in the case of the linear probability model with interactions, for the SPM we can look at the predicted
average take-up rates among all eligible individuals (the ATET) by calculating
ATRE spm 

 [1-  (-X ˆ )] / N ,

elig 1

1

i

(16a)

e

where ̂ is obtained by maximizing (11) and again N e is the number of eligible children. This is comparable to
the effect estimated by the RCLPM in (4a). The delta method can be used to calculate the standard errors for these
predicted take-up rates in Stata, and details of this calculation are given in our Online Appendix A.8 One can also

calculate take-up for a randomly chosen person over the whole sample (the ATE) as
N

ATR spm  [1- 1 (- X i ˆ )] / N ,

(16b)

i 1

One does need to program the derivatives that the delta method uses, but one can easily calculate numerical derivatives using
the formula in our Online Appendix.
8

13

where N is the overall sample size. To compute the average take-up among the eligible in different demographic
groups, the process can simply be repeated for each group of interest j
ATRE j spm 

 [1-  (- X ˆ )] / N
1

i G j

i

ej

(16c)

,

where again G j denotes the set of individuals eligible for Medicaid in group j and N ej is the number of eligible
children in group j. These estimates are comparable to the effects estimated by the RCLPM in (4b). Calculating
these average take-up rates for a randomly chosen child within demographic groups is analogous to (16c).
The above calculations do not take into account the fact that the eligible children will not be a random
sample in terms of the error term in the eligibility index (9). To account for this when calculating the average takeup among the eligible (ATET) we use
ATRSELE spm 


1
Ne
1
Ne

 Pr( pub

i

 1|elig i  1) 

elig i 1



elig i 1

1
Ne

 Pr( pubi  1, elig i  1) 

Pr( elig i  1)

elig i 1

 

 2 ( X i ˆ , Zi ˆe , ˆ ,e )
,
 ( Z ˆ )
1

(17)

i e

where ( ˆ , ˆe , ˆ ,e ) are obtained by maximizing (11). Intuitively, this equation accounts for selection by treating
take-up as a conditional probability, while (16a) ignores selection by using an unconditional probability. We
estimate take-up for a specific demographic group j using an analogous calculation to (17) just for the subset of
children in group j.
We can calculate the effects of marginal and non-marginal increases in the income limits in an analogous
manner to that used with the RCLPM. For example, consider the non-marginal counterfactual policy change of an
increase in the Medicaid income limits by 10% in 1995 as described in section 3.2 above. To calculate the average
take-up rate among the newly eligible across all demographic groups using the SPM when we ignore the fact that
they will not be a random sample of the population (in terms of e i and  i ), we use

TNEWE spm 

 [1-  (-X ˆ )] / N

i New

1

i

new

.

(18)

14

where again N new is the number of newly eligible children. Again the calculation for the newly eligible in
demographic group j is analogous to (18).
However, one can also take into account the fact that the newly eligible will not be a random sample in
terms of the unobservables e i and  i . For each individual let Z 0i denote the value of the previous explanatory
variables (including the value of FRACELIG under the previous income limits) and Z1i denote the value of the
new explanatory variables under the new income limits (including the new value of FRACELIG). Then the
probability that a child is newly eligible is given by Pr( newelig i )  Pr(-Z1i   e i  -Z0 i  ) . To consider average takeup among the newly eligible which incorporates selection we use

TNEWSELspm 

 Pr( pub

i

 1|newelig i  1)/ N new 

i New





i New

 Pr( pubi  1, newelig i  1) 
 / N new
Pr( newelig i  1)

i New

 

 2 ( X i ˆ , - Z0 i ˆe , ˆ ,e ) -  2 ( X i ˆ , - Z1i ˆe , ˆ ,e )
/ N new .
 (-Z ˆ ) -  (-Z ˆ )
1

0i e

1

(19)

1i e

As before, the calculation for average take-up among the newly eligible in group j is analogous to (19). Note that
one can again use the delta method to get a standard error for (19) using Stata. To calculate a marginal effect,
increase the income limits by 1%-2%, and use (19). For the case where we do not separate children by
demographic group, these effects are comparable to the estimates of  1 from (1a) that the standard LPM
estimates.
We again define crowd-out for a child as the probability the child has private insurance when not eligible
for Medicaid minus the probability the child has private insurance when eligible for Medicaid. Thus we measure
average crowd-out among all those eligible when we do not take into account the fact that the eligible are a
nonrandom sample in terms of ( e i , u ei , u nei ) using

CO spm 

 [Pr( X 

elig 1



i

ne

 u nei  0) - Pr( X i  e  u ei  0)]/ N e

 ([(1-  (- X ˆ

elig 1

1

i

ne

)]-[(1- 1 (- X i ˆe )])/ N e .

(20)

Note that we obtain ˆe and ˆne from maximizing (14) and (15) respectively; since we use separate random samples
the estimates are independent and thus we do not need to calculate their covariance in calculating a standard error

15

for (20). If we take into account the fact that those currently eligible are a nonrandom sample in terms of
( e i , u ei , u nei ) , we estimate average crowd-out among the eligible by

COSELspm 

 [Pr( priv _ nelig

elig 1

i

 1|elig i  1) - Pr( priv _ elig i  1|elig i  1)]/ N e

 Pr( priv _ nelig i  1, elig i  1) Pr( priv _ elig i  1, elig i  1) 

 / Ne
Pr( elig i  1)
Pr( elig i  1)
elig 1 

ˆ
ˆ
  ( X ˆ , Z  , ˆ )  ( X ˆ , Z  , ˆ ) 
   2 i ne i 2 23  2 i e i 1 13  / N e ,
1 ( Zi  2 )
1 ( Zi 1 )
 elig 1





(21)

where priv _ elig i and priv _ nelig i are defined below (11) and (12) respectively. Moreover, since ( ˆne , ˆ2 , ˆ 23 ) are
obtained by maximizing (15) on the first random subsample and ( ˆe , ˆ1 , ˆ13 ) are obtained by maximizing (14) on
the second random subsample, the estimates are independent and thus the two terms in (21) are independent.
Now consider an expansion of the Medicaid limits and continue to let Z0i denote the value of the
previous explanatory variables (including the previous value of FRACELIG) under the previous income limits and

Z1i denote the value of the new explanatory variables under the new income limits. (The only explanatory variable
that changes under the expansion is FRACELIG, since as the income limits rise more children will be eligible in
each state.) If we ignore the fact that the newly eligible are not a random sample, we estimate average crowd-out
among the newly eligible by
CNEW spm  [

 (  ( X ˆ

i New

1

i

ne

)-

 (  ( X ˆ )]/ N

i New

1

i

e

new

,

(22)

where the two sums in (22) are also independent since, as noted above, they are based on separate estimation
based on two random subsamples of independent data. To account for the fact that the newly eligible are not a

16

random sample, we now calculate average crowd-out for the newly eligible using


CNEWSELspm    Pr( priv _ nelig i  1|newelig i  1) -  Pr( priv _ elig i  1|newelig i  1) / N new
i New
 i New


Pr( priv _ nelig i  1, newelig i  1)
Pr( priv _ elig i  1, newelig i  1) 

 
 / N new
Pr( newelig i  1)
Pr( newelig i  1)
i New
 i New


 2 ( X i ˆne , Z i ˆ2 , ˆ 23 )
 2 ( X i ˆe , Zi ˆ1 , ˆ13 ) 

 
 / N new ,
 i New 1 ( Z1i  2 ) - 1 ( Z0 i  2 ) i New 1 ( Z1i  1 ) - 1 ( Z 0 i  1 ) 

(23)

where again the two sums in the last line of (23) are independent. Finally, one again can estimate marginal crowdout effects for the SPM using (23) once for a 1%-2% increase in income limits. For the case where we do not
separate children by demographic group, these effects are comparable to the estimates of  2 from (1b) that the
standard LPM estimates.

3. Comparison to Previous Work Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

Here we consider how our approach relates to previous work estimating heterogeneous treatment effects. It is
worth noting that our approach based on the SPM builds on the important work of AHV and the papers they cite,
but also differs in several important ways. First, we analyze a program, Medicaid, where a child cannot participate
if ineligible, and we exploit this feature in estimation and in calculating treatment effects. Second, Medicaid
eligibility is observable given family income, state of residence, year and child’s age. We use this in calculating
policy effects, and it allows us to consider non-marginal counterfactual Medicaid expansions. (Note that both of
these features of Medicaid apply to other programs, such as Food Stamps.) Third, we assume an unrestricted
trivariate normal distribution for our error terms whereas AHV use a factor structure to allow correlation across
the errors.9 Fourth, we show that policy effects based on the SPM can be precisely estimated, at least for the case
of Medicaid; this was not the case for AHV’s work on Norwegian training programs. Fifth, we show researchers
how pre-programmed commands in Stata can be used to estimate all relevant effects and most standard errors.
Compared to the previous work with random coefficients, our first contribution is to analyze the take-up
and crowd-out of Medicaid expansions. Secondly, we show how to obtain many interesting policy effects from the

9

Note, however, that Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) use a mixture of normals.

17

RCLPM that are comparable to those from the SPM, and then empirically compare these effects below. Finally, we
find that our instruments ( ( FRACELIGi * X i ) are much stronger (in the Imbens and Wooldridge 2008 sense of
using the size of the standard errors on the endogenous variables as an indicator of instrument strength) than
those used in an education application by Blundell et al. (2005).

4. Data
We use data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) 1986, 1987, 1988, 1990, 1991,
1992, and 1993 panels, which cover the period 1986-1995. The SIPP is a nationally representative longitudinal
household survey which is specifically designed to collect detailed income and program participation information.
The recall period between each interview is four months for every individual, and for our panels the panel length
ranges from 24 months for the 1988 panel to 40 months for the 1992 panel. Although the sample universe is the
entire U.S., the Census Bureau did not separately identify state of residence for residents of nine low population
states in those panels. Since state of residence information is critical for us to impute Medicaid eligibility, we drop
all individuals whose state of residence is not identified. We also restrict our sample to children living in
households that are part of the original sample and who are younger than 16 years old at the first time they are
observed. Finally, for comparability with earlier studies we drop children who are observed only once, children
who leave the sample and then return, and children who move between states during the sample period. In total,
these omitted observations constitute less than 8% of the sample.
Although the four-month period increases the probability of accurate reporting, particularly relative to the
fifteen-month recall period of the March Current Population Survey (Bennefield 1996), the SIPP suffers from the
problem of “seam bias.” Specifically, Census Bureau researchers have shown that there are a disproportionate
number of transitions between the last month of the current wave and the first month of the next wave (see, e.g.,
Young 1989, Marquis and Moore 1990). We use data for all interview months and account for seam bias by
including a dummy variable for the fourth month of each interview wave. When we calculate predicted take-up
and crowd-out probabilities, we follow Ham, Li, and Shore-Sheppard (2009) and adjust our parameter estimates by
dropping the coefficient on the fourth month dummy and adding one-quarter of this coefficient to the intercept.

18

In their study of accounting for seam bias in a multi-state, multi-spell duration model, Ham, Li and ShoreSheppard (2009) find that this is preferable to using data only from the fourth month of each wave.
We need to impute Medicaid eligibility and use four steps to do so. First, we construct the family unit
relevant for Medicaid program participation and determine family income. Second, we assign family-specific
poverty thresholds based on the size of the family and the year. Since Medicaid eligibility resulted from AFDC
eligibility over this period, we then use information on the family income and family structure, along with the
AFDC parameters in effect in the state and year, to impute eligibility for AFDC. Finally, we assign Medicaid
eligibility if any of the following conditions hold: the child is in an AFDC-eligible family; the child is income
eligible for AFDC and either lives in a state without a family structure requirement or lives in a state with an
AFDC-unemployed parent program and has an unemployed parent; or the child’s family income as a percent of
the relevant poverty line is below the Medicaid expansion income eligibility cutoff in effect for that age child in his
or her state of residence at that time.
In Table 1 we present the (unweighted) sample means for the variables used in our regressions. Both
Medicaid participation and Medicaid eligibility rose over the course of the sample, while private insurance coverage
fell. The rise in eligibility was particularly dramatic between the 1988 and 1990 panels, when federally mandated
expansions took effect. Compared with the changes in insurance eligibility and coverage, the demographic
variables are fairly stable across panels.

5. Results
5.1 Medicaid Parameter Estimates, Predicted Rates of Take-up and Responses to a Policy
Experiment
In this section, we first briefly discuss our results from the three models we estimate. With the exception
of the standard model previously estimated in the literature, our coefficient estimates are not as informative as the
predicted rates from our models. Consequently, to save space we do not present the coefficients in the main text
but make them available for the reader in Tables B1 and B2 in the Online Appendix. Moreover, we focus on the

19

predicted Medicaid take up rates for the eligible (the ATET) and the response to our counterfactual policy
experiment since these are likely to be most useful for policy.10
In all our regressions we include demographic variables as well as state, year and age dummies for each
child to control for state-specific, age-specific and year-specific unobservables. Also, since we use longitudinal data,
we cluster the standard errors to account for dependence across person-specific observations. For the standard
LPM, the estimated take-up rate averaged across marginal families is a very statistically significant 0.127. (See
column (1) of Table B1 in the Online Appendix.) Since these are IV estimates we need to consider the issue of
weak IV. We cannot investigate whether our instruments are weak using the rule of thumb for the F-test being
greater than 10 suggested by Staiger and Stock (1997), or the refinements of their rule in Stock and Yogo (2005),
since the F-test is not appropriate if the observations are dependent across the same child or if heteroskedasticity is
present. Since the first stage equation is a LPM estimated on panel data, both problems will occur in our
application. Instead we use the rule-of-thumb from Hansen, Hausman, and Newey (2008) that the Wald statistic
for the coefficient on the excluded instrument FRACELIG in the first stage equation should be greater than 33
(for one excluded instrument). Since we find that the Wald statistic for the coefficient on FRACELIG is
approximately 3,500, we conclude that weak instruments are not an issue here.
Using this basic specification, we estimate the simultaneous equation RCLPM discussed in section 3,
allowing the eligibility effect to depend on demographic variables as well as on the state, year and age dummies for
each child. (The eligibility coefficients for the Medicaid equation are presented in column (3) of Table B1 in the
Online Appendix.) It is important to note that since the effect of eligibility is interacted with demographics
(including continuous variables) in these models the eligibility main effect cannot be interpreted in isolation. In
the Medicaid equation the demographic interaction coefficients vary dramatically across demographic groups and
are individually significant (except for race and gender of the child). Of course these interaction effects are relative
to the omitted category, and will change if we change the omitted category. On the issue of weak instruments for
10

We do not feel that an experiment which makes every American child eligible for Medicaid is particularly interesting from a
policy perspective since we believe there is little chance that the US will move to universal government sponsored health care,
let alone one based on the current Medicaid system. (We include the relevant expressions for the ATEs since they may be
useful in other applications.) We do not consider marginal effects since to be able to estimate these effects precisely across
many demographic groups, we will need more than a one or two percent increase in income limits, i.e. something closer to our
nonmarginal change.

20

the RCLPM model, we do not know of a well-developed rule of thumb or test for weak IV in an exactly identified
model with K endogenous variables and error terms that are correlated over time (for the same individual) and
heteroskedastic. However our problem has quite a bit of structure, since we are essentially asking if

FRACELIGi * X ik is a strong instrument for elig i X ik over k  1,..., K . Since we know from immediately
above that FRACELIGi is an excellent instrument for elig i , we also would expect FRACELIGi * X ik to be an
excellent instrument for elig i X ik .11 Finally, if one takes the approach that the standard errors for the second stage
equation are a good indicator of whether one has a weak IV problem when the number of instruments does not
grow large with the sample size (see Imbens and Wooldridge 2008), then it is clear that weak IV are not a problem
in our application.
We also estimate the SPM for Medicaid participation (see columns (1) and (2) of Table B2 in the Online
Appendix).

In all index functions we continue to include age, time and state dummies and account for

dependence across observations for the same child. As expected, the coefficients in the eligibility index function
are jointly significant, and all the coefficients except that for gender are very significant in the expected direction.
While to the best of our knowledge there is not a rule of thumb for the coefficient on FRACELIG to assess the
quality of empirical identification in the SPM, the Wald statistic for this variable is approximately 3600, suggesting
that the participation equations for public private insurance are well identified in the SPM. Again all coefficients
are relative to the omitted category.
Since, as noted above, the parameter estimates in the Online Appendix Tables B1 and B2 (for the RCLPM
and SPM respectively) are not invariant to the choice of omitted category, it is much more useful to calculate the
Medicaid take-up rates that are implied by the models. In column (1) of Table 2 we use the RCLPM to predict the
11

When we test the null hypothesis k  0 in the quasi first stage regressions
elig i X ik   1k X i  k ( FRACELIGi * X ik )  u 2 i , k  1,..., K ,
it is reassuring to note that the minimum Chi-Square statistic is 1920, 960, 1280 and 78 for the eligibility * demographics , the
eligibility * age dummies,, the eligibility * year dummies, and the eligibility*state dummies in the first stage equation,
respectively. Of course this is an informal testing procedure, since the tests are not independent. One could avoid this latter
problem by testing the null hypothesis 1  2  ...  K  0 . Alternatively, if one followed Amemiya (1985) and used
( X *( Z ˆ ) ) as the vector of instruments for X * elig (where ˆ is estimated by (2)), the test for weak IV would reduce to
i

i

i

i

testing whether FRACELIGi is a weak IV for elig i , and we have already seen that this null hypothesis is decisively rejected
by the data.

21

average Medicaid take-up rates among eligible children (the ATET) from different demographic groups. In column
(2) we present the corresponding estimates using the SPM. (Note that in each case we do not take into account the
fact that those eligible for Medicaid are a non-random sample in terms of unobservables and thus the results in
columns (1) and (2) are comparable.) The estimates in columns (1) and (2) can be compared to the take-up rate
estimated for marginal families in the entire sample (using the standard LPM) of 0.12. We use the data from those
eligible in the 1995 SIPP panel to calculate these take-up rates to make them comparable to results from our
counterfactual policy experiment, in which we examine the impact of increasing the 1995 eligibility income limits
by 10%.
In column (3) of Table 2 we present Medicaid take-up rates from the SPM using (17), where we take into
account the fact that those who are eligible for Medicaid are not randomly selected from the population. Note
that the results in this column are therefore not directly comparable with the estimated take-up rates in columns
(1) and (2). The point estimates of these ATET for a given demographic group are very similar quantitatively in
models (1) and (2), except for children from families with two or more earners. In columns (1) - (3) all estimates
are easily statistically distinguishable from zero, although the estimates in column (2) are more precise than the
estimates in column (1). Not surprisingly, the SPM produces more sensible results than does the RCLPM when
the predicted probabilities are near zero or one. The take-up rates in column (3) are somewhat larger than those in
columns (1) and (2) because they take into account the fact (as estimated by the data) that those who are eligible
for Medicaid have unobservable characteristics that make them more likely to take up Medicaid.
Focusing on the estimates in column (2) for the SPM without accounting for unobservables for currently
eligible children, we see a wide variety of average take-up rates among the eligible across groups, ranging from 0.08
for children from families with more than two earners to 0.77 for children from families with no earners. White
children have a take-up rate of 0.40 while the take-up rate for non-white children is 0.64. The estimated take-up
rate for children from families in which the family head has less than a high school degree is 0.60, while it is 0.22
for children in families in which the family head has a college degree or more. Moreover, the take-up rate for a
child from a family in which a female is a single head is 0.68, while it is only 0.27 for a child from a two parent
family. These findings indicate that the traditionally welfare-ineligible population has lower response to eligibility

22

than the traditionally welfare-eligible. While this has been suspected in the literature previously, these are the first
quantitative estimates of the differences in take-up across groups, and these differences are substantial. Our
estimates suggest that improving take-up among the eligible requires efforts to promote public coverage primarily
among populations that had not previously been eligible for coverage.
Table 3 shows the predicted take-up rates for children in the 1995 SIPP made newly eligible under a
counterfactual nonmarginal policy experiment where we increase the 1995 income limits by 10%. In column (1) we
make this calculation for the RCLPM estimates using (6a) and (6b), while in column (2) we make this calculation
using the SPM while not accounting for unobservable differences using estimates using (16a) and (16b). The
average take-up rates for all the newly eligible in columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 are much smaller than the average
take-up rates for all eligible children in the respective columns in Table 2, and for the demographic groups
combined, much closer to the estimate from the standard LPM approach. These results are to be expected given
that the families with newly eligible children come from further up the income distribution than the previously
eligible, and they might consider Medicaid less substitutable for private insurance as they might have such
insurance through their employers, a possibility we investigate further below. 12
Column (3) of Table 3 uses (19) to calculate the take-up rates in newly eligible families using the SPM
when we allow selection. As expected, the estimates in column (3) are again larger than those in column (2)
because of the positive estimated correlation between unobservables in eligibility and unobservables in take-up.
There are also wide differences across groups of the newly eligible in their take-up response to the policy
expansion, with the observably less disadvantaged children having substantially lower estimated rates of enrolling
in the Medicaid program for which they are eligible. Interestingly, the average take-up rate for marginal families
from the standard model is relatively close to the average take-up rates for newly eligible two earner or two parent
families (see Table 3), suggesting that these latter groups may each approximate the marginal families in the
standard estimates. This interpretation seems especially plausible given that the expansions focused on extending
benefits to two-parent families.

12

Moreover the newly eligible may be unaware of their eligibility for some period of time - see Ham and Shore-Sheppard
(2005) for evidence on this issue.

23

Tables 2 and 3 indicate a significant advantage of the two approaches we explore here over the standard
LPM approach. Using the latter all one can do is use the estimated average take-up rate for all (unobserved)
marginal families to predict the effect of an expansion, while our approach permits us to estimate effects among
observable groups of children actually affected by the expansion. Further, our estimates in column (3) of each table
allow us to account for the fact that currently eligible children or those made eligible by our policy experiment will
have different unobservables.

5.2 Private Coverage Parameter Estimates, Predicted Crowd-out Rates and Private Insurance

Responses to a Policy Experiment
Here we repeat the analysis of Section 5.1 for private insurance coverage. In the standard model, the
estimated private insurance response to eligibility is essentially zero for marginal families affected by Medicaid
expansions. (Again the parameter estimates are affected by the normalization (omitted category) so we place these
estimates in Tables B1 and B2 of the Online Appendix.) In the RCLPM estimates, the only statistically significant
coefficients are on the eligibility main effect and on the interactions of eligibility with gender, male head and the
age of the highest earner (see column (4) of Table B1 in the Online Appendix), although the number of significant
coefficients will be affected by the normalization. However, when we estimate the SPM, we find that all
demographic variables, except for the gender of the child, are statistically significantly related to private insurance
participation both when a randomly chosen child is and is not eligible for Medicaid (see columns (3) and (4) in
Table B2 in the Online Appendix). The signs of the variables are the same in the index functions for private
participation when eligible and not eligible for Medicaid, indicating that the effect of demographic variables on the
index functions for private insurance coverage is in the same direction when a child is eligible for Medicaid as
when the child is not eligible.
In Table 4 we present our estimated crowd-out rates. We use children eligible for Medicaid in the 1995
SIPP panel to calculate these take-up rates; thus they are directly comparable to the results in Table 2. We present
the private participation rates when eligible and not eligible in Table B3 of the Online Appendix to save space.
However, it is worth noting i) that there is a very wide variation in predicted participation across groups when
eligible and when ineligible, with the highest rates of private insurance participation for children whose families

24

have the greatest likelihood of connection to the labor market and ii) these private insurance participation rates are
precisely estimated. Column (1) shows crowd-out rates for currently eligible children (again this is an ATET) using
the RCLPM estimates, which have been placed in columns (1) and (2) of Table B3 in the Online Appendix. Note
that the standard LPM constrains crowd-out to be constant across demographic groups, but this constraint does
not hold in the data. The estimated crowd-out rates vary from 0.03 to 0.16 (ignoring the estimated negative effects
for some of the more advantaged groups) and are generally statistically significant. The estimated average crowdout among all eligible children from the 1995 SIPP panel is a statistically significant 0.05, in contrast to the
standard LPM estimate for all marginal families of essentially zero; note that there is no way to know how crowdout affects the eligible population on average from the LPM estimate for marginal families.. This result makes
sense in that the average eligible family is likely to find public insurance to be more substitutable for private
insurance than will a marginally eligible family, since on average eligible families will have lower incomes, be less
likely to receive employer provided coverage, have access to poorer private coverage, and face higher out of pocket
costs for insurance as a fraction of their incomes than the marginal families.
Column (2) in Table 4 shows crowd-out rates for eligible children using the SPM and not accounting for
unobservable heterogeneity between eligible and non-eligible children. The estimated average crowd-out rate
across all eligible children is again statistically significant, but is somewhat smaller than the respective estimate for
the RCLPM.13 Also, crowd-out rates across the different groups range only from 0.004 to 0.04 (again ignoring the
negative estimates); thus there is a considerably less disparity in crowd-out rates across groups than predicted by
the RCLPM.
Finally, the results when we use the SPM, and allow for the fact that those eligible and those ineligible for
Medicaid are nonrandom samples, are in column (3) of Table 4. The private participation rates from this model
(which have been placed in columns (5) and (6) of Table B3 in the Online Appendix) show considerable variance
across groups, and they again are precisely estimated. Further, as one would expect, they are lower than the
respective estimates in columns (3) and (4) of Table B3, since unobservables in eligibility are likely to be negatively

13

While we have not explored this difference in depth, we suspect that it may have to do with problems in the RCLPM when
participation rates approach zero or one.

25

correlated with the unobservables in the index function for participation in private insurance. In other words, the
Medicaid eligible population has unobservable characteristics which make them less likely to get private insurance
coverage, ceteris paribus. However, all of the implied crowd-out rates (but one) are insignificant, suggesting that
allowing for differences in unobservables is asking too much of the data when investigating crowd-out.
Finally in columns (1)-(3) of Table 5 we report our estimates of crowd-out among the newly Medicaid
eligible in the 1995 SIPP data under our counterfactual expansion of the Medicaid income limits; again the
participation rates among the newly eligible are presented in Table B4 of the Online Appendix. As expected, for all
three estimation approaches (i.e. RCLPM, SPM not accounting for unobservables, and SPM accounting for
unobservables) the predicted participation rates are smaller than those for all children and continue to be precisely
estimated. For the RCLPM the crowd-out rates are generally statistically insignificant but quite small (and many of
the point estimates are actually negative). For the SPM not accounting for unobservables, the crowd-out rates are
estimated to be positive (as expected), though again most of the estimates are quite small and statistically
insignificant. There are four groups of the newly eligible for whom crowd-out rates are statistically distinguishable
from zero, although the estimates are still economically small, at 0.03—children in families where the highest
earner has a high school degree or some college, children in families with a female head, and children in families
with one earner Interestingly the standard errors in column (2) are quite small, indicating that for this model we
are estimating relatively precise ‘zero’ crowd-out rates among the newly eligible; these results are not surprising
considering that public insurance is likely to be less substitutable for private insurance for newly eligible families
than for previously eligible families. Note that the standard LPM results indicate that crowd-out is likely to be
small or zero for the average marginal families, while our results suggest this is true for all demographic groups
within the marginal families. Finally, the size of the standard errors in column (3) of Table 5 suggest that we
cannot obtain precise crowd-out effects for the newly eligible using the SPM while allowing for selection.

6. Conclusions
In this paper we demonstrate how two approaches—a random coefficients linear probability model
(RCLPM) and a switching probit model (SPM)—can be used to estimate a variety of effects of Medicaid eligibility

26

on take-up and private insurance crowd-out. Specifically, they can be used to estimate effects across different
demographic groups for an average eligible child, a randomly chosen child, a child from a marginally eligible
family, and a child made newly eligible by a counterfactual non-marginal expansion of eligibility. In our empirical
work we focus on the effects on eligible children and those made newly eligible by a counterfactual policy
experiment, since these are likely to be of most interest to policymakers. Neither of these effects are currently
available in the literature, nor is a comparison of their estimates from the RCLPM and the SPM. The RCLPM has
the advantage that it is easier to estimate, although this is not a huge advantage given the SPM is also easily
estimated in Stata if one follows our approach for obtaining standard errors. The SPM has the advantage that it
also allows us to control for changes in unobservables (conditional on making a distributional assumption),
although we find that such a model is too rich for the data when calculating crowd-out effects among the newly
eligible. Both the RCLPM and the SPM can be implemented using preexisting commands in Stata, and both
produce precisely estimated effects for participation in private and public insurance. Interestingly, the RCLPM
and SPM generally produce similar policy effects when we do not account for unobserved heterogeneity using the
SPM.
We find that average take-up rates are much higher for eligible children than for newly eligible children.
Our conclusions about take-up are similar across all three sets of estimates, with each model producing a wide
range of take-up rates across demographic groups. Average take-up rates are around 0.5 for all three approaches.
Take-up rates among the newly eligible following a counterfactual policy simulation are also fairly similar across
estimates, ranging from 0.21 for the RCLPM and the SPM not accounting for selection to 0.27 for the SPM
accounting for selection. These take-up rates are substantially larger than the average take-up rate for marginal
families of 0.13 obtained from the standard LPM model. In addition, we find that participation rates for the
eligible vary dramatically across groups, with observably less disadvantaged children having lower take-up of the
public insurance for which they are eligible. In particular, children in families where the highest earner has a high
school degree or some college have take-up rates roughly two-thirds as large as the take-up rates among children in
families where the highest earner does not have a high school degree, while children in male-headed or dualheaded families have take-up rates only half as large as those among children in female-headed families. Thus our

27

results should prove quite useful in helping policy makers identify groups that are eligible but underserved by
Medicaid.
We estimate precise estimates of private insurance participation across demographic groups for the eligible
and the newly eligible in our counterfactual experiment. When examining average crowd-out among all eligible
children, we find somewhat less heterogeneity across demographic groups and a somewhat lower degree of
similarity across estimation methods. We find the largest estimates of average crowd-out using the RCLPM, with
estimates ranging from 0 to 0.16 and an overall average of 0.05. (More disadvantaged groups show evidence of
higher crowd-out, as well as higher take-up.) The estimates from either version of the SPM range from 0 to 0.05,
with larger standard errors in the model accounting for selection. We find relatively precise ‘zero’ effects of
eligibility on crowd-out among newly eligible children on average and across demographic groups using the SPM
without selection, but not using the RCLPM or the SPM with selection.
Overall, our results provide important information for policymakers about differences in response to
eligibility across observable demographic groups, as well as information about how responses to eligibility differ
between individuals who were previously eligible and those made newly eligible by a counterfactual Medicaid
expansion. For example, while crowd-out may be an issue for many demographic groups among the eligible, there
are (precisely estimated) negligible effects for those affected by nonmarginal expansions, presumably because
Medicaid is less of a substitute for private insurance for the newly eligible. This suggests that crowd-out does not
need to be considered in any demographic groups when considering Medicaid expansions. While we have
demonstrated the usefulness of our approaches in the context of the Medicaid program, they can also be used in
evaluating the effects of many other social programs, such as Food Stamps.

28

References
Aakvik, A., Heckman, J. J., and Vytlacil, E. J. (2005), “Estimating Treatment Effects for Discrete Outcomes When
Responses to Treatment Vary: An Application to Norwegian Vocational Rehabilitation Programs,” Journal of
Econometrics 125, 15-51.
Amemiya, T., (1985), Advanced Econometrics, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Angrist, J. D., (2001), “Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with Dummy Endogenous Regressor:
Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 19(1), 2-16.
Angrist, J. D., (2004), “Treatment Effect Heterogeneity in Theory and Practice,” Economic Journal 114, 52–83.
Bennefield, R.L., (1996), “A Comparative Analysis of Health Insurance Coverage Estimates: Data from CPS and
SIPP,” U.S. Bureau of the Census SIPP Working Paper No. 218.
Bhattacharya, J., Goldman, D., and McCaffrey, D, (2006), “Estimating Probit Models with Self-Selected
Treatments,” Statistics in Medicine 25, 389-413.
Blumberg, L. J., Dubay, L., and Norton, S. A., (2000), “Did the Medicaid Expansions for Children Displace
Private Insurance? An Analysis Using the SIPP,” Journal of Health Economics 19, 33-60.
Blundell, R., Dearden, L., and Sianesi, B., (2005), “Evaluating the Effect of Education on Earnings: Models,
Methods and Results from the National Child Development Survey” Journal of Royal Statistics Society 168, 473-512,
Card, D. and Payne, A. A., (2002), “School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School Spending, and the
Distribution of Student Test Scores,” Journal of Public Economics 83, 49-82.
Carneiro P, Hansen K, and Heckman J.J., (2003), “Estimating Distributions of Treatment Effects with an
Application to the Returns to Schooling and Measurement,” International Economic Review 44,361-422.
Currie, J. and Gruber, J., (1996a), “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Expansions of Medicaid
Eligibility for Pregnant Women,” Journal of Political Economy 104, 1263-1296.
_____, (1996b), “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and Child Health,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 111, 431-466.
Cutler, D. M. and Gruber, J., (1996), “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 111, 391-430.
Dubay, L. C. and Kenney, G. M., (1996), “The Effects of Medicaid Expansions on Insurance Coverage of
Children,” The Future of Children 6, 152-161.
Gruber, J. and Simon, K., (2008), “Crowd-out 10 years later: Have recent public insurance expansions crowded out
private health insurance?” Journal of Health Economics 27, 201-217.
Ham, J. C., Li, X., and Shore-Sheppard, L. D., (2009), “Seam Bias, Multiple-State, Multiple-Spell Duration Models
and the Employment Dynamics of Disadvantaged Women,” NBER working paper 15151.

29

Ham, J. C. and Shore-Sheppard, L. D., (2005), “The Effect of Medicaid Expansions for Low-Income Children on
Medicaid Participation and Private Insurance Coverage: Evidence from the SIPP,” Journal of Public Economics 89, 5783.
Hansen, C., Hausman, J. and Newey, W., (2008), “Many Weak Instruments and Microeconomic Practice,” Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics 26, 398-422.
Heckman, J. J., (1979), “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica 47, 153-161.
Heckman, J. J., Smith, J., and Clements, N., (1997), “Making the Most Out of Programme Evaluations and Social
Experiments: Accounting for Heterogeneity in Programme Impacts” The Review of Economic Studies, 64,, 487-535
Hudson, J. L., Selden, T. M., and Banthin, J. S., (2005), “The Impact of SCHIP on Insurance Coverage of
Children,” Inquiry 42, 232-54.
Imbens, G. and Wooldridge, J. (2008), Lecture 15 in the IRP (Madison) Workshop on Applied Microeconomics,
available at: http://www.irp.wisc.edu/newsevents/workshops/appliedmicroeconometrics/schedule1.htm .
LoSasso, A. T. and Buchmueller, T. C, (2004), “The Effect of the State Children’s Health Insurance Program on
Health Insurance Coverage,” Journal of Health Economics 23, 1059–1082.
Marquis, K. H. and Moore, J. C., (1990), “Measurement Errors in the Survey of Income and Program Participation
Program Reports,” 1990 Annual Research Conference Proceedings, Washington, D.C.: U. S. Bureau of the Census.
Moffitt, R., (2007), “Estimating Marginal Returns to Higher Education in the UK,” NBER Working Paper 13534.
Quandt, R. E., (1958), “The Estimation of the Parameters of a Linear Regression System Obeying Two Separate
Regimes,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 53, 873-880.
_____, (1960), “Tests of the Hypothesis That a Linear Regressions System Obeys Two Different Regimes,” Journal
of the American Statistical Association 55, 324-330.
_____, (1972), “A New Approach to Estimating Switching Regression,” Journal of the American Statistical Association
67, 306-310.
Selden, T. M., Banthin, J. S., and Cohen, J. W., (1998), “Medicaid’s Problem Children: Eligible but not Enrolled,”
Health Affairs 17, 192-200.
Shaikh, A. M. and Vytlacil, E. J., (2005), “Threshold Crossing Models and Bounds on Treatment Effects: A
Nonparametric Analysis,” NBER Technical Working Paper No. 307.
Shore-Sheppard, L. D., (2000), “The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility on the Distribution of Children’s
Health Insurance Coverage,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 54, 59-71.
_____, (2008), “Stemming the Tide? The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility on Health Insurance
Coverage,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy: 8 (Advances), Article 6, available at:
http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/vol8/iss2/art6.
Staiger, D. and Stock, J., (1997), “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments,” Econometrica 65, 557286.

30

Stock, J. H. and Yogo, M., (2005), “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,” in J.H. Stock and
D.W.K. Andrews, eds., Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: A Festschrift in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 80–108.
Thorpe, K. E. and Florence, C. S., (1998), “Health Insurance among Children: The Role of Expanded Medicaid
Coverage,” Inquiry 35(4), 369-379.
Van de Ven, W. P. M. M. and Van Praag, B. M. S., (1981), “The Demand for Deductibles in Private Health
Insurance,” Journal of Econometrics 17, 229-252.
Yazici, E., Kaestner, R., (2000), “Medicaid Expansions and the Crowding Out of Private Health Insurance Among
Children,” Inquiry 37, 23– 32.
Young, N., (1989), “Wave-seam Effects in the SIPP,” Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods, Alexandria,
VA: American Statistical Association, 393-398.

31

Table 1: Means of the Variables Used in Estimation

SIPP Panel

1986

1987

1988

1990

1991

1992

1993

Medicaid

0.12

0.12

0.11

0.16

0.17

0.18

0.20

Private Coverage

0.73

0.75

0.75

0.71

0.73

0.71

0.69

Imputed Eligibility

0.19

0.18

0.18

0.27

0.29

0.31

0.34

Size of Health Insurance Unit

4.22

4.16

4.18

4.16

4.22

4.17

4.22

White

0.83

0.83

0.82

0.78

0.82

0.80

0.81

Male

0.51

0.51

0.51

0.51

0.51

0.52

0.51

Two Parents

0.76

0.77

0.77

0.71

0.74

0.73

0.73

Male Head Only

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.02

No Earners

0.14

0.13

0.13

0.16

0.15

0.16

0.16

One Earner

0.41

0.42

0.42

0.43

0.42

0.41

0.41

Two Earners

0.38

0.39

0.40

0.37

0.38

0.38

0.38

36.49

36.47

36.49

36.67

36.90

36.89

37.10

Education of Highest Earner 12.68

12.69

12.84

12.74

12.92

12.95

12.95

0.20

0.19

0.19

0.28

0.30

0.32

0.34

86-88

87-89

88-89

90-92

91-93

92-95

93-95

Age of Highest Earner

FRACELIG
Years Covered
Number of Observations

175709 182307 163165 397187 267589 433545 406833

Notes: Shown are unweighted means from the respective SIPP panels noted above. See the text for a description of the
sample construction.

32

Table 2
Estimated Medicaid Average Take-up Rates for Eligible Children
From the Random Coefficient Linear Probability Model and the Switching Probit Model

Group

RCLPM

SPM
Selection Ignored
(2)

(1)
All Population
Race
White
Non-White
Education of Highest Earner
High School Drop-out
High School Graduate
Some College
College Graduate
Family Structure
Female Head
Male Head
Two parents
Number of Earners
No earner
One earner
Two earners
More than two earners

SPM
Selection Accounted for
(3)

0.47***
(0.03)

0.47***
(0.01)

0.51***
(0.02)

0.41***
(0.03)
0.62***
(0.03)

0.40***
(0.01)
0.64***
(0.01)

0.44***
(0.02)
0.68***
(0.02)

0.61***
(0.04)
0.44***
(0.03)
0.38***
(0.03)
0.19***
(0.03)

0.60***
(0.01)
0.44***
(0.01)
0.40***
(0.01)
0.22***
(0.01)

0.62***
(0.02)
0.48***
(0.02)
0.44***
(0.02)
0.27***
(0.01)

0.68***
(0.04)
0.31***
(0.04)
0.27***
(0.03)

0.69***
(0.01)
0.28***
(0.02)
0.26***
(0.01)

0.72***
(0.02)
0.32***
(0.03)
0.30***
(0.02)

0.78***
(0.04)
0.28***
(0.03)
0.09**
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.05)

0.77***
(0.005)
0.28***
(0.01)
0.12***
(0.01)
0.08***
(0.01)

0.79***
(0.02)
0.32***
(0.03)
0.18***
(0.02)
0.12***
(0.02)

Notes: All regressions/index functions include demographic main effects, year, age, state dummies, eligibility-year, eligibilityage and eligibility-state interactions and a fourth month dummy. Standard errors have been corrected for repeated
observations across the same children. Estimates are based on coefficients from all SIPP panels and data on Medicaid eligible
children in the 1995 SIPP panel.
*** denotes significantly different from zero at the 1% level of significance; ** denotes significantly different from zero at the
5% level of significance; * denotes significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance.

33

Table 3
Counterfactual Policy Analysis: Estimated Medicaid Take-up Rates for the Newly Eligible after
Raising the 1995 Income Limits by 10%

RCLPM
Group
All Newly Eligible Population
Race
White
Non-White
Education of Highest Earner
High School Drop-out
High School Graduate
Some College
College Graduate
Family Structure
Female Head
Male Head
Two parents
Number of Earners
No earner
One earner
Two earners
More than two earners

SPM
Selection Ignored
(2)

(1)

SPM
Selection Accounted for
(3)

0.21***
(0.05)

0.21***
(0.01)

0.27***
(0.01)

0.18***
(0.05)
0.31***
(0.05)

0.18***
(0.01)
0.32***
(0.01)

0.24***
(0.01)
0.38***
(0.01)

0.30***
(0.05)
0.21***
(0.05)
0.20***
(0.05)
0.07
(0.06)

0.28***
(0.01)
0.21***
(0.01)
0.21***
(0.01)
0.11***
(0.01)

0.33***
(0.01)
0.26***
(0.01)
0.27***
(0.01)
0.17***
(0.01)

0.38***
(0.05)
0.15***
(0.06)
0.15***
(0.05)

0.39***
(0.01)
0.16***
(0.02)
0.15***
(0.01)

0.46***
(0.01)
0.21***
(0.02)
0.20***
(0.01)

0.63***
(0.05)
0.23***
(0.05)
0.09
(0.06)
-0.07
(0.07)

0.63***
(0.01)
0.22***
(0.01)
0.11***
(0.01)
0.06***
(0.01)

0.66***
(0.01)
0.28***
(0.01)
0.17***
(0.01)
0.11***
(0.02)

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Estimates are based on coefficients from all SIPP panels and the data on those in the 1995 SIPP
panel made newly eligible by the increase in the Medicaid income limits.

34

Table 4
Estimated Crowd-out Rates for Eligible Children

RCLPM

SPM
Selection Ignored
(2)

SPM
Selection Accounted for
(3)

Group

(1)

All Population

0.05**
(0.02)

0.02*
(0.01)

0.05
(0.03)

0.05**
(0.02)
0.06*
(0.04)

0.01
(0.01)
0.02*
(0.01)

0.05
(0.04)
0.04
(0.03)

0.08**
(0.03)
0.05**
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.08)

0.005*
(0.01)
0.03***
(0.01)
0.04***
(0.01)
0.02
(0.02)

0.02
(0.03)
0.06
(0.04)
0.07
(0.04)
0.06
(0.05)

0.10**
(0.04)
0.16**
(0.04)
0.005
(0.02)

0.04***
(0.01)
0.03
(0.02)
0.004
(0.01)

0.05**
(0.03)
0.06
(0.05)
0.04
(0.04)

0.11**
(0.05)
0.03**
(0.02)
-0.08**
(0.04)
-0.10
(0.07)

0.03*
(0.01)
0.03*
(0.01)
-0.002
(0.01)
-0.03
(0.02)

0.03
(0.02)
0.06
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.06)

Race
White
Non-White
Education of Highest Earner
High School Drop-out
High School Graduate
Some College
College Graduate
Family Structure
Female Head
Male Head
Two parents
Number of Earners
No earner
One earner
Two earners
More than two earners

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Recall that the SPM estimates separate private insurance participation equations when eligible for
Medicaid and when ineligible. Thus, estimates in columns (2) and (3) are calculated using coefficients from columns (3) and
(4) of Table B2 in the Online Appendix, respectively.

35

Table 5
Counterfactual Policy Analysis: Crowd-out Rates for the Newly Eligible Population after Raising
Medicaid Income Limits by 10%

RCLPM
Group
All Population
Race
White
Non-White
Education of Highest Earner
High School Drop-out
High School Graduate
Some College
College Graduate
Family Structure
Female Head
Male Head
Two parents
Number of Earners
No earner
One earner
Two earners
More than two earners

(1)

SPM
Selection Ignored
(2)

SPM
Selection Accounted for
(3)

-0.03
(0.05)

0.02
(0.01)

0.07
(0.06)

-0.03
(0.05)
-0.04
(0.05)

0.02
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)

0.07
(0.06)
0.06
(0.06)

-0.02
(0.05)
-0.02
(0.05)
-0.03
(0.05)
-0.10
(0.05)

-0.02
(0.02)
0.03*
(0.02)
0.03**
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)

0.01
(0.05)
0.07
(0.06)
0.09
(0.06)
0.09
(0.06)

0.01
(0.05)
0.10
(0.07)
-0.06
(0.05)

0.03*
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
0.01
(0.01)

0.09
(0.05)
0.07
(0.07)
0.06
(0.06)

0.01
(0.07)
-0.01
(0.05)
-0.09
(0.06)
-0.13
(0.09)

0.00
(0.02)
0.03*
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.02)

0.02
(0.03)
0.08
(0.06)
0.06
(0.06)
0.03
(0.07)

Notes: See notes to Tables 3 and 4.

36

