NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UPSTREAM VERSUS DOWNSTREAM IMPLEMENTATION OF CLIMATE POLICY
Erin T. Mansur
Working Paper 16116
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16116

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

I thank Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell, Meredith Fowlie, Don Fullerton, Matt Kotchen, Kerry Smith,
Chris Snyder, Rob Williams and participants at the NBER conference on The Design and Implementation
of U.S. Climate Policy for useful comments on this chapter. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Erin T. Mansur. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Upstream versus Downstream Implementation of Climate Policy
Erin T. Mansur
NBER Working Paper No. 16116
June 2010
JEL No. Q4,Q5
ABSTRACT
This chapter examines the tradeoffs of regulating upstream (e.g., coal, natural gas, and refined petroleum
product producers) versus regulating downstream (e.g., direct sources of greenhouse gases (GHG)).
In general, regulating at the source provides polluters with incentives to choose among more opportunities
to abate pollution. This chapter develops a simple theoretical model that shows why this added flexibility
achieves the lowest overall costs. I broaden the theory to incorporate several reasons why these potential
gains from trade may not be realized--transactions costs, leakage, and offsets--in the context of selecting
the vertical segment of regulation.
Erin T. Mansur
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
erin.mansur@dartmouth.edu

1

Introduction

This chapter examines the tradeoﬀs of regulating greenhouse gases (GHG) upstream versus
downstream. Upstream regulation focuses on firms producing or importing raw materials
that contain GHG like coal, natural gas, and refined petroleum products.

In contrast,

downstream regulation typically refers to regulating the direct sources of GHG including
motor vehicles, farms, power plants, and other stationary sources. The implications of which
sectors to target will depend on four issues discussed below: cost eﬀectiveness, transactions
costs, leakage, and oﬀsets.
Before examining these issues, this chapter explores the terms “upstream” and “downstream.” Regulation may occur at many diﬀerent segments of a vertical chain.

For this

reason, I will refer to the choice of upstream versus downstream regulation as one of regulatory vertical segment selection, or vertical targeting. Some industries have short chains,
while others have many links.
For example, consider the regulation of carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions from personal
vehicles. The chain begins with worldwide exploration and extraction of crude oil. Firms
extract most of the oil used for US transportation internationally. The US only produces a
third of the oil that it consumes (Energy Information Administration (EIA), 2008). In the
second vertical segment, firms transport crude by pipeline or tanker. Third, the oil reaches a
refinery, most likely one of the 150 refineries in the US. Imports account for approximately
12 percent of US motor gasoline consumption (EIA, 2008).

Fourth, after refining the

crude oil into motor gasoline, the product moves, typically by pipeline, to about 390 major
wholesale racks.1
(Census, 2010).

Fifth, trucks bring it to approximately 105,000 US gasoline stations
Sixth, consumers purchase and pump the gasoline into over 244 million

private and commercial registered motor vehicles in the US (Department of Transportation,
2009). While firms and consumers release CO2 emissions in all six links, in this case, the
vast majority occurs during consumption of the final product.
This example illustrates two points regarding vertical targeting. First, the number of
firms or consumers involved in each step may diﬀer dramatically. As discussed below, optimal regulation occurs at the pollution source (assuming an otherwise functioning market).
However, the number of refineries pales in comparison to the number of registered vehicles.
1

OPIS collects wholesale gasoline and diesel prices for over 390 racks (http://www.opisnet.com/rack.asp
accessed April 15, 2010).

2

If few opportunities exist to abate CO2 downstream of refining—namely if wholesale racks,
gasoline stations, and motor vehicles cannot sequester some of the carbon content in the
gasoline at marginal costs equal to or below carbon prices—then regulating at the refinery
level will result in small losses in cost eﬀectiveness from potential trades but great savings
in transactions costs.
Second, the terms “upstream” and “downstream” do not define a specific vertical segment. The upstream industry could mean any one of several industries. In this example,
upstream typically refers to refineries, while downstream refers to vehicles.

However, in

other contexts, “upstream” might mean the polluters and “downstream” might mean consumers. For example, in electricity markets, upstream regulation targets power plants while
downstream refers to regulating retailers, the Load Serving Entities (LSEs). Downstream
regulation would require estimating the source of electricity for each LSE and using a carbon
price at that level of the vertical chain.

The terminology of upstream and downstream

must be understood in context. This chapter aims to address: (i) why, in a general setting,
regulating polluters directly maximizes social welfare, and (ii) why this might not apply for
carbon policy.2 In particular, if policies do not target polluters, would a regulation upstream
of the pollution source be more cost eﬀective, or would a downstream one be preferred?
In the sections below, I develop a theoretical model that explains why regulating the
source of pollution lowers abatement costs.

In particular, if firms can reduce emissions

at the end of the pipe, upstream regulations may miss these options. Next I discuss three
mechanisms that may aﬀect regulators choice of vertical targeting and how one could account
for them in determining a least cost policy.

First, transactions costs from monitoring

and enforcing regulations diﬀer dramatically along the vertical chain given the number of
consumers or producers involved at each segment. Second, while policy discussions include
concerns of leakage, I note how the choice of vertical targeting will aﬀect the degree of
leakage.

Namely, the supply elasticity of unregulated firms varies by segment.

Last, if

the point of regulation lies upstream of the pollution source, oﬀsets can reward firms for
choosing to abate downstream.

I discuss how these oﬀset programs may aﬀect the total

costs of a regulation for a given vertical chain. Many consider oﬀsets to provide a tradeoﬀ:
lower abatement costs but increase total emissions. I show that oﬀsets may even increase
2

For simplicity, I will refer to all GHG emissions and regulations as carbon emissions and carbon policy,
respectively. See the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report (Solomon et al.,
2007) for an explanation of the science of converting various GHG emissions into carbon dioxide equivalent
emissions.

3

both costs and emissions.

Taking account for all four aspects of vertical targeting—cost

eﬀectiveness, transactions costs, leakage, and oﬀsets—this chapter provides a model of how
costs vary along a vertical chain.

The chapter concludes with a brief discussion of other

potential issues with vertical targeting and a summary of the main findings.

2

Theory of Cost Eﬀectiveness

This section examines the relative cost eﬀectiveness of upstream versus downstream regulation.3 Suppose that firm i produces a single good that results in carbon emissions. The firm
maximizes profits π with respect to its output q, the carbon content of its fuel F (measured
in carbon/q), and its end-of-pipe emissions rate r (measured as the fraction of a fuel’s carbon
emitted):
max π = P (Q)q − c(q) − a(q, F, r),

(1)

q,F,r

where the price of the good sold (P ) depends on the total industry output Q, and firm costs
are denoted c(q) for production (given no carbon regulation) and a(q, F, r) for abatement.
Note that F r equals the typical emissions rate definition. For a given competitive quantitychoosing environment, an unregulated firm will set marginal revenue (MR ≡

∂P (Q)q
)
∂q

equal

to marginal cost (MC ≡ c0 (q)) and not abate: r = 1, a = 0.

Next I write a(q, F, r) as two additive components: ain (q, F ) depending only on inputs,

and aout (q, F, r) for “end-of-pipe” technologies. Switching to a lower carbon fuel (for example, a vehicle switching from oil-based diesel to biodiesel, or a power plant switching from
coal to natural gas) would be in ain . aout includes other technologies, like installing carbon
capture and sequestration (CCS) technology on a power plant, but also any other type of
abatement decision that would not be covered by changing inputs. For example, if a refinery
changed the product mix to produce more asphalt (which would sequester carbon), then this
would also be part of aout .
Consider two possible regulations: a carbon price as an input-based regulation tin ; and a
carbon price as an end-of-pipe regulation τ out . We can rewrite the firm’s objective function
3

This chapter relates to several literatures. Schmalensee (1976) compares upstream versus downstream
welfare measurements of input-based taxes. The environmental costing literature notes the practical importance of making both inputs and outputs reflect social costs (Smith, 1992). Burrows (1977) modeled the
input substitution implications of pollution taxes relative to standards. Carlton and Loury (1980) consider
the entry and exit implications of taxation policy.

4

in equation (1) as:
max π = P (Q)q − c(q) − tin F rq − τ out F rq − ain (q, F ) − aout (q, F, r),
q,F,r

(2)

where r corresponds to the emissions rate of the firm’s unregulated fuel choice. As mentioned
above, an unregulated firm would not abate, r = 1. In this setting, I write the first order
conditions as:
q : tin F + τ out F r = MR − c0 (q) − ∂ain /∂q − ∂aout /∂q,

(3)

F : tin q + τ out rq = −∂ain /∂F − ∂aout /∂F,

(4)

r : τ out F q = −∂aout /∂r.

(5)

A cost-eﬀective regulation would allow firms to use any means of abating pollution,
whether it be end of pipe, input based, or just producing less output.

In this case, the

regulator would need to be able to monitor the actual emissions rate, r. When feasible, like
in the case of power plants that use a Continuous Emissions Monitoring System (CEMS),
firms will choose among all possible ways of reducing carbon.

To enact this, regulators

would set tin = 0 and, if socially optimal, τ out = MD, the marginal damages from carbon
emissions.4 From equations (3), (4), and (5), we see that firms have an incentive to reduce
pollution on all margins, and to continue to abate until the carbon price τ out equals the
marginal abatement cost (MAC):
τ out = MACout =

MR − c0 (q) −

Fr

∂ain
∂q

−

∂aout
∂q

=−

∂ain
∂F

+ ∂a∂Fout
∂aout /∂r
=−
.
rq
Fq

(6)

All regulated firms would have similar incentives. Hence, the marginal cost of abatement
will be equal across all techniques and all firms: the result being cost eﬀective.
In contrast, an input-based regulation would set τ out = 0 and, in order to be allocatively
eﬃcient, tin = MD.5 In this case, from equation (5) we see that firms have no incentive to
abate using end-of-pipe technologies. Furthermore, only under an end-of-pipe regulation,
the marginal abatement cost from reducing output or changing inputs depends on the choice
4
Under a tax, regulators would levy a tax τ out while under a cap-and-trade regulation, permits would be
auctioned or grandfathered such that the expected permit price equals τ out .
5
This section looks at extremes of regulating only one vertical segment. However, some combination
of upstream and downstream policies could provide incentives for lowering abatement costs but also keep
transactions costs low (for example, see Fullerton and Wolverton (2000)). The discussion of oﬀsets revisits
this issue.

5

of r. While firms will still have incentives to reduce output and improve the carbon content
of fuels, some opportunities to abate will be forgone. In equilibrium, all firms would set:
tin = MACin =

MR − c0 (q) −

∂ain
∂q

F

∂aout
∂q

−

=−

∂ain
∂F

+
q

∂aout
∂F

.

(7)

If such an approach had been used for sulfur dioxide regulation twenty years ago, firms
would only have incentive to switch to low-sulfur coal and not to install scrubbers. Given
the number of scrubbers that have been installed because of Title IV of the 1990 Clean Air
Act Amendments, an input-based regulation may have been quite costly in that case. In the
context of CO2 , CCS’s high capital costs may make end-of-pipe opportunities less relevant.
In order to measure the additional costs of using an input-based regulation, one would
need to be able to estimate the marginal abatement cost for all techniques. Figure 1 depicts
how these costs might be determined.

As Metcalf and Weisbach (2009) note, a narrow

policy will miss out on some opportunities and will result in a steeper marginal abatement
cost curve.

Figure 1 shows this in a slightly diﬀerent way. The horizontal axis shows
b
the overall amount of abatement required, aggregating over all polluters, by the policy A.

The left vertical axis maps input-based marginal abatement costs, MACin , as in equation

(7). The right vertical axis represents the marginal costs only for end-of-pipe abatement,
MACend . This includes those incentives outlined in equation (6) but not in equation (7):
−1
−1
−1
MACend
(A) ≡ MACout
(A) − MACin
(A).

(8)

In other words, MACend accounts for the abatement options resulting from changing r.
Where the marginal costs equate (MACin = MACend ) at A∗ , firms achieve the least cost
option.

The shaded area shows the additional costs (AddCost) that firms incur by only

being rewarded for changing q and F :
AddCost =

Z

e
A

A∗

MACin (x)dx −

Z

e
A

MACend (x)dx.

(9)

A∗

Under the theoretical assumptions above, flexibility achieves the lowest overall costs. As
a starting point, downstream regulation appears the cost eﬀective policy.
dynamic incentives may exacerbate this finding.

Furthermore,

Firms would have incentive to develop,

and invest in, new end-of-pipe abatement technologies if the carbon price were on emissions
but not if they face an input-based policy.

6

3

Three Main Concerns of Vertical Targeting

However, regulating at the source of pollution may fail to realize these gains from trade
for several reasons. This section highlights three: transactions costs, leakages, and oﬀsets.
Transaction costs recognize that monitoring and enforcement become more complex when
a vertical segment includes many polluters. Leakage occurs when unregulated firms emit
more because of the policy. Vertical targeting will aﬀect leakage: unregulated firms in some
vertical links will be more price elastic than others. Upstream policies coupled with oﬀsets
may allow for cost eﬀectiveness. However, asymmetric information could result in greater
emissions and greater costs with oﬀsets than without them. The following section discusses
some other issues that have been raised on this issue.

3.1

Transactions Costs

Transactions costs pose a major hurtle for establishing an end-of-pipe regulation: The cost of
monitoring and enforcing regulation for millions of pollution sources could dwarf the benefits
from some downstream regulations. In contrast, a regulation upstream of pollution sources
could substantially reduce these costs. Metcalf and Weisbach (2009) note that regulating a
few thousand fossil-fuel producing companies would account for 80 percent of GHG emissions
in the US. By including some select non-fossil polluters, an additional 10 percent of total
emissions would be regulated.

Metcalf and Weisbach (2009) argue that the transactions

costs of adding these polluters would be modest.
I modify the theory from the previous section to account for these costs. Suppose that
regulators incur a cost κ in determining emissions from each source. In addition, monitoring
the usage and carbon content of each fuel also results in costs. For simplicity, assume the
same constant cost κ that society incurs on each input supplier. Furthermore, assume that
the decision to regulate upstream or downstream—i.e., input-based or end of pipe—is jointly
determined for all n pollution sources and m fuel suppliers. A regulator trying to minimize
costs now faces a trade oﬀ: regulate end of pipe and incur costs nκ; or regulate inputs and
incur higher abatement costs and some transactions costs AddCost + mκ.

Note that if

m > n, then end-of-pipe regulation will always be lower cost (assuming similar transactions
costs per firm).
As discussed in the motor vehicle example at the start of this chapter, many segments
in the vertical chain could be regulated. In order to minimize overall costs, regulators may
7

consider all V options, where V equals the number of vertical links associated with carbon
emissions from one particular sector or industry. Let v ∗ solve the cost minimization problem:
v∗ = arg min {AddCostv + lv κ} ,
v∈{1,..,V }

(10)

where lv equals the number of agents in segment v (e.g., n or m). Note that for the polluting
segment, AddCost = 0.
In general, moving further upstream (or downstream) from the source of pollution results
in forgoing some abatement opportunities. Hence, I expect AddCost to increase monotonically with vertical distance from the pollution source. However, the number of regulated
firms may increase or decrease along the vertical chain. In the vehicle example, while the
number of vehicles vastly exceeds refineries, more firms extract oil worldwide than own US
refineries.
Finally, note that transactions costs depend on technology. In the future, technology
will likely improve such that collecting and using information for enforcement becomes even
easier.

As a result, the cost of regulating more complex vertical levels will likely fall;

regulating 250 million vehicles may become feasible. In other words, the optimal vertical
targeting of regulation may change over time.

3.2

Leakage

Leakage poses a second major concern of upstream versus downstream regulation.

If all

nations do not harmonize carbon prices, then incomplete regulation will aﬀect the types
of goods produced and consumed.

Leakage occurs when partial regulation results in an

increase in emissions in unregulated parts of the economy.6
policy will aﬀect the magnitude of leakage.

The vertical targeting of the

Here, leakage could be an issue with either

upstream or downstream regulation.
Define the market demand for a good as QD (p). We can write the residual demand for
regulated firms’ output as: QDR (p) = QD (p) − QSU (p), where QSU represents the supply of

firms not regulated. In particular, QSU will include output from foreign firms. Note that
not all foreign production need be unregulated, as firms in some countries already face a
6

Many recent papers examine leakage. For example, Fowlie (2009) develops a theory of incomplete
regulation. She shows how leakage can, in some cases, increase total emissions relative to no regulation,
and in other cases, decrease emissions relative to full regulation. Bushnell and Chen (2009) simulate the
Western US electricity grid to examine how various proposals on how permits are allocated would aﬀect the
degree of leakage.

8

carbon price. In addition, many policy proposals include a discussion of border adjustments
(for example, see Metcalf and Weisbach, 2009). Fischer and Fox (2009) compare the eﬀects
on leakage of border taxes versus rebates.
Decomposing market demand into its two components—QDR (p) and QSU (p)—is useful in
understanding the relationship between leakage and vertical targeting.

In particular, if

market prices increase in equilibrium, residual demand for domestic firms will fall for two
reasons. Consumers buy less, which reduces emissions, but also foreign firms produce more
which will increase emissions.

These unregulated emissions cause damage.

If marginal

damages are (locally) constant and equal the carbon price τ , then regulating segment v will
result in additional damages (AddDmg):
£
¤
AddDmgv = τ Fere QSU (p1 ) − QSU (p0 )) ,

(11)

where Fe and re represent unregulated firms’ fuel carbon content and end-of-pipe emissions
rate, and p1 and p0 denote the price of good v with and without regulation, respectively. All

else equal, a policy that aims at the part of the vertical chain with the least elastic foreign
supply will result in the greatest welfare.
This also applies to a multiproduct setting. When close substitutes, more leakage occurs
in markets for unregulated goods.

In general, more precisely defined markets will have

greater substitutes so fine-tuned regulations may cause greater leakage.

Note that this

perspective has focused narrowly on the prices of the regulated good. In a general equilibrium
setting, prices throughout the vertical chain, and in the rest of the economy, will also be
aﬀected. As such, leakage could occur in many industries.
One particular type of leakage deserves further examination. Reshuﬄing occurs when
firms do not change production (firms’ location, output, and methods stay fixed), but do
change where they sell the goods. In electricity markets, reshuﬄing may occur if regulation
requires LSEs to document the sources of purchased power (Bushnell, Peterman, and Wolfram, 2008). Unlike leakage, where the location and amount of production of carbon-intensive
goods physically changes, reshuﬄing looks more like an accounting exercise. Producers sell
the relatively clean power to the regulated LSEs and the relatively dirty power to others.
For goods where transportation is inherently diﬃcult to track, like electricity, regulators may
find reshuﬄing particularly problematic.
Regulators face the issue of reshuﬄing for other goods with heterogeneous carbon intensities. Within biofuels, for example, some fuels have carbon rates well below that of oil, while
9

others may exceed crude’s carbon content. Even with consumer goods, heterogeneity arises
due to production technology diﬀerences. Suppose that an import tariﬀ were enacted, and
regulators could accurately measure the carbon content of the imported goods. We would
expect that some reshuﬄing would take place with only the clean goods coming to the US,
and the dirty goods staying in the other country. Unlike with leakage, emissions may not
increase with reshuﬄing.7 However, import tariﬀs will only apply to the cleanest goods in
equilibrium, limiting their eﬀectiveness in reducing emissions.

3.3

Oﬀsets

If regulators decide to use upstream regulation, they may consider giving firms credit for
choosing options that reduce GHGs downstream. Regulators oﬀer oﬀset programs to lower
overall abatement costs while still reducing emissions to a set level (i.e., the cap). However,
asymmetric information may cause unintended consequences.
Suppose that regulators have imperfect information regarding how much firms would emit
without regulation (i.e., the baseline).

Define e ≡ qF r as regulators’ expected baseline.

Firms have private information; they know the actual unregulated emissions e0 .

After

opting in, regulators and firms observe actual emissions e ≡ qF r. Finally, I denote actual

abatement as α ≡ e0 − e, and regulators’ expected abatement as α ≡ e − e.

The objective function for firms facing input-based regulation with oﬀsets is:
max π = P (Q)q − c(q) − tin F q − ain (q, F ) − aout (q, F, r) + σ(r, e).
q,F,r

(12)

The subsidy σ commonly takes the form of pollution credits for perceived abatement α.
Regulated firms can use oﬀset credits in lieu of using pollution permits, and thus equal the
carbon price in equilibrium: σ(r, e) = tin α.
Asymmetric information over α can result in adverse selection (Montero, 1999). Unlike
with an end-of-pipe regulation, firms have a choice to opt into an oﬀset program.

For a

continuous, diﬀerentiable abatement technology, a firm will opt in if the marginal subsidy
exceeds the marginal abatement costs, ∂σ/∂r > ∂aout /∂r. If marginal abatement costs lie
below the carbon price tin , then such adoption could lower total abatement costs across all
firms.
7

If firms reshuﬄe through electronic transfers, then emissions will not increase. On the other hand, if
reshuﬄing requires that goods be physically moved to diﬀerent locations, this would (presumably) increase
emissions due to additional transportation.

10

Regulators will likely either understate or overstate baseline emissions e0 , and both cases
may lead to adverse eﬀects.

First, if e falls substantially below e0 , then a firm with low

marginal abatement costs may lack the incentive to reduce r. Even though the firm could
reduce emissions at low social costs, the subsidy would be insuﬃcient to provide it with
incentives to do so. This type of error will result in forgone cost savings to society. However,
these opportunities would also be missed in an input-based regulation without oﬀsets.
The second type of error could actually increase social costs relative to a no oﬀset regime.
In this case, a particularly lucrative subsidy may entice even a firm with high marginal
abatement costs to opt in.

This will occur if the regulator substantially overstates the

baseline emissions, e > e0 .

Given continuous and diﬀerentiable abatement costs, a firm

could abate just a small amount, |∆r| < ε, and receive a large subsidy.

The number of

credits awarded equal the perceived abatement, α > 0, even though actual abatement α is

near zero. In this case, when virtually no actual abatement occurs, society incurs no costs
(even those firms receive transfers).
However, for “lumpy” investments, this type of error can result in costs to society. Lumpiness may result from a technological characteristic (CCS may have large capital costs and
low marginal costs), or a policy (if regulators can only monitor large changes in r). In either
case, firms must now either make a large investment or none at all.
Oﬀsets provide net benefits to society equal to the actual value created (i.e., the carbon
price times actual abatement) less the firms’ abatement costs: tin α − aout . Under a cost
eﬀective policy, firms abate only if the social benefits exceed social costs. If e0 = e, oﬀsets

would be cost eﬀective. However, firms with larger predicted baselines, e > e0 , may have
incentive to abate even if doing so reduces social welfare. Even with unbiased estimates,
measurement error in the regulators’ perceived baseline results in higher costs due to adverse
selection. To see this, note that a firm will opt in only if it receives payments greater than
cost, tin α > aout . Thus, oﬀsets increase abatement costs when firms have incentive to opt
(tin α > aout ) in even though doing so results in a net losses to society (tin α < aout ), or:
tin α > aout > tin α.

(13)

Some high-cost firms will opt in, and some low-cost firms will opt out.8
8
Note that these distortions can persist in the long run as the subsidy reduces the permit price below the
cost eﬀective price τ out .

11

Furthermore, oﬀsets can result in a form of leakage.9 If firms abate α but earn credits
for α, then overall emissions increase by α − α.
damages associated with climate change.

These additional emissions increase the

If damages are locally linear, and if marginal

damages equal the carbon price, then these additional emissions cost society tin · (α − α).

Combining the net benefits from oﬀsets with the damages from additional emissions, one

can measure the overall net losses from oﬀsets (Of fLoss) across all firms in link v as:
Off Lossv =

l
X
i=1

{[−(tin α − aout ) + tin · (α − α)] · 1 [tin α > aout ]} ,

(14)

where 1 [·] indicates opting in. Note that Of fLoss may be positive or negative.
While regulators cannot observe e0 for each firm, they may know its distribution. In this
case, the expected net losses from oﬀsets, E[Of fLossv ], can help determine the least costly
policy. Combining all four components—cost eﬀectiveness, transactions costs, leakage, and
oﬀsets—the link v∗∗ minimizes total social costs:
v∗∗ = arg min {AddCostv + lv κ + AddDmgv + E[Off Lossv ]} .
v∈{1,..,V }

4

(15)

Other Issues of Vertical Targeting

Next I briefly discuss several other issues that have been raised in the context of upstream
versus downstream regulation. These include imperfect competition, regulatory treatment,
tax salience, and integrating markets.

4.1

Imperfect Competition

With regards to upstream regulation, some raise a concern that imperfect competition amplifies carbon price pass through. In particular, some argue that input-based carbon prices
will be marked up repeatedly in a chain of industries with market power. In contrast, they
posit, a downstream carbon price will only aﬀect the last segment of the chain.
Consider three issues regarding imperfect competition and carbon price pass through.
First, while firms with market power have incentives to increase prices above marginal costs,
this does not imply that an additional carbon cost will increase market prices by more than
9

This occurs only if regulators tie the oﬀset program to the cap-and-trade regulation. However, if
separate government subsidies or voluntary markets fund oﬀsets, and regulated firms cannot use these oﬀsets
for compliance, then the additional supply of oﬀsets will not reduce abatement in the regulated market.

12

the additional cost. Firms optimize by setting marginal revenue equal to marginal costs, and
the slope of marginal revenue may be either greater or less than the slope of inverse demand.
Second, when firms exert market power the theory of the second best applies and the optimal
tax need not equal marginal damages (see, for example, Buchanan (1969)).

Third, with

fixed proportions (whereby firms cannot substitute other inputs to change emissions, i.e.,
r = r), upstream and downstream regulation will result in the same equilibrium.

Chiu,

Mansley, and Morgan (1998) refer to this as the irrelevance result.
To see this last point, I use an example of a chain of imperfectly competitive industries. In
particular, suppose that a monopolist in one market sells to another downstream monopolist,
who then sells to customers. The upstream firm maximizes profits (π u ) by producing qu at an
input price w. The upstream firm incurs costs c(qu ). The downstream firm maximizes profits
(π d ) by producing qd , for which consumers pay p. The downstream firm pays wqu + k(qd ).
Using notation from the previous sections, the regulator will impose either an input-based
or an end-of-pipe carbon price. The resulting profit functions equal:
π u = w(qu )qu − c(qu ) − tin rF qd
π d = p(qd )qd − wqu − k(qd ) − τ out rF qd
For simplicity, let qd = qu and F = 1. I write the firms’ first order conditions as:
w + w0 q = c0 + tin r
p + p0 q = w + k0 + τ out r,
or rearranging terms, the downstream firm’s response function as w = p + p0 q − k0 − τ out r.
Thus, solving backwards, the upstream firm’s first order condition becomes:
p + 3p0 q + p00 q 2 − c0 − k 0 − k00 q = tin r + τ out r.

(16)

Note that if r = r , then an upstream carbon price equates to downstream policy.10

4.2

Regulation

Metcalf and Weisbach (2009) discuss how regulated industries may treat upstream and downstream policies diﬀerentially. For example, if electric utilities face direct, end-of-pipe regulation and receive grandfathered permits, then regulators may limit their ability to pass
10

For perfectly competitive downstream markets, firms’ first order condition imply w = p − k 0 − τ out r.
The upstream monopolist maximizes profits by solving p + p0 q − c0 − k0 − k00 q = tin r + τ out r. Again, the
policies are equivalent. Chiu et al. (1998) reach the same conclusion for an upstream monopolist selling to
downstream Cournot oligopolists.

13

on marginal cost increases: the opportunity cost of permits in hand may not be treated
the same as a purchased permits. In contrast, the same utility may easily pass on higher
input prices under upstream regulation. Note that from a social welfare perspective, fully
incorporating increases in marginal costs in determining the market equilibrium price will
be eﬃcient. Namely, the optimal price would be where marginal social costs equal marginal
social benefits, not where price equals average costs.

4.3

Tax Salience

Some promote downstream regulation by arguing that a carbon price near the point of
emissions (e.g., power plants or gasoline stations) will make the policy more salient for the
polluter, and therefore, result in greater response. This argument stems from findings of
behavioral economists, who posit that consumers respond more to easily-computed taxes.
Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009) look at state-level alcohol consumption from 1970-2003.
They find a greater change in consumption with taxes already included in the shelf price
(excise taxes) than with taxes applied at the point of sale (sales taxes).

Consumers find

those taxes already imbedded in the price of the good to be the most salient. Note that these
findings suggest that any policy in which firms account for carbon costs in the “shelf” price
(whether it be because of an increase in fuel prices from input-based regulation or because of
an increase in marginal costs directly from an end-of-pipe regulation) would be more eﬀective
at changing end-users’ behavior than a carbon price placed on consumers afterwards.

4.4

Integrating Markets

The optimal vertical segment of regulation for one emissions source’s vertical chain may
diﬀer across sources. For example, regulating refineries may minimize costs in the case of
vehicles’ carbon while emission source regulation may minimize costs for stationary facilities.
In integrating these diﬀerent regulations, it will be important, from a cost eﬀective perspective, that chains do not “cross.” Namely, cost eﬀectiveness will fail if firms pay the
carbon price more than once: for example, if a refinery faces a carbon price and then sells
its fuel oil to a power plant already paying for emissions, then the outcome will not be least
cost.

On the other hand, in integrating regulations across markets, establishing trading

ratios so that refineries and power plants can trade permits (in dollars per ton of carbon
dioxide, for example) will enable greater gains and lower overall costs. If power plants can

14

reduce emissions at a lower marginal cost than can a refinery, then allowing firms to trade
across sectors will lower overall costs.

5

Conclusions

This chapter sets out some key issues in deciding what level of a vertical chain of industries
to target in designing regulation. After developing a model of cost eﬀectiveness, the chapter
examines several reasons why potential gains from trade may not be realized. First, upstream
regulation could substantially reduce transactions costs. Regulating a few thousand fossilfuel producing companies would account for 80 percent of GHG emissions (Metcalf and
Weisbach, 2009). Second, if all nations do not harmonize carbon prices, then incomplete
regulation will aﬀect the types of goods produced, traded, and consumed. The magnitude
of regulatory leakage depends on whether policy regulates firms upstream or downstream.
Third, oﬀsets have been considered in order to give firms facing upstream regulation with
the incentive to choose some downstream options to reduce emissions. While these oﬀsets
may result in lower overall abatement costs, they may also have unintended consequences
that result in less overall abatement (Montero, 1999).

This chapter discusses how cost

eﬀectiveness, transactions costs, leakage, and oﬀsets relate to the issue of regulatory vertical
segment selection.

References
[1] Buchanan, James. 1969. “External Diseconomies, Corrective Taxes, and Market Structure,” American Economic Review, 59(1): 174-177.
[2] Burrows, Paul. 1977. “Pollution Control with Variable Production Processes,” Journal
of Public Economics, 8: 357-367.
[3] Bushnell, James and Yihsu Chen. 2009. “Regulation, Allocation, and Leakage in Capand-Trade Markets for CO2 ,” NBER Working Paper 15495.
[4] Bushnell, James, Carla Peterman, and Catherine Wolfram. 2008. “Local Solutions to
Global Problems: Climate Change Policies and Regulatory Jurisdiction,” Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy, 2(2): 175-193.
[5] Carlton, Dennis W. and Glenn C. Loury. 1980. “The Limitations of Pigouvian Taxes as a
Long-Run Remedy for Externalities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95(3): 559-566.

15

[6] Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
Evidence,” American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145-1177.
[7] Chiu, Stephen, Edward C. Mansley, John Morgan. 1998. “Choosing the right battlefield
for the war on drugs: an irrelevance result,” Economics Letters, 59(1): 107-111.
[8] Fischer, Carolyn and Alan K. Fox. 2009. “Comparing Policies to Combat Emissions
Leakage: Border Tax Adjustments versus Rebates,” RFF Discussion Paper 2009-02.
[9] Fowlie, Meredith. 2009. “Incomplete Environmental Regulation, Imperfect Competition,
and Emissions Leakage,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(2): 72-112.
[10] Fullerton, Don and Ann Wolverton. 2000. “Two Generalizations of a Depost-Refund
System,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 90(2): 238-242.
[11] Hobbs, Benjamin F., James Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak. 2010. “Upstream vs. Downstream CO2 Trading: A Comparison for the Electricity Context,” Energy Institute at
Haas Working Paper 203.
[12] Metcalf, Gilbert and David Weisbach. 2009. “The Design of a Carbon Tax,” Harvard
Environmental Law Review, 33(2): 499-556.
[13] Montero, Juan-Pablo. 1999. “Voluntary Compliance with Market-Based Environmental
Policy: Evidence from the US Acid Rain Program,” Journal of Political Economy, 107:
998-1033.
[14] Schmalensee, Richard. 1976. “Another Look at the Social Valuation of Input Price
Changes,” American Economic Review, 66(1): 239-243.
[15] Smith, V. Kerry. 1992. “Environmental Costing for Agriculture: Will It Be Standard
Fare in the Farm Bill of 2000?” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 74(5):
1076-1088.
[16] Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor and H.L. Miller. 2007. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, 2007. http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/contents.html
(accessed April 12, 2010).
[17] United States Energy Information Administration. 2008. Annual Energy Review.
DOE/EIA-0384. http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/aer/pdf/aer.pdf (accessed April 10,
2010).
[18] United States Census Bureau. 2010. Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages.
http://www.bls.gov/iag/tgs/iag447.htm (accessed April 10, 2010).

16

$/ton

MACend

$/ton

MACin

Â
A*
End-of-Pipe based Abatement

Input based Abatement

Figure 1: Depiction of Marginal Abatement Costs broken into Input-based and other,
End-of-Pipe Abatement. The horizontal axis is the total amount of abatement
required under the cap. The shaded area is the additional costs incurred by
only allowing input-based abatement methods to be used.

17

