NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY IN EMERGING MARKETS:
A SURVEY
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Working Paper 16125
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16125

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

The author would like to thank Olivier Blanchard, Ben Friedman, Oyebola Olabisi, Eswar Prasad and
participants at the ECB conference in October 2009, for comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets: A Survey
Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 16125
June 2010
JEL No. E0,E5,F41,O16
ABSTRACT
The characteristics that distinguish most developing countries, compared to large industrialized countries,
include: greater exposure to supply shocks in general and trade volatility in particular, procyclicality
of both domestic fiscal policy and international finance, lower credibility with respect to both price
stability and default risk, and other imperfect institutions. These characteristics warrant appropriate
models.
Models of dynamic inconsistency in monetary policy and the need for central bank independence and
commitment to nominal targets apply even more strongly to developing countries. But because most
developing countries are price-takers on world markets, the small open economy model, with nontraded
goods, is often more useful than the two-country two-good model. Contractionary effects of devaluation
are also far more important for developing countries, particularly the balance sheet effects that arise
from currency mismatch. The exchange rate was the favored nominal anchor for monetary policy in
inflation stabilizations of the late 1980s and early 1990s. After the currency crises of 1994-2001, the
conventional wisdom anointed Inflation Targeting as the preferred monetary regime in place of exchange
rate targets. But events associated with the global crisis of 2007-09 have revealed limitations to the
choice of CPI for the role of price index.
The participation of emerging markets in global finance is a major reason why they have by now earned
their own large body of research, but it also means that they remain highly prone to problems of asymmetric
information, illiquidity, default risk, moral hazard and imperfect institutions. Many of the models designed
to fit emerging market countries were built around such financial market imperfections; few economists
thought this inappropriate. With the global crisis of 2007-09, the tables have turned: economists should
now consider drawing on the models of emerging market crises to try to understand the unexpected
imperfections and failures of advanced-country financial markets.

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu

Outline
1. Why do we need different models for emerging markets?
2. Goods markets, pricing, and devaluation
2.1 Traded goods and the Law of One Price; pass-through; commodities
2.2 When export prices are sticky; elasticities
2.3 Nontraded goods; Salter Swan model
2.4 Contractionary effects of devaluation

3. Inflation
3.1 Hyperinflation, high inflation, and moderate inflation
3.2 Stabilization programs
3.3 Central Bank independence

4. Nominal targets for monetary policy
4.1 The move from money targeting to exchange rate targeting
4.2 The movement from exchange rate targeting to inflation targeting
4.3 “Headline” CPI, Core CPI, and Nominal Income Targeting

5. Exchange rate regimes
5.1 The advantages of fixed exchange rates
5.2 The advantages of floating exchange rates
5.3 Evaluating overall exchange rate regime choices.
5.4 Classifying countries by exchange rate regime
5.5 The Corners Hypothesis

6.

Procyclicality
6.1 The procyclicality of capital flows in developing countries
6.2 The procyclicality of demand policy in developing countries
a. The procyclicality of fiscal policy
b. The political business cycle.
c. The procyclicality of monetary policy

6.3 Commodities and the Dutch Disease
6.4 Product-oriented choices for price index under inflation targeting

7. Capital flows
7.1 The opening of emerging markets
a.
b.
c.

Measures of financial integration
Sterilization and capital flow offset
Controls, capital account liberalization, sequencing

7.2 Does financial openness improve welfare?
a.
b.
c.

Benefits of financial integration
Markets don’t quite work that way
Capital inflow bonanzas

8. Crises in emerging markets
8.1 Reversals, sudden stops, speculative attacks, crises
8.2 Contagion
8.3 Management of Crises
8.4 Policy instruments and goals
8.5 Default and how to avoid it
8.6 Early warning indicators

9. Conclusion
2

Monetary Policy in Emerging Market Countries: A Survey
Thirty years ago, the topic of Macroeconomics or Monetary Economics for
Developing Countries hardly existed1, beyond a few papers regarding devaluation.2 Nor
did the term “emerging markets” exist. Certainly it was not appropriate at that time to
apply to such countries the models that had been designed for industrialized countries,
with their assumption of financial sectors that were highly market-oriented and open to
international flows. To the contrary, developing countries typically suffered from
“financial repression” under which the only financial intermediaries were uncompetitive
banks and the government itself, which kept nominal interest rates artificially low (often
well below the inflation rate) and allocated capital administratively rather than by market
forces.3 Capital inflows and outflows were heavily discouraged, particularly by capital
controls, and were thus largely limited to foreign direct investment and loans from the
World Bank and other international financial institutions.
Over time, the financial sectors of most developing countries – at least those
known as emerging markets – have gradually become more liberalized and open. The
globalization of their finances began in the late 1970s with the syndicated bank loans that
recycled petrodollars to oil-importers. Successive waves of capital inflow followed after
1990 and again after 2003. The largest outpouring of economic research was provoked
not so much by the capital booms themselves as by the subsequent capital busts: the
international debt crisis of 1982-89, the emerging market crises of 1995-2001, and
perhaps the global financial crisis of 2008-09.
In any case, the literature on emerging markets now occupies a very large share of
the field of international finance and macroeconomics. International capital flows are
central to much of the research on macroeconomics in developing countries. This
includes both efficient-market models that were originally designed to describe advanced
economies and market-imperfection models that have been designed to allow for the
realities of default risk, procyclicality, asymmetric information, imperfect property rights
and other flawed institutions.
In the latter part of the 19th century most of the vineyards of Europe were
destroyed by the microscopic aphid Phylloxera vastatrix. Eventually a desperate last
resort was tried: grafting susceptible European vines onto resistant American root
stock. Purist French vintners initially disdained what they considered
compromising the refined tastes of their grape varieties. But it saved the European

1

The field apparently did not get a comprehensive textbook of its own until Agenor and Montiel (1st edition
1996, 2nd edition 1999).
2
Two seminal papers on devaluation in developing countries were Diaz-Alejandro (1963) and Cooper
(1971).
3
McKinnon (1973) and Shaw (1973). King and Levine (1993) and Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000),
using data for 80 and 74 countries, respectively, conclude that domestic financial development is conducive
to growth. Rajan and Zingales (1998a) support the causal interpretation by means of data on disaggregated
industrial sectors and their dependence on external finance.

3

vineyards, and did not impair the quality of the wine. The New World had come to
the rescue of the Old.
In 2007-08, the global financial system was grievously infected by so-called
toxic assets originating in the United States. Many ask what fundamental
rethinking will be necessary to save macroeconomic theory. Some answers may lie
with models that have been applied to fit the realities of emerging markets, models
that are at home with the financial market imperfections that have now unexpectedly
turned up in industrialized countries as well. Purists will be reluctant to seek
salvation from this direction. But they should not fear. The hardy root stock of
emerging market models is incompatible with fine taste.

1. Why do we need different models for emerging markets?
At a high enough level of abstraction, it could be argued, one theory should apply
for all. Why do we need separate models for developing countries? What makes them
different? We begin the chapter by considering the general structural characteristics
that tend to differentiate these countries as a group, though it is important also to
acknowledge the heterogeneity among them.
Developing countries tend to have less developed institutions (almost by
definition), and specifically to have lower central bank credibility, than industrialized
countries. 4 Lower central bank credibility usually stems from a history of price
instability, including hyperinflation in some cases, which in turn is sometimes
attributable to past reliance on seignorage as a means of government finance in the
absence of a well-developed fiscal system. Another common feature is an uncompetitive
banking system, which is again in part attributable to a public finance problem: a
traditional reliance on the banks as a source of finance, through a combination of
financial repression and controls on capital outflows.
Another structural difference is that the goods markets of small developing
countries are often more exposed to international influences than those of, say, Europe or
Japan. Although their trade barriers and transport costs have historically tended to
exceed those of rich countries, these obstacles to trade have come down over time.
Furthermore developing countries tend to be smaller in size and more dependent on
exports of agricultural and mineral commodities than are industrialized countries. Even
such standard labor-intensive manufactured exports as clothing, textiles, shoes, and basic
consumer electronics are often treated on world markets as close substitutes across
suppliers. Therefore these countries are typically small enough that they can be
regarded as price-takers for tradable goods on world markets. Hence the “small open
economy” model.

4

E.g., Fraga, Goldafjn and Minella (2003).

4

Developing countries tend to be subject to more volatility than rich countries.5
Volatility comes from both supply shocks and demand shocks. One reason for the
greater magnitude of supply shocks is that primary products (agriculture, mining, forestry
and fishing) make up a larger share of their economies. These activities are vulnerable
both to extreme weather events domestically and to volatile prices on world markets.
Droughts, floods, hurricanes, and other weather events tend to have a much larger effect
on GDP in developing countries than industrialized ones. When a hurricane hits a
Caribbean island, it can virtually wipe out the year’s banana crop and tourist season –
thus eliminating the two biggest sectors in some of those tropical economies. Moreover,
the terms of trade are notoriously volatile for small developing countries, especially those
dependent on agricultural and mineral exports. In large rich countries, the fluctuations
in the terms of trade are both smaller and less likely to be exogenous.
Volatility also arises from domestic macroeconomic and political instability.
Although most developing countries in the 1990s brought under control the chronic
pattern of runaway budget deficits, money creation, and inflation, that they had
experienced in the preceding two decades, most have still been subject to monetary and
fiscal policy that is procyclical rather than countercyclical. Often income inequality and
populist political economy are deep fundamental forces.
Another structural difference is the greater incidence of default risk.6 Even for
government officials who sincerely pursue macroeconomic discipline, they may face
debt-intolerance: global investors will demand higher interest rates in response to
increases in debt that would not worry them coming from a rich country. The
explanation may be the reputational effects of a long history of defaulting or inflating
away debt.7 The reputation is captured, in part, by agency ratings.8
Additional imperfections in financial markets can sometimes be traced to
underdeveloped institutions, such as poor protection of property rights, bank loans made
under administrative guidance or connected lending, and even government corruption.9
With each round of financial turbulence, however, it has become harder and harder to
attribute crises in emerging markets solely to failings in the macroeconomic policies or
financial structures of the countries in question. Theories of multiple equilibrium and
contagion reflect that not all the volatility experienced by developing countries arises
domestically. Much comes from outside, from global financial markets.
5

Hausmann, Panizza, and Rigobon (2006) find that real exchange rate volatility is three times higher in
developing countries than in industrialized countries (but that the difference is not attributable to larger
shocks). As De Santis and Imrohoroğlu (1997) report, stock market volatility is higher too.
6
Blanchard (2005) explores implications of default risk for monetary policy.
7
The term “debt intolerance” comes from Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003). They argue that
countries with a poor history of default and inflation may have to keep their ratios of external debt to GDP
as low as 15 percent to be safe from the extreme duress of debt crises, levels that would be easily managed
by the standards of advanced countries. The tendency for budget deficits to push interest rates up more
quickly in debt-intolerant countries than in advanced countries helps explain why fiscal multipliers appear
to be substantially lower in developing countries -- Ilzetzki, Mendoza and Vegh (2009). (Trade openness
is another reason.)
8
Rigobon (2002) finds that Mexico’s susceptibility to international contagion diminished sharply, after it
was upgraded by Moody’s in 2000. Eichengreen and Mody (2000, 2004) confirm that ratings and default
history are reflected in the interest rates that borrowers must pay.
9
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997), Johnson, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and
Shleifer (2000) and Wei (2000), among many others.

5

The next section of this chapter considers goods markets and concludes that the
small open economy model is probably most appropriate for lower-income and middleincome countries: prices of traded goods are taken as given on world markets. Two key
variants feature roles for nontraded goods and contractionary effects of devaluation. The
subsequent three sections focus on monetary policy per se. They explore, respectively,
the topics of inflation (including high-inflation episodes, stabilization, and central bank
independence), nominal anchors, and exchange rate regimes. The last three sections of
the chapter focus on the boom-bust cycle experienced by so many emerging markets.
They cover, respectively, procyclicality (especially in the case of commodity exporters),
capital flows, and crises.

2. Goods markets, pricing, and devaluation
As already noted, because developing countries tend to be smaller economically
than major industrialized countries, they are more likely to fit the small open economy
model: they can be regarded as price-takers, not just for their import goods, but for their
export goods as well. That is, the prices of their tradable goods are generally taken as
given on world markets.10 It follows that a devaluation should push up the prices of
tradable goods quickly and in proportion.
2.1 Traded goods, pass-through and the Law of One Price
The traditional view has long been that developing countries, especially small
ones, experience rapid pass-through of exchange rate changes into import prices, and then
to the general price level. There is evidence in the pass-through literature that exchange
rate changes are indeed reflected in imports more rapidly when the market is a
developing country than when it is the United States or another industrialized country.11
The pass-through coefficient tells to what extent a devaluation has been passed through
into higher prices of goods sold domestically, say, within the first year. Pass-through has
historically been higher and faster for developing countries than for industrialized
countries. For simplicity, it is common to assume that pass-through to import prices is
complete and instantaneous.
This assumption appears to have become somewhat less valid, especially in the
big emerging market devaluations of the 1990s. Pass-through coefficients appear to
have declined in developing countries, though they remain well above those of
industrialized economies.12
10

The price-taking assumption requires three conditions: intrinsic perfect substitutability in the product as
between domestic and foreign, low trade barriers, and low monopoly power. Saudi Arabia, for example,
does not satisfy the third condition, due to its large size in world oil markets.
11
High pass-through especially characterizes developing countries that are (unofficially) dollarized in the
sense that a high percentage of assets and liabilities are denominated in dollars. Reinhart, Rogoff, and
Savastano (2003b).
12
Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2003, 2005) find that the price indexes are kept down by
substitution away from imports toward cheaper local substitutes. Frankel, Parsley and Wei (2005) are

6

On the export side, agricultural and mineral products, which remain important
exports in many developing countries, tend to face prices that are determined on world
markets. Because they are homogeneous products, arbitrage is able to keep the price of
oil or copper or coffee in line across countries, and few producers have much monopoly
power. The situation is less clear, however, regarding the pricing of manufactures and
services. Clothing products or call centers in one country may or may not be treated by
customers as perfect substitutes for clothing or call centers in another country.
2.2 When export prices are sticky
There is good empirical evidence that an increase in the nominal exchange rate
defined as the price of foreign currency (that is, a devaluation or depreciation of the
domestic currency) causes an increase in the real exchange rate.13
There are two
possible approaches to such variation in the real exchange rate. First, it can be
interpreted as evidence of stickiness in the nominal prices of traded goods, especially
non-commodity export goods, which in turn requires some sort of barriers to international
arbitrage, such as tariffs or transportation costs. Second, it could be interpreted as a
manifestation that nontraded goods and services, which by definition are not exposed to
international competition, play an important role in the price index. Both approaches are
fruitful, because both elements are typically at work.14
If prices of exports are treated as sticky in domestic currency, then traditional
textbook models of the trade balance are more relevant. Developing countries tend to
face higher price-elasticities of demand for their exports than do industrialized countries.
Thus it may be easier for an econometrician to find the Marshall-Lerner condition
satisfied, though one must allow for the usual lags in quantity response to a devaluation,
producing a J-curve pattern in the response of the trade balance.15
2.3 NonTraded Goods
The alternative approach is to stick rigorously to the small open economy
assumption, that prices of all traded goods are determined on world markets, but to

among those finding that passthrough to prices of narrowly defined import products is indeed higher for
developing countries, but that it has declined since 1990, and investigating the reasons. Loayaza and
Schmidt-Hebbel (2002) find a decline in passthrough for Latin America. One explanation for the decline
since the 1980s is an environment of greater price stability – Choudhri and Hakura (2006).
13
E.g., Edwards (1989), Taylor (2002), and Bahmani-Oskooee, Hegerty and Kutan (2008). In other
words, though some real exchange rate fluctuations are exogenous – and would show up in prices if the
exchange rate were fixed -- some are not.
14
Indeed, the boundary between the two approaches is not as firm as it used to seem. On the one hand,
even highly tradable goods have a non-traded component at the retail level (the labor and real estate that go
into distribution costs and retail sales) -- Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2005) and Burstein, Neves,
and Rebelo (2003). On the other hand, even goods that have in the past been considered nontradable can
become tradable if, for example, productivity reduces their costs below the level of transport costs and thus
makes it profitable to export them -- Bergin, Glick, and Taylor (2006) and Ghironi and Melitz (2005).
This is a promising area of research.
15
Two empirical studies of trade elasticities for developing countries are Marquez (2002) and BahmaniOskooee and Kara (2005).

7

introduce a second category: nontraded goods and services. Define Q to be the real
exchange rate:
(1)
E (CPI *)
Q
(CPI )
Where
E ≡ the nominal exchange rate, in units of domestic currency per foreign.
CPI ≡ the domestic Consumer Price Index, and
CPI* ≡ the world Consumer Price Index.
Assume that the price indices, both at home and abroad, are Cobb-Douglas functions of
two sectors, tradable goods (TG) and nontradable goods (NTG), and that for simplicity
the weight on the nontradable sector, α , is the same at home and abroad:
E ( PTG *1 PNTG * )
Q
( PTG 1 PNTG  )


( EPTG *) PTG * PNTG *
( PTG ) PTG  PNTG

We observe the real exchange vary, including sometimes in apparent response to
variation in the nominal exchange rate. The two possible interpretations, again, are: (1)
variation in the relative price of traded goods (EPTG *)/PTG, which is the case considered
in the preceding section, or (2) variation in the within-country relative price of nontraded
goods (i.e., the price of nontraded goods relative to traded goods). In this section, to
focus on the latter, assume that international arbitrage keeps traded goods prices in line:
PTG = EPTG*.
Then the real exchange depends only on the relative price of nontraded
goods.
(2)
(P
* / P *) 
Q

NTG

TG

( PNTG / PTG ) 

If the relative price of nontraded goods goes up in one country, that country’s currency
will exhibit a real appreciation. 16
Two sources of variation in the relative price of nontraded goods make this simple
equation useful and interesting, particularly for developing countries. They are very
different in character: one is best thought of as monetary in origin and short-term in
duration, the other as real and long-term.
Begin with the latter: the famous Balassa (1964)-Samuelson (1964) effect. An
empirical regularity that shows up robustly in long-term data samples, whether crosssection or time series, is that when a country’s per capita income is higher, its currency is
stronger in real terms. This real appreciation can in turn usually be associated with an
increase in the relative price of nontraded goods, as per the above equation. The
elasticity coefficient is estimated at around .4.17 Balassa and Samuelson identified the
causal mechanism as productivity growth that happens to be concentrated in the tradable
16

There was a time when some economists working in developing countries insisted that the proper
definition of the term “real exchange rate” was the price of traded goods relative to non-traded goods..
Harberger (1986).
17
E.g., Rogoff (1996).

8

good sector. (Bergin, et al, 2006, and Ghironi and Melitz, 2005, have shown
theoretically why this may be no coincidence.) Regardless of the mechanism, the
empirical regularity is well-established.18
Having said that, individual countries can deviate very far from the BalassaSamuelson line, especially in the short run. There has been an unfortunate tendency,
among those papers that invoke the Balassa-Samuelson relationship, to try to assign it
responsibility for explaining all variation in the relative price of nontraded goods and
therefore in the real exchange rate, even in the short run. A more sensible approach
would be to recognize the large temporary departures of the real exchange rate from the
Balassa-Samuelson line, and to think about what causes them first to appear and then
disappear gradually over time.
Fortunately, we have long had some simple models of how monetary factors can
explain large temporary swings in the real exchange rate. A monetary expansion in a
country with a currency peg will show up as inflation in nontraded goods prices, and
therefore as real appreciation, in the short run. A devaluation will rapidly raise the
domestic price of traded goods, thereby reducing the relative price of nontraded goods
and showing up as a real depreciation. The Salter-Swan model originally showed these
effects, and their implications for internal balance (attaining the desired trade balance)
and external balance (attaining the desired point on a tradeoff between output and price
level acceleration).19
Dornbusch (1973, 1980) extended the nontraded goods model, in research on the
case of pegged countries that was once as well-known as his famous overshooting model
for the case of floating countries. The extension was to marry Salter-Swan with the
Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments. No flexible-price assumptions were
harmed in the making of this model: The nominal price of nontraded goods was free to
adjust. But, in the aftermath of a devaluation or in the aftermath of a domestic credit
contraction, the levels of reserves and money supply would lie below their long-run
equilibria. Only via a balance of payments surplus could reserves flow in over time,
thereby gradually raising the overall money supply and nontraded goods prices in
tandem. In the long run all prices and quantities, including the real exchange rate, would
be back to their equilibrium values -- but only in the long run. Movements in the relative
price of nontraded goods that arise from money factors in the short run and from BalassaSamuelson in the long run remain a good way to think about real exchange rates in
developing countries.
2.4

Contractionary effects of devaluation

Devaluation is supposed to be expansionary for the economy, in a “Keynesian
approach to the trade balance,” that is, in a model where higher demand for domestic
goods, whether coming from domestic residents or foreign, leads to higher output rather
than higher prices. Yet, in currency crises that afflict developing countries, devaluation
often seems to be associated with recession rather than expansion.
Political costs of devaluation
18
19

Kravis and Lipsey (1988), De Gregorio, Giovannini and Wolf (1994), and Choudhri and Khan (2005).
Salter (1959) and Swan (1963) and Corden (1994).

9

In a widely quoted statistic, Cooper (1971) found that political leaders often lose
office in the year following devaluation. Frankel (2005) updated the estimate and
verified statistical significance: A political leader in a developing country is almost twice
as likely to lose office in the six months following a currency crash as otherwise.
Finance ministers and central bank governors are even more vulnerable. The political
unpopularity of devaluations in developing countries helps explain why policy makers
often postpone devaluations until after elections.20
Why are devaluations so unpopular? It is often thought that they have adverse
distributional effects. But the urban elites that are most important to the political process
in most developing countries are more likely to benefit from the relative price effects of
devaluation (an increase in the price of agricultural products relative to services) than is
the rural population. One possibility is that devaluations act as a proxy for unpopular
IMF austerity programs or other broad reform packages. IMF-associated austerity
programs have often resulted in popular unrest. 21 I also tested the proposition that
devaluations are acting as a statistical proxy for unpopular IMF austerity programs by
conditioning the previous calculation on the adoption of IMF programs. The IMF
program variable does not seem to raise the frequency of leader job loss, relative to
devaluations that did not involve an IMF program.22 There is more support for the
hypothesis that finance ministers and central bankers are likely to lose their jobs when a
devaluation is perceived as violating previous public assurances to the contrary; but this
only explains part of the effect. The dominant reason appears to be that devaluations are
indeed contractionary.
Empirical studies
Edwards (1986) and Acar (2000) found that devaluation in developing countries
is contractionary in the first year, but then expansionary when exports and imports have
had time to react to the enhanced price competiveness. (In the very long run, devaluation
is presumed neutral, as prices adjust and all real effects disappear.) Bahmani-Oskooee
(2006) also found some evidence of contractionary effects. For the countries hit by the
East Asia crisis of 1997-98, Upadhyaya (1999) found that devaluation was at best neutral
in the long run, while Chou and Chao (2001) found a contractionary effect in the short
run. Ahmed, et al. (2002) find that contractionary devaluations are a property of
developing countries in particular. Rajan and Shen (2006) find that devaluations are only
contractionary in crisis situations, which they attribute to debt composition issues.
Connolly (1983) and Kamin (1988) did not find contractionary effects.
Nunnenkamp and Schweickert (1990) rejected the hypothesis of contraction on a sample
20

Stein and Streb (1998).
For example, riots following food-subsidy cutbacks contributed to the overthrow of President Nimeiri of
Sudan in 1985. Edwards and Santaella (1993) report nine cases of post-devaluation coup attempts, in a
study that looks at the role of IMF presence along with various measures of political instability in
determining whether devaluations during the period 1950-1971 were economically successful. Lora and
Olivera (2004) find that voters punish presidents for pro-market policies and for increases in the rate of
inflation, but not for exchange rate policies per se. For an earlier summary of the political consequences
of IMF-type austerity programs, see Bienen and Gersovitz (1985).
22
Conditioning on the IMF dummy variable has no discernible effect on the frequency of leader turnover.
Either with or without an IMF program, the frequency of job loss following devaluations is about 20%,
almost double the rate in normal times.
21

10

of 48 countries, except during the first year in the case of manufactured exports (as
opposed to agricultural). Some who find no negative correlation attribute the findings of
those who do to the influence of third factors such as contemporaneous expenditurereducing policies.
Confirming a new phenomenon, Calvo and Reinhart (2001) found that exports do
not increase at all after a devaluation, but rather fall for the first eight months. Perhaps
firms in emerging market crises lose access to working capital and trade credit even when
they are in the export business.
Effects via price pass-through
Through what channels might devaluation have contractionary effects? Several
of the most important contractionary effects of an increase in the exchange rate are
hypothesized to work through a corresponding increase in the domestic price of imports,
or of some larger set of goods. Indeed, rapid pass-through of exchange rate changes to
the prices of traded goods is the defining assumption of the “small open economy
model,” which has always been thought to apply fairly well to emerging market
countries. The contractionary effect would then follow in any of several ways. The
higher prices of traded goods could, for example, reduce real incomes of workers and
therefore real consumption.23 Or they could increase costs to producers in the non-traded
goods sector, coming from either higher costs of imported inputs such as oil or higher
labor costs if wages are indexed to the cost of living.24 Krugman and Taylor (1978)
added increased tariff revenue to the list of ways in which devaluation might be
contractionary.25 The higher price level could also be contractionary through the “real
balance effect,” which is a decline in the real money supply. The tightening of real
monetary conditions, which typically shows up as an increase in the interest rate, could
then exert its contractionary effect either via the demand side or via the supply side.26
These mechanisms were not much in evidence in the currency crashes of the
1990s. The reason is that the devaluations were not rapidly passed through to higher
prices for imports, for domestic competing goods, or to the CPI in the way that the small
open economy model had led us to believe. The failure of high inflation to materialize in
East Asia after the 1997-98 devaluations, or even in Argentina after the 2001 devaluation,
was good news. But it called for greater scrutiny of the assumption that developing
countries were subject to complete and instantaneous pass-through.27
23

Diaz-Alejandro (1963) identified a loss in aggregate demand coming from a transfer of income from
(low-saving) urban workers who consume traded goods, to (high-saving) rich owners of agricultural land.
Barbone and Rivera-Batiz (1987) point the finger at profits of firms owned by foreign investors.
24
References include Corbo (1985) for the context of Chile in 1981, Solimano (1985) on wage indexation,
Agénor (1991) on intermediate inputs, and Hanson (1983) on both imported inputs and indexed wages.
25
Cooper (1971) provided the original compendium of ways in which devaluation could be contractionary.
Montiel and Lizondo (1989) and Morley (1992) present analytical overviews.
26
Williamson (1991) argued that Poland’s “shock therapy” of 1990 was an example of the contractionary
effect of devaluation on demand. Van Wijnbergen (1986) introduced a contractionary effect on the supply
side: firms in developing countries are known often to be dependent on working capital as a factor of
production, and devaluation reduces the availability of that working capital.
27
Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2005) locate the slow adjustment to the overall price level in the nontraded sector. Burstein, Neves and Rebelo (2005) attribute slow adjustment to the insulation between dock
prices of imported goods and retail prices created by distribution costs.

11

Balance sheet effect from currency mismatch
Balance sheet effects have become easily the most important of the various
possible contractionary effects of devaluation. Banks and other firms in emerging
markets often incur debt denominated in foreign currency, even while much of their
revenues are in domestic currency. This situation is known as currency mismatch.
When currency mismatch is combined with a major devaluation, otherwise-solvent firms
have trouble servicing their debts. They may have to lay off workers and close plants, or
go bankrupt altogether. Such weak balance sheets have increasingly been fingered in
many models, not only as the major contractionary effect in a devaluation, but also as a
fundamental cause of currency crises in the first place.28
A number of empirical studies have documented the balance sheet effect, in
particular the finding that the combination of foreign-currency debt plus devaluation is
indeed contractionary. Cavallo, Kisselev, Perri and Roubini (2004) find that the
magnitude of recession is related to the product of dollar debt and percentage
devaluation. Bebczuk, Galindo and Panizza (2006) find that devaluation is only
contractionary for the one-fifth of developing countries with a ratio of external dollar
debt to GDP in excess of 84%; it is expansionary for the rest. 29
Why do debtor countries develop weak balance sheets in the first place? What is
the origin of the currency mismatch? There are four theories. First, so-called
“Original sin:” Investors in high-income countries are unwilling to acquire exposure in
the currencies of developing countries.30 Second, adjustable currency pegs: an
apparently fixed exchange rate lulls borrowers into a false sense of security and so into
incurring excessive unhedged dollar liabilities.31 Third, moral hazard: borrowing in
dollars is a way for well-connected locals to put the risk of a bad state of nature onto the
government, to the extent the authorities have reserves or other claims to foreign
exchange.32

28

The analytical literature on balance sheet effects and output contraction includes, but is not limited to:
Caballero and Krishnamurty (2002), Calvo, Izquierdo, & Talvi (2003), Cespedes, Chang and Velasco
(2000, 2003), Cespedes, Chang and Velasco (2003, 2004), Chang and Velasco (1999), Christiano, Gust
and Roldos (2002), Cook (2004), Dornbusch (2002), Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2005), Krugman (1999),
Mendoza (2002), and Schneider and Tornell (2004).
29
Calvo, Izquierdo and Meija (2004), using a sample of 32 developed and developing countries, find that
openness, understood as a large supply of tradable goods, reduces the vulnerability of a given current
account deficit, so that lack of openness coupled with liability dollarization are key determinants of the
probability of Sudden Stops. Calvo, Izquierdo, and Talvi (2003) and Cavallo and Frankel (2008), too,
stress that the required change in relative prices is larger the more closed an economy is in terms of its
supply of tradable goods.
30
The phrase was coined by Ricardo Hausmann, and was intended to capture the frustrating position of a
policy-maker whose policies had been fated by history to suffer the curse of currency mismatch before he
even took office. E.g., Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) and Hausmann and Panizza (2003). Velasco
(2001) is skeptical of the position that original sin deprives policy makers of monetary independence
regardless of the exchange rate regime. Goldstein and Turner (2004) point out things countries can do to
reduce currency mismatch.
31
Hausmann and Panizza (2003), however, find no empirical support for an effect of exchange rate regime
on original sin, only country size.
32
E.g., Dooley (2000a); Krugman (1999); and Wei and Wu (2002).

12

Fourth, procrastination of adjustment: when the balance of payments turns
negative, shifting to short-term and dollar-denominated debt are ways the government
can retain the affections of foreign investors and thus postpone adjustment.33 These
mechanisms, along with running down reserves and staking ministerial credibility on
holding a currency peg, are part of a strategy that is sometimes called “gambling for
resurrection.” What they have in common, beyond achieving the desired delay, is
helping to make the crisis worse when it does come, if it comes.34 It is harder to restore
confidence after a devaluation if reserves are near zero and the ministers have lost
personal credibility. Further, if the composition of the debt has shifted toward the short
term, in maturity, and toward the dollar, in denomination, then restoring external balance
is likely to wreak havoc with private balance sheets regardless the combination of
increases in interest rate versus increases in exchange rate.
We return to these issues when considering emerging market financial crises in
section 8 of this survey.

3. Inflation
3.1 High Inflation Episodes
Hyperinflation is defined by a threshold in the rate of increase in prices of 50% per
month by one definition, 1000% per year by another.35 The first two clusters of
hyperinflationary episodes in the 20th century came at the ends of World War I and World
War II, respectively. The third could be said to have come at the end the Cold War: in
Latin America, Central Africa, and Eastern Europe.36
Receiving more scholarly attention, however, have been the numerous episodes of
inflation that, while quite high, did not qualify as hyperinflation. As Fischer, Sahay and
Vegh (2002) wrote:
“Since 1947, hyperinflations … in market economies have been rare. Much more common have
been longer inflationary processes with inflation rates above 100 percent per annum. Based on a
sample of 133 countries, and using the 100 percent threshold as the basis for a definition of very
high inflation episodes, … we find that (i) close to 20 percent of countries have experienced
inflation above 100 percent per annum; (ii) higher inflation tends to be more unstable; (iii) in high
inflation countries, the relationship between the fiscal balance and seigniorage is strong… (iv)
inflation inertia decreases as average inflation rises; (v) high inflation is associated with poor
macroeconomic performance; and (vi) stabilizations from high inflation that rely on the exchange
rate as the nominal anchor are expansionary.”

Dornbusch and Fischer (1993), after the distinction between hyperinflation and high
inflation, also made a distinction between high inflation episodes and moderate inflation
episodes. The dividing line between moderate and high inflation is drawn at 40%. The
33

In other words, a country without a serious currency mismatch problem may develop one just in the year
after a sudden stop in capital inflows but before the ultimate currency crash. Frankel (2005).
34
This helps explain why the ratio of short-term foreign debt to reserves appears so often and so robustly in
the literature on early warning indicators for currency crashes, discussed in Section 8 of the chapter.
35
Dornbusch, Sturzenegger and Wolf (1977); Sachs (1987).
36
Dornbusch and Fischer (1986).

13

traditional hypothesis is of course that monetary expansion and inflation elicit higher
output and employment – provided the expansion is an acceleration from the past or a
departure from expectations. In any case, at high rates of inflation this relationship
breaks down, and the detrimental effects of price instability on growth dominate, perhaps
via a disruption of the usefulness of price signals for the allocation of output.37 Bruno
and Easterly (1998) found that periods during which inflation is above the 40% threshold
tend to be associated with significantly lower real growth .
Why do countries choose policies that lead to high inflation, given the detrimental
effects? Seignorage or the inflation tax is one explanation. Dynamic inconsistency (low
credibility) of government pledges to follow non-inflationary rates of money growth is
another.
As Edwards (1994) pointed out, the modeling approach has shifted away from
starting with an exogenous rate of money growth, and instead seeks to endogenize
monetary policy by means of political economy and public finance. According to
Cukierman, Edwards, and Tabellini (1992), for example, countries with polarized and
unstable political structure find it hard to collect taxes, and so are more likely to have to
resort to seignorage. Fischer (1982) found that some countries collect seignorage worth
10% of total government finance. The public finance problem is worsened by the
Olivera-Tanzi effect: because of lags in tax collection, disinflation reduces the real value
of tax receipts. Catao and Terrones (2005) found evidence for the inflation tax view:
developing economies display a significant positive long-run effect on inflation of the
fiscal deficit when it is scaled by narrow money (the inflation tax base). Easterly, Mauro
and Scmidt-Hebbel (1995) pursued the Cagan logic that high inflation arises when the
needed revenue exceeds that corresponding to the seignorage-maximizing rate of money
growth.
3.2 Inflation stabilization programs
In almost all developing countries, inflation came down substantially during the
1990s, though many had previously undergone several unsuccessful attempts at
stabilization before succeeding. High-inflation countries often had national indexation
of wages and other nominal variables; removing the indexation arrangements was
usually part of the successful stabilization programs.38
In theoretical models that had become popular with monetary economists in the
1980s, a change to a credibly firm nominal anchor would fundamentally change
expectations so that all inflation, in traded and non-traded goods alike, would disappear,
without loss of output in the transition. This property has not been the historical
experience, however. Stabilization is usually difficult. 39

37

E.g., Fischer (1991, 1993).
E.g., Fischer (1986, 1988).
39
E.g., Dornbusch (1991).
38

14

Where excessive money growth is rooted in the government’s need to finance
itself by seignorage, one reason stabilization attempts are likely to fail is if they don’t
address the underlying fiscal problem.40
Inflation inertia is another explanation. Calvo and Vegh (1998) reviewed the
literature on attempts to stabilize from high inflation and why they so often failed.
Exchange-rate based stabilization attempts generally show a lot of inflation inertia.41 As
a result of the inertia, producers gradually lose price competitiveness on world markets in
the years after the exchange rate target is adopted.
Calvo and Vegh (1994) thus found
that the recessionary effects associated with disinflation appear in the late stages of
exchange rate-based programs. This is by contrast with money-based programs, in which
recessionary effects show up early, as a result of tight monetary policy.
A third explanation for failed stabilization attempts is that the declaration of a
money target or an exchange rate peg is not a completely credible commitment: the
policy can easily be changed in the future. Thus the proclamation of a rule is not a
sufficient solution to the dynamic consistency problem.42 Some attribute inertia of
inflation and the loss of output during the transitions to the imperfect credibility of such
targets, and thus urge institutional restrictions that are still more binding, for example,
dollarization in place of Argentina’s failed quasi-currency-board. But there can be no
more credibly firm nominal anchor than full dollarization. Yet when Ecuador gave up
its currency in favor of the dollar, neither the inflation rate nor the price level converged
rapidly to US levels. Inflationary momentum, rather, continued.
3.3 Central Bank Independence
The characteristics of underdeveloped institutions and low inflation-fighting
credibility that are common afflictions among developing countries standardly lead to
two prescriptions for monetary policy: that it is particularly important (i) that their central
banks should have independence43 and (ii) that they should make regular public
commitments to a transparent and monitorable nominal target. These two areas,
independence and targets, are considered in this and subsequent sections, respectively.
A number of emerging market countries have followed the lead of industrialized
countries, and given their central banks legal independence. In Latin America the trend
began with Chile, Colombia , Mexico, and Venezuela in the 1990s.44 The Bank of
Korea was made independent in 1998, following that country’s currency crisis. Many
other developing countries have moved in the same direction.45

40

Cukeriman (2008); Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2006). Sachs (1987) argued that Bolivia’s 1985
stabilization achieved credibility because the budget gap was closed.
41
E.g., Kiguel and Liviatan (1992 ) and Uribe (1997).
42
The originators of the dynamic consistency analysis were Barro and Gordon (1983), Calvo (1988), and
Kydland and Prescott (1977).
43
E.g., Cukierman, Miller and Neyapti (2002).
44
Junguito and Vargas (1996).
45
Arnone, Laurens and Segalotto (2006).

15

Does institutional insulation of the central bank from political pressure help to
bring down inflation, at lower cost to output than otherwise? Cukierman, Webb and
Neyapti (1992) lay out three measures of Central Bank Independence (CBI) and present
the resultant indices for 72 countries. As with currency regimes (section 5.4 of the
chapter), it is not necessarily enough to look at whether the central bank has de jure or
legal independence. The three indices are: legal independence, turnover of governors of
central banks, and an index derived from a questionnaire that the authors had asked
monetary policy makers fill out. The authors find that de jure status is sufficient -- legal
measures are important determinants of low inflation -- in developed countries, but not
in developing countries. Conversely, turnover of central bank governors is strongly
correlated with inflation in developing countries. The implication is that independence is
important for all, but the distinction between de jure independence and de facto
independence is necessary in developing countries. Haan and Kooi (2000), in a sample
of 82 countries in the 1980s, including some with very high inflation, find that CBI as
measured by governor turnover can reduce inflation. Cukierman, Miller and Neyapti
(2002) report that the countries in transition out of socialism in the 1990s made their
central banks independent, which eventually helped bring down inflation.
Crowe and Meade (2008) examine CBI in an updated data set with a broad
sample of countries. They find that increases in CBI have tended to occur in more
democratic countries and in countries with high levels of past inflation. Their study has a
time series dimension, beyond the usual cross section, and uses instrumental variable
estimation to seek to address the thorny problem that CBI might not be causally related to
low inflation, if both result from a third factor (political priority on low inflation). The
finding: greater CBI is associated with lower inflation. Gutiérez (2003) and Jácome
and Vázquez (2008) also find a negative statistical relationship between central bank
independence and inflation among Latin American and Caribbean countries. Haan,
Masciandaro, and Quintyn (2008) find that central bank independence lowers the mean
and variance of inflation with no effect on the mean and variance of output growth.
There are also some skeptics, however. Mas (1995) argues that central bank
independence won’t be helpful if a country’s political economy dictates budget deficits
regardless of monetary policy. Landström (2008) finds little effect from CBI.

4. Nominal targets for monetary policy
The principle of commitment to a nominal anchor in itself says nothing about
what economic variables are best suited to play that role. In a non-stochastic model, any
nominal variable is as good a choice for monetary target as any other nominal variable.
But in a stochastic model, not to mention the real world, it makes quite a difference what
is the nominal variable toward which the monetary authorities publicly commit in
advance. 46 Should it be the money supply? Exchange rate? CPI? Other
alternatives? The ex ante choice will carry big ex post implications for such important
variables as real income.
46

Rogoff (1985) may be the best reference for the familiar point that the choice of nominal target ex ante
makes a big difference in the presence of ex post shocks.

16

Inflation, the exchange rate, and the money supply are all well-represented among
developing countries’ choices of nominal targets.47 The choice of what variable should
serve as nominal anchor is explored next.
4.1 The move from money targeting to exchange rate targeting
Inflation peaked in the median emerging market country overall around 1990,
about ten years behind the peak in industrialized countries..
Many developing countries attempted to bring down high inflation rates in the
1980s, but most of these stabilization programs failed. Some were based on orthodox
money growth targets. Enthusiasm for monetarism largely died out by the end of
the1980s, perhaps because M1 targets had recently proven unrealistically restrictive in
the largest industrialized countries. Even from the viewpoint of the proverbial
conservative central banker who cares only about inflation, public promises to hit targets
that cannot usually be fulfilled subsequently will do little to establish credibility. The
Bundesbank had enough credibility that a long record of proclaiming M1 targets and then
missing them did little to undermine its conservative reputation or expectations of low
inflation in Germany. Developing countries in general do not enjoy the same luxury.
When improved price stability was finally achieved in countries that had
undergone very high inflation and repeated failed stabilization attempts in the 1980s, the
exchange rate was usually the nominal anchor around which the successful stabilization
programs were built.48 Examples include Chile’s tablita, Bolivia’s exchange rate target,
Israel’s stabilization, Argentina’s convertibility plan, and Brazil’s real plan. (The
advantages, and disadvantages of fixed exchange rates for emerging markets are
discussed in section 5.)
But matters continued to evolve subsequently.
4.2 The move from exchange rate targeting to inflation targeting
The series of emerging market currency crises that began in December 1994 and
ended in January 2002 all involved the abandonment of exchange rate targets, in favor of
more flexible currency regimes, if not outright floating. In many countries, the
abandonment of a cherished exchange rate anchor for monetary policy took place under
the urgent circumstances of a speculative attack (including Mexico and Argentina). A
few countries made the jump to floating preemptively, before a currency crisis could hit
(Chile and Colombia). Only a very few smaller countries responded to the ever rougher
seas of international financial markets by moving in the opposite direction, to full
dollarization (Ecuador) or currency boards (Bulgaria).
From the longer-term perspective of the four decades since 1971, the general
trend has been in favor of floating exchange rates.49 But if the exchange rate is not to be
the nominal anchor, then some other variable should play this role.50

47

Mishkin and Savastano (2002).
Atkeson and Kehoe (2001) argue that money targeting does not allow the public to monitor central bank
behavior as well as exchange rate targeting does.
49
Collins (1996); Larrain and Velasco ( 2001); Chang and Velasco (2000).
48

17

With exchange rate targets tarnished by the end of the 1990s, monetarism out of
favor, and the gold standard having earlier been relegated to the scrap heap of history,
there was a clear vacancy for the position of Preferred Nominal Anchor. The regime of
Inflation Targeting (IT) was a fresh young face, coming with an already-impressive
resumé of recent successes in wealthier countries (New Zealand, Canada, United
Kingdom, and Sweden). IT got the job. Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico switched
from exchange rate targets to Inflation Targeting in 1999,51 the Czech Republic, Hungary
and Poland about the same time, as well as Israel, Korea, South Africa, and Thailand.
Mexico followed in 2000, then Indonesia and Romania in 2005 and Turkey in 2006.52
In many ways, Inflation Targeting has functioned well. It apparently anchored
expectations and avoided a return to inflation in Brazil, for example, despite two severe
challenges: the 50% depreciation of early 1999, as the country exited from the real plan,
and the similarly large depreciation of 2002, when a presidential candidate who at the
time was considered anti-market and inflationary pulled ahead in the polls.53
One might argue, however, that the events of 2007-2009 put strains on the
Inflation Targeting regime in the way that the events of 1994-2001 had earlier put strains
on the regime of exchange rate targeting. Three other kinds of nominal variables have
forced their way into the attentions of central bankers, beyond the CPI. One nominal
variable, the exchange rate, never really left – certainly not for the smaller countries. A
second category of nominal variables, prices of agricultural and mineral products, is
particularly relevant for many developing countries. The greatly heightened volatility of
commodity prices in the 2000s decade, culminating in the spike of 2008, resurrected
arguments about the desirability of a currency regime that accommodates terms of trade
shocks. A third category, prices of assets such as equities and real estate, has been
especially relevant in industrialized countries, but not just there.54 The international
financial upheaval that began in mid-2007 with the US sub-prime mortgage crisis has
forced central bankers everywhere to re-think their exclusive focus on inflation to the
exclusion of asset prices.
Proponents of IT have always left themselves the loophole of conceding that
central banks should pay attention to other variables such as exchange rates, asset prices,
commodity prices to the extent that they portend future inflation. In many of the last
century’s biggest bubbles and crashes, however, monetary policy that in retrospect had
been too expansionary pre-crisis never showed up as goods inflation, only as asset
inflation. Central bankers tend to insist that it is not the job of monetary policy to address
50

Baillu, Lafrance and Perrault (2003) and Svensson (2000) emphasized this point.

51

Loayza and Soto (2002) and Schmidt-Hebbel and Werner (2002). (Chile had started announcing
inflation targets earlier, but kept a BBC exchange rate regime until 1999.)
52
Rose (2007).
53
Giavazzi, Goldfajn, and Herrera (2005).
54
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2006), Edison, Luangaram, and Miller (2000), Aizenman and Jinjarak
(2009) and Mendoza and Terrones (2008) explore how credit booms lead to rising asset prices in emerging
markets, often preceded by capital inflows and followed by financial crises.

18

asset prices. E.g., De Gregorio (2009) makes the point that asset bubbles can be
addressed with tools other than monetary policy.
Fraga, Goldfajn and Minella (2003) found that inflation-targeting central banks in
emerging market countries miss their declared targets by far more than they do in
industrialized countries. Most analysis of Inflation Targeting is better suited to large
industrialized countries than to developing countries, in several respects.55 First, the
theoretical models usually do not feature a role for exogenous shocks in trade conditions
or difficulties in the external accounts. The theories tend to assume that countries need
not worry about financing trade deficits internationally, presumably because international
capital markets function well enough to smooth consumption in the face of external
shocks. But for developing countries, international capital markets often exacerbate
external shocks, rather than the opposite. Booms, featuring capital inflows, excessive
currency overvaluation and associated current account deficits are often followed by
busts, featuring sudden stops in inflows, abrupt depreciation, and recession.56 An
analysis of alternative monetary policies that did not take into account the international
financial crises of 1982, 1994-2001 or 2008-09, would not be useful to policy makers in
emerging market countries.
Capital flows are prone to exacerbate fluctuations in particular when the source of
the fluctuations is trade shocks. This observation leads us to the next relevant respect in
which developing countries differ from industrialized countries.
IT can be vulnerable to the consequences of supply shocks, which tend to be
larger for developing countries for reasons already noted in Section 1. As has been
shown by a variety of authors, Inflation Targeting (defined narrowly) is not robust with
respect to supply shocks.57 Under strict IT, to prevent the price index from rising in the
face of an adverse supply shock, monetary policy must tighten so much that the entire
brunt of the fall in nominal GDP is borne by real GDP. Most reasonable objective
functions would, instead, tell the monetary authorities to allow part of the temporary
shock to show up as an increase in the price level. Of course this is precisely the reason
why many IT proponents favor flexible inflation targeting, often in the form of the Taylor
Rule, which does indeed call for the central bank to share the pain between inflation and
output.58 It is also a reason for pointing to the “core” CPI rather than “headline” CPI.

55

This is not to forget the many studies of inflation targeting for emerging market and developing
countries, most of them favorable. Savastano (2000) offered a concise summary of much of the research
as of that date. Amato and Gerlach (2002) and Masson, Savastano, and Sharma (1997) argued that IT can
be good for emerging markets, but only after certain conditions such as freedom from fiscal dominance are
satisfied. Batini and Laxton (2006) argue that pre-conditions have not been necessary. Laxton and
Pesenti (2003) conclude that because central banks in emerging market countries (such as Czechoslovakia)
tend to have lower credibility, they need to move the interest rate more strongly in response to movements
in forecasted inflation than a rich country would. Others include Debelle (2001); De Gregrio (2009);
Gonçalves and Salles (2008), Goodfriend and Prasad (2007); Hammond, Kanbur, Prasad (2009); Jonas and
Mishkin (2005); Mishkin (2000; 2008); and Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2007).
56
Kaminsky, Reinhart and Vegh (2005); Reinhart and Reinhart (2009); Gavin, Hausmann, Perotti and
Talvi (1997).
57
Among other examples: Frankel (1995b) and Frankel, Smit, and Sturzenegger (2007).
58
E.g., Svensson (2000).

19

4.3 “Headline” CPI, Core CPI, and Nominal Income Targeting
In practice, Inflation-Targeting central bankers usually respond to large temporary
shocks in import prices for oil and other agricultural and mineral products as they should:
by trying to exclude them from the measure of the CPI that is targeted.59 Central banks
have two approaches to doing this. Some explain ex ante that their target for the year is
inflation in the Core CPI, a measure that excludes volatile components, usually food and
energy products. The virtue of this approach is that the central banks are able to abide
by their commitment to core CPI when the supply shock comes (assuming the supply
shock is located in the farm or energy sectors; it doesn’t work, for example, if the shock
is labor unrest or power failures that shut down urban activity). The disadvantage of
declaring core CPI as the official target is that the person in the street is less likely to
understand it, compared to the simple CPI. Transparency and communication of a target
that the public can monitor are the original reasons for declaring a specific nominal target
in the first place.
The alternative approach is to talk about the CPI ex ante, but then in the face of an
adverse supply shock explain ex post that the increase in farm or energy prices is being
excluded due to special circumstances. This strategy is questionable from the standpoint
of credibility. The people in the street are told that they shouldn’t be concerned by the
increase in the CPI because it is “only” occurring in the prices of filling up their car fuel
tanks and buying their weekly groceries. Either way, ex ante or ex post, the effort to
explain away supply-induced fluctuations in the CPI undermines the credibility of the
monetary authorities. This credibility problem is especially severe in countries where
there are grounds for suspecting that government officials already fiddle with the
consumer price indices for political purposes.
One variable that fits the desirable characteristics of a nominal target is nominal
GDP. Nominal income targeting is a regime that has the attractive property of taking
supply shocks partly as P and partly as Y, without forcing the central bank to abandon the
declared nominal anchor. It was popular with macroeconomists in the 1980s.60 Some
claimed it was less applicable to developing countries because of long lags and large
statistical errors in measurement. But these measurement problems are smaller than they
used to be. Furthermore, the fact that developing countries are more vulnerable to
supply shocks than are industrialized countries suggests that the proposal to target
nominal income is more applicable to them, not less, as McKibbin and Singh (2003) have
pointed out.
In any case, and for whatever reason, nominal income targeting has not been
seriously considered since the 1990s, either by rich countries or poor.

5. Exchange Rate Regimes
59

Devereux, Lane, and Xu (2006) show theoretically, advantages of targeting non-traded goods to the
extent that exchange rate pass-through is high (as in section 2.1).
60
It was easier to see the superiority of nominal GDP targeting when the status quo was M1 targeting .
(The proposal for nominal income targeting might have been better received by central banks if it had been
called “Velocity-Shift-Adjusted Money Targeting.”)

20

Many Inflation-Targeting central banks in developing countries have all along put
more emphasis on the exchange rate than they officially admitted. This tendency is the
famous Fear of Floating of Reinhart (2000) and Calvo and Reinhart (2000, 2002).61
When booming markets for their export commodities put upward pressure on their
currencies (2003-2008), they intervene to dampen appreciation. Then, when crisis hits,
the country may intervene to dampen the depreciation of their currencies. Central banks
still do – and should – pay a lot of attention to their exchange rates. The point applies to
the entire spectrum from managed floaters to peggers. Fixed exchange rates are still an
option to be considered for many countries, especially small ones.62
5.1 The advantages of fixed exchange rates
For very small countries, full dollarization remains one option, or joining the
euro, for those in Europe. The success of EMU has inspired regional groupings of
developing countries in various parts of the world to discuss the possibility of trying to
follow a similar path.63
Fixed exchange rates have many advantages, in addition to their use as a nominal
anchor for monetary policy. They reduce transactions costs and exchange risk, which in
turn facilitates international trade and investment. This is especially true for
institutionally locked-in arrangements, such as currency boards64 and dollarization.65
Influential research by Rose (2000) and others over the last decade has shown that fixed
exchange rates and, especially, monetary unions for developing countries, increase trade
and investment substantially. In addition fixed exchange rates avoid the speculative
bubbles to which floating exchange rates are occasionally subject.
5.2 The advantages of floating exchange rates
Of course fixed exchange rates have disadvantages too. Most importantly, to the
extent financial markets are integrated, a fixed exchange rate means giving up monetary
independence; the central bank can’t increase the money supply, lower the interest rate,
or devalue the currency, in response to a downturn in demand for its output.
It has been argued that developing countries have misused monetary discretion
more often than they have used it to achieve the textbook objectives. But a second
disadvantage of a fixed rate presupposes no discretionary abilities: it means giving up the

61

Among the possible reasons for aversion to floating, Calvo and Reinhart (2002) emphasize high passthrough and contractionary depreciations.
62
Meanwhile, in response to the global financial crisis of 2007-09, small countries on the periphery of
Europe felt newly attracted to the idea of rapid adoption of the euro (Iceland and some Central European
countries).
63
Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1994) and Levy Yeyati and Sturzennegger (2000) apply OCA criteria to a
number of relevant regions. Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1999) and Goto and Hamada (1994) for Asia.
64
Ghosh, Gulde and Wolf (2000), Hanke and Schuler (1995) and Williamson (1995).
65
Calvo (2002) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2001).

21

automatic accommodation to supply shocks that floating gives,66 especially trade shocks:
a depreciation when world market conditions for the export commodity weaken, and vice
versa.67
Berg, Borensztein, and Mauro (2003) say it well:
“Another characteristic of a well-functioning floating exchange rate is that it responds
appropriately to external shocks. When the terms of trade decline, for example, it makes sense for
the country’s nominal exchange rate to weaken, thereby facilitating the required relative price
adjustment. Emerging market floating exchange rate countries do, in fact, react in this way to
negative terms of trade shocks. In a large sample of developing countries over the past three
decades, countries that have fixed exchange rate regimes and that face negative terms of trade
shocks achieve real exchange rate depreciations only with a lag of two years while suffering large
real GDP declines. By contrast, countries with floating rates display large nominal and real
depreciations on impact and later suffer some inflation but much smaller output losses.”

Besides the inability to respond monetarily to shocks, there are three more
disadvantages of rigidity in exchange rate arrangements. It can impair the central bank’s
lender of last resort capabilities in the event of a crisis in the banking sector, as Argentina
demonstrated in 2001. It entails a loss of seignorage, especially for a country that goes
all the way to dollarization. For a country that stops short of full dollarization, pegged
exchange rates are occasionally subject to unprovoked speculative attacks (of the
“second-generation” type68).
Some who see costly speculative attacks as originating in the maturity mismatch
problem suggest that exchange rate variability is beneficial in that it forces borrowers to
confront the risks of foreign-currency-denominated debt. The warning is that the choice
of an adjustable peg regime, or other intermediate exchange rate regime, leads to
dangerously high unhedged foreign-currency borrowing. It is argued that a floating
regime would force borrowers to confront explicitly the existence of exchange rate risk,
and thereby reduce unhedged foreign-currency borrowing.69 This sounds like an
argument that governments should introduce gratuitous volatility because private
financial agents underestimate risk. But some models establish this advantage of
floating, even with rational expectations and only uncertainty that is generated only by
fundamentals.70
5.3 Evaluating overall exchange rate regime choices
Econometric attempts to discern what sort of regime generically delivers the best
economic performance across countries – firmly fixed, floating, or intermediate – have
not been successful. To pick three, Ghosh, Gulde and Wolf (2000) find that firm fixers
perform the best, Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003) that floaters do the best, and
Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) that intermediate managed floats work the best! Why the
stark discrepancy? One reason is differences in how the studies classify de facto
66

Ramcharan (2007) finds support for the advantage of floating in response to supply shocks, for the case
of natural disasters.
67
Among peggers, terms-of-trade shocks are amplified and long-run growth is reduced, as compared to
flexible-rate countries, according to Edwards and Yeyati (2005). Also see Broda (2004).
68
Chang and Velasco (1997). The generations of speculative attack models are explained below.
69
70

Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2004) and Eichengreen (1999, p. 105).
Chamon and Hausmann (2005), Chang and Velasco (2004), Jeanne (2005), and Pathak and Tirole (2004)

22

exchange rate regimes. (To be discussed in the next section.) But another reason is that
the virtues of alternative regimes depend on the circumstances of the country in question.
No single exchange rate regime is right for all countries.
A list of Optimum Currency Area criteria that qualify a country for a relatively firm
fixed exchange rate, versus a more flexible rate, should include these eight
characteristics:71
1. Small size.
2. Openness, as reflected, for example, in the ratio of tradable goods to GDP.72 The
existence of a major-currency partner with whom bilateral trade, investment and
other activities are already high, or are hoped to be high in the future, would also
work in favor of a fixed rate..
3. “Symmetry of shocks,” meaning high correlation of cyclical fluctuations
(particularly demand shocks) in the home country and in the country that
determines policy regarding the money to which pegging is contemplated. This
is important because, if the domestic country is to give up the ability to follow its
own monetary policy, it is better if the interest rates chosen by the larger partner
are more often close to those that the domestic country would have chosen
anyway.73
4. Labor mobility.74 When monetary response to an asymmetric shock has been
precluded, it is useful if workers can move from the high-unemployment country
to the low-unemployment countries. This is the primary mechanism of
adjustment across states within the monetary union which is the United States.
5. Countercyclical remittances. Emigrant’s remittances (i) constitute a large share
of foreign exchange earnings in many developing countries, (ii) are variable, (iii)
appear to be countercyclical.75
That remittances apparently respond to the
difference between the cyclical positions of the sending and receiving country,
makes it a bit easier to give up the option of responding to shocks by setting
monetary policies different from those of the partner.
6. Countercyclical fiscal transfers. Within the United States, if one region suffers
an economic downturn, the federal fiscal system cushions it; one estimate is that
for every dollar fall in the income of a stricken state, disposable income falls by
only an estimated 70 cents. Such fiscal cushions are largely absent at the
international level, with the possible exception of the role of France in the
Communité Financière Afrique. (Even where substantial transfers exist, they are
rarely countercyclical.)

71

Four surveys offering a more complete discussion of the choice of exchange rate regime and further
references are: Edwards ( 2002) , Edwards and Savastano (1999), Frankel (2004) and Rogoff (2004).
72
The classic reference is McKinnon (1963).
73
Mundell (1961); Eichengreen (1999).
74
The classic reference is Mundell (1961).
75
Only the countercyclicality is in need of documentation. Clarke and Wallstein (2004) find that
remittance receipts go up in response to a natural disaster. Kapur (2003) finds that they go up in response to
an economic downturn. Yang and Choi (2007) find that they respond to rainfall-induced economic
fluctuations. Frankel (2009) finds that bilateral remittances respond to the differential in sender-receiver
cyclical conditions. Some other authors, however, do not find evidence of such countercyclicality.

23

7. Well-developed financial system.76
8. Political willingness to give up some monetary sovereignty. Some countries
look on their currency with the same sense of patriotism with which they look on
their flag.
5.4 Categorizing exchange rate regimes
It is by now well-known that attempts to categorize countries’ choice of regime
(into fixed, floating, and intermediate) in practice differ from the official categorization.
Countries that say they are floating, in reality often are not.77 Countries that say they are
fixed, in reality often are not.78 Countries that say they have a Band Basket Crawl
(BBC) regime, often do not.79
There are a variety of attempts to classify de facto regimes. Some seek to infer
the degree of exchange rate flexibility around the anchor; others seem to infer what is the
anchor. 80
Pure de facto studies look only at the times series of exchange rates and
reserves81; others pay more attention to other information, including what the country
says.82 Less well-known is that the de facto classification regimes do not agree among
themselves. The correlation of de facto classification attempts with each other is
generally as low as the correlation with the IMF’s official classification scheme.83
Indeed, neat categorization may not be possible at all. That Argentina was in the
end forced to abandon its currency board, in 2001, also dramatizes the lesson that the
choice of exchange rate regime is not as permanent or deep as had previously been
thought. The choice of exchange rate regime is more likely endogenous with respect to
institutions, rather than the other way around.84
5.5 The Corners Hypothesis
The “corners hypothesis” — that countries are, or should be, moving away from
the intermediate regimes, in favor of either the hard peg corner or the floating corner —
was proposed by Eichengreen (1993) and rapidly became the new conventional wisdom
with the emerging market crises of the late 1990s.85 But it never had a good theoretical

76

Husain, Mody and Rogoff (2005)and Aghion, Bacchetta, Ranciere, and Rogoff (2009) find that
countries appear to benefit by having increasingly flexible exchange rate systems as they become richer
and more financially developed.
77

Calvo and Reinhart (2002).
Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995).
79
Frankel, Schmukler and Servén (2000), Frankel and Wei (2007).
80
Frankel and Wei (2008).
81
These include Calvo and Reinhart (2000, 2002), Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2001, 2003a,b, 2005),
and Shambaugh (2004).
82
These include Ghosh, Gulde and Wolf (2000, 2002) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2003, 2004).
83
Benassy et al (2004) and Frankel (2004).
84
Alesina and Wagner (2003) and Calvo and Mishkin (2003).
85
Fischer (2001), Council on Foreign Relations (1999), and Meltzer (2000).
78

24

foundation.86 It subsequently lost popularity. Perhaps it is another casualty of the
realization that no regime choice is in reality permanent, and that investors know that.87
In any case, many countries continue to follow intermediate regimes such as band-basketcrawl, and do not seem any the worse for it.

6. Procyclicality
As noted in the introduction, one structural feature that tends to differentiate
developing countries from industrialized countries is the magnitude of cyclical
fluctuations. This is in part due to the role of factors that “should” moderate the cycle,
but in practice seldom do that. If anything, they tend to exacerbate booms and busts
instead: procyclical capital flows, procyclical monetary and fiscal policy, and the related
Dutch Disease. The hope that improved policies or institutions might reduce this
procyclicality makes this one of the most potentially fruitful avenues of research in
emerging market macroeconomics.
6.1 The procyclicality of capital flows in developing countries
According to the theory of intertemporal optimization, countries should borrow
during temporary downturns, to sustain consumption and investment, and should repay or
accumulate net foreign assets during temporary upturns. In practice, it does not tend to
work this way. Capital flows are more often procyclical than countercyclical.88 Most
theories to explain this involve imperfections in capital markets, such as asymmetric
information or the need for collateral. Aguiar and Gopinath (2006, 2007), however,
demonstrate that the observation of procyclical current accounts in developing countries
might be explained in an optimizing model if shocks take the form of changes in the
permanent trend of productivity rather than temporary cyclical deviations from trend.
One interpretation of procyclical capital flows is that they result from procyclical
fiscal policy: when governments increase spending in booms, some of the deficit is
financed by borrowing from abroad. When they are forced to cut spending in
downturns, it is to repay some of the excessive debt that the incurred during the upturn.
Another interpretation of procyclical capital flows to developing countries is that they
pertain especially to exporters of agricultural and mineral commodities, especially oil.
We consider procyclical fiscal policy in the next sub-section, and the commodity cycle
(Dutch disease) in the one after.
6.2 The procyclicality of demand policy
The procyclicality of fiscal policy
86

The feeling that an intermediate degree of exchange rate flexibility is inconsistent with perfect capital
mobility is a misinterpretation of the principle of the Impossible Trinity. To take a clear example,
Krugman (1991) shows theoretically that a target zone is entirely compatible with uncovered interest parity.
Williamson (1996, 2001) favors intermediate exchange rate regimes for emerging markets.
87
Reinhart and Reinhart (2003).
88
Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2005); Reinhart and Reinhart (2009); Perry (2009); Gavin, Hausmann,
Perotti and Talvi (1996); and Mendoza and Terrones (2008).

25

Various authors have documented that fiscal policy tends to be procyclical in
developing countries, in comparison with industrialized countries.89 Most studies look
at the procyclicality of government spending, because tax receipts are particularly
endogenous with respect to the business cycle. Indeed, an important reason for
procyclical spending is precisely that government receipts from taxes or royalities rise in
booms, and the government cannot resist the temptation or political pressure to increase
spending proportionately, or even more than proportionately.
The political business cycle
The political business cycle is the hypothesized tendency of governments to adopt
expansionary fiscal policies, and often monetary policies as well, in election years. In
this context, the fiscal expansion takes the form of tax cuts as easily as spending
increases. The theory was originally designed with advanced countries in mind. Some
comprehensive empirical studies find evidence that the political budget cycle is present in
both developed and less-developed countries. But developing countries are thought to be
even more susceptible to the political business cycle than advanced countries.90
One interpretation is that institutions such as constitutional separation of powers
in the budget process are necessary to resist procyclical fiscal policy, and these
institutions are more often lacking in developing countries.91 Brender and Drazen (2005)
offer another interpretation: the finding of a political budget cycle in a large crosssection of countries is driven by the experience of ‘‘new democracies’’ – most of which
are developing or transition countries -- where fiscal manipulation by the incumbent
government succeeds politically because voters are inexperienced with elections. They
find that once these countries are removed from the larger sample, the political fiscal
cycle disappears.
The procyclicality of monetary policy
Countercyclical monetary policy is difficult to achieve, particularly because of lags
and uncertainty. For this reason, it is often suggested that the advantages of discretion in
monetary policy are not large enough to outweigh disadvantages, such as the inflation
bias from dynamic inconsistency, especially for developing countries. Hence the support
for the tying of hands and committing to a nominal target.
Taking as given, however, some degree of commitment to a nominal target, it would
seem to be self-defeating to choose a nominal target that could build unnecessary
procyclicality into the automatic monetary mechanism. But this is what inflation
targeting does in the case of supply shocks. Again, where terms of trade fluctuations are
important, it would be better to choose a nominal anchor that accommodates terms of
trade shocks rather than exacerbating them.

89

Gavin and Perotti(1997), Lane and Tornell (1999), Tornell and Lane (1999), Kaminsky, Reinhart, and
Vegh (2004), Talvi and Végh (2005), Alesina, Campante and Tabellini (2008), and Mendoza and Oviedo
(2006).
90
Persson and Tabellini (2003, chapter 8) use data from 60 democracies over the period 1960-1998. Shi
and Svensson (2006) use data from 91 countries over the period 1975–1995 Also Schuknecht (1996).
Drazen (2001) offers an overview.
91
Saporiti and Streb (2003). Alesina, Hausmann, Hommes and Stein (1999) study fiscal institutions.

26

6.3 Commodities and the Dutch Disease
Clear examples of countries with very high export price volatility are those
specialized in the production of oil, copper, or coffee, which periodically experience
swings in world market conditions that double or halve their prices.
The Dutch Disease refers to some possibly unpleasant side effects of a boom in
peteroleum or other mineral and agricultural commodities.92 It arises when a strong, but
perhaps temporary, upward swing in the world price of the export commodity causes the
following pattern: a large real appreciation in the currency, an increase in spending (in
particular, the government increases spending in response to the increased availability of
tax receipts or royalties93), an increase in the price of nontraded goods relative to nonexport-commodity traded goods, a resultant shift of resources out of non-exportcommodity traded goods, and a current account deficit . When the adversely affected
tradable goods are in the manufacturing sector, the feared effect is deindustrialization. In
a real model, the reallocation of resources across tradable sectors may be the inevitable
consequence of a global increase in the real commodity price. But the movement into
non-traded goods is macroeconomic. That it is all painfully reversed when the world
price of the export commodity goes back down is what makes this a disease, particularly
if the complete cycle is not adequately foreseen.
Other examples of the Dutch Disease arise from commodity booms due to the
discovery of new deposits or some other expansion in supply, leading to a trade surplus
via exports or a capital account surplus via inward investment to develop the new
resource. In addition, the term is also used by analogy for other sorts of inflows such as
the receipt of transfers (foreign aid or remittances) or a stabilization-induced capital
inflow. In all cases, the result is real appreciation and a shift into nontradables, and
away from (non-commodity) tradables. The real appreciation takes the form of a
nominal appreciation if the exchange rate is flexible, and inflation if the exchange rate is
fixed.
A wide variety of policy measures have been proposed, and some adopted, to cope
with the commodity cycle.94 Some of the most important are institutions to insure that
export earnings are put aside during the boom time, into a commodity saving fund,
perhaps with the aid of rules governing the cyclically adjusted budget surplus.95 Other
proposals include using futures markets to hedge the price of the commodity and
indexing debt to the price.
6.4. Product-oriented choices for price index by inflation-targeters
Of the possible price indices that a central bank could target, the CPI is the usual
choice. The CPI is indeed the logical candidate to be the measure of the inflation
objective for the long-term. But it may not be the best choice for intermediate target on
92

E.g., Corden (1984). Frankel (2010) is a survey of the Dutch Disease and the more general Natural
Resource Curse.
93
E.g., Lane and Tornell (1998).
94
E.g., Sachs (2007).
95
Davis et al (2001). Chile’s rule adjusts the budget surplus for the deviation of the copper price from its
long run value as well as GDP from potential, with two panels making the determination.

27

an annual basis. We have already noted that IT is not designed to be robust with respect
to supply shocks. If the supply shocks are terms of trade shocks, then the choice of CPI
to be the price index on which IT focuses is particularly inappropriate.
Proponents of inflation targeting may not have considered the implications of the
choice between the CPI and production-oriented price indices in light of terms of trade
shocks. One reason may be that the difference is not, in fact, as important for large
industrialized countries as for small developing countries, especially those that export
mineral and agricultural commodities.
A CPI target, if implemented literally, can be destabilizing for a country subject to
terms of trade volatility. It calls for monetary tightening and currency appreciation when
the price of the imported good goes up on world markets, but not when the price of the
export commodity goes up on world markets – precisely the opposite of the desired
pattern of response to terms of trade movements. The alternative to the choice of CPI as
price target is an output-based price index such as the PPI, the GDP deflator, or an index
of export prices. The important difference is that imported goods show up in the CPI,
but not in the output-based price indices; and vice versa for exported goods: they show up
in the output-based prices but much less in the CPI.
Terms of trade shocks for small countries can take two forms: a fluctuation in the
nominal price (i.e., dollar price) of export goods on world markets and a fluctuation in the
nominal price of import goods on world markets. Consider each in turn.
Export price shocks
A traditional textbook advantage of floating exchange rates applies to commodity
exporters in particular. When world demand for the export commodity falls, the
currency tends to depreciate, thus ameliorating the adverse effect on the current account
balance and output. When world demand for the export commodity rises, the currency
tends to appreciate, thus ameliorating the inflationary impact. One possible
interpretation of the emerging market crises of the 1990s is that declines in world market
conditions for oil and consumer electronics, exacerbated by a procyclical falloff in capital
flows into emerging market countries that exported these products, eventually forced the
abandonment of exchange rate targets. The same devaluations could have been achieved
much less painfully if they had come automatically, in tandem with the decline in
commodity export prices.
It is evident that a fixed exchange rate necessarily requires giving up the
automatic accommodation of terms of trade shocks. A CPI target requires giving up
accommodation of trade shocks as well; but needlessly so. A form of inflation targeting
that focused on an export price index or product price index would experience an
automatic appreciation in response to an increase in the world price of the export
commodity: in the absence of such an appreciation, the price index would rise, requiring
the monetary authorities to tighten. Thus the succinct argument for targeting a productoriented index is that it offers the best of both worlds: the automatic accommodation of
terms of trade shocks that floating promises, as well as the nominal anchor that an
exchange rate target or inflation target promise.
Do inflation targeters react perversely to import price shocks?

28

For countries that import oil rather than export it, a major source of terms of trade
fluctuations takes the form of variation in world oil prices. As Part 4 noted, there is a
danger that CPI targeting, if interpreted too literally by central bankers, would force them
to respond to an increase in the dollar price of their import goods by contracting their
money supply enough to appreciate their currencies proportionately.
Given the value that most central bankers place on transparency and their
reputations, it would be surprising if their public emphasis on the CPI did not lead them
to be at least a bit more contractionary in response to adverse supply shocks, and
expansionary in response to favorable supply shocks, than they would be otherwise. In
other words, it would be surprising if they felt able to take full advantage of the escape
clause offered by the idea of core CPI. There is some reason to think that this is indeed
the case. A simple statistic: the exchange rates of inflation-targeting countries (in
dollars per national currency) are positively correlated with the dollar price on world
markets of their import baskets. Why is this fact revealing? The currency should not
respond to an increase in world prices of its imports by appreciating, to the extent that
these central banks target core CPI (and to the extent that the commodities excluded by
core CPI include all imported commodities that experience world price shocks, which is a
big qualifier). If anything, floating currencies should depreciate in response to such an
adverse terms of trade shock. When these IT currencies respond by appreciating instead,
it suggests that the central bank is tightening monetary policy to reduce upward pressure
on the CPI.
Every one of the inflation targeters in Latin America shows a monthly correlation
between dollar prices of imported oil and the dollar values of their currencies that is both
positive over the period 2000-2008 and greater than the correlation during the pre-IT
period.96 The evidence supports the idea that inflation targeters – in particular, Brazil,
Chile and Peru -- tend to react to the positive oil shocks of the past decade by tightening
monetary policy and thereby appreciating their currencies. The implication seems to be
that the CPI which they target does not in practice entirely exclude oil price shocks.
What is wanted as candidate for nominal target is a variable that is simpler for the
public to understand ex ante than core CPI, and yet that is robust with respect to supply
shocks. Being robust with respect to supply shocks means that the central bank should
not have to choose ex post between two unpalatable alternatives: an unnecessary
economy-damaging recession or an embarrassing credibility-damaging violation of the
declared target.
PEP and PP targeting
The idea of producer price targeting (PPT) is a moderate version of a more exotic
proposed monetary regime called Peg the Export Price – or PEP, for short. Under the
PEP proposal, a copper producer would peg it currency to copper, an oil producer would
peg to oil, a coffee producer to coffee, etc.97

96
97

Frankel (2009b).
Frankel (2003, 2005).

29

How would PEP work operationally? Conceptually, one can imagine the
government holding reserves of gold or copper or oil, and buying and selling the
commodity whenever necessary to keep the price fixed in terms of local currency.
Operationally, a more practical method would be for the central bank each day to
announce an exchange rate vis-à-vis the dollar, following the rule that the day’s exchange
rate target (dollars per local currency unit) moves precisely in proportion to the day’s
price of gold or copper or oil on the New York market (dollars per commodity). Then
the central bank could intervene via the foreign exchange market to achieve the day’s
target. The dollar would be the vehicle currency for intervention -- precisely as it has
long been when a small country defends a peg to some non-dollar currency. Either way,
the effect would be to stabilize the price of the commodity in terms of local currency. Or
perhaps, since these commodity prices are determined on world markets, a better way to
express the same policy is stabilizing the price of local currency in terms of the
commodity.
The argument for the export targeting proposal, relative to an exchange rate
target, can be stated succinctly: It delivers one of the main advantages that a simple
exchange rate peg promises, namely a nominal anchor, while simultaneously delivering
one of the main advantages that a floating regime promises, namely automatic adjustment
in the face of fluctuations in the prices of the countries’ exports on world markets.
Textbook theory says that when there is an adverse movement in the terms of trade, it is
desirable to accommodate it via a depreciation of the currency. When the dollar price of
exports rises, under PEP the currency per force appreciates in terms of dollars. When the
dollar price of exports falls, the currency depreciates in terms of dollars. Such
accommodation of terms of trade shocks is precisely what is wanted. In past currency
crises, countries that have suffered a sharp deterioration in their export markets have
often eventually been forced to give up their exchange rate targets and devalue anyway.
The adjustment was far more painful -- in terms of lost reserves, lost credibility, and lost
output -- than if the depreciation had happened automatically.
The desirability of accommodating terms of trade shocks is also a particularly
good way to summarize the attractiveness of export price targeting relative to the
reigning champion, CPI targeting. Consider again the two categories of adverse terms of
trade shocks: a fall in the dollar price of the export in world markets and a rise in the
dollar price of the import on world markets. In the first case, a fall in the export price,
one wants the local currency to depreciate against the dollar. As already noted, PEP
delivers that result automatically; CPI targeting does not. In the second case, a rise in
the import price, the terms-of-trade criterion suggests that one again might want the local
currency to depreciate. Neither regime delivers that result.98 But CPI targeting actually
has the implication that the central bank tighten monetary policy so as to appreciate the
currency against the dollar, by enough to prevent the local-currency price of imports from
rising. This implication – reacting to an adverse terms of trade shock by appreciating
the currency – is perverse. It can be expected to exacerbate swings in the trade balance
and output.
98

There is a reason for that. In addition to the goal of accommodating terms of trade shocks, there is also
the goal of resisting inflation; but to depreciate in the face of an increase in import prices would exacerbate
price instability.

30

Product Price Index
A way to render the proposal far more moderate is to target a broad index of all
domestically produced goods, whether exportable or not. An index of product prices is
superior to the GDP deflator in that – just like the CPI – it can easily be collected
monthly. Even in a poor small country with very limited capacity to gather statistics,
government workers can survey a sample of firms every month to construct a primitive
index of product prices as easily as they can survey a sample of retail outlets to construct
a primitive CPI.
If a broad index of export or product prices were to be the nominal target, it
would of course in practice be impossible for the central bank to hit the target exactly, in
contrast to the way that is possible to hit virtually exactly a target for the exchange rate,
the price of gold, or even the price of a basket of four or five exchange-traded agricultural
or mineral commodities. There would instead be a declared band for the export price
target, which could be wide if desired, just as with the targeting of the CPI, money
supply, or other nominal variables. Open market operations to keep the index inside the
band if it threatens to stray outside could be conducted in terms either of foreign
exchange or in terms of domestic securities.

7. Capital flows
7.1 The opening of emerging markets
The first major post-war wave of private capital flows to developing countries
came after the large oil price increases of the 1970s. The major borrowers were
governments in oil-importing countries, and the major vehicles were syndicated bank
loans, often “recycling petrodollars” from surplus OPEC countries, via the London
euromarket. This first episode ended with the international debt crisis that surfaced in
1982. The second major wave began around 1989, and ended with the East Asia crisis of
1997. It featured a greater role for securities rather than bank loans, especially in East
Asia, and the capital went relatively more to private sector borrowers. The third wave
began around 2003, this time including China and India, and may have ended with the
global financial crisis of 2008.
The boom-bust cycle, however, masks a long-run trend of gradually increased
opening of financial markets. We begin this part of the chapter by documenting the
extent to which emerging market countries have indeed emerged, that is, the extent to
which they have opened up to the international financial system. We then consider the
advantages and disadvantages of this financial integration
7.2 Measures of financial integration
Integration into international financial markets, much as integration into goods
markets, can be quantified in three ways: direct observation of the barriers to

31

integration, measurements based on flow quantities, and measurements based on the
inferred ability of arbitrage to equalize returns across countries.
Legal barriers to integration
Most developing countries had serious capital controls as recently as the 1980s,
but a majority liberalized them subsequently, at least on paper. Many researchers use the
binary accounting of de jure regulations maintained by the IMF, or the higher-resolution
version of Quinn (1997). These measures suggest substantial liberalization, especially in
the 1990s. The drawback is that de jure regulations may not reflect the reality. Some
governments do not enforce their capital controls (lack of enforcement can arise because
the private sector finds ways around the controls, such as leads and lags in payments for
imports and exports), while others announce a liberalization and yet continue to exercise
heavy-handed “administrative guidance.”
Quantities (gross or net) of capital flows.
Many researchers prefer to use measures relating to capital flow quantities,
because they reflect de facto realities. There are many possible quantity-based measures.
They include current account magnitudes, net capital flows, gross capital flows,
debt/GDP ratios, and the “saving-retention coefficient” in a regression of national
investment rates against national saving rates.99 They also include risk-pooling estimates
such as a comparison of cross-country consumption correlations with cross-country
income correlations. Tests find that the volatility of consumption in developing
countries has, if anything, gone up rather than going down as one would expect if free
capital flows smoothed interemporily.100
One disadvantage of trying to infer the degree of capital mobility from capital
flow quantities is that they reflect not only the desired parameter but the magnitude of
exogenous disturbances. A country with genuine capital controls may experience large
capital outflows in a year of exogenously low investment while a country with open
markets may experience no net outflows in a year when national investment happens to
equal approximately national saving. Finance experts thus often prefer to look at prices
rather than quantities.
Arbitrage of financial market prices.
If prices of assets or rates of return in one country are observed to fluctuate in
close synchronization along with prices or returns in other countries, it is good evidence
that barriers are low and arbitrage is operating freely.
Sometimes one can test whether the price of an asset inside an emerging market is
close to the price of essentially the same asset in New York or London. One example is
99

Examples of this “Feldstein-Horioka regression” applied to developing countries include Dooley, Frankel
and Mathieson (1987) and Holmes (2005). Even when instrumenting for the endogeneity of national
savings, the coefficient remains surprisingly high for developing countries, which throws additional doubt
on whether this is actually a measure of barriers to capital mobility. There is evidence that increases in the
budget deficit are associated with decreases in national saving (both in developing countries and others -Giavazzi, Jappelli and Pagano, 2000) some theories notwithstanding.
100
Prasad, Rogoff, Wei, and Kose (2003) and Levchenko (2004). Such tests are better interpreted as
throwing doubt on the proposition that capital flows work to smooth consumption than as tests of the
degree of financial integration.

32

multiple listings of the same equity on different exchanges (e.g., Telmex). A second is
prices of American Depository Receipts or Global Depository Receipts. A third is the
price of a country fund traded in New York or London compared to the Net Asset Value
of the same basket of equities in the home country.101
The more common kind of arbitrage tests are of interest rate parity, which
compare interest rates on bonds domestically and abroad. Of course bonds at home and
abroad are often denominated in different currencies. There are three versions of
interest rate parity, quite different in their implications: Closed or covered interest
parity, open or uncovered interest parity, and real interest parity.
Covered interest differentials are a useful measure of whether capital controls are
effective; they remove the currency element by hedging it on the forward market. A
growing number of emerging markets issue bonds denominated in their own currencies
and offer forward rates, but many do not, and in most cases the data do not go back very
far. A more common way of removing the currency element is to look at the sovereign
spread: the premium that the country must pay to borrow in dollars, relative to LIBOR
or the US Treasury bill rate. The sovereign spread largely reflects default risk, and
remains substantial for most developing countries.102 An alternative is the Credit
Default Swap, which became increasingly available for the larger emerging markets after
1997 and again shows substantial default risk.103 There are some indications that such
measures may have underestimated risk during the boom phase of the credit cycle,
relative to fundamentals, even ex ante.104
Equalization of expected returns across countries is implied by perfect financial
integration, if risk is unimportant – a very strong assumption. Uncovered interest
parity is the condition that the interest differential equals expected depreciation (which is
stronger than covered interest parity, the arbitrage condition that the interest differential
equals the forward discount, because the existence of an exchange risk premium would
preclude it). Another way of testing if expected returns are equalized across countries,
is to see if the forward discount equals expected depreciation. Often expected returns are
inferred from the systematic component of ex post movements in the exchange rate. The
rejection of the null hypothesis is consistent and strong (though not as strong for
emerging markets as in advanced countries). In financial markets, exploitation of this
forward rate bias is very popular, and goes by the name of the “carry trade”: investors
go short in the low-interest-rate currency and long in the high-interest-rate currency.
Although there is always a risk that the currency will move against them, particular in an
“unwinding” of the carry trade, on average they are able to pocket a profit.105
101

Asymmetric information can characterize segmented markets. There is some evidence that domestic
residents sometimes have better information on the value of domestic assets than do foreign residents. E.g.,
Frankel and Schmukler (1996) and Kim and Wei (2002).
102
Eichengreen and Mody (2000, 2004) estimated econometrically the determinants of interest rate spreads
on individual issues.
103
Adler and Song (2009) and Ranciere (2002).
104
Eichengreen and Mody (2001), Kamin and Von Kleist (1999), and Sy (2002).
105

Bansal and Dahlquist (2000); Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2009); Burnside, Eichenbaum, and
Rebelo (2007), Chinn and Frankel (1993); Frankel and Poonawala (2010); and Ito and Chinn (2007).

33

Expected returns in equity markets are another way of approaching the
quantification of financial integration. The literature is surveyed by Bekaert and Harvey
(2003). Liberalization of emerging markets shows up as increased correlation between
returns locally and globally.106 Meanwhile, that increased correlation reduces one of the
major benefits of investing in emerging markets in the first place: portfolio
diversification.107
Real interest rate equalization is the third of the parity conditions. The
proposition that real interest rates are equalized across countries is stronger than
uncovered interest parity.108 The proposition that real returns to equity are equalized is
stronger still, as bonds and equity may not be fully integrated even within one country.109
Since sovereign spreads and covered interest differentials are often substantial for
developing countries – and these would be pure arbitrage conditions, in the absence of
capital controls and transactions costs -- it is not surprising that the stronger parity
conditions fail as well.
Sterilization and offset
Given the progressively higher degree of capital mobility among developing
countries, particularly among those known as emerging markets, models that previously
would only have been applied to industrialized countries are now applied to them as well.
This begins with the traditional textbook Mundell-Fleming model, designed to show how
monetary and fiscal policy work under conditions of high capital mobility. Monetary
economists – usually with advanced countries in mind -- argue today that models can
dispense with the LM curve, and the money supply itself, on the grounds that money
demand is unstable and central banks have gone back to using the interest rate as their
instrument anyway.110 These concepts are still often necessary, however, for thinking
about emerging markets, because they are necessary for thinking about the question of
sterilization and offset.
An application of interest is the principle of the Impossible Trinity: are exchange
rate stability, open financial markets, and monetary independence mutually
incompatible? Research does seem to bear out that countries with flexible exchange
rates have more monetary independence.111
The literature on sterilization and offset is one way to parameterize whether
capital mobility is so high that it has become difficult or impossible for a country with a
fixed exchange rate to pursue a monetary policy independent of the rest of the world.
The parameter of interest is the offset coefficient, defined as the fraction of an increase in
net domestic assets (and thereby in the monetary base) that has leaked out of the country
through a deficit in the capital account (and thereby in the overall balance of payments)
after a given period of time. The offset coefficient could be considered another entry on
106

Bekaert and Harvey (1997).
Harvey (1995) and Goetzmann, and Jorion (1999).
108
Imperfect integration of goods markets can disrupt real interest parity even if bond markets are highly
integrated. E.g., Dornbusch (1983).
109
Harberger (1980) looked at overall returns to capital and found them no more equalized for developing
countries than for industrialized countries.
110
Woodford (2003); Friedman (2004).
111
Shambaugh (2004); Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2010).
107

34

the list of criteria in the preceding section for evaluating the degree of capital mobility. It
is the aspect of capital mobility that is of greatest direct interest for the conduct of
monetary policy.
Econometrically, any sort of attempt to estimate the offset coefficient by
regressing the capital account or the overall balance of payments against net domestic
assets is plagued by reverse causation. If the central bank tries to sterilize reserve flows
– and the point of the exercise is to see if it has the ability to do so – then there is a
second equation in which changes in net domestic assets depend on the balance of
payments. Sorting out the offset coefficient from the sterilization coefficient is
difficult.112 Early attempts to do so suggested that central banks such as Mexico’s lose
less than half of an expansion in domestic credit to offsetting reserve outflows within one
quarter, but more in the long run.113 This is consistent with Mexico’s attempt to sterilize
reserve outflows in 1994, which seemed to work for almost a year, but then ended in the
peso crisis.
Perhaps it is easier to sterilize reserve inflows than outflows: a number of emerging
market central banks in the early 1990s succeeded in doing so for a year or two, by
selling sterilization bonds to domestic residents.114 But they found this progressively
more difficult over time. Keeping the domestic interest rate above the world interest rate
created a quasi-fiscal deficit for the central bank.115 Eventually they gave up, and
allowed the reserve inflow to expand the money supply. China during the period after
2004 experienced the largest accumulation of reserves in history.116 Although a highly
regulated banking sector has efficiency costs, it does have advantages such as facilitating
the sterilization of reserve flows. For several years China succeeded in sterilizing the
inflow.117 Eventually, in 2007-08, China too had to allow the money to come in,
contributing to overheating of the economy.
Capital controls
Most developing countries retained capital controls even after advanced countries
removed theirs, and many still do.118 Although there are many ways to circumvent
controls,119 it would be a mistake to think that they have little or no effect.
There are many different varieties of capital controls. An obvious first
distinction is between controls that are designed to keep out inflows and those that work
to block outflows.

112

Kouri and Porter (1974).
Cumby and Obstfeld. (1983) and Kamas (1986).
114
E.g., Colombia, Korea, and Indonesia. Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart (1993, 1994a, 1994b, 1995),
Frankel and Okongwu (1996), and Montiel (1996).
115
Calvo (1991).
116
Largely attributable to unrecorded speculative portfolio capital inflows -- Prasad and Wei (2007).
117
Liang, Ouyang, and Willett (2009) and Ouyang, Rajan and Willett (2007).
118
Dooley (1996) surveyed the subject. A variety of country experiences were considered by Edison and
Reinhart (2001) and in Edwards (2007) and Larrain (2000).
119
Capital controls become harder to enforce if the trade account has already been liberalized. Exporters
and importers can use leads and lags in payments, and over- and under-invoice. Aizenman (2008).
113

35

Controls on inflows120 are somewhat more likely to be enforceable. It is easier to
discourage foreign investors than to block up all the possible channels of escape.
Furthermore controls on outflows tend to discourage inflows and so can fail on net.121
Chile famously deployed penalties on short-term capital inflows in the 1990s,
which succeeded in shifting the maturity composition of inflows, considered more stable,
without evidently reducing the total.122 They do come with disadvantages,123 and Chile
removed its controls subsequently. After the global financial crisis of 2008-09, Brazil
revived the policy.
Controls on capital outflows receive less support from scholars, but are still
sometimes used by developing countries, especially under crisis conditions. When
Malaysia imposed controls on outflows in 1998 so as to be able to maintain its exchange
rate, the result was not the disaster of which many economists had warned.124 Magud and
Reinhart (2007) find that capital controls in other countries have been less successful at
reducing the volume of flows.
7.2 Does financial openness improve welfare?
A large literature is re-evaluating whether financial integration is beneficial, for
developing countries in particular. For a country deciding whether to open up to
international capital flows, the question is whether advantages of financial integration
outweigh the disadvantages. Important surveys and overviews include Fischer (1997),
Obstfeld (1998, 2009), Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Sloek (2004); Henry (2007), Kose,
Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2009), Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose (2003, 2010) and Rodrik
(1998).125
Benefits to financial integration, in theory
In theory, financial liberalization should carry lots of benefits. Potential gains
from international trade in financial assets are analogous to the gains from international
trade in goods. First, it enables rapidly-developing countries to finance their investment
more cheaply by borrowing from abroad than if they were limited to domestic savings.
Second, it allows consumption smoothing in response to adverse shocks. Third, it allows
diversification of assets and liabilities across countries. Fourth: it facilitates emulation of
foreign banks and institutions. Fifth: it promotes discipline on macro policy.
120

Reinhart and Smith (1998).
International investors are less likely to put their money into a country if they are worried about their
ability to take the principal, or even the returns, out again. Bartolini and Drazen (1997).
122
E.g., Edwards (1999), De Gregorio, Edwards, and Valdes (2000) and Agosin and French-Davis (1996).
Colombia had somewhat similar controls against short term capital inflows – Cardenas and Barrera (1997).
123
Forbes (2007) finds that Chile’s famous controls on capital inflows raised the cost of capital for small
firms in particular. For Reinhart and Smith (2002) the main problem is being able to remove the controls
at the right time.
124
Rodrik and Kaplan (2002) found that Malaysia’s decision to impose controls on outflows helped it
weather the Asia crisis. But Johnson and Mitton (2001) found that Malaysian capital controls mainly
worked to provide a screen behind which politically favored firms could be supported.
125
Other useful contributions to this large literature include Eichengreen and Leblang (2003), Mishkin
(2007), and Rodrik and Subramanian (2009).
121

36

Increasing doubts, in practice
Financial markets do not work quite as smoothly in practice as some of the
textbook theories suggest. Three salient anomalies: capital often flows “uphill” rather
than from rich to poor, capital flows are often procyclical rather than counter cyclical,
and severe debt crises don’t seem to fit the model.
Capital flows uphill. Countries that have lower income usually have lower
capital/labor ratios. In a neoclassical model, with uniform production technologies, it
would follow that they have higher returns to capital and, absent barriers to capital
mobility, should on average experience capital inflows. But capital seems to flow from
poor to rich as often as the reverse, as famously pointed out by Lucas (1990).126
Procyclicality. As already noted, rather than smoothing short-term disturbances
such as fluctuations on world markets for a country’s export commodities, private capital
flows are often procyclical: pouring in during boom times and disappearing in
recessions.
Debt crises. Financial liberalization has often been implicated in the crises
experienced by emerging markets over the last ten years. Certainly a country that does
not borrow from abroad in the first place cannot have an international debt crisis.
Beyond that, there are concerns that (a) international investors have sometimes lost
enthusiasm for emerging markets abruptly, unexplained by any identifiable change in
fundamentals or information at hand, (b) that contagion sometimes carries the crises to
countries with strong fundamentals, and (c) that the resulting costs, in terms of lost
output, often seem disproportionate to any sins committed by policymakers.127 The
severity of the 2008-09 crisis inevitably raised once again the question of whether
modern liberalized financial markets are more of a curse than a blessing.128 Sometimes
the doubts are phrased as a challenge to the “Washington consensus” in favor of free
markets generally.129
Tests of overall benefits
Some empirical studies have found evidence that these benefits are genuine.130
Some, more specifically, have found that opening up equity markets facilitates the

126

Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanaian (2007); Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan and Volosovych (2008); Reinhart and
Rogoff (2004); and Gourinchas and Jeanne (2009), Kalemli-Ozcan, Reshef, Sorensen, and Yosha (2009)
and Dominguez (2009). The general consensus-answer to the paradox is that inferior institutions in many
developing countries prevent potential investors from capturing the high expected returns that a low
capital/labor ratio would in theory imply.
127
Barro (2002) estimates that the combined currency and banking crises in East Asia in 1997-98 reduced
economic growth in the affected countries over a five-year period by 3 percent per year.
128
E.g., Kaminsky (2008).
129
E.g., Estevadeordal and Taylor (2008).
130
Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) estimate the gains from international financial integration at about 1
percent, which they consider small. Hoxha, Kalemli-Ozcan and Vollrath (2009) find relatively large gains
from financial integration.

37

financing of investment.131 Others have less sanguine results.132 The theoretical
prediction that financial markets should allow efficient risk-sharing and consumptionsmoothing is not borne out in many empirical studies.133
Conditions under which capital inflows are likely beneficial
A blanket indictment (or vindication) of international capital flows would be too
simplistic. Quite a lot of research argues that financial liberalization is more likely to be
beneficial under some particular circumstances, and less so under others. A recurrent
theme is that the aggregate size of capital inflows is not as important as the conditions
under which they take place.
Some recent papers suggest that financial liberalization is good for economic
performance if countries have reached a certain level of development, particularly with
respect to institutions and the rule of law.134 One specific claim is that financial opening
lowers volatility135 and raises growth136 only for rich countries, and is more likely to
lead to market crashes in lower-income countries.137 A second claim is that capital
account liberalization raises growth only in the absence of macroeconomic imbalances,
such as overly expansionary monetary and fiscal policy.138 A third important finding is
that institutions (such as shareholder protection and accounting standards) determine
whether liberalization leads to development of the financial sector,139 and in turn to longrun growth.140 The cost-benefit trade-off from financial openness improves
significantly once some clearly identified thresholds in financial depth and institutional
quality are satisfied.141 A related finding is that corruption tilts the composition of
131

Bekaert and Harvey (2002), Chari and Henry (2004, 2008), Edison and Warnock (2003), and Henry
(2000a,b, 2003) and Bekaert, Harvey (2005) show that when countries open their stock markets, the cost of
capital facing domestic firms falls (stock prices rise), with a positive effect on their investment and on
economic growth. Others who have given us before-and-after studies of the effects of stock market
openings include Claessens and Rhee (1994). Henry and Sasson (2008) find that real wages benefit as well.
132
Cross-country regressions by Edison, Levine, Klein, Ricci, and Sloek (2002) and Prasad and Rajan
(2008) suggest little or no connection from financial openness to more rapid economic growth for
developing countries and emerging markets.
133
Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2009).
134
Kose, Prasad and Taylor (2009) find that the benefits from financial openness increasingly dominate the
drawbacks once certain identifiable threshold conditions in measures of financial depth and institutional
quality are satisfied. Similarly, Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito (2008) find that greater financial openness with a
high level of financial development can reduce or increase output volatility, depending on whether the level
of financial development is high or low. Also Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2009)
135
Biscarri, Edwards, and Perez de Gracia (2003). Aghion, Bacchetta and Banerjee (2004) and Bacchetta
and van Wincoop, (2000) argue theoretically that volatility is higher for countries at an intermediate level
of financial development than for those who have not yet liberalized.
136
Edwards (2001) and Klein and Olivei (2008).
137
Martin and Rey (2002) find that financial globalization may make emerging market financial crashes
more likely. But Ranciere, Tornell and Westermann (2008) find that countries experiencing occasional
financial crises grow faster, on average, than countries with stable financial conditions. Kaminsky and
Schmukler (2008) find that financial liberalization is followed in the short run by more pronounced boombust cycles in the stock market, but leads in the long run to more stable markets.
138
Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2003). They reject the claim that it is the level of development that
matters.
139

Chinn and Ito (2002).
Klein (2003); Chinn and Ito (2005); and Obstfeld (2009).
141
Kose, Prasad, and Taylor (2009).
140

38

capital inflows toward the form of banking flows (and away from FDI), and toward
dollar-denomination (vs. denomination in domestic currency), both of which have been
associated with crises.142 Inadequacies in the financial structures of developing
countries probably explain the findings that financial opening in those countries does not
produce faster long-run growth as it does in industrial countries. The implication is that
financial liberalization can help if institutions are strong and other fundamentals are
favorable, but can hurt if they are not.143
All of these findings are consistent with the longstanding conventional lesson
about the sequencing of reforms: that countries will do better in the development process
if they postpone opening the capital account until after other institutional reforms. The
reasoning is that it is dangerous for capital flows to be allowed to respond to faulty
signals.144 The observable positive correlation between the opening of capital markets
and economic growth could be attributable to reverse causation — that rich countries
liberalize as a result of having developed, not because of it. Edison, et al, (2002),
however, conclude from their own tests that this is not the case.
7.3 Capital inflow bonanzas
With each episode of strong capital inflows to emerging markets, everyone would
like to believe that the flows originate in good domestic fundamentals, such as
macroeconomic stabilization and microeconomic reforms. Some research, however,
indicates that external factors are at least as influential as domestic fundamentals. Low
US interest rates are often identified as a major influence.145 This research is important
because during booms the authors are often among the few offering the warning that if
inflows result from easy US monetary policy more than in domestic fundamentals,
outflows are likely to follow in the next phase of the cycle. Even preceding the 2008
global financial crisis, much of the research on the carry trade implied that capital flows
from low interest rate countries (the United States, Japan and Switzerland) to high
interest rate countries (Iceland, New Zealand and Hungary) could rapidly unwind.
Earlier, Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart (1993, 1994ab, 1996) were prescient with respect
to the 1994 Mexican Peso crisis. 146 Reinhart and Reinhart (2009) again find that global
factors, such as U.S. interest rates, have been a driver of the global capital flow cycle
since 1960. These papers also shed important light on how emerging market authorities
manage the inflows, as between currency appreciation, sterilized foreign exchange
intervention, unsterilized intervention, and capital controls.

142
143

Wei and Wu (2002).

Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian (2007).
The results of Edwards (2008) indicate that relaxing capital controls increases the likelihood of
experiencing a sudden stop if it comes ahead of other reforms. Contributions on sequencing include
Edwards (1984), McKinnon (1993), and Kaminsky and Schmukler (2003).
145
Arora and Cerisola (2001), Borensztein, Zettelmeyer, and Philippon (2001), and Frankel and Okongwu
(1996) are among those finding significant effects of US interest rates on emerging market spreads.
146
Also Fernandez-Arias (1996) and Montiel and Reinhart (2001). Eichengreen and Rose (2000),
analyzing data for more than 100 developing countries, 1975-1992, find that banking crises are strongly
associated with adverse external condition, in particular, high interest rates in northern counties.
144

39

8 Crises in Emerging Markets
The boom phase is often followed by a bust phase.147 We begin with an enumeration
and definition of the various concepts of external crises in the literature.
8.1 Definitions: Reversals, stops, attacks, and crises
Current account reversals are defined as a reduction within one year of the current
account deficit of a certain percentage of GDP. Typically a substantial current account
deficit disappears, and is even converted into a surplus.148 An observed switch from
current account deficit to surplus could, however, be due to an export boom, which is
quite different from the exigent circumstance that most have in mind. More refined
concepts are needed.
“Sudden Stops” is an expression first used by Dornbusch, Goldfajn and Valdes
(1995). They are typically defined as a substantial unexpected reduction in net capital
inflows. The first theoretical approach to the problem of sudden stops is Calvo (1998). A
large theoretical literature followed.149
Operationally, the Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004) criterion for sudden stop is a
sudden cut in foreign capital inflows (a worsening of the financial account, at least two
standard deviations below the sample mean) that is not the consequence of a positive
shock (namely a trade shock), but rather is accompanied by a costly reduction in
economic activity.150 Another way to restrict the episodes to reductions in deficits that
cannot result from a boom – rising exports and income— is to add the criterion that they
are accompanied by an abrupt reduction in international reserves.
An important variety of sudden stops is called “systemic,” that is, threatening the
international financial system, not just a single country.151 In order to isolate episodes of
capital account reversals related to systemic events of an external origin, they define
crises as periods of collapsing net capital inflows that are accompanied with skyrocketing
Emerging Markets bond spreads.
“Speculative attacks” are defined as a discrete increase in demand for foreign
currency, in exchange for domestic currency, by speculators (i.e., market participants
betting on a devaluation). The precise date of the speculative attack may come later
than the sudden stop, for example if the central bank is able to prolong the status quo
after the loss of capital inflows, by running down reserves for a period of time. In
typical models, the speculative attack is successful, in the sense that the central bank runs
out of reserves on that same day, and is forced to devalue in the way the speculators
anticipated. But there is also a notion that there can be unsuccessful speculative attacks,
in which the authorities fight the speculation, for example by raising interest rates sharply
147

Overviews of crises in emerging markets that ended the 1990s boom include Fischer (2004), Kenen
(2001) and Desai (2003).
148
Edwards (2004a, b) and Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (1998, 2000).
149
References include, among many others, Arellano and Mendoza (2003), Calvo (2003), Calvo, Izquierdo
and Talvi (2003, 2006), Calvo and Reinhart (2001), Guidotti, Sturzenegger and Villar (2004), and Mendoza
(2002, 2006).
150
Also Edwards (2004b).
151
Calvo, Izquierdo and Loo-Kung (2006).

40

or paying out reserves, and ultimately are able to maintain the parity, versus successful
speculative attacks, in which they are ultimately forced to devalue.152 The latter is
sometimes defined as a currency crash, if the devaluation is at least 25% and it exceeds
the rate of depreciation in preceding years by at least 10%.153
Generations of models of speculative attacks
The leading theoretical framework for currency crises is built around models of
speculative attacks. The literature is often organized into a succession of several
generations. In each case, the contribution made by the seminal papers was often the
ability to say something precise about the date when the speculative attack occurred. But
the generations can be distinguished according to whether the fundamental problem is
seen as, respectively: overly expansionary monetary policy, multiple equilibria, or
structural problems associated with moral hazard and balance sheet effects.
The first generation models began with Krugman (1979) and Flood and Garber
(1984).154 The government was assumed to be set on an exogenous course of rapid
money creation, perhaps driven by the need to finance a budget deficit. A resulting
balance of payments deficit implies that the central bank will eventually run out of
reserves and need to devalue. But under rational expectations, speculators will anticipate
this, and will not wait so long to sell their domestic currency as to suffer capital loss.
But neither will they attack the currency as early as the original emergence of the deficit.
Rather, the speculative attack falls on the date when the reserves left in the vault of the
central bank are just barely enough to cover the discontinuous fall in demand for
domestic currency that will result from the shift from a situation of a steady exchange
rate and prices to a new steady state of depreciation and inflation.
The second generation of models of speculative attacks argue that more than one
possible outcome – crisis and no-crisis – can be consistent with equilibrium, even if there
has been no change in fundamentals. In a self-fulfilling prophecy, each market
participant sells the domestic currency if he or she thinks the others will sell. The
seminal papers are by Obstfeld (1986b, 1996).155 One branch of the second generation
models focuses on the endogeneity of monetary policy: the central bank may genuinely
intend not to inflate, but may be forced into it when, for example, labor unions win higher
wages.156 Many of the models build on the theories of bank runs (Diamond and Dybvyg,
1983)157 and the prisoners’ dilemma (where speculators each try to figure out whether the
152

Guidotti, Sturzenegger and Villar (2004) distinguish between sudden stops that lead to current account
reversals and those that don’t. In the latter case, presumably the country found an alternative source of
financing, namely reserve depletion or exceptional funding from an international financial institution.
153
E.g. Frankel and Rose (1996). A “currency crisis” is defined as a sharp increase in exchange market
pressure that shows up either as a 25% devaluation or as a loss of reserves that is a commensurate
proportion of the monetary base.
154
Obstfeld (1986a) did it in an optimizing model.
155
Attacks occur deterministically if fundamentals such as reserves are weak, and do not occur if they are
strong. Multiple equilibria arise in a third case: intermediate levels of fundamentals. Also Sachs, Tornell
and Velasco (1996a).
156
Obstfeld (1996) and Jeanne (1997).
157
Among the authors applying the bank runs theory to emerging market crises are Chang and Velasco
(1997, 1999a, b, 2001). The fundamental problem of bank illiquidity is exacerbated by financial

41

others are going to attack).158 The balance sheet problems discussed earlier also often
play a key role here. Morris and Shin (1998) make the important modification of
introducing uncertainty into the model, which can rule out multiple equilibria.
Another important category of speculative attack models attributes crises neither to
monetary fundamentals, as in the first generation, nor to multiple equilibria, as in the
second generation.159 The culprit, rather, is structural flaws in the financial system that
create moral hazard in the behavior of domestic borrowers vis-à-vis their government.
Certain domestic borrowers, whether banks or firms, have close connections with the
government. When the East Asia crisis hit in 1997, the problem came to be known
popularly as “crony capitalism.”160 The government in turn has access to a supply of
foreign exchange, in the form of foreign exchange reserves, and perhaps also in the
ability to tax export receipts or to borrow from the IMF. Even in cases where the
government says explicitly ahead of time that domestic borrowers will not be bailed out,
those that are well connected believe (usually correctly) that they will be bailed out in the
event of a crisis. Thus they over-borrow. The speculative attack comes on the day
when the stock of international debt that has some claim on government rescue becomes
as large as the supply of reserves. (Again, rational speculators will not wait longer,
because there would then not be enough foreign currency to go around.) The ideas go
back to Diaz-Alejandro (1985). Dooley (2000a)’s “insurance model” can claim the
honor of having been written just before the East Asia crisis.161 Krugman (1998) is
probably the most widely cited.162

liberalization. Under fixed exchange rates, a run on banks becomes a run on the currency if the Central
Bank attempts to act as a lender of last resort. Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) documented the frequency
with which banking crises and currency crises come together. Also Diamond and Rajan (2001),
Hausmann and Rojas-Suárez (1996), and Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2004). Martinez Peria and
Schmukler (2001) examined the role of deposit insurance. Dages, Goldberg, and Kinney (2000) found that
foreign ownership of banks is not the problem. Radelet and Sachs (1998) suggested that the East Asia
crisis of 1997-98 was essentially an international version of a bank run.
158
One variant of the game theory approach, motivated by concerns that a single large hedge fund could
deliberately engineer a crisis, posits a player that is larger than the others: Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini
(2002); and Corsetti, Dasgupta, Morris, and Shin (2004).
159
The “two generations” language originated with Eichengreen. Views vary as to what should be
designated the third generation. Krugman (1999) says that the third generation should be identified by
balance sheet effects, not by banking bailouts per se. But, to me, only bailout moral hazard considerations
merit the designation of a third generation.
160
Claessens, Djankov and Lang (2000) statistically study family-controlled firms in East Asia. Rajan and
Zingales (1998b) study relationship banking.
161
Likewise McKinnon and Pill (1996).
162

Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1999a, b), Chinn, Dooley, and Shrestha (1999) and Chinn and Kletzer
(2001) are among those attributing the East Asia crisis to structural flaws in the financial system of the
moral hazard sort. In the theories of Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2001a,b, 2004), government
guarantees to banks give them an incentive to incur foreign debt. Calvo and Mendoza (1996) see roots of
Mexico's 1994 peso crisis in financial globalization, anticipation of a banking-system bailout, and selffulfilling prophecy.

42

Although it is often presumed that foreign residents, rather than domestic residents, lead
the way in pulling money out of a country during a speculative attack, there is no
presumption in theory that this is the case. Nor does the empirical evidence seem to support
it.163

8.2 Contagion
It has long been noted that when one emerging market is hit by a sudden stop, it is
more likely that others will be as well. The correlation tends to be much greater within
the same general geographic area.164
There is not complete agreement as to the definition of contagion. Some correlation
across emerging markets can be explained by common external shocks.165 Masson
(1999) calls these monsoonal effects. They are best not termed contagion, as the phrase
implies transmission from one country to another, which Masson calls spillover effects.
Spillover effects that can be readily interpreted in terms of fundamentals include
investment linkages, trade linkages, and competition in third markets. A number of
interesting specific channels of contagion from one country to another have been
identified empirically.166 Finally, there is what might be called pure contagion, which
runs via investor behavior in a world of imperfectly efficient financial markets. One
example is information cascades: investors may react to a crisis in Thailand or Russia by
revising their estimation of the value of the “Asian model” or the odds of IMF bailouts.167
Another example is illiquidity in international financial markets and reduced risk
tolerance, which in crises such as 2008 seem to induce flight from emerging markets
generally, alongside flight from high-yield corporate debt and any other assets suspected
of illiquidity or risk.
8.3 Managing Emerging Market Crises
There have long been three legs to the policymaking stool of managing crises in
developing countries: adjustment of national policies, “Private Sector Involvement,” and
163

Choe, Kho and Stulz (1999, 2005) and Frankel and Schumkler (1996). If anything, domestic investors
have the informational advantage.
164
Eichengreen, Rose and Wyplosz (1996); Baig and Goldfajn (1999); Bae, Karolyi, and Stulz (2000);
Bekaert, Harvey, and Ng (2005), Forbes and Rigobon (2000, 2002), Rigobon (2000); Kaminsky and
Reinhart (2000, 2002); Kaminsky, Reinhart and Vegh (2003), Kaminsky and Schmukler (1999); and
Corsetti,Pericoli and Sbracia (2005).
165
A prominent example of a common external shock is an increase in US interest rates, a factor discussed
earlier. Uribe and Yue (2003).
166
Glick and Rose (1999), Forbes (2002) and Forbes and Chinn (2004) find that contagion moves along the
lines of trade linkages. Kaminsky and Reinhart (2008) find that when contagion spreads across continents,
it passes through major financial centers along the way. Kaminsky and Schmukler (2002) find contagion
via rating agencies. Borensztein and Gelos (2003) find herding among emerging market mutual funds.
167

This is not to say investors are irrational. Calvo and Mendoza (2000) demonstrate that globalization
“may promote rational contagion by weakening individual incentives for gathering costly information.”
Morck , Yeung and Yu (2000) attribute the correlation among emerging markets to shared weak property
rights.

43

the role of the IMF and other multilateral participation.
Adjustment
In the traditional orthodoxy, a crisis required adjustment of the macroeconomic
policies that had gotten the country into the problem in the first place. In the old
language of Harry Johnson, this meant some combination of expenditure-switching
policies, in practice meaning devaluation, and expenditure reducing policies, meaning
monetary and fiscal contraction – typically substantial doses of all of the above.
A tightening of monetary policy is often the first response to a sudden stop. The
urgent need in a currency crisis is to improve the balance of payments. Raising interest
rates is thought to do this in two ways: first by making domestic assets more attractive to
international investors, and second by cutting domestic expenditure and therefore
improving the trade balance.
Many have analyzed the so-called interest rate defense, particularly the question
whether and when it is preferable to devaluation.168 Furman and Stiglitz (1998)
emphasize that an increase in the interest rate can decrease the attractiveness of the
country’s assets to foreign investors, rather than increasing it, because of the increase in
default risk.169 But this point does not change the basic logic that some combination of
monetary contraction and devaluation is called for, to restore external balance, absent
some international angel willing and able to make up the gap in financing. The
possibility that devaluation is contractionary does, by contrast, interfere with the basic
logic that the central bank can deploy the optimal combination of an increase in the
interest rate and an increase in the exchange rate to restore external balance without
losing internal balance.170
Private Sector Involvement
If a crisis debtor is to compress spending and the IMF or other parts of the
international financial community is to chip in with an emergency loan, the foreign
exchange should not go merely to helping the countries creditors cash in and depart the
scene. Private Sector Involvement was the term for the requirement adopted in the
1990s for “bailing in” private creditors rather than “bailing them out.” The idea is that
creditors agree to roll over loans as part of the complete package that includes the
national government and the IMF, and that it is in their interest collectively to do so even
if the free rider problem tempts each of them to get out. This process was thought to
have been easier in the 1980s, when the creditors were banks finite in number and
susceptible to negotiation, and to have grown more difficult subsequently, when the
creditors have more often constituted a larger number of widely-dispersed bondholders.
But the basic issue is the same either way.
The International Financial Institutions

168

Aghion, Banerjee and Bacchetta (2000); Flood and Rose (2002); Christiano, Gust, and Roldos (2002);
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001); Drazen (2003); and Eichengreen and Rose (2003).
169
Also Blanchard (2005). This point is rooted in the theory of imperfect information and credit rationing
– Stiglitz and Weiss (1981). Lahiri and Vegh (2003, 2007) show that, under certain conditions, it is
feasible to delay the crisis, but raising interest rates beyond a certain point may actually hasten the crisis.
170
Frankel (2003).

44

The International Financial Institutions (the IMF, the World Bank, and other
multilateral development banks) and governments of the United States and other large
economies (usually in the form of the G-7, in the past) are heavily involved in
“managing” financial crises.171
The IMF is not a full-fledged Lender of Last Resort, though some have proposed
that it should be.172 The Fund does not contribute enough money to play this role in
crises, even in the high-profile rescue programs where the loans are a large multiple of
the country’s quota. Usually the IMF is viewed as applying a “Good housekeeping seal
of approval,” where it vouches for the remedial actions to which the country has committed.
IMF conditionality has been severely criticized.173 There is a broad empirical
literature on the effectiveness of conditional IMF lending.174 The better studies have
relied on large cross country samples that allow for the application of standard statistical
techniques to test for program effectiveness, avoiding the difficulties associated with
trying to generalize from the finding of a few case studies. The overall conclusion of such
studies seems to be that IMF programs and IMF conditionality may have on balance a
positive impact on key measures of economic performance. Such assessments suggest
that IMF programs result in improvements in the current account balance and the overall
balance of payments.175
The impact of IMF programs on growth and inflation is less clear. The first round
of studies failed to find any improvement in these variables. Subsequent studies suggest
that IMF programs result in lower inflation.176 The impact of IMF programs on growth is
more ambiguous. Results on short-run growth are mixed; some studies find that
implementation of IMF programs leads to an immediate improvement in growth,177 while
other studies find a negative short-run effect.178 Studies that look at a longer time
horizon, however, tend to show a revival of growth.179 This is to be expected: countries
entering into IMF programs will often implement policy adjustments that have the
immediate impact of reducing demand, but could ultimately create the basis for sustained
growth. The structural reforms embedded in IMF programs inherently take time to
improve economic performance. Finally, the crisis that led to the IMF program, not the
IMF program itself, is often responsible for an immediate fall in growth.
171

Among many references: Cline (1985, 1994), Eichengreen and De Long (2002) and Frankel and
Roubini (2003).
172
Fischer (1999).
173
E.g., Furman and Stiglitz (1998) and Radelet and Sachs (1998). In the East Asia crises, the criticism
focused not just on the austerity of macroeconomic conditionality, but also on the perceived ‘mission
creep” of venturing into microeconomic reforms not conventionally associated with financial crises.
174
Including Bird and Rowlands (1997), Faini, de Melo, Senhadji-Semlali and Stanton (1991), Joyce (1992),
and Hutchison (2003).
175
Haque and Khan (2002) provide a survey.
176
Conway (1994), Bagci and Perrudin (1997) and Dicks-Mireaux, Mecagni and Schadler (2000) found
that inflation fell following an IMF program; the result was statistically significant only in the first two of
these three studies.
177
Dicks-Mireaux, Mecagni and Schadler (2000).
178
Bordo and Schwartz (2000) compare countries receiving IMF assistance during crises in the period
1973-98 with countries in the same region not receiving assistance and find that the real performance (for
example, GDP growth) of the former group was possibly worse than the latter.
179
Conway (1994).

45

Despite such academic conclusions, there was a movement away from strict
conditionality subsequent to the emerging market crises of the 1990s. In part, the new
view increasingly became that the Fund could not force a country to follow the
macroeconomic policy conditions written into an agreement, if the deep political forces
within the country would ultimately reject the policies.180 It is necessary for the local
government to “take ownership” of the reforms.181 One proposal to deal with this
situation was the Contingent Credit Line: a lending facility that would screen for the
policy conditions ex ante, and then unconditionally insure the country against external
financial turmoil ex post. The facility was reborn under the name Flexible Credit Line in
the 2008-09 financial crisis, with less onerous conditionality. But most emerging market
countries managed to avoid borrowing from the Fund this time, with the exception of
some, particularly in Eastern Europe, that were in desperate condition.
Some critics worry that lending programs by the International Financial
Institutions and G-7 or other major governments create moral hazard, that debtor
countries and their creditors have little incentive to take care because they know they will
be rescued. Some even claim that this international moral hazard is the main reason for
crises, that the international financial system would operate fine if it weren’t for such
meddling by public institutions.182
There is a simple way of demonstrating that moral hazard arising from
international bailouts cannot be the primary market failure. Under a neo-classical model,
capital would flow from rich high capital/labor countries to lower-income low
capital/labor country, for example from the United States to China. Instead it often flows
the opposite way, as already noted. Even during the peaks of the lending booms, the
inflows are less than would be predicted by an imperfection-free neoclassical model.183
Therefore any moral hazard incentive toward greater capital flows created by the IFIs
must be less than the various market failures that inhibit capital flows.
8.4 Policy Instruments and Goals After a Balance of Payments Shock
Why have so many countries suffered deep recessions as part of the adjustment
process in the aftermath of a deterioration in their balance of payments? One school of
thought is that policy has been too contractionary, perhaps because the IMF does not
understand that an increase in the interest rate increases default risk.184
In this section we consider the problem of a central bank attempting to attain two
goals -- internal and external balance – by means of two policy instruments – the
exchange rate and the interest rate.185 Our interpretation of internal balance is Y = Y ,
180

According to the influential strain of research represented by Acemoglu et al (2003), Easterly and
Levine (2002) and Hall and Jones (1999), institutions drive out the effect of policies. Evrensel (2002)
finds that the IMF is not able to enforce macroeconomic conditionality.
181
Boughton (2003).
182
Bordo and Schwartz (2000), Calomiris (1998), Dooley and Verma (2003), and Meltzer (2000). But
Lane and Phillips (2001) find no evidence that country spreads react to changes in the moral hazard of
international bailouts.
183
E.g., Blanchard (1983).
184
Furman and Stiglitz (1998), as discussed in the preceding sub-section.
185
The graphical analysis is from Frankel (2003a) , but the algebra has been added.

46

where Y ≡ real income and Y ≡ potential output.
Our interpretation of external balance is that overall balance of payments BP = 0,
where BP = CA + KA,
CA ≡ current account, and
KA ≡ capital account.
One could just as easily choose different goals for the levels of Y and BP.
Internal and External Balance When Devaluation is Expansionary
Assume for now:
Y = A(i) + TB ,
where i ≡ domestic interest rate; and
dA
 0.
absorption, A, is a function of the interest rate, with
di
Assume that the trade balance, linearized for simplicity, is given by TB = xE - mY.
where
E ≡ the exchange rate, defined as the price of foreign currency.
If the trade balance is derived from an elasticities approach (the country has some
monopoly power in its export good, as in Section 2.2), then x is related to the sensitivity
of export demand to relative prices; if the trade balance is derived from the traded goods
/ nontraded goods model (the country is a price-taker in all traded goods, as in the small
open economy model of section 2.3), then x is related to sensitivity of the supply of
traded goods to relative prices. “Sensitivity” could simply mean, for example, the
elasticity, normalized for the quantity of goods relative to E, if there were no additional
effect on import spending or the demand for traded goods.

Assume that the capital account of the balance of payments is given by the
function:
dk

KA = k(i-i*), where d (i  i*)  0 ,
and i* ≡ world interest rate.
First we derive the internal balance relationship, solving for Y as a function of i
and E.
Y = A(i) + TB

(3)

TB = xE – mY

(4)
A(i )  xE
(5)
Substitute (4) into (3): Y =
(1  m)
We want the relationship between i and E that gives internal balance (output equal
to potential:

__

Y Y

=>

A(i )
xE
.
(6)

(1  m) (1  m)
An increase in E would improve the trade balance, resulting in a rise in Y as well. In
order to go back to the potential output, we need to increase the interest rate. Thus the
graph looks like this, labeled NN:
__

Y =

47

E

NN

i
Figure 1: Slope of Internal Balance curve is conventionally positive.

We obtain the slope of the NN curve by differentiating equation (6):

Ai
E

= x
i Y  Y

(7)

As Ai < 0, the slope is positive, which is why we have drawn NN sloping upward.
Intuititively, because a devaluation is expansionary, it would have to be offset by a
contractionary increase in the interest rate if total output is to remain at the same level.
Second we derive the external balance relationship, solving for BP as a function
of i and E. The Balance of Payments is the sum of the trade balance and the capital
account:

BP  TB  KA
BP  xE  mY  k (i  i*)

(8)

We plug equation (5) into equation (8) to eliminate Y, and rearrange to obtain the BP in
terms of E and i. External Balance is achieved when BP=0; therefore
BP = xE  mA(i )  k (i ) = 0

1 m

1 m

(9)

We draw the relationship between i and E that gives external balance.
If E increases then the interest rate has to fall in order to restore external balance.
Therefore, the trade surplus created by the increase in E would be offset by the capital
outflow and increase in imports. In the graph we label the external balance line BB:
48

E

BB

i
Figure 2: Slope of External Balance curve is negative.

To obtain the slope, we differentiate equation (9) to obtain:

m

E
 Ai 
x
i BP  0

1 m
ki
x

(10)

As Ai <0 and k i >0, the slope is negative, which is why we have drawn BB sloping
downward. Intuitively, a devaluation improves the trade balance, which could be
financed by borrowing from abroad if the interest rate is raised.
The points below the BB curve are points of deficit. The interest rate isn’t high
enough to attract the necessary capital inflow. Assume an exogenous adverse capital
account shock, a rise in the world interest rate i* or some other downward shift in KA, as
in a speculative attack. In other words, the country now finds itself in balance of
payments deficit. If the country has an adverse capital account shock, then BB curve
shifts to the right (BB´) so the country finds that its location point now corresponds to a
Balance of Payments deficit, because it is to the left of the new BB’ Schedule. At E the
objective is to reach E’ where the economy is at both at internal and external balance. In
this case the policy options are clear: the central bank has to raise the interest rate and
depreciate the currency. While the increase in the interest rate attracts capital inflows, it
also causes a contraction in output. Fortunately, the country has another instrument, the
exchange rate, at hand. Devaluation will improve exports, which in turn will pick up both
the trade balance and the output. The optimal combination of E and i will put the
economy at the intersection of the two graphs, where the new external balance constraint
is satisfied, without a recession. This is harder in practice than in theory, due especially
to uncertainty; but policy-makers can grope their way to equilibrium through a
tatonnement process.
Notice that the fundamental logic of the graph does not change even if default risk
means that ki is very small. Even if the capital account does not improve, an increase in
49

the interest rate still improves the balance of payments by reducing spending and
therefore raising the trade balance.

NN

E
B’
B

BB’
BB

i
Figure 3: “Sudden stop” shifts External Balance curve out.

Internal and External Balance When Devaluation is Contractionary
Now assume that devaluation has a contractionary effect on domestic demand, for
example because of a balance sheet effect from dollar debts, or any of the other reasons
discussed in Section 2.4:

dA
dA
 0,
0 .
di
dE

Y = A(i, E) + TB

We have the following solution for output: Y =

A(i, E )  xE
(1  m)

(11)

__

Set Y  Y and differentiate to obtain the new slope of NN,

E
i Y  Y

=



Ai
x  AE

We will assume that x the stimulus to net exports from a devaluation is small in the short
run, because the elasticities are small, so that AE dominates, and the devaluation is indeed
contractionary overall: The slope is negative.

50

E

NN

D
BB
i

Figure 4: Balance sheet effect turns Internal Balance slope negative.

We again illustrate the shift in the figure if there is an exogenous adverse balance
of payments shock. Now both internal and external balances have negative slopes.
They may not intersect at all. In this case, we are not confident in which direction the
interest and the exchange rate should go. When the balance of payment goes into deficit
due to a shock in the capital account (a point like D) a devaluation will restore the
external balance (by improving the trade balance); but at the same time a devaluation
hurts the economy as it is contractionary. Moreover, the improvement in exports may not
be enough to offset the contractionary effects so the country may go into a recession.
We have a situation where we may not be able restore equilibrium internally and
externally, at least not at reasonable levels of E and i ; and even if we can in theory, it is
not possible to say whether E should be increased a lot and i decreased, or vice versa.
Even assuming the two curves intersect somewhere, a process of tatonnement by policymakers may take a long time to get there, and the curves may have moved again by that
time. The lesson: it is better in the first place not to develop balance sheets that are so
vulnerable as to put policy-makers in such a difficult situation as illustrated in the figure.
8.5. Default and avoiding it

One option for a country in severe payments difficulty is simply to default on its
debt. Yet it has relatively been rare during the post-war period for countries to do so.
The big question is “why?” Two answers are most common.
Why don’t countries default?
The first reason why countries are said not to default on their debt is that they
don’t want to lose access to capital markets in the future. International investors will
want to punish defaulters by refusing to lend to them in the future, or perhaps by lending
only at severe penalty interest rates. But is that threat regarding the distant future enough
to discourage countries from defaulting and thereby saving a great deal of foreign
exchange today? And, for their part, is the threat by international investors never to lend
again credible in the sense that they will have the incentive to stick to it in the future?

51

Bulow and Rogoff (1989) answer no: that threat won’t sustain non-default, in a repeated
game. 186
The other common answer is that countries are afraid that if they default they will
lose trade. In one version, they are afraid of losing the trade credit, or even access to the
international payments system: even if they pay cash for an import, the cash might be
seized by a creditor in payment of an outstanding debt. The classic reference is Eaton
and Gersovitz (1981). Some persuasive empirical evidence appears to support this
theory.187 It is also consistent with evidence that countries possessing high overall
trade/GDP ratios suffer from fewer sudden stops188: international investors will be less
likely to pull out, because they know the country is less likely to default. Under this
logic, a higher ratio of trade is a form of “giving hostages” that makes a cut off of lending
less likely.
Another possible answer to the question, “why don’t countries default” is that
they do, but not explicitly. Countries often announce that they are unable to service their
debts under the schedule or terms contractually agreed to. A painful process usually
follows in which they negotiate new terms.
Ex ante measures for better risk-sharing
The largest cost arising from protracted negotiations over restructuring is the
disincentive to domestic investment and output created by the debt overhang in the
meantime. Domestic firms will not seek to earn foreign exchange if they think it will be
taken away from them, to service past debts.189
Reformers wishing to reduce the severity of emerging market crises have asked
whether there is not a way for lenders and borrowers to agree ahead of time on a more
efficient way to share risk. The goal of minimizing high costs to restructuring debt is the
same as that which is thought to be achieved in the domestic context by bankruptcy
law.190 One proposed solution is to establish the equivalent of an international
bankruptcy court, perhaps as a “debt workout” office of the IMF. 191
Collective Action Clauses are one proposal that was eventually adopted in some
prominent emerging markets. The investors agree ex ante in the bond contract that in the
event a restructuring should prove necessary, a few holdouts among the creditors will not
be able to obstruct a settlement that the rest regard as beneficial. CACs are sold as a
186

Dooley and Svensson (1994), however, argue that debtors are unable to suspend debt service
permanently and credibly.
187
Rose and Spiegel (2004) and Rose (2005) find that bilateral debt reschedulings lead to losses of trade
along corresponding bilateral lines, estimated at 8 percent a year for 15 years, from which he infers that lost
trade is the motivation debtors have to avoid such defaults. Rose and Spiegel (2008) find that strong
bilateral trade links are correlated with low default probabilities.
188
Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004), Edwards (2004), and Cavallo and Frankel (2008).
189
Krugman (1989) and Sachs (1983) argued that the efficiency burden of the debt overhang in the 1980s
was sufficiently great that forgiveness would make all better off, creditors as well as debtors, a logic that
contributed to the Brady Plan writedowns at the end of the decade. Some have suggested that the plans to
forgive loans to Highly Indebted Poor Countries might work the same way, but Henry and Arslanalp (2005)
conclude not. Also Edwards (2002).
190
Friedman (2000), Claessens, Klingebiel, and Laeven (2003), Frankel and Roubini (2003) .
191
Sachs (1998). One short-lived version was the proposed Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism.
Krueger (2003) and Shleifer (2003).

52

realistic way to accomplish private sector involvement without the worst of the moral
hazard problems of IMF bailouts. The prediction of Barry Eichengreen, that the
adoption of CACs would not discourage investors in the case of more creditworthy
issuers, appears to have been accurate.192 But neither have they yet made a big difference
in crisis resolution.
Ex ante provision of collateral can allow financing to take place where reputations
and other institutions are not strong enough to sustain it otherwise. Models that presume
the necessity of collateral in emerging markets are some of the most promising for
possible re-importation back into the mainstream of macroeconomics in rich countries.193
We have mentioned above attractions of financing via equity, FDI, and
commodity-indexed bonds. Each of these can be regarded as risk-sharing arrangements
that are more efficient than ordinary bonds or bank loans: in the event of a “bad state of
nature,” such as a decline in world demand for the country’s exports, the foreign investor
suffers some of the losses automatically, avoiding the need for protracted negotiations
with the borrower.
8.6. Early warning indicators

Having learned to become less ambitious than attempting to estimate full structural
models of reality, some economists have tried to the simpler task of testing whether
economic indicators can help predict when and where emerging market crises will
strike.194 One motivation is to shed light on competing models of speculative attack, or
theories of crisis origins more generally. Often the motivation is just to give policymakers some advanced warning of possible crises, so that the dangers can be addressed
before disaster strikes. (For this motivation, one must make sure that the relevant data
are available in real time.)
It is often pointed out that if reliable indicators of this sort were readily at hand, they
would induce behavior that would disrupt the relationship: either private investors would
pull out of the country at an earlier date or else policy-makers would correct imbalances
in time and so prevent the crisis altogether . This point is useful as a caveat to
researchers not to expect that finding reliable indicators will be easy. But neither is it a
reason not to try. If observable imbalances get gradually worse as the probability of a
crisis rises, it is natural for the IMF (or any other party) to be at the forefront of those
trying to ascertain the relationships. If the research bears fruit, and policymakers’
actions then succeed in eliminating crises, that is a consummation devoutly to be wished
for. More likely the IMF would be faced with the dilemma posed by the knowledge that
announcing concerns when the crisis probability rises to, say, 50%, runs the risk of
precipitating a crisis that otherwise might not have occurred. In any case, we are not in
the fortunate position of having had tremendous success in finding early warning
indicators.

192

Eichengreen and Portes (1995), Eichengreen (1999), Eichengreen and Mody (2004).
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2000, 2001, 2003, 2005) and Mendoza and Smith (2006). It goes back
to the seminar article of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).
194
Berg and Pattillo (1999a, b) and Goldstein, Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) evaluate different
approaches.
193

53

The studies often use panels, combining a cross-section of many countries with time
series. A few studies use a cross-section of countries to see what determines which
countries suffered more and which less when hit by the common shock of a salient global
episode.195
Asset prices
Bubbles – or, perhaps safer to say, extreme booms – in equity markets and real
estate markets have come to be associated with high-income countries. But they can
afflict emerging markets as well, as noted earlier. Stock market prices are apparently
among the more successful early warning indicators of crises in emerging markets. 196
Reserves
The foreign exchange reserve holding behavior of developing countries differs in
some ways from that of advanced countries. For one thing, they hold more.197 Many
studies have found that reserves, sometimes expressed as a ratio to the money supply,
sometimes relative to short-term debt, would have been a useful predictor of the
emerging market crises of the 1990s.198
After the emerging market crises of the 1990s, the traditional rule of thumb that
developing countries should hold enough reserves to equal at least three months of
imports was replaced by the “Guidotti rule.” This is the guideline that they should hold
enough reserves to cover all foreign debt that is short-term or maturing within one year.
most emerging market countries worked to increase their holdings of reserves strongly,
typically raising the Guidotti ratio of reserves to short term debt climbed from below one
to above one.199 The motive was precautionary: to self insure against the effects of future
crises or the need to return to the IMF. 200 (It would be hard to say which they feared
more.) Economists wondered whether the levels of reserves were excessive, since most
are held in the form of US Treasury bills which have a low rate of return.201 This was

195

Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1996b) for the “tequila effect” of the 1994 Mexican peso crisis; Obstfeld,
Shambaugh and Taylor (2009, 2010) or Rose and Spiegel (2009) for the 2008 global financial crisis.
196
Rose and Spiegel (2009) find that equity prices are the only robustly significant indicators that can
predict which countries got into trouble in 2008.
197
And not just because developing countries are less likely to float than are advanced countries. Frenkel
(1974) and Frenkel and Jovanovic (1981) .
198
Including Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1996b), Frankel and Rose (1996) and Kaminsky, Lizondo and
Reinhart (1998), among others.
199
Guidotti (2003).
200
Aizenman (2009), Aizenman and Lee (2007), Aizenman and Marion (2003) and Jeanne and Ranciere
(2009) conclude that reserves in emerging market countries generally can be explained by a precautionary
model, although reserves in a few Asian countries exceed that level.
201
Jeanne (2007) and Summers (2006). Rodrik (2006) argued that the countries would be better off using
some of the reserves to pay down short-term debt.

54

especially true of China.202 But in the global financial crisis of 2008, it appears that the
caution of most of the reserve holders was vindicated.203
Bank credit
Many studies find that rapid expansion of domestic bank credit is an early warning
indicator of crises. Loayza and Ranciere (2006) note the contradiction of this finding
with the literature that uses bank credit as a proxy for the extent of intermediation and
financial development; the reconciliation is the distinction between the short run and the
long run.
Composition of inflows
Some authors have found that the composition of capital inflows matters more than
the total, in seeking to predict the frequency and severity of crises.204
International bank lending, in particular, has been implicated in most crises, usually
because of the acute problem of moral hazard created by the prospect of government
bailouts. Foreign direct investment is a less risky source of capital inflow than loans.205
The same is true of equity flows.206
As noted in Part 2, borrowers with a currency mismatch – foreign currency
liabilities and domestic currency revenues -- suffer from an adverse balance sheet when
the currency is forced into devaluation.207 Analogously, borrowers with a maturity
mismatch – liabilities that are shorter-term than the domestic investment projects in
which the funds were invested – suffer when interest rates are forced upward. 208
Conditions that make a crisis painful when it happens do not automatically imply that
crises are more likely to happen.209 But the majority view is that poorly structured
balance sheets, suffering from currency mismatch or maturity mismatch, make crises
both more likely to occur, and more severe when they do occur. Indeed, as we have seen
in Part 7, many of the latter-day models of speculative attack are based precisely on the
balance sheet problem.

202

Many, such as Goldstein and Lardy (2009), believe China’s peg to the dollar is essentially mercantilist,
while McKinnon (2004) argues that it is appropriate. Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2003), argue
that China’s tremendous amassing of reserves is not precautionary, but rather part of a deliberate and
successful development strategy. This claim is consistent with the general finding of Rodrik (2008) that
currency undervaluation promotes growth.
203
Aizenman (2009) and Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2009, 2010) find that high reserve levels paid
off after all, in the global crisis of 2008, because those with high reserves were statistically less likely to get
into trouble. Rose and Spiegel (2009), however, do not find reserves to have been a useful predictor in
2008.
204
Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia.(2004) and Frankel and Rose (1996) find significant effects of composition
measures in probit regressions, but not for overall ratios of current account deficits or debt to GDP.
205
E.g., Lipsey (2001) and Frankel and Rose (1996).
206
Razin, Sadka, and Yuen (1998).
207
Baliño, Bennett, Borensztein (1999), Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2004), and Cespedes et al. (2003).
Calvo, et al. (2003) call it “domestic liability dollarization.”
208
E.g., Rodrik and Velasco (1999).
209
Some have argued that circumstances making crises more severe will also make them less likely to
happen because steps will be taken to avoid them. E.g., Dooley (2000b).

55

Measuring mismatch is more difficult than talking about it. One proxy for
currency mismatch is the ratio of foreign liabilities of the financial sector to money.210
An alternative proxy is a measure of deposit dollarization computed as “Dollar Deposits /
Total Deposits” in the financial system.211
The ratio of short-term debt to reserves has received attention, of which the
Guidotti threshold (1.0) is one case. Perhaps because the ratio efficiently combines two
important numbers, reserves and short-term debt, the ratio is emphasized in more studies
of early warning indicators than any other statistic.212

9. Summary of Conclusions
The macroeconomics of developing countries has become a field of its own.
Among the characteristics that distinguish most developing countries from the large
industrialized countries are: greater exposure to supply shocks in general and trade
volatility in particular (especially for the commodity exporters), procyclicalty of
international finance (contrary to orthodox theory), lower credibility with respect to both
price stability and default risk (due in part to a past history of financing deficits by
seignorage and default), procyclicality of fiscal policy (due in part to the imposition of
austerity in crises), and other imperfect institutions.
Some models of monetary policy originally designed for industrialized countries - dynamic inconsistency in monetary policy and the need for central bank independence
and commitment to nominal targets – apply even more strongly to developing countries,
in light of the credibility problem. But because most developing countries are pricetakers on world markets, the small open economy model, with nontraded goods, is more
often useful than the two-country two-good model. Contractionary effects of
devaluation are far more important for developing countries, particularly the balance
sheet effects that arise from currency mismatch.
The choice of exchange rate regime is no more clear-cut for emerging market
countries than it is for advanced countries. On the one hand, small size, openness and
less developed financial markets point relatively more to fixed exchange rates. On the
other hand, terms of trade volatility and the experience with speculative attacks point
toward more flexible exchange rates. Some began to float after the crises of the 1990s.
In place of the exchange rate as favored nominal target for monetary policy, the
conventional wisdom has anointed inflation targeting, with the CPI as the choice for price
index. This chapter has departed in one place from the mission of neutrally surveying
the literature: It argues that events associated with the global crisis of 2007-09 have
revealed limitations to this role for the CPI.

210

Alesina and Wagner (2003) and Guidotti et. al. (2003). The drawback, of course, is that the foreign
liabilities of the financial sector is not the same as foreign-currency liabilities of domestic residents.
Goldstein and Turner (2004).
211
Computed by Arteta (2005a, b).
212
Examples include Berg, Borensztein, Milesi-Ferreti, and Pattillo (1999), Frankel and Rose (1996),
Goldstein, Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000), Mulder, Perrelli and Rocha (2002), Rodrik and Velasco (1999,
2000), and Sachs (1998) among others.

56

Although the participation of emerging markets in global finance is a major
reason why they have by now earned their own large body of research, they remain
highly prone to problems of asymmetric information, illiquidity, default risk, moral
hazard and imperfect institutions. Many of the models designed to fit developing
countries were built around such financial market imperfections, and few thought this
inappropriate. Since the crisis of 2007-09 showed that the United States and other rich
countries have these problems too, to a much greater extent than previously understood,
perhaps some of the models that had been applied to emerging markets could now be of
service in thinking how to rebuild mainstream monetary macroeconomics.

57

References
Acar, Mustafa, 2000, “Devaluation in Developing Countires: Expansionary or Contractionary?” Journal of
Economic and Social Research 2(1), 59–83.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, and Yunyong Thaicharoen, 2003. "Institutional
Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth," Journal of Monetary Economics,.
50(1), 49–123.
Adler, Michael, and Jeong Song, 2009, “The Behavior of Emerging Market Sovereigns' Credit Default
Swap Premiums and Bond Yield Spreads,” International Journal of Finance & Economics 15(1), 31–58.
Agénor, Pierre-Richard, 1991, “Output, Devaluation and the Real Exchange Rate in Developing
Countries,” Review of World Economics (Springer: Berlin / Heidelberg).
Agénor, Pierre-Richard, and Peter Montiel, 1999, Development Macroeconomics, 2nd edition (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press).
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, and Abhijit Banerjee, 2000, “A Simple Model of Monetary Policy
and Currency Crises,” European Economic Review 44 (4-6), 728–738.
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, and Abhijit Banerjee, 2004, “Financial Development and the
Instability of Open Economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics 51(6), 1077–1106.
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, Romaine Ranciere, and Kenneth Rogoff , 2009, “Exchange Rate
Volatility and Productivity Growth: The Role of Financial Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
56(4), 494–513.
Agosin, M, and R. French-Davis, 1996, “Managing Capital Inflows in Latin America,” in M. ul Haq, I.
Kaul, and I. Grunberg, eds., The Tobin Tax: Coping with Financial Volatility (New York: Oxford
University Press).
Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath, 2006, “Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the Current Account,”
Journal of International Economics 69(1), 64–83.
Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath, 2007, “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the Trend”
Journal of Political Economy 115(1), .
Ahmed, Shaghil; Christopher Gust; Steven Kamin; Jonathan Huntley, 2002, “Are Depreciations as
Contractionary as Devaluations? A Comparison of Selected Emerging and Industrial Economies,”
International Finance Discussion Papers No. 2002–737 (September ) .
Aizenman, Joshua, 2008, “On the Hidden Links Between Financial and Trade Openness,” Journal of
International Money and Finance, Elsevier, 27(3), 372–386. NBER Working Paper No. 9906, 2003.
Aizenman, Joshua, 2009, “On the Paradox of Prudential Regulations in the Globalized Economy:
International Reserves and the Crisis–A Reassessment,” NBER Working Paper No. 14779, March.
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie Chinn, and Hiro Ito “Assessing the Emerging Global Financial Architecture:
Measuring the Trilemma’s Configurations over Time,” NBER Working Paper No. 14533, December 2008.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Yothin Jinjarak, 2009, “Current Account Patterns and National Real Estate
Markets,” Journal of Urban Economics 66(2), 75–89. NBER WP No. 13921, April 2008.

58

Aizenman, Joshua, and Jaewoo Lee, 2007, “International Reserves: Precautionary Versus Mercantilist
Views, Theory and Evidence,” Open Economies Review 18(2), 191–214.
Aizenman, Joshua and Nancy Marion , 2003, “The High Demand for International Reserves in the Far East:
What is going on?” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 17, 370–400.
Alesina, Alberto, and Robert Barro, 2001, “Dollarization,” American Economic Review, 91(2), 381–385.
Alesina, Alberto, Filipe Campante and Guido Tabellini, 2008, “Why Is Fiscal Policy Often Procyclical?”
Journal of the European Economic Association 6(5), 1006–1036.
Alesina, Alberto, Ricardo Hausmann, Rudolf Hommes and Ernesto Stein, 1999, “Budget Institutions and
Fiscal Performance in Latin America,” Journal of Development Economics 59(2), 253–273.
Alesina, Alberto, and Alexander Wagner, 2006, “Choosing (and Reneging on) Exchange Rate Regimes”,
Journal of the European Economic Association 4(4), 770–799. NBER Working Paper No. 9809, 2003.
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Vadym Volosovych, 2008, “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from
Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90. NBER WP
No. 11901, 2005.
Amato, Jeffery, and Stefan Gerlach, 2002, “Inflation Targeting in Emerging Market and Transition
Economies: Lessons After a Decade,” European Economic Review, 46(4-5), 781–790.
Arellano, Cristina and Enrique Mendoza, 2003, “Credit Frictions and ‘Sudden Stops’ in Small Open
Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for Emerging Markets Crises,” in Sumru Altuğ,
Jagjit Chadha, and Charles Nolan, eds., Dynamic Macroeconomic Analysis: Theory and Policy in General
Equilibrium (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press). NBER Working Paper No. 8880, 2002.
Arnone, Marco, Bernard Laurens and Jean-François Segalotto, 2006, “Measures of Central Bank
Autonomy: Empirical Evidence for OECD, Developing, and Emerging Market Economies,” IMF Working
Paper No. 06/228 .
Arora, Vivek, and Martin Cerisola, 2001, “How Does U.S. Monetary Policy Influence Sovereign Spreads
in Emerging Markets?” IMF Staff Papers 48(3), 474–498.
Arteta, Carlos, 2005a, "Exchange Rate Regimes and Financial Dollarization: Does Flexibility Reduce Bank
Currency Mismatches?" Berkeley Electronic Journals in Macroeconomics, Topics in Macroeconomics
5(1), Article 10.
Arteta, Carlos, 2005b, “Are Financially Dollarized Countries More Prone To Costly Crises?” Monetaria,
28 (Spring), 105–160.
Arteta, Carlos, 2005c, “Exchange Rate Regimes and Financial Dollarization: Does Flexibility Reduce
Currency Mismatches,” Topics in Macroeconomics 5(1), Article 10.
Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen and Charles Wyplosz, 2003, “When Does Capital Account
Liberalization Help More than it Hurts?” in Elhanan Helpman and Efraim Sadka, eds., Economic Policy in
the International Economy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 177–206. NBER Working Paper No.
8414.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick Kehoe, 2001, “The Advantage of Transparent Instruments of Monetary
Policy,” Staff Report 297, Federal Reserve Bank of Minnesota. NBER Working Paper No. 8681.

59

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2000, “Liberalization, Overshooting, and Volatility,” in
Sebastian Edwards, ed., Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies: Theory, Evidence, and
Controversies, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Bae, Kee-Hong, G. Andrew Karolyi, and Rene Stulz, 2003, “A New Approach to Measuring Financial
Contagion,” Review of Financial Studies 16, 717–763. NBER Working Paper No. 7913, 2000.
Bahmani-Oskooee, M., and I. Miteza, 2006, "Are Devaluations Contractionary? Evidence from Panel
Cointegration," Economic Issues 10, 49–64.
Bahmani-Oskooee, M, S.Hegerty and A.Kutan, 2008, "Do Nominal Devaluations Lead to Real Devaluations? Evidence from 89 Countries" International Review of Economics and Finance 17, 644–70.
Bahmani-Oskooee, M. and O. Kara, 2005, “Income and Price Elasticities of Trade: Some New Estimates,”
The International Trade Journal 19, 165–178.
Baig, Taimur, and Ilan Goldfajn, 1999, “Financial Market Contagion in the Asian Crisis,” IMF Staff Papers
46(2), .
Bailliu, Jeannine, Robert Lafrance and Jean-Francois Perrault, 2003. "Does Exchange Rate Policy Matter
for Growth?" International Finance 6(3), 381–414.
Balassa, Bella, 1964, "The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal," Journal Political Economy 72,
584–596.
Baliño, Tomás, Adam Bennett, Eduardo Borensztein, 1999, Monetary Policy in Dollarized Economies,
Occasional Paper 171 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund).
Bansal, Ravi, and Magnus Dahlquist, 2000, “The Forward Premium Puzzle: Different Tales from
Developed and Emerging Economies,” Journal of International Economics 51, 115–144.
Barbone, Luca, and Francisco Rivera-Batiz, 1987, “Foreign capital and the contractionary impact of
currency devaluation, with an application to Jamaica,” Journal of Development Economics 26(1), 1–15.
Barro, Robert, 2002, “Economic Growth in East Asia Before and After the Financial Crisis,” in edited by
David Coe and Se-Jik Kim, eds., Korean Crisis and Recovery (Washington DC: International Monetary
Fund), 333–351. NBER Working Paper No. 8330, 2001.
Barro, Robert, and David Gordon, 1983, “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model,”
Journal of Political Economy 91(4), 589–610.
Bartolini, Leonardo, and Alan Drazen, 1997, “Capital Account Liberalization as a Signal,” American
Economic Review 87, 138–54.
Batini, Nicoletta, and Douglas Laxton, 2006, “Under What Conditions can Inflation Targeting be Adopted?
The Experience of Emerging Markets,” Central Bank of Chile Working Papers No. 406, December.
Bayoumi, Tamim, and Barry Eichengreen, 1994, “One Money or Many? Analyzing the Prospects for
Monetary Unification in Various Parts of the World,” Studies in International Finance 76. Princeton
University Press.
Bayoumi, Tamim, and Barry Eichengreen, 1999, “Is Asia an Optimum Currency Area? Can it Become
One?” In Exchange Rate Policies in Emerging Asian Countries, edited by Stefan Collignon, Jean PisaniFerry, and Yung Chul Park. 347–366 (London: Routledge).

60

Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell Harvey, 1997, “Emerging Equity Market Volatility,” Journal of Financial
Economics 43(1), 29–77.
Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell Harvey, 2002, “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets,” The
Journal of Finance 55(2), 565–613.
Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell Harvey, 2003, “Emerging Markets Finance,” Journal of Empirical Finance
10(1-2), 3–56.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad ,2005, “Does Financial Liberalization Spur
Growth?” Journal of Financial Economics 77(1), 3–55.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2009, “Financial Openness and Productivity,”
NBER Working Paper No. 14843, April.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Angela Ng, 2005, “Market Integration and Contagion,” The Journal
of Business 78(1), 39–69.
Benassy-Quere, Agnes. 1999. “Exchange Rate Regimes and Policies: An Empirical Analysis.” In Stefan
Collignon, Jean Pisani-Ferry, and Yung Chul Park, eds., Exchange Rate Policies in Emerging Asian
Countries. (London: Routledge).
Berg, Andrew, Eduardo Borensztein, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferreti, and Catherine Pattillo. 1999. “Anticipating
Balance of Payments Crises: The Role of Early Warning Systems.” Occasional Paper 186 (Washington,
D.C.: International Monetary Fund).
Bergin, Peter, Reuven Glick, and Alan Taylor, 2006, “Productivity, Tradability, and the Long-Run Price
Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53(8), 2041–2066.
Bernanke, Ben, Thomas Laubach, Frederic Mishkin, and Adam Posen, 1999, Inflation Targeting: Lessons
from the International Experience (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Berg, Andrew, and Catherine Pattillo, 1999a, “Are Currency Crises Predictable? A Test.” IMF Staff Papers
46(2), 107-138.
Berg, Andrew, and Catherine Pattillo, 1999b, “Predicting Currency Crises: The Indicators Approach and
An Alternative,” Journal of International Money and Finance 18, 561–586.
Bienen, Henry, and Mark Gersovitz, 1985, “Economic Stabilization, Conditionality, and Political
Stability,” International Organization 39(4), 728–754.
Bird, Graham and Dane Rowlands, 1997, “The Catalytic Effects of Lending by the International Financial
Institutions,” World Economy, 967–991.
Biscarri, Javier Gomez, Sebastian Edwards, and Fernando Perez de Gracia, 2003, “Stock Market Cycles,
Liberalization, and Volatility,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 22(7), 925–955. NBER WP
9817, 2003.
Blanchard, Olivier, 1983, “Debt and the Current Account Deficit in Brazil,” in Pedro Aspe Armella,
Rudiger Dornbusch, and Maurice Obstfeld, eds. Financial Policies and the World Capital Market: The
Problem of Latin American Countries (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Blanchard, Olivier, 2005, “Fiscal Dominance and Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Brazil,” in Francesco
Giavazzi, Ilan Goldfajn, and Santiago Herrera, eds., Inflation Targeting, Debt, and the Brazilian
Experience, 1999 to 2003 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press). MIT Dept.Ec. WP No. 04-13.

61

Bordo, Michael, and Anna Schwartz, 2000, “Measuring Real Economic Effects of Bailouts: Historical
Perspectives on How Countries in Financial Distress Have Fared With and Without Bailouts,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy 53(1), 81–167. NBER Working Paper No. 7701.
Borensztein, Eduardo, RG Gelos, 2003, “A Panic-Prone Pack? The Behavior of Emerging Market Mutual
Funds,” IMF Staff Papers 50(1), 43–63.
Borensztein, Eduardo, Jeromin Zettelmeyer, and Thomas Philippon, 2001, “Monetary Independence in
Emerging Markets: Does the Exchange Rate Regime Make a Difference?” IMF Working Paper No. 01/1,
January. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=272255
Boughton, James , 2003, “Who's in Charge? Ownership and Conditionality in IMF-Supported Programs.”
in Stephen Kosack, Gustav Ranis, and James Vreeland, eds., Globalisation and the Nation State: The
Impact of the IMF and the World Bank (London: Routledge). IMF Working Paper No. 03/191.
Brender, Adi, and Alan Drazen, 2005, “Political Budget Cycles in New Versus Established Democracies,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 52(7), 1271-1295.
Broda, Christian, 2004, "Terms of Trade and Exchange Rate Regimes in Developing Countries." Journal
of International Economics 63(1), 31–58.
Brunnermeier, Markus, Stefan Nagel, Lasse Pedersen, 2009, “Carry Trades and Currency Crashes,” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2008, 23, 313–347. NBER WP no. 14473.
Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly, 1998, “Inflation Crises and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 41(1), 3-26.
Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1989, "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt," Journal
of Political Economy, 97(February), 155–178.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2001a, “Hedging and Financial Fragility in Fixed
Exchange Rate Regimes,” European Economic Review 45, 1151–93.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2001b, “Prospective Deficits and the Asian
Currency Crisis,” Journal of Political Economy 109(6). 1155-1197.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2004, “Government Guarantees and SelfFulfilling Speculative Attacks,” Journal of Economic Theory 119, 31–63.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2005, “Why Are Rates of Inflation So Low After
Large Devaluations?” Journal of Political Economy 113(4),742–784. NBER Working Paper No. 8748,
2002.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2006, “Government Finance in the Wake of a
Currency Crisis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53(3), 401–440. NBER WP No. 9786, June 2003.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2007, “The Returns to Currency Speculation in
Emerging Markets,” American Economic Review 97(2), 333–8.
Burstein, Ariel, João Neves, and Sergio Rebelo, 2003, “Distribution Costs and Real Exchange Rate
Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(6), 1189–
1214.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2001, “International and domestic collateral constraints in
a model of emerging market crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(3), 513–548.

62

Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2000, “Emerging Market Crises: An Asset Markets
Perspective,” February 2000 MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 98-18REV .
Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2003, “Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial Development and
Underinsurance,” Journal of Finance 58(2), 867–893.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2005. "Exchange Rate Volatility and the Credit Channel in
Emerging Markets: A Vertical Perspective," International Journal of Central Banking 1(1), May.
Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2006, "Bubbles And Capital Flow Volatility: Causes And
Risk Management," Journal of Monetary Economics 53(1), 35–53.
Calomiris, Charles, 1998, “The IMF’s Imprudent Role as Lender of Last Resort,” Cato Journal, 17, 275–
295.
Calvo, Guillermo, 1988, “Servicing the public debt: the role of expectations,” American Economic Review
78(4), 647–61.
Calvo, Guillermo, 1991, "The Perils of Sterilization," IMF Staff Papers 38(4), 921–926.
Calvo, Guillermo, 1998, “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden
Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics (CEMA), 1(1), 35–54.
Calvo, Guillermo, 2002, “On Dollarization,” The Economics of Transition, 10(2), 393–403.
Calvo, Guillermo, 2003, “Explaining Sudden Stops, Growth Collapse, and BoP Crises: The Case of
Distortionary Output Taxes,” IMF Mundell-Fleming Lecture, IMF Staff Papers. Also in G. Calvo
Emerging Capital Markets in Turmoil: Bad Luck or Bad Policy? (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press) 2005.
NBER Working Paper No. 9864.
Calvo Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo and Rudy Loo-Kung, 2006, “Relative Price Volatility Under Sudden
Stops: The Relevance of Balance Sheet Effects.” Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, 69(1), 231–
254, June.
Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo and Luis Fernando Mejía, 2004, “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops:
The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects,” Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. NBER
Working Paper No. 10520, 2003.
Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2003, “Sudden Stops, The Real Exchange Rate,
and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons,” in V.Alexander, J. Mélitz, and G. von Furstenberg, eds.,
Monetary Unions and Hard Pegs (Oxford UK: Oxford University Press). Also in G. Calvo, Emerging
Capital Markets in Turmoil: Bad Luck or Bad Policy? (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press) 2005. NBER Working
Paper 9828.
Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi , 2006, “Phoenix Miracles in Emerging Markets:
Recovering without Credit from Systemic Financial Crises,” American Economic Review 96(2), 405–410.
NBER WP 12101, 2006.
Calvo, Guillermo, Leo Leiderman and Carmen Reinhart, 1993, "Capital Inflows and Real Exchange Rate
Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors," IMF Staff Papers 40(1), 108–150.
Calvo, Guillermo, Leo Leiderman and Carmen Reinhart, 1994a, "The Capital Inflows Problem: Concepts and
Issues," Contemporary Economic Policy XII(July), 54–66.

63

Calvo, Guillermo, Leo Leiderman and Carmen Reinhart, 1994b, "Capital Inflows to Latin America: The 1970s
and the 1990s," in Edmar Bacha, ed., Development, Trade and the Environment (London: MacMillan Press).
Calvo, Guillermo, Leo Leiderman and Carmen Reinhart, 1995, "Inflows of Capital to Developing
Countries in the 1990s: Causes and Effects," Journal of Economic Perspectives. 10(2), 123–139.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Enrique Mendoza, 1996, “Mexico's Balance-Of-Payments Crisis: A Chronicle of a
Death Foretold,” Journal of International Economics 41(3-4), 235–264
Calvo, Guillermo and Enrique Mendoza, 2000, “Rational contagion and the globalization of securities
markets,” Journal of International Economics, 51(1), .
Calvo, Guillermo and Frederic Mishkin, 2003, “The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging
Market Countries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(4), 99–118., Also in G. Calvo Emerging Capital
Markets in Turmoil: Bad Luck or Bad Policy? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 2005.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen Reinhart, 2001, “When Capital Inflows Come to a Sudden Stop:
Consequences and Policy Options,” in Key Issues in Reform of the International Monetary System
(Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund), edited by Peter Kenen and Alexander Swoboda .
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen Reinhart, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
117(2), 379–408.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen Reinhart, 2000, “Fixing for Your Life,” in Brookings Trade Forum
(Brookings Institution Press: Washington DC)
Calvo, Guillermo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2004, “Sudden Stop, Financial Factors and Economic Collapse: A
View from the Latin American Frontlines,” in From the Washington Consensus Towards a New Global
Governance, Barcelona, Sept. 24–26.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carlos Vegh, 1994, "Inflation Stabilization and Nominal Anchors," Contemporary
Economic Policy, XII(April), 35–45.
Cardenas, Mauricio, and Felipe Barrera, 1997, “On the Effectiveness of Capital Controls: The Experience
of Colombia During the 1990s,” Journal of Development Economics 54(1), 27–57.
Cavallo, Eduardo, and Jeffrey Frankel. 2008. “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More Vulnerable
to Sudden Stops, or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality,” Journal of International Money and
Finance 27(8), 1430–1452.
Cavallo, Michelle, Kate Kisselev, Fabrizio Perri and Nouriel Roubini, 2004 “Exchange Rate Overshooting
and the Costs of Floating,” Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Céspedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang and Andrés Velasco, 2003, “IS-LM-BP in the Pampas,” IMF Staff
Papers 50(special issue), 143–156.
Céspedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang and Andrés Velasco, 2004, “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate
Policy,” The American Economic Review, 94(4), 1183–1193.
Chamon, Marcos, and Ricardo Hausmann, 2005, “Why Do Countries Borrow the Way they Borrow?,” in
Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann, eds., Other People's Money: Debt Denomination and Financial
Instability in Emerging Market Economies (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Chang, Roberto, and Andrés Velasco, 1997, “Financial Fragility and the Exchange Rate Regime,” Journal
of Economic Theory 92(1), 1–34. NBER W Paper No. 6469.

64

Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco, 1999, “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets,” FRBA, 84(2), 4–17.
NBER Working Paper No. 6606.
Chang, Roberto, and Andres Velasco, 1999, “Liquidity Crises in Emerging Markets: Theory and Policy,”
NBER Macro Annual 1999.
Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco, 2001 , “A Model of Financial Crises in Emerging Markets” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May, 116(2), 489–517
Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco, 2000, “Exchange-Rate Policy for Developing Countries,” American
Economic Review 90(2), 71–75.
Chari, Anusha, and Peter Henry , 2004, "Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence From a Natural
Experiment," Journal of Finance, 59(3). NBER WP No. 8988, 2002.
Chari, Anusha, and Peter Henry, 2008, “Firm Specific Information and the Efficiency of Investment."
Journal of Financial Economics, 87(3), 636–655.
Chinn, Menzie, Michael Dooley, Sona Shrestha, 1999, “Latin America and East Asia in the Context of an
Insurance Model of Currency Crises,” Journal of International Money and Finance 18(4), 659–681. NBER
Working Paper No. 709l.
Chinn, Menzie, and Jeffrey Frankel, 1993, "Exchange Rate Expectations and the Risk Premium: Tests for a
Cross-Section of 17 Currencies," Review of International Economics 1(2), 136–144.
Chinn, Menzie, and Hiro Ito, 2005, “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics. NBER WP 8967.
Chinn, Menzie, and Kenneth Kletzer, 2001, “International Capital Inflows, Domestic Financial
Intermediation, and Financial Crises under Imperfect Information,” in R. Glick, ed., Emerging Markets
Crises, New York: Cambridge University Press. NBER Working Paper No. 7902, 2000.
Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho and René Stulz, 1999, “Do Foreign Investors Destabilize Stock Markets?
The Korean Experience in 1997,” Journal of Financial Economics 54(2), 227–264 .
Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho and René Stulz, 2005, “Do Domestic Investors Have an Edge? The Trading
Experience of Foreign Investors in Korea,” Review of Financial Studies 18(3),795–829.
Chou , Win Lin, and Chi-Chur Chao, 2001, “Are Currency Devaluations Effective? A Panel Unit Root
Test,” Economics Letters 72(1), 19–25.
Choudhri, Ehsan, and Dalia Hakura, 2006, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Domestic Prices: Does the
Inflationary Environment Matter?” Journal of International Money and Finance 25(June), 614–639. IMF
Working Paper WP/01/194 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund).
Choudhri, Ehsan, and Mohsin Khan, 2005, “Real Exchange Rates in Developing Countries: Are BalassaSamuelson Effects Present?” International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 52(December), 387–409.
Christiano, Lawrence, Christopher Gust and Jorge Roldos, 2004, “Monetary Policy in a Financial Crisis,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 119(1), 64–103.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov and Larry H. P. Lang, 2000, “The Separation of Ownership and Control
in East Asian Corporations,” Journal of Financial Economics 58(1-2), 81–112 .

65

Claessens, Stijn, Daniela Klingebiel, and Luc Laeven, 2003, “Financial Restructuring in Banking and
Corporate Sector Crises: What Policies to Pursue?” In M. Dooley and J.Frankel, eds., Managing Currency
Crises in Emerging Markets (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). NBER WP No. 8386, 2001.
Claessens, Stijn, and Moon-Whoa Rhee, 1994, "The Effect of Equity Barriers on Foreign Investment in
Developing Countries," in J. Frankel, ed., The Internationalization of Equity Markets (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press).
Clarke, George, and Scott Wallstein, 2004, “Do Remittances Protect Households in Developing Countries
against Shocks? Evidence from a Natural Disaster in Jamaica,” World Bank.
Cline, William, 1984, International Debt: Systemic Risk and Policy Response, Institute for International
Economics, Washington DC.
Cline, William, 1995, International Debt Reexamined (Washington DC: Institute for International
Economics).
Collins, Susan, 1996, “On Becoming More Flexible: Exchange Rate Regimes in Latin America and the
Caribbean,” Journal of Development Economics, 51(1), 117–138.
Connolly, Michael, 1983, “Exchange Rates, Real Economic Activity, and the Balance of Payments:
Evidence from the 1960s,” in E. Claaasen and P. Salin, eds., Recent Issues in the Theory of Flexible
Exchange Rates (Amsterdam: North Holland).
Conway, Patrick, 1994, “IMF Lending Programs: Participation and Impact,” Journal of Development
Economics 45(December), 365–391.
Cook, David, 2004, “Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets: Can Liability Dollarization Explain
Contractionary Devaluations?” Journal of Monetary Economics 51(6), 1155–1181.
Cooper, Richard, 1971, “Currency Devaluation in Developing Countries,” Essays in International Finance
No. 86, (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University).
Corbo, Vittorio, 1985, “Reforms and Macroeconomic Adjustments in Chile during 1974–1984,” World
Development, 13(8), 893–916.
Corden, W. Max, 1984, “Booming Sector and Dutch Disease Economics: Survey and Consolidation,”
Oxford Economic Papers 36(3),359-380
Corden, W. Max, 1994, “A Model of Balance of Payments Policy,” Chapter 2 in Economic Policy,
Exchange Rates and the International Monetary System (Oxford University Press).
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Marcello Pericoli and Massimo Sbracia, 2005, “’Some Contagion, Some
Interdependence’: More Pitfalls in Tests of Financial Contagion,” Journal of International Money and
Finance 24(8), 1177–1199.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti and Nouriel Roubini, 1999a, “What Caused the Asian Currency and
Financial Crisis? Part I: A Macroeconomic Overview,” Japan and the World Economy, 11(3), 305–373.
NBER Working Paper No. 6833.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti and Nouriel Roubini , 1999b, “Paper Tigers? A Model of the Asian
Crisis,” European Economic Review 43(7), 1211–1236
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti and Nouriel Roubini, 2002, “The Role of Large Players in Currency
Crises,” in Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel, eds. Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets,
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press). NBER Working Paper No. 8303, 2001.

66

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Anil Dasgupta, Stephen Morris, Hyun Song Shin, 2004, “Does One Soros Make a
Difference? A Theory of Currency Crises with Large and Small Traders,” Review of Economic Studies
71(1), 87–113.
Council on Foreign Relations. 1999. Safeguarding Prosperity in a Global Financial System: The Future
International Financial Architecture (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics).
Crowe, Christopher, and Ellen Meade, 2008, “Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution
and Effectiveness,” European Journal of Political Economy, 24(4), 763–777.
Cukierman, Alex, Sebastian Edwards, Guido Tabellini , 1992 “Seigniorage and Political Instability,”
American Economic Review 82(3), 537–555.
Cukierman, Alex, Geoffrey Miller and Bilin Neyapti 2002 “Central Bank Reform, Liberalization and
Inflation in Transition Economies: An International Perspective,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49(2),
237–264.
Cukierman, Alex, Steven Webb, and Bilin Neyapti, 1992, “Measuring the Independence of Central Banks
and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes.” World Bank Economic Review 6(3), 353–398.
Cumby, Robert, and Maurice Obstfeld,1983, "Capital Mobility and the Scope for Sterilization."in Pedro
Aspe Armella, Rudiger Dornbusch, Maurice Obstfeld, eds. Financial Policies and the World Capital
Market: The Problem of Latin American Countries (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Dages, Gerard, Linda Goldberg, and Daniel Kinney, 2000, “Foreign and Domestic Bank Participation in
Emerging Markets: Lessons from Mexico and Argentina,” FRBNY Economic Policy Review (September),
17–36.
Davis, Jeffrey, Rolando Ossowski, James Daniel, and Steven Barnett, 2001, “Stabilization and Savings
Funds for Nonrenewable Resources: Experience and Fiscal Policy Implications,” Occasional Paper 205
(Washington DC: International Monetary Fund).
Debelle, Guy. 2001, “The Case for Inflation Targeting in East Asian Countries,” in David Gruen and John
Simon, eds., Future Directions for Monetary Policies in East Asia (Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia).
De Gregorio, José, 2009, “Inflation targeting and financial crises,” Speech by Governor of the Central Bank
of Chile, Seminar on Financial Crises, organized by Banco de la República de Colombia and the Fondo de
Garantías de Instituciones Financieras de Colombia, Bogota, 28 May.
De Gregorio, José, 2009b, “Implementation of Inflation Targets in Emerging Markets,” in G. Hammond, R.
Kanbur, and E.Prasad, eds., Monetary Policy Frameworks for Emerging Markets (Cheltenham, UK: Eward
Elgar Publishing).
De Gregorio, José, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo Valdes, 2000, “Controls on Capital Inflows: Do They
Work?” Journal of Development Economics 63(1), 59–83. NBER Working Paper No. 7645.
De Gregorio, José, Alberto Giovannini, and Holger Wolf, 1994, "International Evidence on Tradables and
Nontradables Inflation," European Economic Review, 38(6), 1225–44.
De Santis, Giorgio, and Selahattin Imrohoroğlu, 1997, “Stock returns and Volatility in Emerging Financial
Markets,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 16(4), 561–579.
De Long, Brad, and Barry Eichengreen, 2002, “Between Meltdown and Moral Hazard: “The International
Monetary and Financial Policies of the Clinton Administration,” in Jeffrey Frankel and Peter Orszag, eds.,
American Economic Policy in the 1990s (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

67

Desai, Padma, 2003, Financial Crisis, Contagion, and Containment: From Asia to Argentina (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press).
Devereux, Michael, Philip Lane, and Philip Xu, Juanyi, 2006, “Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy in
Emerging Market Economies,” Economic Journal 116(511), 478–506..
Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig, 1983, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity,” Journal of
Political Economy, 91(June), 401–419.
Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan, 2001, “Banks, Short-Term Debt, and Financial Crises: Theory,
Policy Implications, and Applications,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 54(1), 37–
71. NBER Working Paper No. 7764, 2000.
Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos, 1963, “A Note on the Impact of Devaluation and the Redistribution Effect,”
Journal of Political Economy, 71(6), 577–580.
Diaz Alejandro, Carlos, 1984, “Latin American Debt: I Don't Think We are in Kansas Anymore,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1984(2), 335–403.
Diaz Alejandro, Carlos, 1985, “Goodbye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash…” Journal of
Development Economics, 19(1/2), 1–24.
Dicks-Mireaux, L., M. Mecagni, and S. Schadler, 2000, “Evaluating the Effect of IMF Lending to LowIncome Countries,” Journal of Development Economics 61, 495–526.
Dominguez, Kathryn, 2009, “International Reserves and Underdeveloped Capital Markets,” in Ken West
and Lucrezia Reichlin, eds., NBER International Seminar in Macroeconomics 2009, (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press).
Dooley, Michael, 1996 , “A Survey of Literature on Controls over International Capital Transactions, IMF
Staff Papers 43(4), 639–687.
Dooley, Michael, 2000a, “A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets,” Economic Journal 110(January), 256–
272.
Dooley, Michael, 2000b, "International Financial Architecture And Strategic Default: Can Financial Crises
Be Less Painful?," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 53(1), 361–377.
Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter Garber, 2004, “An Essay on the Revived Bretton
Woods System,” International Journal of Finance and Economics, 9(4), 307–313. NBER WP 2003.
Dooley, Michael, Jeffrey Frankel and Donald Mathieson, 1987, “International Capital Mobility: What Do
Saving-Investment Correlations Tell Us?,” IMF Staff Papers 34(3), 503-530.
Dooley, Michael, and Lars Svensson, 1994, “Policy Inconsistency and External Debt Service,” Journal of
International Money and Finance, 13(3), 364–374.
Dooley, Michael, and Sujata Verma, 2003,“Rescue Packages and Output Losses Following Crises,”in
M.Dooley and J.Frankel, eds., Managing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press). NBER Working Paper No. 8315, 2001.
Dornbusch Rudiger, 1973, "Devaluation, Money and Nontraded Goods," American Economic Review.
63(5), 871-880.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1980, Open Economy Macroeconomics (New York: Basic Books).

68

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1983, “Real Interest Rates, Home Goods, and Optimal External Borrowing,” Journal
of Political Economy, 91(1), 141–153
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1991 “Credibility and Stabilization,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(3),837–
850.
Dornbusch Rudiger, 2002, “A Primer on Emerging Market Crises,” in M. Dooley and J.Frankel, eds.,
Managing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Managing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets
(Chicago:University of Chicago Press).
Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Sebastian Edwards, 1991, The Macroeconomics of Populism in Latin America,
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer, 1986, “Stopping Hyperinflations Past and Present,” Review of
World Economics 122(1), 1–47.
Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer, 1993, “Moderate Inflation,” World Bank Economic Review, 7(1),
1–44.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn and Rodrigo Valdes, 1995, “Currency Crises and Collapses,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 219–293.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Frederico Sturzenegger and Holger Wolf, 1977, “Extreme Inflation: Dynamics And
Stabilization,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Alejandro Werner, 1994, “Mexico: Stabilization, Reform, and No Growth,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Draghi, Mario, Franceso. Giavazzi, and Robert C. Merton, 2003, “Transparency, Risk Management, and
International Financial Fragility,” Geneva Reports on the World Economy (Geneva; and CEPR, London:
International Center for Banking and Monetary Studies). NBER Working Paper No. 9806.
Drazen, Alan, 2001, “The Political Business Cycle After 25 years,” in Ben Bernanke and Ken Rogoff, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Easterly, W., R.Islam and J. Stiglitz, 2001, “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining Growth Volatility,” in B.
Plesokovic and N. Stern, ed., Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics (Washington,
DC: The World Bank)
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, 2002, “Tropics, Germs, and Endowments,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy. NBER Working Paper No. 9106.
Easterly, William, Paolo Mauro, Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, 1995, “Money-Demand and SeigniorageMaximizing Inflation,” Journal of Money, Credit & Banking, 27(May), 583–603.
Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, 1981, “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical
Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies 48(2), 289–309.
Edison, Hali, Ross Levine, Michael Klein, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sloek, 2002, “International Financial
Integration and Economic Growth,” Journal of International Money and Finance 21(6), 749–776.
Edison, Hali, Michael Klein, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sloek, 2004, “Capital Account Liberalization and
Economic Performance: Survey and Synthesis,” IMF Staff Papers 51. NBER WP No. 9100.
Edison, Hali, Pongsak Luangaram, and Marcus Miller, 2000, “Asset Bubbles, Leverage, and

69

‘Lifeboats’: Elements of the East Asian Crisis.” Economic Journal 110(January), 3209–34.
Edison, Hali, and Carmen Reinhart, 2001,“Stopping Hot Money,” Journal of Development Economics
66(2), 533–553.
Edison, Hali, and Francis Warnock, 2003, “A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital Controls,”
Journal of Empirical Finance, 10(1-2), 81–103.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1984, “The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in Developing Countries,”
Essays in International Finance 156 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press)
Edwards, Sebastian, 1986, “Are Devaluations Contractionary?” Review of Economics and Statistics 68(3),
501–508.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1989, Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation, and Adjustment: Exchange Rate Policy in
Developing Countries (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Edwards, Sebastian, 1994, "The Political Economy of Inflation and Stabilization in Developing Countries,"
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 42(2), 235–66.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1999, “How Effective are Capital conTrols?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(4),
65–84.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2003, “Exchange Rate Regimes, Capital Flows, and Crisis Prevention,” in Martin
Feldstein, ed., Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Edwards, Sebastian, 2001, “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies
Different?” in Horst Siebert, ed., The World's New Financial Landscape: Challenges for Economic Policy
(Heidelberg and New York: Springer). NBER WP 8076.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2004a, “Financial Openness, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals,” American
Economic Review 94(2), 59–64.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2004b, “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account Reversals and
Sudden Stops,” IMF Staff Papers. January.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2007, Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies,
Practices and Consequences, editor (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Edwards, Sebastian, “Sequencing of Reforms Financial Globalization, and Macroeconomic Vulnerability,”
NBER Working Paper No. 14384, October 2008.
Edwards, Sebastian, and Eduardo Levy Yeyati, 2005, “Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock Absorbers,”
European Economic Review, 49(8), 2079–2105 . NBER Working Paper No. 9867, July 2003.
Edwards, Sebastian, and Julio Santaella, 1993, “Devaluation Controversies in the Developing Countries:
Lessons from the Bretton Woods Era,” in Michael Bordo and Barry Eichengreen, eds., Retrospective on the
Bretton Woods System (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Edwards, Sebastian, and Miguel Savastano, 2000, “Exchange Rates in Emerging Economies: What Do We
Know? What Do We Need to Know?” in Anne Krueger, ed., Economic Policy Reform: The Second Stage
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press). NBER Working Paper No. 7228.

70

Eichengreen, Barry. 1994, International Monetary Arrangements for the 21st Century (Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution).
Eichengreen, Barry, 1999, Toward a New Financial Architecture: A Practical Post-Asia Agenda
(Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics).
Eichengreen, Barry, 2005, “Can Emerging Markets Float? Should they Inflation Target?” in Peter Sinclair,
Rebecca Driver, and C. Thoenissen, eds., Exchange Rates, Capital Flows, and Policy (London: Routledge).
Eichengreen, Barry, and Ricardo Hausmann, 1999, “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,” in New
Challenges for Monetary Policy (Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City).
Eichengreen, Barry, and David Leblang, 2003, “Capital Account Liberalization and Growth: Was Mr.
Mahatir Right?” International Journal of Finance and Economics 8(3), 205–224. NBER Working Paper
No. 9427.
Eichengreen , Barry, and Ashoka Mody, 2000a, “Lending Booms, Reserves and the Sustainability of ShortTerm Debt: Inferences from the Pricing of Syndicated Bank Loans,” Journal of Development Economics,
63(1), 5–44.
Eichengreen , Barry, and Ashoka Mody, 2001, “What Explains Changing Spreads on Emerging Market
Debt?,” in Sebastian Edwards, ed., Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies: Theory, Evidence, and
Controversies," (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody, 2004, “Would Collective Action Clauses Raise Borrowing Costs?
An Update and Additional Results,” Economic Journal 114(April), 495–. Policy Research Working Paper
no. 2363, Washington, DC: The World Bank (2000).
Eichengreen, Barry and Richard Portes, 1995, Crisis? What Crisis? Orderly Workouts for Sovereign
Debtors (London: Centre for Economic Policy Research).
Eichengreen, Barry, and Andrew Rose, 2000, "Staying Afloat When the Wind Shifts: External Factors and
Emerging-Market Banking Crises," in Guillermo Calvo, Rudiger Dornbusch and Maurice Obstfeld, eds.,
Money, Factor Mobility and Trade: Essays in Honor of Robert Mundell (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Eichengreen, Barry, and Andrew Rose, 2003, “Does it Pay to Defend against a Speculative Attack?” in J.
Frankel and M. Dooley, eds., Managing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Eichengreen, Barry, Andy Rose and Charles Wyplosz, "Contagious Currency Crises." Scandinavian
Journal of Economics 98(4), 463–484.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, and Alan Taylor, 2008, “Is the Washington Consensus Dead? Growth, Openness,
and the Great Liberalization, 1970s–2000s,” NBER Working Paper No.14264, August.
Evrensel, Ay Y., 2002, “Effectiveness of IMF-supported Stabilization Programs in Developing Countries,”
Journal of International Money and Finance, 21(5), 565–587.
Faini, Ricardo, Jaime de Melo, A. Senhadji-Semlali and J. Stanton, 1991, “Macro Performance Under
Adjustment lending,” in V. Thomas, A Chibber, M. Dailami and J. de Melo, eds., Restructuring Economies
in Distress: Policy Reform and the World Bank (Washington, DC: The World Bank).
Fernandez-Arias, Eduardo, 1996. "The New Wave of Private Capital Inflows: Push or Pull?," Journal of
Development Economics, Elsevier, 48(2), 389–418, March.
Fischer, Stanley, 1982, “Seigniorage and the Case for a National Money,” Journal of Political Economy,

71

Fischer, Stanley, 1986, Indexation, Inflation and Economic Policy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press:).
Fischer, Stanley, 1988, “Real Balances, The Exchange Rate, and Indexation: Real Variables in
Disinflation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103(1), 27–49.
Fischer, Stanley, 1991, “Growth, Macroeconomics, and Development,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Fischer, Stanley, 1993, "The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth," Journal of Monetary Economics,
32(3), 485–512.
Fischer, Stanley, 1997, “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF” speech by IMF DMD.
Also in S. Fischer, IMF Essays from a Time of Crisis.
Fischer, Stanley, 1999, “On the Need for an International Lender of Last Resort,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 13(4), 85–104 .
Fischer, Stanley. 2001, “Exchange Rate Regimes: Is the Bipolar View Correct?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15(2), 3–24.
Fischer, Stanley, 2004, IMF Essays from a Time of Crisis: The International Financial System,
Stabilization, and Development (Cambridge, MA:MIT Press).
Fischer, Stanley, Ratna Sahay and Carlos Vegh, 2002. "Modern Hyper- and High Inflations," Journal of
Economic Literature 40(3), 837–880.
Flood, Robert, and Peter Garber, 1994, "Collapsing Exchange-Rate Regimes: Some Linear Examples,"
Journal of International Economics 17(1–2), 1–13.
Flood, Robert, and Nancy Marion, 2001, “Perspectives on the Recent Currency Crisis Literature,” in
Guillermo Calvo, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Maurice Obstfeld, eds., Money, Capital Mobility, and Trade:
Essays in Honor of Robert Mundell (Cambridge: MIT Press).
Flood, Robert, and Andrew Rose, 2002, “Uncovered Interest Parity in Crisis,” IMF Staff Papers 49(2),
252–266. IMF Working Paper 01/207.
Forbes, Kristin, 2002, “Are Trade Linkages Important Determinants of Country Vulnerability to Crises?” in
Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press:). NBER Working Paper No. 8194, 2001.
Forbes, Kristin, 2007, “One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial Constraints for
Smaller Firms,” Journal of International Economics 71(2), 294–323. NBER Working Paper No. 9777,
2003.
Forbes, Kristin, and Menzie Chinn, 2004, “A Decomposition of Global Linkages in Financial Markets over
Time,” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(3), 705–722. NBER Working Paper No. 9555, 2003.
Forbes, Kristin, and Roberto Rigobon, 2000, “Contagion in Latin America: Definitions, Measurement, and
Policy Implications,” Economia 1(2), 1–46. NBER Working Paper No. 7885.
Forbes, Kristin, and Roberto Rigobon, 2002, “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring Stock
Market Comovements,” Journal of Finance 57(5), 2223–2261.

72

Fraga, Arminio., Ilan Goldfajn and André Minella, 2003, “Inflation Targeting in Emerging Market
Economies,” in Ken Rogoff and Mark Gertler, eds., NBER Macro Annual 2003 (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press).
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1995b. “Monetary Regime Choices for a Semi-Open Country,” in Sebastian Edwards, ed.,
Capital Controls, Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy in the World Economy, (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press).
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2003a,“Coping with Crises in Emerging Markets: Adjustment versus Financing,” in Dilip
Das, eds. Perspectives in Global Finance (London: Routledge).
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2003, “A Proposed Monetary Regime for Small Commodity Exporters: Peg the Export
Price (PEP),” International Finance (Blackwill Publishers), 6(1), 61–88.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2004, “Experience of and Lessons from Exchange Rate Regimes in Emerging
Economies,” in Monetary and Financial Integration in East Asia: The Way Ahead, edited by Asian
Development Bank (New York: Palgrave Macmillan Press).
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2005, “Contractionary Currency Crashes in Developing Countries,” IMF Staff Papers
52.2, 149–192.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2009a, “Are Bilateral Remittances Countercyclical?” NBER WP 15419, Oct..
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2009b, “A Comparison of Monetary Anchor Options for Commodity-Exporters in Latin
America and the Caribbean,” Myths and Realities of Commodity Dependence,” World Bank, Sept.17–18.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2010, “The Natural Resource Curse: A Survey,” Forthcoming in Export Perils, Brenda
Shaffer, ed., (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press). NBER WP No. 15836; HKS RWP10005, Feb.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Chudozie Okongwu, 1996, "Liberalized Portfolio Capital Inflows in Emerging
Markets: Sterilization, Expectations, and the Incompleteness of Interest Rate Convergence," International
Journal of Finance and Economics 1(1), 1–23.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Jumana Poonawala, 2010, “The Forward Market in Emerging Currencies: Less Biased
than in Major Currencies” Journal of International Money and Finance. NBER WP No. 12496.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose, 1996, "Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An Empirical
Treatment," Journal of International Economics 41(3/4), 351–366.
Frankel , Jeffrey, and Nouriel Roubini, 2003, “The Role of Industrial Country Policies in Emerging Market
Crises,” in Martin Feldstein, ed., Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies,
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Sergio Schmukler, 1996, "Country Fund Discounts and the Mexican Crisis of 1994:
Did Mexican Residents Turn Pessimistic Before International Investors?" Open Economies Review 7, Fall,
511–34.
Frankel, Jeffrey, Sergio Schmukler and Luis Servén. 2000. Verifiability and the Vanishing Intermediate
Exchange Rate Regime. Brookings Trade Forum 2000, edited by Susan Collins and Dani Rodrik
(Washington DC: Brookings Institution).
Frankel, Jeffrey, Ben Smit, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2008, "South Africa: Macroeconomic Challenges
after a Decade of Success," Economics of Transition 16(4), 639–677.

73

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei. 1994. “Yen Bloc or Dollar Bloc? Exchange Rate Policies of the East
Asian Economies,” in Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger, eds., Macroeconomic Linkages: Savings, Exchange
Rates, and Capital Flows (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Frenkel, Jacob, 1974, “The Demand for International Reserves by Developed and Less-Developed
Countries,” Economica, Feb.
Frenkel, Jacob, and Boyan Jovanovic 1981, “Optimal International Reserves: A Stochastic Framework,”
The Economic Journal, 91(362), 507–514.
Friedman, Benjamin, 2000, “How Easy Should Debt Restructuring Be?” in Charles Adams, Robert Litan
and Michael Pomerleano, eds., Managing Financial and Corporate Distress: Lessons from Asia
(Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution).
Friedman, Benjamin, 2004, “The LM Curve: A Not-So-Fond Farewell, “ in Thatcher. ed.,
Macroeconomics, Monetary Policy, and Financial Stability. (Ottawa: Bank of Canada). NBER WP No.
10123.
Furman, Jason, and Joseph Stiglitz, 1998, “Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from East Asia,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 115–135.
Gavin, Michael, Ricardo Hausmann, Roberto Perotti and Ernesto Talvi, 1997, “Managing Fiscal Policy in
Latin America and the Caribbean: Volatility, Procyclicality, and Limited Creditworthiness,” Revista del
Banco Central de Venezuela, XI(1). Inter-American Development Bank, RES WP 4032, 1996.
Gavin, Michael, and Roberto Perotti, 1997, “Fiscal Policy in Latin America,” in Ben S. Bernanke and
Julio Rotemberg, ed., NBER Macro Annual 1997, (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Ghironi, Fabio, and Marc Melitz , 2005, “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
Heterogeneous Firms” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 120(3), 865–915.
Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, and Holger Wolf. 2000. “Currency Boards: More than a Quick Fix?”
Economic Policy, 31(October): 270–335.
Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, and Holger Wolf. 2003. Exchange Rate Regimes: Choices and
Consequences. (Cambridge: MIT Press).
Giavazzi, Francesco, Ilan Goldfajn, and Santiago Herrera, 2005, “Overview: Lessons from Brazil,” in
Inflation Targeting, Debt, and the Brazilian Experience, 1999 to 2003 (Cambridge: MIT Press) .
Giavazzi, Francesco, Tullio Jappelli and Marco Pagano, 2000, “Searching for Non-Linear Effects of Fiscal
Policy: Evidence from Industrial and Developing Countries,” European Economic Review 44(7), 1259–
1289.
Glick, Reuven, and Andrew Rose, 1999, “Contagion and Trade: Why are Currency Crises Regional?”
Journal of International Money and Finance 18(4), 603–617.
Goldfajn, Ilan, and Sergio Werlang, 2000, “The Pass-Through from Depreciation to Inflation: A Panel
Study,” Economics Department, PUC-Rio, Texto Para Discussao No. 424.
Goldstein, Morris, Graciela Kaminsky and Carmen Reinhart, 2000, Assessing Financial Vulnerability: An
Early Warning System for Emerging Markets (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics).
Goetzmann, William, and Philippe Jorion, 1999, “Re-emerging Markets,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 34, 1–32 .

74

Goldstein, Morris and Mohsin Khan, 1985, "Income and Price Effects in Foreign Trade," in R. Jones and P.
Kenen, eds. Handbook of International Economics II, (Elsevier).
Goldstein, Morris, and Nicholas Lardy, 2009, The Future of China’s Exchange Rate Regime, Policy
Analyses in International Economics No. 87, Petersen Institute for International Economics, Washington,
July.
Goldstein, Morris, and Philip Turner, 2004, Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging Markets
(Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics).
Gonçalves, Carlos Eduardo and João Salles, 2008, “Inflation Targeting in Emerging Economies: What do
the Data Say?” Journal of Development Economics 85(1-2), 312–318.
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Eswar Prasad, 2007, “A Framework for Independent Monetary Policy in China,”
CESifo Economic Studies.
Goto, Junichi, and Koichi Hamada. 1994, “Economic Preconditions for Asian Regional Integration,” in
Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger, ed., . Macroeconomic Linkages: Savings, Exchange Rates, and Capital
Flows, NBER - East Asia Seminar on Economics, 3, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne, 2006, “The Elusive Gains from International Financial
Integration,” Review of Economic Studies 73(3), . NBER Working Paper No. 9684, May 2003.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne, 2009. "Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The
Allocation Puzzle," NBER Working Paper 13602, 2007.
Guidotti, Pablo, 2003, “Toward a Liquidty Management Strategy for Emerging Market Countries,” in Jose
Antonio Gonzalez, Vittorio Corbo, Anne Krueger, and Aaron Tornell, eds., Latin American
Macroeconomic Reforms: The Second Stage. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Guidotti, Pablo, Federico Sturzenegger and Agustin Villar, 2004, “On the Consequences of Sudden Stops,”
Economía, 4(2), 171-214.
Gutiérez, Eva, 2003, “Inflation Performance and Constitutional Central Bank Independence: Evidence from
Latin America and the Caribbean,” IMF WP/03/53, March.
Haan, Jakob, and W.J. Kooi, 2000, “Does Central Bank Independence Really Matter? - New Evidence for
Developing Countries Using a New Indicator,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 24(4), 643–664.
Haan, Jakob, Donato Masciandaro, Marc Quintyn , 2008, “Does Central Bank Independence Still Matter?”
European Journal of Political Economy, 24(4), 717–721.
Hall, Robert, and Chad Jones, 1999, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per Worker
than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1), 83–116.
Hammond, Gill, Ravi Kanbur, Eswar Prasad, eds., 2009, Monetary Policy Frameworks for Emerging
Markets (Cheltenham, UK.Edward Elgar Publishing)
Hanke, Steve, and Kurt Schuler, 1994, Currency Boards for Developing Countries: A Handbook. (ICS
Press).
Hanson, James, 1983, “Contractionary Devaluation, Substitution in Production and Consumption, and the
Role of the Labor Market,” Journal of International Economics 14(1-2), 179–89.

75

Haque, Nadeem, and Mohsin Khan, 2002, "Do IMF–Supported Programs Work? A Survey of the CrossCountry Empirical Evidence," in Mohsin Khan, Saleh Nsouli, Chorng-Huey Wong, eds., Macroeconomic
Management: Programs and Policies (Washington, DC: IMF). IMF Working Paper, WP/98/169.
Harberger, Arnold ,1980, "Vignettes on the World Capital Market." The American Economic Review,
70(2), 331–37.
Harberger, Arnold, 1986, “Economic Adjustment and the Real Exchange Rate,” in Sebastian Edwards and
Liaquat Ahamed, eds., Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rates in Developing Countries (University of
Chicago Press: Chicago) 369–424.
Harvey, Campbell, 1995, “Predictable risk and returns in emerging markets,” Review of Financial Studies,
8, 773–816.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Michael Gavin, Carmen -Serra, and Ernesto Stein. 1999. Why Do Countries Float the
Way They Do? In New Initiatives to Tackle International Financial Turmoil. Interamerican Development
Bank Annual Meetings of the Board of Governors, Paris.
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Ugo Panizza, 2003, “On the Determinants of Original Sin: An Empirical
Investigation,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 22(7), 957–990.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Ugo Panizza, and Roberto Rigobon, 2006, “The Long-Run Volatility Puzzle of the
Real Exchange Rate,” Journal of International Money and Finance 25(1), 93–124.
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Liliana Rojas-Suárez, editors, 1996, Banking Crises in Latin America
(Washington DC: Inter-American Development Bank).
Henry, Peter, 2000, "Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?" Journal of Financial
Economics, 58(1–2).
Henry, Peter, 2000, "Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity Prices,"
Journal of Finance 55(2).
Henry, Peter, 2003, "Capital Account Liberalization, The Cost of Capital, and Economic Growth,"
American Economic Review, 93(2). Chari, Anusha, and Peter Henry, “Capital Account Liberalization, the
Cost of Capital, and Economic Growth, NBER WP No. 9488, February 2003.
Henry, Peter, 2007, “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation," Journal of
Economic Literature, 45. Chari, Anusha, and Peter Henry, “Capital Account Liberalization: Allocative
Efficiency or Animal Spirits,” NBER Working Paper No. 8908, April 2002.
Henry, Peter, and Serkan Arslanalp, 2005, "Is Debt Relief Efficient?" Journal of Finance, 60(2). [“Debt
Relief: What Do the Markets Think?”] NBER W P No. 9369, 2002.
Henry, Peter, and Diego Sasson, “Capital Account Liberalization, Real Wages, and Productivity,” NBER
Working Paper No.
Holmes, Mark, 2005, “What Do Savings-Investment Correlations Tell Us About the International Capital
Mobility of Less Developed Countries?” Journal of Economic Integration 20(3), 590–603.
Hoxha, Indrit, Sebnem. Kalemli-Ozcan and Dietz Vollrath, 2009, “How Big are the Gains from
International Financial Integration,” NBER Working Paper 14636, January.
Husain, Asim, Ashoka Mody and Kenneth Rogoff, 2005, “Exchange Rate Regime Durability and
Performance in Developing vs. Advanced Economies,”Journal of Monetary Economics 52(1), 35–64.

76

Hutchison, Michael, 2003, “A Cure Worse Than the Disease? Currency Crises and the Output Costs of
IMF-Supported Stabilization Programs,” in S. Dooley and J. Frankel, eds., Managing Currency Crises in
Emerging Markets (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique Mendoza and Carlos Vegh, 2009, “How Big Are Fiscal Multipliers?” CEPR Policy
Insight No. 39, October.
Ito, Hiro, and Menzie Chinn, 2007, “Price-Based Measurement of Financial Globalization: A CrossCountry Study of Interest Rate Parity,” Pacific Economic Review 12(4):419–444.
Jácome, Luis, and Francisco Vázquez, 2008, “Is There Any Link Between Legal Central Bank
Independence and Inflation? Evidence from Latin America and the Caribbean,” European Journal of
Political Economy 24(4), 788–801.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Romain Rancière, 2009, “The Optimal Level of International Reserves For Emerging
Market Countries: A New Formula and Some Applications,” February .
Jeanne, Olivier, 2005, "Why Do Emerging Market Economies Borrow in Foreign Currency?" IMF
Working Paper 03/177. In Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann, eds., Other People's Money: Debt
Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).
Jeanne, Olivier, 2007, “International Reserves in Emerging Market Countries: Too Much of a Good
Thing?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1–55.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, 2005, "Original Sin, Balance Sheet Crises and the Roles of
International Lending," In Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann, eds., Other People's Money: Debt
Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies (Chicago:University of Chicago
Press). IMF WP02/234.
Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, Eric Friedman, 2000, “Corporate Governance in the Asian
Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 141–186.
Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer, 2000, “Tunneling,”
American Economic Review 90(2), 22–27.
Johnson, Simon and Todd Mitton, 2003, “Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence from Malaysia,”
Journal of Financial Economics 67(2), 351–382. NBER WP 8521, 2001.
Jonas, Jiri, and Mishkin, Frederic, 2005, “Inflation Targeting in Transition Economies: Experience and
Prospects,” in Ben Bernanke and Michael Woodford, ed., The Inflation-Targeting Debate (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press).
Joyce, Joseph, 1992, “The Economic Characteristics of IMF program Countries,” Economics Letters 38(2),
237–242 .
Junguito, Roberto, and Hernando Vargas, 1996, “Central Bank Independence and Foreign Exchange
Policies in Latin America,” Banco de la Republica de Colombia, Borradores de Economia series(046,
Bogota, Feb.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Ariell Reshef, Bent Sorensen, and Oved Yosha, 2009. “Why Does Capital Flow
to Rich States?” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming. NBER Working Paper No. 11301, 2005.
Revised, February 2009.

77

Kamas, Linda, 1986, "The Balance of Payments Offset to Monetary Policy: Monetarist, Portfolio-Balance,
and Keynesian Estimates for Mexico and Venezuela," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 18(4), 467–
481.
Kamin, Steven, and Karsten Von Kleist, 1999, “The Evolution and Determinants of Emerging Markets
Credit Spreads in the 1990s” (May). BIS Working Paper No. 68.
Kaminsky, Graciela, 2008, “Crises and Sudden Stops: Evidence from International Bond and SyndicatedLoan Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 14249, August.
Kaminsky, Graciela, Saúl Lizondo, and Carmen Reinhart, 1998, "Leading Indicators of Currency Crises,"
International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 45(1), 1–48.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: Causes of Banking and Balance of
Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, 89(3), 473–500. Reprinted in: Franklin Allen and
Douglas Gale (eds.), Financial Crises (Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 2007).
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen Reinhart , 2000, “On Crises, Contagion, and Confusion,” Journal of
International Economics, 51(1), 145–168. Reprinted in: Geert Bekaert and Campbell Harvey, eds.,
Emerging Markets (Camberley: Edward Elgar Publishing, Ltd., 2004).
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen Reinhart, 2002, “Financial Markets in Times of Stress,” Journal of
Development Economics, 69(2), 451–470. NBER Working Paper No. 8569, 2001.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen Reinhart, 2008, “The Center and the Periphery: The Globalization of
Financial Turmoil,” in Carmen M. Reinhart, Carlos A. Végh and Andres Velasco, eds., Money,Crises, and
Transition: Essays in Honor of Guillermo Calvo, The MIT Press, 171–216. NBER Working Paper No.
9479, 2003.
Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen Reinhart and Carols Vegh, 2003, "The Unholy Trinity of Financial
Contagion,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(4), 99–118.
Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen Reinhart, and Carlos Vegh, 2005, "When It Rains, It Pours: Procyclical
Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, 19, 11–82.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Sergio Schmukler, 1999, “What Triggers Market Jitters? A Chronicle Of The
Asian Crisis,” Journal of International Money and Finance 18(4), 537–560.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Sergio Schmukler, 2002, “Emerging Market Instability: Do Sovereign Ratings
Affect Country Risk and Stock Returns?” World Bank Economic Review, Vol 16(2), 171–195. Reprinted
in: Richard Levich, Giovanni Majnoni, and Carmen Reinhart, eds., Ratings, Rating Agencies, and the
Global Financial System, Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands, 2002, 227–250.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Sergio Schmukler, 2008, “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The Effects of
Financial Liberalization,” Review of Finance 12, 253–292. NBER Working Paper No. 9787, 2003.
Kenen, Peter, 2001, The International Financial Architecture: What’s New? What’s Missing? (Washington,
DC: Institute for International Economic:).
Kiguel, Miguel, and Nissan Liviatan, 1992, “The Business Cycle Associated with Exchange Rate-Based
Stabilizations,” World Bank Economic Review 6(2), 279–305.
Kim, Woochan, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2002, “Foreign Portfolio Investors Before and During a Crisis,”
Journal of International Economics 56(1), 77–96.

78

King, Robert, and Ross Levine, 1993, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108(3), 717–37.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105(2) 211–48.
Klein, Michael, 2003, “Capital Account Openness and the Varieties of Growth Experience,” NBER
Working Paper No. 9500, February.
Klein, Michael, and Nancy Marion, 1997, “Explaining the Duration of Exchange–Rate Pegs,” Journal of
Development Economics 54(2), 387–404.
Klein, Michael, and Giovanni Olivei, 2008, “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Development, and
Economic Growth,” Journal of International Money and Finance 27(6), 861–875. NBER WP 7384, 1999.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2009. "Financial Globalization: A
Reappraisal," IMF Staff Papers, 56(1), 8–62, April.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Ashley Taylor, 2009, “Threshold Conditions in the Process of International
Financial Integration,” NBER Working Paper No. 14916, April.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco Terrones, 2009, “Does Financial Globalization Promote Risk
Sharing?” Journal of Development Economics 89(July), 258–270.
Kouri, Pentti, and Michael Porter, 1974, “International capital flows and portfolio equilibrium” Journal of
Political Economy 82(May/June), 443–67.
Kravis, Irving, and Richard Lipsey, 1988, "National Price Levels and the Prices of Tradables and
Nontradables," American Economic Review 78(2), 474–78.
Krueger, Anne, 2003, “IMF Stabilization Programs,” in Martin Feldstein, ed., Economic and Financial
Crises in Emerging Market Economies (Chicago: University of Chicago Press:).
Krugman, Paul, 1979, “A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
11(3). August, 311–325.
Krugman, Paul, 1988, “Financing Versus Forgiving a Debt Overhang,” Journal of Development Economics
29(December), 253–68.
Krugman, Paul, 1991, "Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Quarterly Journal of Economics
106(3), 669–82.
Krugman Paul, 1999, “Balance Sheets Effects, the Transfer Problem and Financial Crises,” in Peter Isard,
Assaf Razin and Andrew Rose, eds., International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honour of
Robert P. Flood, Jr. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Krugman, Paul and Taylor, Lance, 1978. "Contractionary effects of devaluation," Journal of International
Economics 8(3), 445–456.
Kydland, Finn, and Edward Prescott, 1977, “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal
Plans," The Journal of Political Economy 85(3), 473.
Lahiri, Amartya, and Carlos Végh, 2003. "Delaying the Inevitable: Interest Rate Defense and Balance of
Payments Crises," Journal of Political Economy 111(2), 404–424.
Lahiri, Amartya, and Carlos Végh, 2007. "Output Costs, Currency Crises and Interest Rate Defence of a
Peg," Economic Journal, 117(516), 216–239.

79

Landström, Matx, 2008, “Do Central Bank Independence Reforms Matter for Inflation Performance?”
University of Gävle, Sweden, Dec.
Lane, Philip, and Aaron Tornell, 1998, “Voracity and Growth,” NBER WP 6498; published as "Voracity
and Growth in Discrete Time", Economics Letters 62(1), 139–145.
Lane, Timothy, and Steven Phillips, 2001, "IMF Financing and Moral Hazard," Finance and Development
38(2). Revised version of “Does IMF Financing Lead to Moral Hazard?” IMF Working Paper WP/00/168
(Washington: IMF, October 2000).
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, 1997, “Legal
Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52(3), 1131–50, July.
Larrain, Felipe, 2000, editor Capital Flows, Capital Controls, and Currency Crises: Latin America in the
1990s, (Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press).
Larrain, Felipe, and Andres Velasco. 2001. “Exchange Rate Policy in Emerging Markets: The Case for
Floating,” Studies in International Economics, No. 224, Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Laxton, Douglas, and Paolo Pesenti, 2003, “Monetary Rules for Small, Open, Emerging Economies,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50(5), 1109–1146. NBER WP No. 9568.
Levchenko, Andrei, 2004, “Financial Liberalization and Consumption Volatility In Developing Countries,”
IMF Staff Papers 52(2), 237–259.
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzennegger, 2000, “The Euro and Latin America : Is EMU a
Blueprint for Mercosur?” American Journal of Economics 110, 63–99.
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2001, “Exchange Rate Regimes and Economic
Performance,” IMF Staff Papers (February).
Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2003, “To Float or to Trail: Evidence on the Impact of
Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth,” American Economic Review, 93(4), 1173–1193.
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2003b, “A De Facto Classification of Exchange Rate
Regimes: A Methodological Note,” American Economic Review 93(4).
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2005, “Classifying Exchange Rate Regimes: Deeds Vs.
Words,” European Economic Review, 49(6), 1603–1635.
Liang, Priscilla, Alice Ouyang, and Thomas Willett, 2009, “The RMB Debate and International Influences
on China’s Money and Financial Markets,” in James Barth, John Tatom, and Glenn Yago, eds., China’s
Emerging Financial Markets: Challenges and Opportunities (Springer: New York).
Lipsey, Robert E. “Foreign Direct Investors in Three Financial Crises,” NBER Working Paper No. 8084,
January 2001.
Loayza, Norman, and Romain Ranciere, 2006, “Financial Development, Financial Fragility, and Growth,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38(4), 1051–1076.
Loayza, Norman, and Raimundo Soto. 2002. Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges.
(Santiago: Central Bank of Chile).
Lucas, Robert, 1990. "Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?" American Economic
Review, 80(May), 92–96.

80

Magud, Nicholas, and Carmen Reinhart, 2006, “Capital Controls: An Evaluation,” in Sebastian Edwards,
ed., Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and Consequences,
University of Chicago Press. NBER Working Paper 11973.
Marquez, Jaime, 2002, “Income and Price Effects of Asian Trade,” in his Estimating Trade Elasticities
(Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston) p. 91–102.
Martin, Philippe, and Hélène Rey, 2006, “Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or Without Crash?”
American Economic Review 96(5), 1631–1651.
Martinez Peria, Maria Soledad, and Sergio Schmukler, 2001, “Do Depositors Punish Banks for Bad
Behavior? Market Discipline, Deposit Insurance, and Banking Crises,” Journal of Finance LVI(3), 1029–.
Mas, Ignacio, 1995, “Central Bank Independence: A Critical View from a Developing Country
Perspective,” World Development 23(10), 1639–1652.
Masson, Paul, 2001, “Exchange Rate Regime Transitions,” Journal of Development Economics, 64, 571–
86.
Masson, Paul, Miguel Savastavano, and Sunil Sharma, 1997, “The Scope for Inflation Targeting in
Developing Countries,” IMF Working Paper 97/130, October.
McKibbin, Warwick, and Kanhaiya Singh. “Issues in the Choice of a Monetary Regime for India”,
Australian National University, May 2000. Brookings Discussion Papers in International Economics No.
154, September 2003.
McKinnon, Ronald. 1963. “Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic Review, 53(September), 657–
665.
McKinnon, Ronald, 1973, Money And Capital In Economic Development (Washington, DC:The Brookings
Institution).
McKinnon, Ronald, 1993, The Order of Economic Liberalization: Financial Control in the Transition to a
Market Economy (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press).
McKinnon, Ronald, 2004, “The East Asian Dollar Standard,” China Economic Review, 15(3), 325–330.
McKinnon, Ronald and Huw Pill, 1997, “Credible Economic Liberalizations and Overborrowing,”
American Economic Review 87, 189–193.
Meltzer, Alan. 2000. Report of the International Financial Institution Advisory Commission. Submitted to
the US Congress and US Department of the Treasury, March 8.
Mendoza, Enrique, 2002, “Credit, Prices and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop,” in Frankel, J.
and S. Edwards, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).
Mendoza, Enrique, “Lessons From the Debt-Deflation Theory of Sudden Stops,” NBER WP no. 11966,
Jan. 2006.
Mendoza, Enrique, and Pedro Marcelo Oviedo, 2006, “Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomic Uncertainty in
Developing Countries: The Tale of the Tormented Insurer,” NBER Working Paper No. W12586, October .
Mendoza, Enrique, and Mendoza Katherine A. Smith, 2006, “Quantitative implications of a debt-deflation
theory of Sudden Stops and asset prices,” Journal of International Economics 70, 82– 114.

81

Mendoza, Enrique, and Marco Terrones, “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from Macro Aggregates
and Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 14049, May 2008.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin, 1998, “Sharp Reductions in Current Account Deficits: An
Empirical Analysis.” European Economic Review 42(May), 897–908.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin, 2000, “Current Account Reversals and Currency Crises:
Empirical Regularities,” in Paul Krugman, ed., Currency Crises (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Mishkin, Frederic, 2000, “Inflation Targeting in Emerging Market Countries,” American Economic Review,
90(2), 105–109. NBER Working Paper 7618.
Mishkin, Frederic, 2003, “Financial Policies and the Prevention of Financial Crises in Emerging Market
Countries,” in Martin Feldstein, ed., Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Mishkin, Frederic, 2008, “Can Inflation Targeting Work in Emerging Market Countries?” in Money,
Crises, and Transition: Essays in Honor of Guillermo Calvo, edited by Carmen Reinhart, Carlos Vegh and
Andres Velasco . NBER Working Paper No. 10646, July 2004.
Mishkin, Frederic, 2007, “Is Financial Globalization Beneficial?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
39(2-3), 259–294. NBER WP no. 11891, 2005.
Mishkin, Frederic, and Miguel Savastano, 2002, “Monetary Policy Strategies for Emerging Market
Countries: Lessons from Latin America,” Comparative Economic Studies XLIV(2), 45–83.
Mishkin, Frederic, and Klaus, Schmidt-Hebbel, 2001, “One Decade of Inflation Targeting in the World:
What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?” in Norman Loayza and Raimundo Soto, eds.,
Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges (Santiago: Central Bank of Chile). Reprinted in
Mishkin, Monetary Policy Strategy (MIT Press: Cambridge, 2007).
Montiel, Peter, 1996, “Managing Economic Policy in the Face of Large Capital Inflows: What Have We
Learned?” in G. Calvo and M. Goldstein, eds., Private Capital Flows to Emerging Markets After the
Mexican Crisis (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics).
Montiel, Peter, and Saul Lizondo, 1989, “Contractionary Devaluation in Developing Countries: An
Analytical Overview,” IMF Staff Papers 36(1), 182–227
Montiel, Peter, and Reinhart, Carmen, 2001, “The Dynamics of Capital Movements to Emerging
Economies During the 1990s,” in Stephany Griffith-Jones, Manuel Montes, and Anwar Nasution, eds.
Short-term Capital Flows and Economic Crises (Oxford: Oxford University Press)..
Morck , Randall, Bernard Yeung and Wayne Yu, 2000, “The Information Content of Stock Markets: wHy
do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movements?” Journal of Financial Economics 58(12), 215–260.
Morley, Samuel, 1992, “On the Effect of Devaluation During Stabilization Programs in LDCs,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 74(1), 21–27.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin, 1998, “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-Fulfilling Currency
Attacks,” American Economic Review 88(3), 587–597
Mulder, Christian, Roberto Perrelli, and Manuel Rocha, 2002, “The Role of Corporate, Legal and
Macroeconomic Balance Sheet Indicators in Crisis Detection and Prevention,” IMF Working Paper 02/59
(Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund).

82

Mundell, Robert. 1961, “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic Review 51
(November), 509–517.
Nunnenkamp, Peter, and Rainer Schweickert, 1990, “Adjustment Policies and Economic Growth in
Developing Countries—Is Devaluation Contractionary?” Review of World Economics 126(3), 474-493.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1986a, “Speculative Attack and the External Constraint in a Maximizing Model of the
Balance of Payments,” The Canadian Journal of Economics 19(1), 1–22.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1986b, “Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance-of-Payments Crises,” The American
Economic Review 76(1), 72–81.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1996. “Models of Currency Crises with Self-Fulfilling Features,” European Economic
Review 90, 1037–47.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1998, “The Global Capital Market: Benefactor or Menace?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 12(4), 9–30.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 2009, “International Finance and Growth in Developing Countries: What Have We
Learned,” NBER WP 14691, Feb. Commission on Growth and Development Working Paper no.34, Aug.
2008.
Obstfeld, Maurice,and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. “The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9(4), 73–96.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay Shambaugh and Alan Taylor, 2005, “The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs among
Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility,” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(3), 423–
438.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay Shambaugh and Alan Taylor, 2009, “Financial Instability, Reserves, and Central
Bank Swap Lines in the Panic of 2008,” American Economic Review, 99(2), 480–486.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay Shambaugh, and Alan Taylor, 2010, “Financial Stability, the Trilemma, and
International Reserves.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Ouyang, Alice, Ramkishen Rajan and Thomas Willett, 2007, “China As A Reserve Sink: The Evidence
From Offset And Sterilization Coefficients,” Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research WP 10/2007,
May.
Parsley, David, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2001, "Explaining the Border Effect: The Role of Exchange Rate
Variability, Shipping Costs, and Geography,” Journal of International Economics, 55(1), 87–106.
Perry, Guillermo, 2009, “Beyond Lending: How Multilateral Banks Can Help Developing Countries
Manage Volatility,” (Washington, DC: Center for Global Development).
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Prasad, Eswar, and Raghuram Rajan, 2008. “A Pragmatic Approach to Capital Account Liberalization,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(3), 149–172. NBER Working Paper No.14051.
Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram Rajan, and Arvind Subramanaian, 2007, “Foreign Capital and Economic
Growth,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 153–230.

83

Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei and M. Ayhan Kose, 2003. “Effects of Financial
Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence,” Occasional Paper No. 220, Research
Department, International Monetary Fund. NBER Working Paper 10942, 2004.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2010 “Financial Globalization and
Macroeconomic Policies,” in Handbook of Development Economics, edited by Dani Rodrik and Mark
Rosenzweig (North-Holland Press).
Prasad, Eswar, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2007, “The Chinese Approach to Capital Inflows: Patterns and Possible
Explanations,” in Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and
Consequences, edited by Sebastian Edwards (Chicago: University of Chicago Press:). IMF Working Paper
No. 05/79.
Quinn, Dennis, 1997. “Correlates of Changes in International Financial Regulation,” American Political
Science Review, 91, 3:531–551.
Radelet, Steven, and Jeffrey Sachs, 1998, "The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis, Remedies,
Prospects," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1–74 & 88–90.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 1998a, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic
Review, 88(3 (Jun.), 559–586.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 1998b, “Which Capitalism? Lessons from the East Asian Crisis,”
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 11(3).
Rajan, Ramkishen, and Chung-Hua Shen, 2006, “Why Are Crisis-Induced Devaluations Contractionary?
Exploring Alternative Hypotheses,” Journal of Economic Integration, 21(3), 526–50.
Ramcharan, Rodney, 2007, “Does the Exchange Rate Regime Matter for Real Shocks? Evidence from
Windstorms and Earthquakes,” Journal of International Economics 73(1), 31–47.
Ranciere, Romain, 2002, “Credit Derivatives in Emerging Markets,” Economics Working Papers no. 856,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, April.
Ranciere, Romain, Aaron Tornell and Frank Westermann, 2008, “Systemic Crises and Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 123(1), 359–406.
Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Chi-Wa Yuen, 1998, “A Pecking Order of Capital Inflows and
International Tax Principles,” Journal of International Economics 44, 45–68.
Reinhart, Carmen, 2000, “The Mirage of Floating Exchange Rates,” American Economic Review 90(2),
65–70.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Vincent. Reinhart, 2003, “Twin Fallacies about Exchange Rate Policy in Emerging
Markets,” Moneda y Crédito, 216, 11–29; or Ekonomika, Bulletin of the Malaysian Economic Association,
August. Revised version of NBER Working Paper No. 9670, May 2003.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Vincent Reinhart, 2009, “Capital Flow Bonanzas: An Encompassing View of the
Past and Present,” in J.Frankel and C.Pissarides, eds., NBER International Seminar in Macroeconomics
2008 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004a, “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A
Reinterpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1):1–48.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff , 2004b, “Serial Default and the ‘Paradox’ of Rich-to-Poor Capital
Flows,” The American Economic Review 94(2), Papers and Proceedings (May), 53–58.

84

Reinhart, Carmen, Kenneth Rogoff, and Miguel Savastano, 2003a, “Debt Intolerance,” in William Brainard
and George Perry (eds.), Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1–74. NBER Working Paper 9908.
Reinhart, Carmen, Kenneth Rogoff, and Miguel Savastano, 2003b, “Addicted to Dollars,” NBER Working
Paper No. 10015, October 2003.
Reinhart, Carmen., and R. Todd Smith, 1998, “Too Much of a Good Thing: The Macroeconomics of
Taxing Capital Inflows,” in R. Glick (ed.), Management of Capital Flows and Exchange Rates: Lessons
from the Pacific Rim, Cambridge University Press.
Reinhart, Carmen, and R. Todd Smith, 2002, “Temporary Controls on Capital Inflows,” Journal of
International Economics 57(2), 327–351. NBER Working Paper 8422, 2001.
Rigobon, Roberto, 2002, “The Curse of Non-Investment Grade Countries,” Journal of Development
Economics 69(2), 423–449. NBER Working Paper No. 8636, 2001.
Rigobon, Roberto, 2003a, “Identification through Heteroskedasticity,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
November, 85(4), 777–792. Revised version of “Identification through Heteroskedasticity: Measuring
Contagion between Argentinean and Mexican Sovereign Bonds,” NBER Working Paper 7493, 2000.
Rigobon, Roberto, 2003b, “On the Measurement of the International Propagation of Shocks: Is the
Transmission Stable?” Journal of International Economics 61(2), 261–283 .
Rodrik, Dani, 1998, “Who Needs Capital Account Convertibility?” in Stanley Fischer et al., Should the
IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility? Essays in International Finance No. 207, International
Finance Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Rodrik, Dani, 2006, “The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange Reserves,” International Economic Journal.
20(3), 253–266. NBER WP No. 11952.
Rodrik, Dani, 2007, “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1 .
Rodrik, Dani, and Arvind Subramanian, 2009, “Why Did Financial Globalization Disappoint?” IMF Staff
Papers 56(1).
Rodrik, Dani, and Ethan Kaplan, 2002, “Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?” in Edwards and
Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets (University of Chicago Press). NBER
Working Paper No. 8142, 2001.
Rodrik, Dani, and Andres Velasco, 2000, “Short-Term Capital Flows,” in Annual World Bank Conference
on Development Economics 1999 (Washington, DC: The World Bank).
Rogoff, Kenneth, 1985, “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 100(4), 1169–89.
Rogoff, Kenneth, 1996, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle, Journal of Economic Literature 34(2), 647–
68.
Rogoff, Kenneth, 2004, Evolution and Performance of Exchange Rate Regimes (Washington, DC:
International Monetary Fund).
Rose, Andrew, 2000, “One Money, One Market: Estimating the Effect of Common Currencies on Trade,”
Economic Policy 15(30), 8–45.

85

Rose, Andrew, 2005, “A Reason Why Countries Pay their Debts: Renegotiation and International Trade,”
Journal of Development Economics 77(1), 189–206.
Rose, Andrew, 2007, "A Stable International Monetary System Emerges: Inflation Targeting is Bretton
Woods, Reversed," Journal of International Money and Finance 26(5), 663–681.
Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel, 2004, “A Gravity Model of Sovereign Lending: Trade, Default, and
Credit,” IMF Staff Papers 51. NBER Working Paper No. 9285, 2002.
Rose, Andrew, and Mark Spiegel, 2008, “International Financial Remoteness and Macroeconomic
Volatility,” NBER Working Paper No. 14336, September.
Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel, 2009, “Cross-Country Causes and Consequences of the 2008 Crisis:
Early Warning,” NBER Working Paper No. 15357, September.
Sachs, Jeffrey, 1987, “The Bolivian hyperinflation and stabilization,” American Economic Review 77(2),
279–283.
Sachs, Jeffrey, 1998, “Alternative approaches to financial crises in emerging markets,” in Capital flows and
financial crises, Miles Kahler editor (Council on Foreign Relations: New York).
Sachs, Jeffrey, 2007, “How to Handle the Macroeconomics of Oil Wealth,” Ch. 7 in Escaping the Resource
Curse, edited by M.Humphreys, J.Sachs and J.Stiglitz (Columbia University Press: NY), 173–193.
Sachs, Jeffrey, Aaron Tornell, and Andres Velasco, 1996a. "The Mexican Peso Crisis: Sudden Death or
Death Foretold?," Journal of International Economics 41(3-4), 265–283.
Sachs, Jeffrey, Aaron Tornell, and Andres Velasco, 1996b, “Financial crises in emerging markets: the
lessons from 1995,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 27 (1), 147–216.

Salter, W.E.G., 1959, “Internal and External Balance: The Role of Price and Expenditure Effects,”
Economic Record. Reprinted in Economic Record 35(71), 226 – 238.
Samuelson, Paul, 1964, "Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems," Review of Economics and Statistics 46(2):
145–154.
Saporiti, Alejandro, and Jorge Streb, 2003, “Separation of Powers and Political Budget Cycles,” CEMA
Working Papers: Serie Documentos de Trabajo 251.
Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe, 2001, “Stabilization Policy and the Costs of Dollarization,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 33(2, Part 2), 482–509.
Shambaugh, Jay, 2004, “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119(1), 301–352.
Shleifer, Andrei, 2003, “Will the Sovereign Debt Market Survive?” American Economic Review 93(2), 85–
90.
Schmidt-Hebbel, Klaus, and Alejandro Werner, 2002, “Inflation Targeting in Brazil, Chile, and Mexico:
Performance, Credibility, and the Exchange Rate” Working Papers Central Bank of Chile 171, July.
Schneider, Martin, and Aaron. Tornell, 2004, “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees, and Financial
Crises,” Review of Economic Studies 71, 883–913. NBER Working Paper No. 8060, 2000.

86

Schuknecht, Ludger, 1996, “Political Business Cycles in Developing Countries,” Kyklos 49, 155–170.
Shaw, Edward, 1973, Financial Deepening in Economic Development (New York: Oxford University
Press).
Shi, Min, and Jakob Svensson, 2006, “Political Budget Cycles: Do They Differ Across Countries and
Why?” Journal of Public Economics 90(8-9): 1367–1389.
Solimano, Andres, 1986, “Contractionary Devaluation in the Southern Cone,” Journal of Development
Economics 23, 135–151.
Stein, Ernesto and Jorge Streb, 1998, "Political Stabilization Cycles in High Inflation Economies," Journal
of Development Economics 56(June), 159–180.
Stein, Ernesto and Jorge Streb, 2004, "Elections and the Timing of Devaluations," Journal of International
Economics 63(1), 119–145. Inter-American Development Bank WP No. 396, 1999.
Stiglitz, Joseph, and Andrew Weiss, 1981, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,"
American Economic Review 71(3), 393–410.
Summers, Lawrence, 2006, “Reflections on Global Account Imbalances and Emerging Markets Reserve
Accumulation,” L.K. Jha Memorial Lecture, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, India, March 24, 2006.
Svensson, Lars, 2000, “Open-Economy Inflation Targeting,” Journal of International Economics 50(1),
155–183
Swan, Trevor, 1963, "Longer Run Problems of the Balance of Payments," in H.W. Arndt and W.M.
Corden, eds, The Australian Economy (Melbourne: Cheshire).
Sy, Amadou, 2002, “Emerging Market Bond Spreads and Sovereign Credit Ratings: Reconciling Market
Views with Economic Fundamentals,” Emerging Markets Review 3(4), 380–408.
Talvi, Ernesto, and Carlos Végh, 2005, “Tax Base Variability and Procyclical Fiscal Policy in Developing
Countries,” Journal of Development Economics 78(1), 156–190.
Taylor, Alan, 2002, "A Century Of Purchasing-Power Parity," Review of Economics and Statistics 84
(Feb), 139–150.
Tornell, Aaron, and Philip Lane, 1999, “The Voracity Effect,” American Economic Review 89(1), 22–46.
Upadhyaya, Kamal, 1999, “Currency Devaluation, Aggregate Output, and the Long Run: An Empirical
Study ” Economics Letters 64(2), 197–202
Uribe, Martin, 1997, “Exchange-Rate-Based Inflation Stabilization: The Initial Real Effects of Credible
Plans,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39(2), 197–221.
Uribe, Martin, and Vivian Yue, 2006, “Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives Whom?”
Journal of International Economics 69(1): 6–36. NBER WP No. 10018, 2003.
van Wijnbergen, Sweder, 1986. "Exchange Rate Management and Stabilization Policies in Developing
Countries," in Sebastian Edwards and Liaquat Ahamed, eds., Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rates
in Developing Countries (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Velasco, Andres, 2001, “Impossible Duo? Globalization and Monetary Independence in Emerging
Markets,” Brookings Trade Forum.

87

Wei, Shang-Jin, 2000, “Local Corruption and Global Capital Flows,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity.
Wei, Shang-Jin, and Yi Wu, 2002, “Negative Alchemy: Corruption, Composition of Capital Flows, and
Currency Crises,” in Managing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, S. Edwards & J. Frankel, eds.
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Williamson, John, 1995, What Role for Currency Boards? Policy Analyses in International Economics No.
40 (Institute for International Economics: Washington DC).
Williamson, John, 1996, The Crawling Band as an Exchange Rate Regime: Lessons from Chile, Colombia,
and Israel (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics).
Williamson, John, 1991, The Economic Opening of Eastern Europe (Washington, DC: Institute for
International Economics).
Williamson, John, 2001, “The Case for a Basket, Band and Crawl (BBC) Regime for East Asia,” In Future
Directions for Monetary Policies in East Asia, edited by David Gruen and John Simon. (Sydney: Reserve
Bank of Australia).
Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy (Princeton:
Princeton University Press).
Yang, Dean, 2007, “Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricanes on International Financial Flows,
1970–2002,” Ford School of Public Policy, University of Michigan.
Yang, Dean, and Hwajung Choi, 2007, “Are Remittances Insurance? Evidence from Rainfall Shocks in the
Phillippines,” World Bank Economic Review 21(2), 219–248.

88

