NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERACTIONS BETWEEN STATE AND FEDERAL CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES
Lawrence H. Goulder
Robert N. Stavins
Working Paper 16123
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16123

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

The authors are grateful to Dallas Burtraw, Anthony Eggert, Arik Levinson, and Catherine Wolfram
for helpful comments on a previous version of this chapter. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Lawrence H. Goulder and Robert N. Stavins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Interactions between State and Federal Climate Change Policies
Lawrence H. Goulder and Robert N. Stavins
NBER Working Paper No. 16123
June 2010
JEL No. H10,H77,K32,L51,Q48,Q54
ABSTRACT
Federal action addressing climate change is likely to emerge either through new legislation or via the
U.S. EPA’s authority under the Clean Air Act. The prospect of federal action raises important questions
regarding the interconnections between federal efforts and state-level climate policy developments.
In the presence of federal policies, to what extent will state efforts be cost-effective? How does the
co-existence of state- and federal-level policies affect the ability of state efforts to achieve emissions
reductions?
This paper addresses these questions. We find that state-level policy in the presence of a federal policy
can be beneficial or problematic, depending on the nature of the overlap between the two systems,
the relative stringency of the efforts, and the types of policy instruments engaged. When the federal
policy sets limits on aggregate emissions quantities, or allows manufacturers or facilities to average
performance across states, the emission reductions accomplished by a subset of U.S. states may reduce
pressure on the constraints posed by the federal policy, thereby freeing facilities or manufacturers
to increase emissions in other states. This leads to serious “emissions leakage” and a loss of cost-effectiveness
at the national level. In contrast, when the federal policy sets prices for emissions or does not allow
manufactures to average performance across states, these difficulties are usually avoided. Even in
circumstances involving problematic interactions, there may be other attractions of state-level climate
policy. We evaluate a number of arguments that have been made to support state-level climate policy
in the presence of federal policies, even when problematic interactions arise.

Lawrence H. Goulder
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building 328
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
goulder@stanford.edu
Robert N. Stavins
JFK School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robert_stavins@harvard.edu

INTERACTIONS BETWEEN STATE AND FEDERAL CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES
Lawrence H. Goulder and Robert N. Stavins

1.

Introduction

Over the past five years, a series of climate bills with national cap-and-trade systems at
their heart have been introduced in the U.S. Congress. But as of June 2010, only one bill – H.R.
2454, the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 – had been passed by a house of
Congress, and no bill had been sent to the President for his signature. In this environment of
relatively slow federal action, climate policy initiatives have emerged at the regional, state, and
even local levels. In fact, state-level climate policies are being contemplated, developed, or
implemented in more than half of the fifty states. 1,2
Federal-level action may soon take place, however. This could come through
Congressional action or through greenhouse gas regulation by the U.S Environmental Protection
Agency under the Clean Air Act. In the absence of Congressional action, EPA action is called for
as a result of the 2006 U.S. Supreme Court decision in Massachusetts v. EPA, 3 the Obama
administration’s subsequent “endangerment finding” that carbon dioxide (and other greenhouse
gases) endanger public health and welfare, and the consequent designation in 2010 of carbon
dioxide as a pollutant for regulatory purposes under the Clean Air Act both for stationary and
mobile sources.
No matter whether federal action comes through new legislation or via the EPA’s
authority under the Clean Air Act, important questions arise regarding the relationship of federal
actions to ongoing state-level climate policy developments. In the presence of federal policies, to
what extent will state efforts be cost-effective? How does the co-existence of state- and federallevel policies affect the ability of state efforts to achieve emissions reductions?
This chapter addresses these questions. We find that the co-existence of state and federal
climate efforts can be mutually reinforcing or problematic, depending on the nature of the overlap
between the two systems, the relative stringency of the efforts, and the types of policy instruments
utilized. Problematic interactions arise when the federal policy involves restrictions on aggregate
1

Most prominent among these are the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) in ten northeastern states, and A.B.
32, California’s Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006.

2

Throughout most of U.S. history, state and local governments have had the primary responsibility for environmental
protection (Revesz 2001). However, since the passage of the National Environmental Policy Act in 1969, the federal
role has increased significantly. Federal laws for localized environmental problems generally leave room for states to
exceed national standards.

3

See: http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/06pdf/05-1120.pdf

1

emissions quantities (as with a simple federal cap-and-trade program) or involves nationwide
averaging of performance (as with fuel-economy standards or renewable fuel standards). In these
circumstances, the emission reductions accomplished by a subset of U.S. states reduces pressure
on the constraints posed by the federal policy, thereby freeing – indeed, encouraging – facilities or
manufacturers to increase emissions in other states. This leads to “emissions leakage” and a loss
of cost-effectiveness at the national level. In contrast, when the federal policy fixes prices for
emissions (as under carbon taxes or under a cap-and-trade program with a binding “safety valve”
or “price collar”), more aggressive climate policy in a subset of states does not lead to offsetting
emissions elsewhere. Nationwide emissions are reduced, but the more aggressive action generally
leads to differing marginal abatement costs across states, implying that the same reduction could
have been achieved at lower cost though an increase in the federally established price of
emissions.
Even in situations where significant leakage is likely, there may be a case for state-level
action to the extent that such action yields other, offsetting benefits. We articulate and evaluate a
number of arguments that claim such benefits and are raised to support state-level climate policy in
the presence of federal policies, despite the potential for leakage.
The chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 examines interactions between federal and
state cap-and-trade programs, while Section 3 examines interactions under other policies,
including fuel economy standards and renewable fuel standards. In both of these sections, we
highlight difficulties that stem from these interactions, and explore the extent to which avoiding
these problems is consistent with the continuing presence of state programs. Section 4 evaluates
several arguments claiming various benefits from state-level action that may offset the
disadvantages (such as emissions leakage) identified earlier. Section 5 concludes.

2.

National and Sub-National Cap-and-Trade Systems

How would a federal cap-and-trade system interact with one or more state (or other subnational) cap-and-trade systems? Two key factors driving such interactions are the degree of
overlap in coverage (scope of sources) between the federal and state systems, and the relative
stringency of the two systems. We consider two important cases: programs with perfectly
overlapping coverage, and programs with imperfectly overlapping coverage. 4
2.1

Systems with Perfectly Overlapping Coverage

The simplest case is systems with perfectly overlapping coverage. One example is the case
involving upstream federal and state cap-and-trade systems, both of which are economy-wide.
Another is the case in which the federal and state systems both focus exclusively on the electricity
generation sector.
4

Although our focus is on impacts of overlapping regulations across jurisdictions, the analysis has some formal
similarities to the analysis of outcomes from overlapping regulations within a jurisdiction. Levinson (this volume)
offers the latter analysis.

2

Consider first the situation where the state program is more stringent than the national
program in that it requires reductions from sources within the state that are greater than would be
achieved under the national program alone. In this case, emissions sources must surrender both
state and federal allowances to comply with the two jurisdictions. If a source only needed to
surrender to one jurisdiction, it would choose abatement levels such that marginal abatement costs
equaled the allowance price. If the source must offer allowances to two jurisdictions, it will equate
marginal abatement costs with the sum of the two allowance prices.
Figure 1 below depicts the impact of facing two allowance prices. The figure displays
marginal benefits from emissions (corresponding to marginal costs of emissions abatement) for
two groups of states; the “greener states” prefer more stringent cap-and-trade policy than the other
states do. Suppose that initially the only cap-and-trade program is at the federal level. With
allowance trading across all states, marginal abatement costs are equated across states, and a single
allowance price of pFED applies nationwide. Total emissions at the national level are eGS plus eOS,
a total given by the federal policy’s overall emissions cap.
Now suppose the greener states wish to impose a tighter cap-and-trade program within
their own jurisdictions. They establish their own allowance cap of eGS’, allowing fewer emissions
than their prior equilibrium emissions level eGS. The tighter cap compels producers in the greener
states to reduce their emissions further. This reduces demands for the federal level allowances,
causing the price of these allowances to fall, which leads to increased emissions in the other states.
The new equilibrium price of federal allowances is pFED’. The price of the green states’
allowances is pGS, determined such that the sum of the federal allowance price and the state
allowance price equals the green states’ marginal costs of abatement at eGS’.
Importantly, the greener states’ efforts do not lead to any reductions in national emissions
beyond that mandated by the federal cap. These states face marginal abatement costs of is pFED’
plus pGS, higher than those (pFED’) in the other states. With marginal costs not equalized
nationally, the country’s overall abatement costs are greater than under the federal program alone.
5
Thus, the presence of the greener states’ program compromises cost-effectiveness.
This is the likely outcome from the interaction of a stringent California cap-and-trade
system implemented under AB 32 and a less stringent federal system (assuming similar coverage).
California’s tighter cap would not achieve any further reductions in emissions. At the same time
it would add to the state’s costs and to the nationwide costs of achieving the national target.

5

Prior analyses by McGuinness and Ellerman (2008) and Burtraw and Shobe (2009) offered similar results.

3

What would happen if the state program were less stringent than the federal program in the
sense of requiring smaller reductions from sources within the state than would be achieved under
the Federal program alone? This would be a case where the greener states’ cap is to the right of
eGS. In this case, the federal allowance price would be sufficiently high to cause sources in the
state to reduce emissions below the state cap; the state’s cap is therefore not binding and the
equilibrium price of state allowances is zero. Here the state program has no impact – it neither
affects nationwide nor in-state emissions nor alters the cost-effectiveness of the federal program.
2.2

Systems with Imperfectly Overlapping Coverage

Now consider the case where the national and state programs involve imperfectly
overlapping coverage. In this case, the nature of the interaction again depends upon which
program is more comprehensive in its coverage of state sources. It also depends on which
program is more stringent for the sources covered by both programs.
If the scope of the federal program envelops that of the state program (that is, includes all
the sources in the state program plus others), then for those sectors covered by both the national
and the state program, the results are the same as with perfectly overlapping coverage. If the state
program is more stringent, the same leakage problems and losses of cost-effectiveness apply as
previously discussed. If the state program is less stringent, then it has no impact. This is
essentially the case with the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) in the northeast, which
covers only the electricity sector and is considerably less stringent than the major proposals for
national economy-wide cap-and-trade systems.
If the state program is more comprehensive than the federal program, results again depend
on relative stringency. If the state program is more stringent (for the common covered sectors)
than the federal program, then the federal program becomes irrelevant as regards emissions within
the state involved. In this case, the more stringent state program will loosen pressure on the
federal cap, leading to a reduction in federal allowance prices and associated emissions leakage to
other states. If the state program is less stringent for the common covered sectors, reductions in
common-covered sector in the state will be governed by the federal program. In this case, the state
policy has no direct impact on federal allowance prices and thus generates no leakage to other
states. In both of these cases, the state can bring about reductions in nationwide emissions by
causing reductions in sectors not covered by the federal program.
2.3

Other Design Features and Their Implications

How do other design features affect the nature of interaction of state and federal cap-andtrade systems?
Safety Valves. Some proposals for cap and trade include provisions for a “safety valve” or
ceiling price on allowances. When a safety valve provision is included, the regulating authority
prevents allowance prices from exceeding a given level by issuing additional emissions allowances
as necessary. The effect of a safety valve depends on whether and how often it is triggered.
Consider, for example, a scenario involving perfectly overlapping state and federal systems, and
suppose that initially a safety valve in the federal system is active, so that allowance prices are at
4

the ceiling price. Suppose that the level of emissions in a given state is e1 in equilibrium in this
situation. Now consider what happens if this state attempts to cap its own emissions below e1.
The given state’s tighter cap will force additional abatement in that state, raising its marginal and
total abatement costs.
The impact of the state’s actions on nationwide emissions depends on whether the actions
produce a large enough reduction in demand for federal allowances to disengage the safety valve.
If the state’s reduction is too small to disengage the safety valve, then the price of federal
allowances will be unchanged: it will remain at the ceiling price. In this case, the state’s actions
will imply a reduction in the nation’s overall emissions, since the state’s own emissions reduction
will not be accompanied by any increase in emissions in other states (the price of allowances to
other states has not changed). On the other hand, if the given state’s reduction yields a large
enough reduction in demand for federal allowances to disengage the safety valve, then the price of
federal allowances will fall, thereby inducing an offsetting increase in emissions from other states.
Allowance Allocation Methods. The nature of the allowance allocation in general has no
affect on system interaction (although there are exceptions in the case of regulated industries).
The interactions just described will be the same no matter how much one or both programs relies
on auctioning or free allocation. Although the particular allowance allocation method has
important distributional implications and can affect cost-effectiveness as well, it does not alter the
general pattern of state-federal interactions just described. 6 This is in keeping with the fact that
the allowance allocation method generally does not alter incentives at the margin (or allowance
prices); and it is the marginal incentives that determine emissions levels and cost-effectiveness.
2.4

Potential Resolutions

A Carve Out. There are ways to offset or avoid the leakage that would occur in the
problematic cases above. One is for the federal government to allow a state or group of states a
“carve out” from the federal program if they implement or maintain a state program (or state
programs) at least as stringent. In this case, two disjoint cap-and-trade programs emerge: the
federal system applies only to states that do not carve out. The result is that there will be different
allowance prices in some states and in the Federal system, marginal abatement costs will not be
equated, and so cost-effectiveness will not be achieved.
Re-Denominating Federal Allowances. Another option is for a given state to require
covered facilities with the state to submit more federal allowances per unit of emissions than
would ordinarily be the case. This action by a “greener” state does not eliminate leakage, since it
increases the effective price of reducing emissions in this state relative to the price in other states.
However, in this case leakage is less than 100 percent: the state’s action has the effect of
tightening the national cap, since the given number of federal allowances in circulation now
permits fewer nationwide emissions, assuming some emissions continue in the “greener” state.
6

Regulated firms generally face lower costs if they receive allowances free rather than need to purchase them in an
auction. (See, for example, Bovenberg and Goulder, 2001.) In addition, to the extent that allowances are auctioned
and the proceeds are used to finance reductions in distortionary taxes, policy costs will be lower than in cases
involving other uses of auction revenue or in the case of free allocation. (See, for example, Goulder, Parry, Williams,
and Burtraw, 1999.)

5

Pre-Emption. Another way to avoid problematic interactions is through federal rules preempting (that is, barring) state-level cap and trade in the presence of a federal program. Some
consider this a useful method for preventing leakage and a loss of cost-effectiveness, as well as a
way of assuring that private industry does not face multiple performance or technology standards.
Others point out that to the extent that the greener state’s actions raise costs, those costs are borne
by that state alone; correspondingly, they oppose pre-emption on the grounds that states should
have the freedom to decide whether to impose higher costs on themselves.

3.

Interactions under Other Climate Policies

3.1

Fuel-Economy Standards

Problematic interactions can also occur under policies involving automobile fuel-efficiency
standards or limits on automobiles’ greenhouse gas emissions per mile. In response to the
prospect of climate change, fourteen states moved to establish limits on greenhouse gases (GHGs)
per mile from light-duty automobiles. These so-called “Pavley” standards7 require manufacturers
to reduce per-mile GHG emissions by about 30 percent by 2016 and 45 percent by 2020
(California Air Resources Board, 2008)
Since CO2 emissions and gasoline use are nearly proportional, the Pavley limits effectively
raise the fuel economy requirements for manufacturers in the states adopting such limits. These
state-level actions can interact significantly with the existing federal Corporate Average Fuel
Economy (CAFE) standards. Consider an auto manufacturer that prior to the imposition of the
Pavley limits was just meeting the federal CAFE standard. Now it must meet the (tougher) Pavley
requirement through its sales of cars registered in the adopting states. In meeting the tougher
Pavley requirements, its overall U.S. average fuel economy now exceeds the national requirement:
the national constraint no longer binds. This means that the manufacturer is now able to change
the composition of its sales outside of the Pavley states; specifically, it can shift its sales toward
larger cars with lower fuel-economy.
Indeed, if all manufacturers were initially constrained by the national CAFE standard, the
introduction of the Pavley requirements would lead to “emissions leakage” of 100 percent at the
margin, because the reductions within the Pavley states would be completely offset by emissions
increases outside of those states. Using a numerical simulation model of the U.S. automobile
market, Goulder, Jacobsen, and van Benthem (2009) found that from 2009 through 2020 about 65
percent of the emissions reductions achieved in the new car market in the Pavley states would be
offset by increased emissions in new car markets elsewhere. 8
7

The Pavley standards are named after California Assemblywoman Fran Pavley, who sponsored the California bill
that launched this multi-state effort.

8

Another five percent of the emissions reduction is offset by increased emissions from used cars, as the Pavley effort
leads to lower scrap rates of older, less fuel-efficient automobiles.

6

In May 2009, the Obama administration reached an agreement with the fourteen “Pavley
states,” according to which the U.S. would tighten the federal fuel economy requirements in such a
way as to achieve effective reductions in GHGs per mile consistent with the first-phase goals of
the Pavley initiative. In return, the fourteen states agreed to abandon the first phase of the Pavley
effort, which was no longer necessary, given the tightening of the federal standards. However,
these states still intend to introduce further tightening of the greenhouse-gas-per-mile standards
after 2016. This would imply fuel economy standards more stringent than those applying at the
federal level. Hence the leakage issue remains live. 9
3.2

Renewable Fuel and Portfolio Standards

Renewable fuel standards require that the ratio of renewable to conventional fuels
produced by refiners not fall below a given value. When these standard are imposed at both the
state and federal levels, once again the effort of individual states to exceed the federal standard
could fail to bring about reduced emissions (or increased use of renewable fuels). 10
This will be the case if, to meet the federal requirement, firms can apply a ratio based on
overall (nationwide) use of renewable and conventional fuels. In this case the situation is perfectly
analogous to that described above for fuel-economy standards. If a firm’s ratio of renewable to
refined fuels was just high enough to meet the federal requirement, then when a given state
imposes a higher ratio, the firm will more than meet the federal requirement. It is now able to
utilize more conventional fuels in other states in which it operates. On other hand, if the federal
rules require that each refinery operation – as opposed to each refinery company -- meet the given
ratio, the situation is different. In this case tighter requirements imposed by a given state will not
free up firms to make compensating adjustments in other states.
The same interactions and pattern of outcomes would hold in the case of federal and statelevel renewable portfolio standards, which require the electrical generators utilize renewable
sources of energy (in particular, wind and solar) for a specific share of their annual generation.
The federal systems contemplated in Washington would allow for national trading.
3.3

Interactions When the Federal and State Programs Involve Different Instruments

Significant interactions can also occur when the state and federal climate policy
instruments differ. As mentioned in the introduction, federal climate policy might be undertaken
9

Despite the potential for leakage, the tougher state-level standards may conceivably accelerate the development of
new technologies that auto manufacturers will eventually adopt throughout the nation, thereby leading to lower
emissions and reduced fuel consumption. However, Goulder, Jacobsen, and van Benthem (2009) find that in the
presence of the national CAFE standard, faster technological progress exacerbates the adverse fleet compositional
impacts of state programs. As a result, in this context greater technological progress yields relatively little benefit in
terms of reduced fuel consumption.

10

Apart from the leakage issue discussed here, some analyses indicate that a renewable fuel standard may have
significant disadvantages relative to emissions pricing policies such as carbon taxes or cap and trade. Holland, Hughes
and Knittel (2009) show that the renewable fuel standard effectively subsidizes renewable fuels and that, as a result, it
leads to more overall (renewable plus conventional) fuel use than is economically efficient. See also Wolak (2007).

7

by the U.S. EPA under the auspices of the Clean Air Act. In this event, the EPA would probably
make use of “conventional” regulatory approaches such as performance standards and technology
mandates. Yet cap and trade is likely to continue in the northeast under the Regional Greenhouse
Gas Initiative, and many western states plan to implement cap and trade within the next few years.
How would conventional regulation at the federal level interact with the state-level cap-and-trade
programs?
Much depends on the particular instruments employed at the federal level and on the
specific rules governing the use of these instruments. Consider the following plausible scenario.
Suppose that the EPA imposes performance standards such as limits on emissions of certain
greenhouse gases per unit of output. State- or regional-level cap-and-trade programs will induce
changes in producer behavior, and in some cases these adjustment will cause particular facilities to
exceed the federal performance standard. If the federal rules allow firms (or localities) to average
their emissions-output ratios in determining whether they meet the federal standard, then the capand-trade initiatives at the state or regional level will precipitate offsetting adjustments in other
states or regions. The same applies if the federal rules allow firms or localities to trade
performance credits with one another. 11 Thus, the specifics of the federal rules are important.
3.4

Problematic Circumstances and Benign Cases

Thus, the potential for leakage and the associated loss of cost-effectiveness arise under a
variety of circumstances. In general, problems result when both of the following two conditions
apply: (1) the state-level efforts cause firms or facilities within the greener states to overcomply
with the federal rules and, (2) the federal rules give firms or facilities the freedom to offset this
overcompliance through various adjustments in other states.
We have already noted some cases where the two problematic conditions do not apply.
One is when there is no overlap of the federal and state programs (condition 1 is not met).
Another is when performance standards do not involve nationwide averaging (condition 2 is not
met).
Another circumstance where problems are avoided is when the federal-level program sets
prices. (This case was suggested by the Section 2.3’s discussion of a safety valve.) Suppose, for
example, a carbon tax were imposed at the federal level. If a state decided to impose new
regulations requiring in-state reductions beyond what the federal tax would yield, the additional
state-level reductions would not lead to offsetting increases elsewhere (apart from the usual
“economic leakage”): the reductions in other states would remain governed by the federal carbon
tax. Thus, price-based regulation at the federal level can avoid the problematic state-federal
interactions. However, to the extent that the new state regulations imply differing marginal
abatement costs across states, there is potential exists for achieving the same further reduction in
emissions at lower cost through a higher carbon tax.

11

Some instruments are more conducive to averaging or cross-facility trading than others. Trading or averaging is
relatively straightforward with performance standards, but more difficult with technology mandates.

8

4.

Are There Other, Offsetting Benefits from State-Level Action?

Even in situations where significant leakage is likely, there may be a case for state-level
action to the extent that such action yields other benefits. Here we assess a number of such
arguments.
4.1 Stronger Arguments
We first present arguments that we regard as having some validity, although some require
careful qualification.
•

States can contribute to cost-effectiveness by addressing market failures not addressed by
federal climate policy.

In addition to the environmental externality associated with climate change, there are some
other market failures that merit attention. The presence of these other market failures would imply
that getting relative prices right will not – on its own -- yield the most efficient outcome. To the
degree that federal climate policy disregards these other climate-related market failures, the
potential exists for states to promote greater efficiency by addressing the neglected market failures.
States (and, for that matter, localities) may have an advantage over the federal government
in addressing certain other market failures. For example, they may be most capable of dealing
with the failure stemming from the principal-agent problem associated with renter-occupied
buildings, according to which apartment renters have insufficient incentives to conserve
electricity. States, counties, and cities can productively promote energy efficiency by addressing
this market failure through building codes and zoning (Trisolini 2010). Note, however, that in
some cases the additional market failure is most efficiently addressed through federal policy.
•

States can function as test-beds for alternative policy approaches not contained in an
existing federal effort, thereby providing useful information for possible later adoption at
the federal level.

Clearly, experimentation has appeal, since experiments sometimes pay off handsomely
(Ostrom 2009). Note that this argument seems to call for eventual implementation of the
innovative policy approach at the federal level and a phasing-out of this effort at the state level
after the benefits from given experiments are revealed. Note also that the question arises whether
the experimentation is best carried out at the state, as opposed to federal, level.
•

State policies – particularly those that are more stringent than the federal policy – can
exert pressure for more aggressive action at the federal level if the state efforts appear
effective.

To the extent that a state with more aggressive climate policy can demonstrate that greater
reductions can be achieved at lower cost than previously thought, this can give impetus to stronger
9

federal policy. Here again the state is functioning as a test bed, providing new information. In the
previous case, the new information comes from an experimental policy design; in this case it
comes from the revealed impact of a more stringent policy.
•

When a given state imposes a tougher requirement than applies in other states, it can
pressure manufacturers to adopt the tighter requirement nationwide rather than offer
different technologies in different parts of the country.

California’s tighter auto pollution laws in the 1970s led to the tightening of the federal auto
pollution standards – in part because auto manufacturers did not want to face two standards.
Likewise, the Pavley effort initiated by California may have been instrumental in prompting the
Obama administration’s agreement to tighten federal fuel economy standards. Of course, in
neither case does such causality imply that social welfare is maximized by the more stringent
standard being adopted nationally.
4.2 Weaker Arguments
The following arguments seem to have considerably less merit.
•

States may face different costs of achieving greenhouse gas reductions, and may
experience different benefits from avoided climate change (either because of different
preferences or different physical outcomes)

Differences of this sort exist and are important, but such differences do not provide a sound
justification for state-level policy. Instead, they may justify compensation schemes and other
elements that allow for differential net burdens across states, such as through the allocation across
states of allowances or auction revenues from a federal cap-and-trade system
•

States are more familiar with details related to in-state firms and institutions. With this
better information, they may be most capable of exploiting low-cost opportunities for
addressing climate change.

Clearly, federal regulators – and state regulators as well -- have limited information.
Individual firms tend to have much better information about technological opportunities and
abatement costs than do regulators. The information problem primarily provides a sound argument
for market-based environmental policy – for policy approaches that give individual facilities or
firms the flexibility to make best use of their (better) information. Market-based policies such as
cap-and-trade or carbon taxes have this feature. Note that such policies can address the
information problem effectively, even if the policies are introduced at the federal level. Thus, this
information problem does not provide a good reason for state-level policy.

5.

Conclusions

We have examined the nature and impacts of some important interactions between state
and federal climate policy. Depending on the overlap and stringency of the state and federal
10

policies, as well as the types of policy instruments employed, state efforts in the presence of a
federal policy can be useful or counterproductive.
In general, problems result when both of the following two conditions apply: (1) the statelevel efforts cause firms or facilities within the greener states to overcomply with the federal rules;
and (2) the federal rules give firms or facilities the freedom to offset this overcompliance through
various adjustments in other states. In these circumstances, state-level efforts do not succeed in
reducing greenhouse gas emissions nationally, and they reduce the cost-effectiveness of the overall
national effort.
We find that there is more potential for these difficulties when the federal policy sets limits
on aggregate emissions quantities, or allows manufacturers or facilities to average performance
across states. In contrast, the difficulties are usually avoided when the policies have little overlap
or when the federal policy sets prices for emissions.
Even in circumstances involving problematic interactions, there may be offsetting
attractions of state-level climate policy. We evaluated a number of arguments that have been made
to support state-level climate policy in the presence of federal policies, even when problematic
interactions arise, and found some arguments – with caveats – to be compelling, but others much
less so.

11

REFERENCES

Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder. “Neutralizing the Adverse Industry Impacts
of CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost?” Behavioral and Distributional
Effects of Environmental Policy, C. Carraro and G. Metcalf, eds., University of
Chicago Press, 2001.
Burtraw, Dallas, and Bill Shobe. “State and Local Climate Policy under a National Emissions
Floor.” Working paper, Resources for the Future and University of Virginia, March
2009.
California Air Resources Board. The California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006. Text
of Assembly Bill 32, August 31, 2006. http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/docs/ab32text.pdf

California Air Resources Board. “Comparison of Greenhouse Gas Reductions for the United
States and Canada under U.S. CAFE Standards and California Air Resources Board
Regulations: An Enhanced Technical Assessment,” 2008. Available at
http://www.climatechange.ca.gov/publications/arb.html.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Ian W. H. Parry, Roberton C. Williams III, and Dallas Burtraw. "The
Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Instruments for Environmental Protection in a
Second-best Setting." Journal of Public Economics 72(3):329-60, 1999.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Mark R. Jacobsen, and Arthur van Benthem. “Unintended
Consequences from Nested State and Federal Regulations: The Case of the Pavley
Greenhouse-Gas-per-Mile Limits.” Working paper, Stanford University and University
of California, San Diego. August 2009.
Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes, and Christopher R. Knittel. “Greenhouse Gas
Reductions under Low Carbon Fuel Standards?” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 1(1): 106-46, 2009.
Levinson, Arik. “Interactions among Climate Policy Regulations.” This volume.
McGuinness, Meghan and A. Denny Ellerman. The Effects of Interactions between Federal
and State Climate Policies. CEEPR 08-004. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute
of Technology Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research, May 2008.
Ostrom, Elinor. “A Polycentric Approach for Coping with Climate Change.” Policy Research
Work Paper 5095. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, October 2009.
Revesz, Richard L. AFederalism and Environmental Regulation: A Public Choice Analysis.@
Harvard Law Review (2001), volume 111, pp. 553-641.
12

Trisolini, Katherine A. “All Hands on Deck: Local Governments and the Potential for
Bidirectional Climate Change Regulation.” Stanford Law Review, volume 62, issue 3,
2010, pp. 669-746.
Wolak, Frank. “Low-Carbon Fuel Standards: Do They Really Work?” Stanford Institute for
Economic Policy Research Policy Brief, May.

13

Figure 1: Interaction of Federal and State Cap-and-Trade Programs

marginal
benefit

marginal
benefit

pFED' + pGS
pGS

pFED
pFED'

eGS' eGS

emissions

eOS

Greener States

Other States

14

eOS'

emissions

