NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNCERTAINTY ABOUT GOVERNMENT POLICY AND STOCK PRICES
Lubos Pastor
Pietro Veronesi
Working Paper 16128
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16128

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

Both authors are at the Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Email: lubos.pastor@ChicagoBooth.edu and pietro.veronesi@ChicagoBooth.edu.
We are grateful for comments from Fernando Alvarez, Frederico Belo, Jaroslav Borovika, Pierre Chaigneau,
David Chapman, Josh Coval,Max Croce, Steve Davis, Allan Drazen, Francisco Gomes, John Heaton,
Monika Piazzesi, Amit Seru, Rob Stambaugh, Milan Švolík, Francesco Trebbi, Rob Vishny, as well
as from the conference participants at the 2010 NBER AP meeting, 2010 NBER EFG meeting, 2011
WFA meeting, 2011 SED meeting, 2011 Prague Economic Meeting, 2011 European Summer Symposium
in Financial Markets (Gerzensee), 2011 Chicago Booth CFO Forum, and workshop participants at
the Bank of England, Chicago, Einaudi Institute (Rome), Erasmus, European Central Bank, Harvard,
LBS, LSE, McGill, Northwestern, Notre Dame, Oxford, Vanderbilt, Warwick, and WU Vienna. This
research was funded in part by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock Prices
Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 16128
June 2010, Revised August 2011
JEL No. G01,G12,G14,G18
ABSTRACT
We analyze how changes in government policy affect stock prices. Our general equilibrium model
features uncertainty about government policy and a government that has both economic and non-economic
motives. The government tends to change its policy after performance downturns in the private sector.
Stock prices fall at the announcements of policy changes, on average. The price fall is expected to
be large if uncertainty about government policy is large, as well as if the policy change is preceded
by a short or shallow downturn. Policy changes increase volatility, risk premia, and correlations among
stocks. The jump risk premium associated with policy decisions is positive, on average.
Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu

1.

Introduction

Governments shape the environment in which the private sector operates. They affect firms
in many ways: they levy taxes, provide subsidies, enforce laws, regulate competition, define
environmental policies, etc. In short, governments set the rules of the game.
Governments change these rules from time to time, eliciting price reactions in financial
markets. These reactions are weak if the change is widely anticipated, but they can be
strong if the markets are caught by surprise. This paper analyzes the effects of changes
in government policy on stock prices in a theoretical setting. Naturally, government policy
changes are not exogenously given; they are determined by various economic and political
forces. To account for this endogeneity, we develop a simple asset pricing model in which
the government plays the role of an active decision maker.
We interpret policy changes broadly as government actions that change the economic
environment. Recent examples include the health care reform and the ongoing overhaul of
financial regulation. Another example is the U.S. government’s decision to allow Lehman
Brothers to go bankrupt in 2008, which was perceived by many as signaling a shift in the
government’s implicit too-big-to-fail policy. Numerous other government policy changes also
took place during the financial crisis of 2007-2008. Many of those changes were unprecedented, with long-term effects that were difficult to predict in advance.
A key role in our analysis belongs to uncertainty about government policy, which is an
inevitable by-product of policymaking. We consider two types of uncertainty. The first type,
which we call policy uncertainty, relates to the uncertain impact of a given government policy
on the profitability of the private sector. The second type, which we call political uncertainty,
captures the private sector’s uncertainty whether the current government policy will change.
In other words, there is uncertainty about what the government is going to do, as well as
what the effect of its action is going to be. We find that both types of uncertainty affect
stock prices in important ways.
We develop a general equilibrium model in which firm profitability follows a stochastic
process whose mean is affected by the prevailing government policy. The policy’s impact on
the mean is uncertain. Both the government and the investors (firm owners) learn about
this impact in a Bayesian fashion by observing realized profitability. All agents have the
same prior beliefs about the current policy’s impact, and the same beliefs apply to any other
future government policy. The prior standard deviation is labeled “policy uncertainty.”

1

At a given point in time, the government decides whether or not to change its policy. If a
policy change occurs, the agents’ beliefs are reset: the posterior beliefs about the old policy’s
impact are replaced by the prior beliefs about the new policy’s impact. When making its
policy decision, the government is motivated by both economic and non-economic objectives:
it maximizes the investors’ welfare, as a social planner would, but it also takes into account
the political cost (or benefit) incurred by changing the policy. This cost is unknown to the
investors, who therefore cannot fully anticipate whether the policy change will occur. The
standard deviation of the political cost is labeled “political uncertainty.”
We find that it is optimal for the government to replace its policy by a new one if
the old policy’s impact on profitability is perceived as sufficiently unfavorable; i.e., if the
posterior mean of the impact is below a given threshold. This threshold decreases with policy
uncertainty as well as with the political cost. If the government derives an unexpectedly large
political benefit from changing its policy, the policy will be replaced even if it worked well
in the past. In expectation, however, the threshold is below the prior mean of the policy’s
impact. To push the posterior mean below the prior mean, Bayes’ rule dictates that the
signal—the realized profitability in the private sector—must be lower than expected. As
a result, policy changes are expected to occur after periods of unexpectedly low realized
profitability, which we refer to as “downturns.”
We derive the conditions under which stock prices fall at the announcement of a policy
change. There are two effects. First, a policy change typically increases the firms’ expected
future profitability, as a direct result of the government’s optimal decision rule described in
the previous paragraph. This cash flow effect generally pushes stock prices up. Second, a
policy change increases the discount rates because the new policy’s impact on profitability is
more uncertain; adopting a new policy essentially undoes the gains from learning about the
old policy. This discount rate effect pushes stock prices down. We find that the discount rate
effect is stronger than the cash flow effect unless the old policy’s impact on profitability is
perceived as sufficiently negative. That is, stock prices fall at the announcement of a policy
change unless the posterior mean of the old policy’s impact is below a negative threshold.
This threshold is generally below the policy-change-triggering threshold discussed in the previous paragraph. Stock prices rise if the government replaces an old policy so unproductive
that its posterior mean falls below both thresholds.
We find that, on average, stock prices fall at the announcement of a policy change.
Positive announcement returns are typically small because they tend to occur in states of the
world in which the policy change is largely anticipated by investors. Given the government’s
2

economic motive, any policy change that lifts stock prices is mostly expected, so that much of
its effect is priced in before the announcement. In contrast, negative announcement returns
tend to be larger because they occur when the announcement of a policy change contains
a bigger element of surprise. The probability distribution of the announcement returns is
left-skewed and, most interesting, its mean is below zero. We prove analytically that the
expected value of the stock return at the announcement of a policy change is negative.
We also show numerically that this expected announcement return is more negative when
there is more uncertainty about government policy. When policy uncertainty is larger, so is
the risk associated with a new policy, and so is the discount rate effect that pushes stock
prices down when the new policy is announced. When political uncertainty is larger, so is
the element of surprise in the announcement of a policy change.
We relate the stock return at the announcement of a policy change to the length and
depth of the preceding downturn. We find that the announcement returns are negative
especially after downturns that are short or shallow. The announcement returns can also be
positive, mostly after downturns that are long or deep. However, such positive returns tend
to be small because after long or deep downturns, policy changes are largely anticipated.
Before the announcement of a policy decision, investors are uncertain whether the policy
will change. If it does change, stock prices tend to jump down; if it does not change, prices
tend to jump up. The expected jump in stock prices at the announcement of a policy decision
is generally nonzero. This expected jump captures the risk premium demanded by investors
for facing an uncertain jump in the stochastic discount factor when the policy decision is
announced. The conditional jump risk premium can be positive or negative, depending
on the posterior mean of the policy impact. The unconditional premium is positive and
increasing in both policy uncertainty and political uncertainty.
The volatilities and correlations of stock returns are also affected by changes in government policy. By introducing new policies whose impact is more uncertain, policy changes
increase the volatility of the stochastic discount factor. As a result, risk premia go up and
stock returns become more volatile and more highly correlated across firms. All of these
effects are stronger when policy uncertainty is larger. Before a policy change, stock returns
are affected by fluctuations in the investors’ beliefs about the current policy as well as in
the investors’ assessment of the probability of a policy change. The latter fluctuations stop
after the government makes its policy decision, typically resulting in lower volatilities and
correlations if the decision does not change the prevailing policy.

3

The government’s ability to change its policy has a substantial effect on stock prices. We
compare the model-implied stock prices with their counterparts in a hypothetical scenario
in which policy changes are precluded. We find that the government’s ability to change its
policy amplifies the stock price declines around policy changes. In addition, this ability can
imply a higher or lower level of stock prices compared to the hypothetical scenario.
In the benchmark version of our model, discussed above, the government can change
its policy only at a predetermined point in time. In the first extension of the model, we
endogenize the timing of the policy change, by letting the government solve for the optimal
time to change the policy. We lose our closed-form solutions, but we find numerically that
the key results from our benchmark model continue to hold.
In the benchmark model, the firms’ investment decisions are not modeled explicitly. In
the second extension of the model, we allow firms to disinvest in response to changes in
government policy. In this extension, the firms’ investment decisions and the government’s
policy decision are made simultaneously: the government takes into account the firms’ anticipated response, and each firm considers the decisions of the other firms as well as the
government. In the resulting Nash equilibrium, a fraction of firms remain invested while the
rest hold cash. We show numerically that firms respond to government-induced uncertainty
by cutting their investment. We also show that our key results continue to hold.
In the third and final extension of our model, we introduce heterogeneity in the firms’
exposures to government policy. We find that firms with more exposure typically have higher
expected returns, though the premium for government policy risk is state-dependent and can
be negative. The main results from our benchmark model continue to hold.
Prior studies have analyzed the effects of uncertainty, broadly defined, on various aspects
of economic activity. For example, it is well known that uncertainty generally reduces firm
investment when this investment is at least partially irreversible.1 The impact of uncertainty
about government policy on investment has been analyzed both theoretically and empirically.2 The literature has also analyzed the effects of uncertainty about government policy
on inflation, capital flows, and welfare.3 However, the literature does not have much to say
1

See, for example, Bernanke (1983), McDonald and Siegel (1986), Pindyck (1988), and Dixit (1989).
Bloom (2009) provides a structural analysis of various real effects of macroeconomic uncertainty shocks.
2
For example, Rodrik (1991) shows that even moderate amount of policy uncertainty can impose a hefty
tax on investment. Hassett and Metcalf (1999) find that the impact of tax policy uncertainty on investment
depends on the process followed by the tax policy. Julio and Yook (2011) and Yonce (2009) find that firms
reduce their investment in years leading up to major elections. Durnev (2011) finds that corporate investment
is less sensitive to stock prices during election years.
3
For example, Drazen and Helpman (1990) study how uncertainty about a future fiscal adjustment affects

4

about how this uncertainty affects asset prices, which is the subject of our study. A rare
exception is Sialm (2006), who analyzes the effects of stochastic taxes on asset prices.4 Tax
uncertainty also features in Croce, Kung, Nguyen, and Schmid (2011), who explore its asset pricing implications in a production economy with recursive preferences. Finally, Ulrich
(2011) analyzes how bond yields are affected by Knightian uncertainty about both Ricardian
equivalence and the size of the government multiplier. All of these studies are quite different
from ours. They analyze fiscal policy, whereas we consider a broader set of government actions. We focus on the stock market reactions to government policy announcements, unlike
any of these studies. These studies use very different modeling techniques, and they do not
model the government’s policy decision explicitly as we do. None of these studies feature
Bayesian learning, which plays an important role here.
Our model is also different from the learning models that were recently proposed in the
political economy literature, such as Callander (2008) and Strulovici (2010). In Callander’s
model, voters learn about the effects of government policies through repeated elections.
In Strulovici’s model, voters learn about their preferences through policy experimentation.
Neither study analyzes the asset pricing implications of learning.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2. presents the benchmark model. Section 3.
analyzes the equilibrium stock prices. Section 4. extends the model by endogenizing the time
of the policy change. Section 5. extends the model by allowing firms to disinvest in response to
government-induced uncertainty. Section 6. introduces heterogeneity in the firms’ exposures
to government policy. Section 7. concludes. The Appendix contains technical details and a
reference to the Technical Appendix, which contains all the proofs.

2.

The Model

We consider an economy with a finite horizon [0, T ] and a continuum of firms i ∈ [0, 1]. Let
Bti denote firm i’s capital at time t. Firms are financed entirely by equity, so Bti can also
the dynamics of inflation. Hermes and Lensink (2001) show that uncertainty about budget deficits, tax
payments, government consumption, and inflation is positively related to capital outflows at the country level.
Gomes, Kotlikoff, and Viceira (2008) calibrate a life-cycle model to measure the welfare losses resulting from
uncertainty about government policies regarding taxes and Social Security. They find that policy uncertainty
materially affects the agents’ consumption, saving, labor supply, and portfolio decisions.
4
Other studies, such as McGrattan and Prescott (2005), Sialm (2009), and Gomes, Michaelides, and
Polkovnichenko (2009), relate stock prices to tax rates, without emphasizing tax-related uncertainty. In
empirical work, Erb, Harvey, and Viskanta (1996) relate political risk to future country stock returns, and
Boutchkova, Doshi, Durnev, and Molchanov (2010) relate political uncertainty to stock volatility.

5

be viewed as book value of equity. At time 0, all firms employ an equal amount of capital,
which we normalize to B0i = 1. Firm i’s capital is invested in a linear technology whose rate
of return is stochastic and denoted by dΠit . All profits are reinvested, so that firm i’s capital
evolves according to dBti = Bti dΠit . Since dΠit equals profits over book value, we refer to it
as the profitability of firm i. For all t ∈ [0, T ], profitability follows the process
dΠit = (µ + gt ) dt + σdZt + σ1 dZti ,

(1)

where (µ, σ, σ1 ) are observable constants, Zt is a Brownian motion, and Zti is an independent
Brownian motion that is specific to firm i. The variable gt denotes the impact of the prevailing
government policy on the mean of the profitability process of each firm.5 When gt = 0, the
government policy is “neutral” in that it has no impact on profitability.
The government policy’s impact, gt , is constant while the same policy is in effect. At an
exogenously given time τ , 0 < τ
or not to change its policy.6 As
 old
 g
gt =
g old
 new
g

< T , the government makes an irreversible decision whether
a result, gt is a simple step function of time:
for t ≤ τ
for t > τ if there is no policy change
for t > τ if there is a policy change,

(2)

where g old denotes the impact of the government policy prevailing at time 0. A policy change
replaces g old by g new , thereby inducing a permanent shift in average profitability. A policy
decision becomes effective immediately after its announcement at time τ .
The value of gt is unknown. This key assumption captures the idea that government
policies have an uncertain impact on firm profitability. The prior distributions of both g old
and g new at time 0 are normal with mean zero and known variance σg2:

g ∼ N 0, σg2 ,

(3)

for both g ≡ g old and g ≡ g new . The prior is the same for both policies, the one prevailing
at time 0 and the one that might replace it at time τ . Both policies are expected to be
neutral a priori.7 We refer to σg as policy uncertainty. The value of gt is unknown for all
t ∈ [0, T ] to all agents—the government as well as the investors who own the firms.
5

The simplifying assumption that the government policy affects all firms equally is relaxed in Section 6.
The simplifying assumption that τ is exogenous allows us to obtain analytical results. Section 4. shows
numerically that all of our key results survive when τ is endogenous, i.e., when the government chooses the
optimal time to change its policy.
7
Any government effect on profitability that is stable across policy changes is included in µ.
6

6

The firms are owned by a continuum of identical investors who maximize expected utility
derived from terminal wealth. For all j ∈ [0, 1], investor j’s utility function is given by
1−γ
WTj
j
,
(4)
u WT =
1−γ

where WTj is investor j’s wealth at time T and γ > 1 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
At time 0, all investors are equally endowed with shares of firm stock. Stocks pay liquidating
dividends at time T .8 Investors observe whether a policy change takes place at time τ .
When making its policy decision at time τ , the government maximizes the same objective
function as the investors, except that it also faces a nonpecuniary cost (or benefit) associated
with a policy change. The government changes its policy if the expected utility under the

new policy is higher than it is under the old policy. Specifically, the government solves
  1−γ



WT
CWT1−γ
max Eτ
(5)
| no policy change , Eτ
| policy change ,
1−γ
1−γ
R1
where WT = BT = 0 BTi di is the final value of aggregate capital and C is the “political

cost” incurred by the government if a new policy is introduced. Values of C > 1 represent
a cost (e.g., the government must exert effort or burn political capital to implement a new
policy), whereas C < 1 represents a benefit (e.g., the government makes a transfer to a
favored constituency, or it simply wants to be seen doing something).9 The value of C is
randomly drawn at time τ from a lognormal distribution centered at C = 1:


1 2 2
c ≡ log (C) ∼ N − σc , σc ,
(6)
2
where C is independent of the Brownian motions in equation (1). As soon as the value of C
is revealed to the agents at time τ , the government uses it to make the policy decision. We
refer to σc as political uncertainty. Political uncertainty introduces an element of surprise
into policy changes, resulting in stock price reactions at time τ .
Given its objective function in equation (5), the government is “quasi-benevolent”: it is
expected to maximize the investors’ welfare (because E[C] = 1), but also to deviate from
this objective in a random fashion. The assumption that governments do not behave as fully
benevolent social planners is widely accepted in the political economy literature.10 This
8

No dividends are paid before time T because the investors’ preferences (equation (4)) do not involve
intermediate consumption. Firms in our model reinvest all of their earnings, as mentioned earlier.
9
We refer to C as a cost because higher values of C translate into lower utility (since WT1−γ / (1 − γ) < 0).
The assumption that this cost is nonpecuniary simplifies the analysis. Pecuniary costs would eventually be
passed on to the investors, and modeling this transmission would be distracting given our objectives.
10
Drazen (2000) provides a useful overview of this literature.

7

literature presents various reasons why governments might not maximize aggregate welfare.
For example, governments often redistribute wealth.11 Governments tend to be influenced
by special interest groups.12 They might also be susceptible to corruption.13 Instead of modeling these political forces explicitly, we adopt a simple reduced-form approach to capturing
departures from benevolence. In our model, all aspects of politics—redistribution, corruption, special interests, etc.—are bundled together in the political cost C. The randomness of
C reflects the difficulty in predicting the outcome of a political process, which can be complex and non-transparent. For example, it can be hard to predict the outcome of a battle
between special interest groups. By modeling politics in such a reduced-form fashion, we are
able to focus on the asset pricing implications of government policy changes.
Our modeling of government policies also merits some discussion. We impose the same
prior distribution in equation (3) on all policies. In reality, the priors might differ across
policies. For example, if a potential new policy has already been tried in the past, the agents
may believe they have more prior information about that policy’s impact, so they might
assign a lower prior variance to it. The lower variance might not necessarily be warranted,
though, because the same policy implemented at a different time in a different environment
may have a different impact on profitability. Our assumption that all policies are perceived
by agents as identical ex ante seems like a natural starting point in an asset pricing analysis.
The simplicity of our setup allows us to derive interesting analytical results.
We interpret policy changes as government actions that change the economic landscape,
such as major reforms. Political uncertainty, σc , is the uncertainty about whether a reform
will take place. Policy uncertainty, σg , is the uncertainty about the effect of the reform on
profitability. We show below that both σc and σg affect stock prices in interesting ways.

2.1.

Learning

The value of gt is unknown to all agents, investors and the government alike. At time 0, all
agents share the same prior beliefs about gt , summarized by the distribution in equation (3).
All agents learn about gt in the same Bayesian fashion by observing the realized profitabilities
of all firms. The learning process is described in the following proposition.
11

Redistribution is a major theme in political economy. Prominent studies of redistribution include Alesina
and Rodrik (1994) and Persson and Tabellini (1994), among others. Our model is not well suited for analyzing
redistribution effects because all of our investors are identical ex ante, for simplicity.
12
See, for example, Grossman and Helpman (1994) and Coate and Morris (1995).
13
See, for example, Shleifer and Vishny (1993) and Rose-Ackerman (1999).

8

Proposition 1. Observing the continuum of signals dΠit in equation (1) across all firms
i ∈ [0, 1] is equivalent to observing a single aggregate signal about gt :
dst = (µ + gt ) dt + σdZt .

(7)

Under the prior in equation (3), the posterior for gt at any time t ∈ [0, T ] is given by

gt ∼ N b
gt , σ
bt2 .

(8)

For all t ≤ τ , the mean and the variance of this posterior distribution evolve as
db
gt = σ
bt2σ −1dZbt
1
σ
bt2 = 1
1 ,
+
t
2
σ
σ2

(9)
(10)

g

where the “expectation error” dZbt is given by dZbt = (dst − Et (dst )) /σ for all t ∈ [0, T ].

If there is no policy change at time τ , then the processes (9) and (10) hold also for t > τ .
If there is a policy change at τ , then b
gt jumps from b
gτ to zero right after the policy change,
and for t > τ , b
gt follows the process in equation (9). In addition, for t > τ , σ
bt follows
σ
bt2 =

1
σg2

1
.
+ (t − τ )
1
σ2

(11)

Comparing equations (1) and (7), idiosyncratic shocks dZti wash out upon aggregating
infinitely many independent signals. The aggregate signal in equation (7) is the average
profitability across firms. When this signal is higher than expected, the agents revise their
beliefs about gt upward, and vice versa (see equation (9)). Uncertainty about gt declines
deterministically over time due to learning (see equations (10) and (11)), except for a discrete
jump up at time τ in case of a policy change. A policy change resets the agents’ beliefs about

gt from the posterior N (b
gτ , σ
bτ2) to the prior N 0, σg2 , where σ
bτ < σg due to learning between
times 0 and τ . Before time τ , the agents learn about g old ; after τ , they learn about g old or
g new , depending on whether a policy change occurs (see equation (2)).

2.2.

Optimal Changes in Government Policy

After a period of learning about g old , the government decides whether or not to change
its policy at time τ . If the change occurs, the value of gt changes from g old to g new and
the perceived distribution of gt changes from the posterior in equation (8) to the prior in
equation (3). According to equation (5), the government changes its policy if and only if


 1−γ

CBT1−γ
BT
Eτ
(12)
| policy change > Eτ
| no policy change .
1−γ
1−γ
9

Since government policy affects future profitability, the two expectations in equation (12)
R1
are computed under different stochastic processes for the aggregate capital Bt = 0 Btidi.
We show in the Technical Appendix that the aggregate capital at time T is given by
BT = Bτ e

“
”
2
µ+g− σ2 (T −τ )+σ(ZT −Zτ )

,

(13)

where g ≡ g old if there is no policy change and g ≡ g new if there is one. Evaluating the
expectations in equation (12) based on equation (13) yields the following proposition.
Proposition 2. The government changes its policy at time τ if and only if

where

gτ < g(c) ,
b


σg2 − σ
bτ2 (γ − 1) (T − τ )
c
g(c) = −
.
−
2
(T − τ ) (γ − 1)

(14)

(15)

The government follows a simple cutoff rule: it changes its policy if the posterior mean
of the old policy’s impact, b
gτ , is below a given threshold. That is, a policy is replaced if
its effect on firm profitability is perceived as sufficiently unfavorable. The two terms on the

right-hand side of equation (15) reflect the government’s economic and political motives.
The first term reflects the increase in risk associated with adopting a new policy (σg > σ
bτ ).

Since γ > 1, higher policy uncertainty σg reduces g(c), making a policy change less likely.
The second term reflects the political cost or benefit incurred by the government if the new
policy is adopted. If c > 0, the government incurs a cost, the second component is negative,
and the new policy is less likely to be adopted. If c < 0, the government benefits from a
policy change and the new policy is more likely to be adopted. Since the investors do not
know c, they cannot fully anticipate whether a policy change will occur. The only exception
occurs in the special case of σc = 0; in that case, the investors know the threshold g(c), so
they can fully predict the outcome of the government’s policy decision.
The investors expect c to be close to zero, so their expectation of g(c) is close to g(0).14
Since σg > σ
bτ , equation (15) implies g(0) < 0. That is, in expectation, a policy is replaced

if its impact is perceived as sufficiently negative. It is not enough for b
gτ to be negative; it

must be sufficiently negative for the expected gain from a policy change to outweigh the
higher risk associated with a new policy.15 For the posterior mean of g old to be negative at

Recall from equation (6) that E(C) = 1 implies E(c) = −σc2 /2 rather than zero for c = log (C).
The political economy literature recognizes that uncertainty associated with a policy change may lead
to a bias toward status quo, but the literature focuses mostly on the uncertainty about how the gains and
losses from reform will be distributed across individuals (e.g., Fernandez and Rodrik (1991)). Our investors
are homogeneous; we focus on uncertainty about the aggregate effects of a policy change.
14

15

10

time τ while the prior mean is zero, Bayes’ rule implies that the signal received by investors
before time τ —realized profitability—must be unexpectedly low. Therefore, Proposition 2
implies that policy changes are expected to occur after periods of unexpectedly low realized
profitability.16 We refer to such periods as “downturns.”
To illustrate this implication, we plot the expected dynamics of profitability conditional
on a policy change. We choose a set of plausible parameter values, which are summarized in
Table 1. We simulate many samples of shocks in our economy and record the paths of b
gt and
realized profitability in each sample. Realized profitability is the average profitability across

all firms, reported in excess of µ so that its unconditional mean is zero. We split the samples
into two groups, depending on whether the government changes its policy at time τ .17 We
then plot the average paths of b
gt and realized profitability across all samples within both
groups. Panel A of Figure 1 plots b
gt (solid line) and profitability (dashed line) conditional

on a policy change at time τ . Panel B plots the same quantities conditional on no policy
change. Both panels also plot the average value of the cutoff g(c) (dotted line).
Panel A of Figure 1 shows that policy changes tend to be preceded by periods of low

realized profitability. Between times 0 and τ = 10 years, profitability averages -2.5% per
year. This negative profitability is due to ex-post conditioning on b
gτ < g(c). The average
value of g(c) is -0.5% per year, and the average value of b
gt gradually falls from 0 to -1.5% per

year between times 0 and τ . For the posterior mean b
gt to decline in this manner, realized
profitability must be below b
gt , as discussed earlier. When the policy changes at time τ , both
gt and profitability jump up to zero, on average, and stay there until time T = 20 since there
b
is no more ex-post conditioning after time τ .

Panel B of Figure 1 shows the opposite but milder patterns when there is no policy
change. Due to ex-post conditioning on b
gτ > g(c), the average value of b
gt rises from 0 to
1% per year at time τ , and average realized profitability is 1.5% until time τ . After time τ ,
the average b
gt remains unchanged at 1% because the policy remains the same. Profitability
therefore jumps from 1.5% to 1% at time τ , and it stays there until time T .

Figure 2 shows how the expected dynamics of profitability around policy changes depend
16

Similar results have been obtained in the political economy literature by using different mechanisms.
Rodrik (1996, p.27) writes: “Reform naturally becomes an issue only when current policies are perceived to
be not working.” According to Drazen (2000, p.449), “it is striking how little formal empirical testing there
has been of the view that a crisis is necessary for significant policy change.” An early exception is Bruno and
Easterly (1996), who find that inflation crises tend to be followed by reforms. Drazen and Easterly (2001)
and Alesina, Ardagna, and Trebbi (2006) also find evidence supporting the hypothesis that crises induce
reforms, although the former study finds this evidence only for a subset of the crisis indicators.
17
A policy change occurs in about 38% of all simulated samples.

11

on policy uncertainty and political uncertainty. Each of the four panels is analogous to Panel
A of Figure 1. Whereas Figure 1 is constructed using the values from Table 1, σg = 2% and
σc = 10%, Figure 2 uses the values of σg = 1% and 3% per year, and σc = 0 and 20%.
Figure 2 shows that the downturns preceding policy changes tend to be worse when σg is
larger. Larger values of σg imply more negative expected values of g(c), which imply steeper
declines in b
gt conditional on b
gτ < g(c). To induce steeper declines in b
gt , realized profitability
must be more negative. For σg = 3%, realized profitability before time τ is as low as -4% per
year. The effect of σc is weaker. Changing σc from 0 to 20% has a negligible effect on the

average value of g(c), which is close to g(0). The main effect of σc is that when σc is higher,
large negative values of c are more likely, so a policy change is more likely to occur even if b
gt
is high. For example, changing σc from 0 to 20% increases the likelihood of a policy change

from 46% to 50% when σg = 1%, and from 30% to 31% when σg = 3%. As a result, the
pre-τ declines in b
gt and profitability are less steep, on average.

Having established the government’s optimal policy rule and its key implications for

profitability, we are ready to analyze the asset pricing implications. The following section
presents our main results on the stock price dynamics around policy changes.

3.

Stock Prices

Firm i’s stock represents a claim on the firm’s liquidating dividend at time T , which is equal
R1
to BTi . The investors’ total wealth at time T is equal to BT = 0 BTi di. Stock prices adjust
to make the investors hold all of the firms’ stock. In addition to stocks, there is also a zero
coupon bond in zero net supply, which makes a unit payoff at time T with certainty. We
use this risk-free bond as the numeraire.18 Under the assumption of market completeness,
standard arguments imply that the state price density is uniquely given by
πt =

1  −γ 
Et BT ,
λ

(16)

where λ is the Lagrange multiplier from the utility maximization problem of the representative investor. The market value of stock i is given by the standard pricing formula


πT i
i
Mt = Et
B .
πt T

(17)

18
This assumption is equivalent to assuming a risk-free rate of zero. Such an assumption is innocuous
because without intermediate consumption, there is no intertemporal consumption choice that would pin
down the interest rate. This modeling choice ensures that interest rate fluctuations do not drive our results.

12

3.1.

Stock Price Reaction to the Announcement of a Policy Change

When the government announces its policy decision at time τ , stock prices jump. The
direction and size of the jump depend on whether the government decides to change or
maintain its policy, as well as on the extent to which this decision is unexpected. We derive
a closed-form solution for each firm’s “announcement return,” defined as the instantaneous
stock return at time τ conditional on the announcement of a change in government policy.19
Proposition 3. Each firm’s stock return at the announcement of a policy change is given by
R (b
gτ ) =

(1 − p (b
gτ )) F (b
gτ ) (1 − G (b
gτ ))
,
gτ )) F (b
gτ ) G (b
gτ )
p (b
gτ ) + (1 − p (b

(18)

where
1

F (b
gτ ) = e−γbgτ (T −τ )− 2 γ
G (b
gτ ) = e

2 (T −τ )2

(σg2 −bστ2 )

gτ (T −τ )− 12 (1−2γ)(T −τ )2
b

p (b
gτ ) = N

(19)

(σg2 −bστ2 )

gτ (1 − γ) (T − τ ) −
b

2

σc2


(1 − γ)
(T − τ )2 σg2 − σ
bτ2 ; − , σc2
2
2

!

(20)
,

(21)

and N(x; a, b) denotes the c.d.f. of a normal distribution with mean a and variance b.
The function in equation (21) is the probability of a policy change perceived by the

investors just before time τ . According to Proposition 2, p (b
gτ ) = Prob b
gτ < g(c) . Since
the investors observe gbτ but not c, p (b
gτ ) can be expressed as the probability that c is
below a given threshold, implying equation (21). The rest of Proposition 3 follows from the
comparison of stock prices right before and right after the policy decision at time τ . Right
after time τ , at time τ +, the market value of each firm i takes one of two values:

(T −τ )2 σg2
 M i,yes = B i e(µ−γσ2 )(T −τ )+ 1−2γ
2
if policy changes
τ+
τ+
i
Mτ + =
(T −τ )2 σ
bτ2
 M i,no = B i e(µ−γσ2 +bgτ )(T −τ )+ 1−2γ
2
if policy does not change
τ+
τ+

(22)

The values of the market-to-book (M/B) ratios, Mti /Bti , are equal across firms for all t
because all firms are identical ex ante. We show that right before time τ , the market value
of firm i is given by
i,no
Mτi = ωMτi,yes
+ + (1 − ω) Mτ + ,

(23)

where the weight ω, which is always between 0 and 1, is given by
ω=
19

pτ
,
gτ )
pτ + (1 − pτ ) F (b

(24)

The stock return conditional on the announcement of no change in policy is analyzed in Section 3.2.

13

using the abbreviated notation pτ ≡ p (b
gτ ). As one would expect, ω increases with pτ , with
pτ → 0 implying ω → 0 and pτ → 1 implying ω → 1. The announcement return R (b
gτ ) in
equation (18) is given by the ratio of the quantities in equations (22) and (23):
R (b
gτ ) =

Mτi,yes
+
−1 .
Mτi

(25)

To gain some intuitive insight into the announcement return R (b
gτ ), recall that a policy
change replaces a policy whose impact is perceived to be distributed as N(b
gτ , σ
bτ2) by a policy
whose impact is perceived as N(0, σg2 ). Relative to the old policy, the new policy typically
increases the firms’ expected future cash flows (because b
gτ must be below a threshold that
is typically negative).20 However, the new policy also increases the discount rates due to its

higher uncertainty (because σg > σ
bτ due to learning). The cash flow effect pushes stock prices
up, whereas the discount rate effect pushes them down. Either effect can win, depending on
gτ and the parameter values. The following two corollaries describe the behavior of R (b
b
gτ )

when risk aversion γ > 1 takes extreme values.

Corollary 1. As risk aversion γ → ∞, the announcement return R (b
gτ ) → −1 for any b
gτ .

Corollary 2. As risk aversion γ → 1, the expected value of the announcement return goes

to zero (E {R (b
gτ )} → 0), where the expectation is computed with respect to b
gτ as of time 0.

Both corollaries follow quickly from Proposition 3. When γ → ∞, the discount rate effect
discussed above dwarfs the cash flow effect and stocks lose all of their value when the more
uncertain policy is installed. In this limiting case, the probability of a policy change goes
to zero. By continuity, Corollary 1 implies that if risk aversion is large, policy changes are

unlikely but if they do occur, stock prices fall dramatically. When γ → 1, the discount rate
effect and the cash flow effect cancel out, on average.

3.1.1.

When is the Announcement Return Negative?

In this subsection, we derive the conditions under which the announcement return R (b
gτ ) < 0.
Proposition 4. The market value of each firm drops at the announcement of a policy change
(i.e., R (b
gτ ) < 0) if and only if
20

gτ > g ∗ ,
b

(26)

To clarify the word “typically,” exceptions occur if the government derives an unexpectedly large political
benefit from changing its policy. If c is sufficiently negative, the cutoff g(c) in equation (15) can be positive,
and the old policy can be replaced even if it has a positive perceived impact on profitability.

14

where
g

∗

= −

σg2

−

σ
bτ2





1
(T − τ ) γ −
.
2

(27)

Proposition 4 shows that stock prices drop at the announcement of a new policy unless
the old policy is perceived as having a sufficiently negative impact on profitability. The
relative importance of the cash flow and discount rate effects depends on b
gτ . Under (26),
the discount rate effect is stronger and the announcement return is negative. Formally, (26)
implies G (b
gτ ) > 1, resulting in R (b
gτ ) < 0 (see equations (18) and (20)).

Combining the results in Propositions 2 and 4, stock prices drop at the announcement of
a policy change if and only if
g∗ < b
gτ < g(c) .

(28)

That is, b
gτ must be sufficiently low for the policy change to occur (Proposition 2), but it must
be sufficiently high for the discount rate effect to overcome the cash flow effect (Proposition
4). Comparing the definitions of g(c) and g ∗ in equations (15) and (27),

γ
c
g(c) − g ∗ =
+ σg2 − σ
bτ2 (T − τ ) .
(29)
(T − τ ) (1 − γ)
2

The first term on the right-hand side of equation (29) is expected to be close to zero. The
second term is always positive, so g(c) − g ∗ is generally positive, and its magnitude (and
thus also the size of the interval for which the condition (28) holds) increases with σg .

Since g ∗ in equation (27) can also be expressed as g ∗ = g(0) − σg2 − b
στ2 (T − τ ) γ/2, we

have g ∗ < g(0) < 0. Figure 3 illustrates four possible locations of b
gτ relative to g ∗ , g(0),
and zero. Also plotted is the distribution of g(c), as perceived by investors (who do not

observe c) just before time τ . This normal distribution is centered at a value just above g(0)

(see equations (6) and (15)). This distribution, along with the values of g ∗ and g(0), are
computed based on the parameters in Table 1. The shaded area represents the probability
of a policy change, as perceived by the investors just before time τ .
In Panel A of Figure 3, gbτ is very low, and the probability of a policy change is nearly

one. Since b
gτ < g ∗ , stock prices rise at the announcement of a policy change. Given the high
probability of such a change, the price increase will be small because most of it is already

priced in. In contrast, stock prices plunge in the unlikely event of no policy change, which
occurs if such a change imposes a very large political cost on the government.
In Panels B through D, b
gτ > g ∗ , so stock prices fall if the policy is changed. In Panel
B, g ∗ < b
gτ < g(0), and the policy change reduces stock prices even though it increases
15

the investors’ expected utility. Stock prices are lower due to higher discount rates, but the
expected utility is higher due to higher expected wealth. Expected utility and stock prices
need not move in the same direction because stock prices are related to marginal utility
rather than the level of utility. In Panel D, b
gτ > 0, indicating that the prevailing policy is

boosting profitability. The probability of a policy change is then small, but should such a

change occur (if c << 0), the stock price reaction will be strongly negative. If the government
derives an unexpectedly large political benefit from changing its policy, it replaces even a
policy that appears to work well, and stock prices exhibit a large drop as a result.
Figure 3 captures uncertainty about c while conditioning on b
gτ . Such a perspective is

relevant at time τ when b
gτ is known, but less so before time τ while gbτ is uncertain. As of
time 0, the perceived distribution of gbτ is N(0, σg2 −b
στ2 ). Therefore, the values of b
gτ considered
in Panel A of Figure 3, for which stock prices rise at the announcement of a policy change,

are less likely than those in Panels B through D, for which stock prices fall. The distribution
of R (b
gτ ) that is relevant from the perspective of an econometrician (or an investor at time 0)

must incorporate uncertainty about both c and b
gτ . We integrate out all of that uncertainty
in computing the expected value of R (b
gτ ) in the following subsection.
3.1.2.

The Expected Announcement Return (EAR)

We define the expected announcement return (EAR) as the expected value of R (b
gτ ) after
integrating out all uncertainty about c and b
gτ as of time 0 and conditioning on b
gτ < g(c):
EAR ≡ E {R(b
gτ )|Policy Change} .

(30)

Note that EAR is the return that we expect to see at the announcement of a policy change—
the expected value of the return at time τ conditional on a policy change at the same time
τ . Given the conditioning on a contemporaneous event, EAR does not represent the more
traditional expectation of a future return based on information available today. (The latter
expected returns are analyzed in Section 3.2.) Instead, EAR is the expected return relevant
from an event study perspective. The following proposition presents our main result.
Proposition 5. The expected announcement return is negative (EAR < 0).
According to Proposition 5, stock prices are expected to fall at the announcement of
a policy change. This result relies on the government’s quasi-benevolence. Since the government is expected to maximize the investors’ welfare, the government’s value-enhancing
policy decisions are mostly expected by the market participants. Positive announcement
16

returns tend to occur when the policy change is widely anticipated (b
gτ < g ∗ , see Panel A of
Figure 3). The positive effect of the policy change is thus largely priced in before the announcement, resulting in a weak price reaction to the announcement. In contrast, negative
announcement returns occur when the policy change comes as a bigger surprise (Panels B
through D), so the price reaction is stronger. In short, the positive returns tend to be small
and the negative returns tend to be large. In addition, the negative announcement returns
are fairly likely since even some utility-increasing policy changes reduce market values, as
explained earlier while discussing Panel B of Figure 3.
To understand Proposition 5, it also helps to realize that when investors observe a policy
change, they revise their beliefs about the political cost C. Before time τ , they expect C
to be one (see equation (6)), but conditional on a policy change at time τ , the expectation
drops below one: E(C|policy change) < E(C) = 1. This fact follows from the condition
(14) for the optimality of a policy change, which can be rewritten as c < ξ(b
gτ ), where ξ(b
gτ )
is a decreasing function of b
gτ . (The expected value of c conditional on c < ξ(b
gτ ) is less

than the unconditional expected value of c.) As a result, investors expect the government to
derive a political benefit from any policy change. Even though C does not affect stock prices
directly, it adds noise to the policy decision. Observing a policy change, investors infer that
the increase in risk is certain but the increase in cash flows is not, and stock prices typically
fall. They fall more when b
gτ is higher because the policy change is then more likely to be
politically motivated. After integrating b
gτ out, we prove that EAR< 0.

The magnitude of EAR depends on uncertainty about government policy. We relate EAR

to σg and σc in Figure 4. We compute EAR by averaging the announcement returns R (b
gτ )
across all simulated paths for which a policy change occurs at time τ . The parameter values
are from Table 1, as before, except that we vary σg and σc .
Figure 4 shows that EAR is more negative for larger values of σg and σc . Fixing σc = 20%,
EAR is only -0.3% for σg = 1% but -2% for σg = 3%. When σg is larger, so is the risk
associated with a new policy, and so is the discount rate effect that pushes stock prices
down. Fixing σg = 2%, EAR is -0.5% for σc = 10% and -1.1% for σc = 20%. When σc is
larger, so is the element of surprise in the announcement of a new policy. Also note that
when either uncertainty is zero, so is the announcement return. When σc = 0, the policy
change is fully anticipated, and all of its effect is priced in before the announcement. When
σg = 0, one neutral policy is replaced by another, making no difference to investors.

17

3.1.3.

The Determinants of the Announcement Return

In this subsection, we analyze two key determinants of the announcement return R (b
gτ ) from
equation (18): the length and depth of the downturns that precede policy changes. Recall
that a downturn is defined as a period of unexpectedly low realized profitability. We vary
the downturns’ length and depth in a simple way. We measure the length of a downturn as
LENGTH = τ − t0 ,

(31)

where we set b
gt0 = 0. At time t0, the posterior mean of the policy impact is then equal
to the prior mean, but after t0 , b
gt generally falls, conditional on a policy change at time τ
(Proposition 2). We refer to t0 as the beginning of a downturn.

We measure the depth of a downturn by the number of standard deviations by which b
gt

drops during the downturn. Conditional on gbt0 = 0, the distribution of b
gτ is normal with
p
2
2
mean zero and standard deviation Std(b
gτ ) = σ
bt0 − σ
bτ . We define
DEPTH =

gbτ
.
Std(b
gτ )

(32)

Panel A of Figure 5 plots the announcement return as a function of LENGTH and
DEPTH. Panel B plots the corresponding probability of a policy change, as perceived by
investors just before time τ (cf. Figure 3). Whenever this probability is close to one, the
announcement return is close to zero because the announcement is already priced in. When
the probability is smaller than one, a policy change contains an element of surprise, and the
announcement return is nonzero. The parameter values are from Table 1, as before.
Figure 5 shows that DEPTH has a large effect on the announcement return. When the
downturn is shallow (i.e., DEPTH is not a large negative value), the announcement return
is negative. This result makes sense given Proposition 4, since DEPTH is proportional to
gτ . The magnitude of the announcement return can be as large as -10% if the downturn
b

is sufficiently shallow. Even larger returns can happen if c << 0, i.e., if the government
derives a huge political benefit from changing its policy. In contrast, when the downturn

is sufficiently deep, the announcement return is essentially zero. The return is positive
(Proposition 4), but it is small because the policy change is fully anticipated (Panel B).
The announcement return also depends on LENGTH. Figure 5 shows that shorter downturns are followed by more negative announcement returns, holding DEPTH at a constant
negative value. The reason is that as LENGTH increases, so does Std(b
gτ ) in equation (32),
18

so does the negative magnitude of b
gτ required to keep DEPTH constant, and so does the
probability of a policy change, resulting in a smaller element of surprise in the announcement
of such a change. (This effect reverses when DEPTH is positive because higher LENGTH

then implies a higher positive magnitude of b
gτ and thus a lower probability of a policy
change.) Put differently, shorter downturns are less likely to induce a policy change, so if

such a change occurs, it comes as a bigger surprise. It is also more likely to be politically
motivated, resulting in a more negative announcement return.
The announcement returns in Figure 5 are nonpositive, but they can be positive for
other parameter values. Recall from equation (29) that the size of the interval for which
prices drop at the announcement increases with σg . If σg is small, so is the interval, and
positive announcement returns are more likely. To see this effect, consider Figure 6, which is
analogous to Figure 5, except that the baseline value σg = 2% is replaced by σg = 1% (left
panels) and σg = 3% (right panels). The patterns for σg = 3% are similar to those in Figure
5 but more pronounced; the announcement return can be -20% after a shallow downturn.
However, for σg = 1%, the announcement return can be positive for downturns that are
neither too short nor too shallow. These positive returns are small, less than 0.5%. Slightly
larger positive announcement returns obtain when we raise σc from 10% to 20%, but even
those returns are smaller than 1% (results are not shown to save space).
Figures 5 and 6 show that shorter downturns are followed by more negative announcement
returns when we hold DEPTH fixed at a constant negative value. The same result holds in
expectation when we integrate out uncertainty about DEPTH. Figure 7 is the counterpart of
Figure 4: it plots EAR for two different LENGTHs: 5 years in Panel A and 1 year in Panel
B. (In Figure 4, LENGTH = 10 years.) Figure 7 shows that EAR grows more negative as
LENGTH shortens. For example, in the benchmark case from Table 1, in which σg = 2%
and σc = 10%, EAR goes from -0.5% for LENGTH = 10 (Figure 4) to -1% for LENGTH = 5
to -4% for LENGTH = 1 (Figure 7). The effect of LENGTH is even stronger when there is
more government-induced uncertainty: when σg = 3% and σc = 20%, EAR goes from -2%
for LENGTH = 10 to -4.6% for LENGTH = 5 to -18% for LENGTH = 1.

3.1.4.

The Distribution of Stock Returns on the Announcement Day

In this subsection, we examine the probability distribution of stock returns on the day of
the announcement of a policy change, without conditioning on DEPTH. This distribution
is relevant from the empirical perspective if the event study of the announcement effects is

19

conducted on daily returns, which is commonly done.21 The announcement day returns have
a jump component R(b
gτ ) pertaining to the instant of the announcement, as well as a diffusion
component Mτ +day /Mτ − 1 covering the rest of the announcement day. Figure 8 plots the
distribution of the announcement day returns across all simulated paths for which a policy
change occurs at time τ . The randomness in the simulations comes from the randomness in
gbτ and c. The downturn length is 5 years. The parameter values are from Table 1, as before,
except that we vary σg and σc .
Figure 8 shows that the distribution of the announcement day returns is strongly leftskewed. The mode is close to zero, returns larger than 2% are extremely rare, whereas
returns below -5% and even -10% are more common, especially when σg and σc are large.
This skewness is due to the asymmetry discussed earlier. Positive announcement returns
tend to occur when the policy change is widely anticipated, whereas negative returns occur
when the policy change comes as a bigger surprise. We also see that as we increase σg or
σc , the probability mass in Figure 8 shifts to the left, consistent with our earlier result that
EAR is more negative when σg or σc are larger.

3.2.

Stock Price Dynamics

The dynamics of stock prices are closely related to the dynamics of the stochastic discount
factor from equation (16), which are described by the following proposition.
Proposition 6. The stochastic discount factor (SDF) follows the process
dπt
= −σπ,t dZbt + Jπ 1{t=τ } ,
πt

(33)

where dZbt is the Brownian motion from Proposition 1, 1{t=τ } is an indicator function equal
to one for t = τ and zero otherwise, and the jump component Jπ is given by
( yes (1−pτ )(1−F (bgτ ))
Jπ = pτ +(1−pτ )F (bgτ ) if policy changes
Jπ =
gτ )−1)
τ (F (b
Jπno = pτp+(1−p
if policy does not change .
gτ )
τ )F (b
For t > τ , σπ,t is given by
21



σπ,t = γ σ + (T − t) σ
bt2σ −1 ,

(34)

(35)

For example, Savor and Wilson (2010) use daily returns to analyze the announcement effects of macroeconomic news announcements regarding employment, inflation, and interest rates. If the event study is
conducted on tick-by-tick returns instead, the distribution of the instantaneous return R (b
gτ ) would be more
relevant. That distribution is similar to the distribution of the announcement day returns plotted here,
except that it looks even more left-skewed and it has less probability mass above zero.

20

and for t ≤ τ , it is given in equation (A2) in the Appendix.
Proposition 6 shows that SDF jumps at time τ when the policy decision is announced.
The magnitude of the jump depends on whether the policy is changed as well as on b
gτ . The
jumps Jπyes and Jπno always have the opposite signs. The expected value of the jump, as

perceived just before time τ , is zero: Eτ (Jπ ) = pτ Jπyes + (1 − pτ ) Jπno = 0. It is also easy to
show that Jπyes < 0 (and Jπno > 0) if and only if b
gτ < g ∗∗, where g ∗∗ is given by

γ
g ∗∗ = − (T − τ ) σg2 − σ
bτ2 .
2

(36)

Proposition 7. The return process for stock i is given by

dMti
= µM,tdt + σM,tdZbt + σ1dZti + JM 1{t=τ } ,
i
Mt

where the jump component JM is given by
( yes
JM = R (b
gτ )
JM =
no
JM
= R (b
gτ ) G (b
gτ ) + G (b
gτ ) − 1

if policy changes
if policy does not change .

(37)

(38)

For t > τ , we have

2
µM,t = γ σ + (T − t) σ
bt2σ −1
σM,t = σ + (T − t) σ
bt2σ −1 ,

(39)
(40)

and for t ≤ τ , σM,t and µM,t are given in equations (A4) and (A5) in the Appendix.
Proposition 7 shows that stock returns have two components: a diffusion component and
a jump component. We discuss these components in separate subsections.

3.3.

Stock Price Jump at the Announcement of a Policy Decision

Stock prices jump at time τ when the government announces its policy decision. If the
yes
decision is to change the prevailing policy, the jump JM
is equal to R (b
gτ ), which is given
in equation (18) and analyzed extensively in Section 3.1. If the decision is not to change the
no
policy, the jump JM
in equation (38) involves also the function G (b
gτ ) from equation (20).

Corollary 3. The market value of each firm increases at the announcement of no policy
no
change (i.e., JM
> 0) if and only if gbτ > g ∗, where g ∗ is given in equation (27).
21

yes
no
Comparing Corollary 3 with Proposition 4, we see that the jumps JM
and JM
always

have the opposite signs: whenever one is positive, the other is negative. When b
gτ > g ∗, we
yes
yes
no
no
have JM
< 0 and JM
> 0. When b
gτ < g ∗, we have JM
> 0 and JM
< 0.

In the remainder of this subsection, we focus on the expected value of JM , or the expected

jump in stock prices at the announcement of a policy decision. This expectation captures the
risk premium that investors demand for facing jumps in SDF at time τ . We consider both
conditional and unconditional expectations. The conditional expectation of JM , denoted by
Eτ (JM ), is perceived by agents just before time τ :
yes
no
Eτ (JM ) = pτ JM
+ (1 − pτ ) JM
.

(41)

This conditional expectation conditions on b
gτ , which is observable just before the policy
decision. We also compute the unconditional expectation E (JM ) = E (Eτ (JM )) by integrat
ing out uncertainty about b
gτ as of time 0. (Recall that b
gτ ∼ N 0, σg2 − b
στ2 .) This latter
expectation matters to an econometrician who averages jumps in stock prices across all announcements of policy decisions, without controlling for b
gτ . Neither expectation conditions
on whether the decision changes the policy or not, so that both Eτ (JM ) and E (JM ) can be
viewed as expected returns (or risk premia) in the traditional forward-looking sense.
3.3.1.

The Conditional Jump Risk Premium

Proposition 8. The conditional expected jump in stock prices at time τ , as perceived by
investors just before time τ , is given by
Eτ (JM ) = −

pτ (1 − pτ ) (1 − F (b
gτ )) (1 − G (b
gτ ))
.
gτ ) G (b
gτ )
pτ + (1 − pτ ) F (b

(42)

Corollary 4. We have Eτ (JM ) < 0 if and only if
g∗ < b
gτ < g ∗∗ ,

(43)

where g ∗ is given in equation (27) and g ∗∗ is given in equation (36).
Corollary 4 shows that Eτ (JM ) can be positive or negative, depending on b
gτ .22 This

expected jump, which captures the jump risk premium, is related to the covariance between
the jumps in prices and SDF, as perceived by the agents just before the policy decision:
Eτ (JM ) = −Covτ (Jπ , JM ) ,
22

The size of the interval in (43) is always positive because g∗∗ − g∗ = −g(0) > 0.

22

(44)

where Jπ is given in equation (34). The sign of this covariance depends on whether (43) is
satisfied. If the covariance is positive, upward jumps in marginal utility at time τ tend to be
accompanied by upward jumps in stock prices, which makes stocks an effective hedge against
jumps in SDF. As a result, investors are willing to accept a negative jump risk premium for
holding stocks (i.e., Eτ (JM ) < 0). In contrast, if the covariance is negative, stocks are a
poor hedge against jumps in marginal utility and the jump risk premium is positive.
Corollary 5. As risk aversion γ → ∞, Eτ (JM ) → 0 from above for any value of b
gτ .

Corollary 6. As risk aversion γ → 1, Eτ (JM ) converges to a nonnegative value for any b
gτ .

It converges to zero if and only if b
gτ = − 21 (T − τ ) σg2 − σ
bτ2 .

As γ → ∞, the probability of a policy change goes to zero. Given the diminishing element
of surprise in the policy decision, the jump risk premium diminishes as well. In contrast, the
jump risk premium remains positive almost surely as γ → 1.

3.3.2.

The Unconditional Jump Risk Premium

The expectation E (JM ), which does not condition on gbτ , represents the unconditional jump
risk premium. As noted earlier, E (JM ) is the expected value of the quantity in Proposition
8, where the expectation is taken with respect to b
gτ as of time 0.
Corollary 7. As risk aversion γ → ∞, E (JM ) → 0 from above.

Corollary 8. As risk aversion γ → 1, E (JM ) converges to a positive value.
According to Corollaries 7 and 8, there exist values γ and γ exceeding one such that
E (JM ) > 0 for every γ ∈ (1, γ) as well as for every γ ∈ (γ, ∞). In fact, E (JM ) > 0 appears
to hold for any value of γ. While we are unable to prove E (JM ) > 0 in its full generality (the
analytical challenges are formidable), our numerical investigation supports this statement.
Having evaluated E (JM ) on a large multidimensional grid of parameter values, we have not
found any set of parameters for which E (JM ) > 0 is violated. This result is not surprising
because the condition (43) is unlikely to hold (since g ∗ < g ∗∗ < g(0) < 0, gb0 = 0, and b
gt is
a martingale). We thus conclude that our model implies a positive unconditional premium
for the jump risk associated with the announcements of policy decisions.

Panel A of Figure 9 plots E (JM ) as a function of σg and σc for the parameter values
from Table 1. We set the downturn length to 5 years, so that uncertainty about b
gτ is
23

integrated out as of time t0 = 5 conditional on b
gt0 = 0. The figure shows that the jump

risk premium E(JM ) increases with both σg and σc . In the benchmark case of σg = 2% and
σc = 10%, E(JM ) = 5 basis points; for σg = 3%, it is 10 basis points. These magnitudes
are comparable to the 9.6 basis point jump risk premium estimated by Savor and Wilson
(2010). These authors find that stock market returns tend to be higher on days when news
about inflation, unemployment, or interest rates is announced. We focus on a different kind
of announcements, those of government policy decisions, so Savor and Wilson’s estimates are
not directly comparable to the magnitudes in our Figure 9. Nonetheless, it seems interesting
that the magnitude of the jump risk premium produced by our model is similar to the jump
risk premium estimated empirically for a different kind of market-wide announcements.
yes
no
Panels B and C of Figure 9 plot the unconditional expected jumps E(JM
) and E(JM
),

which are computed analogously to E (JM ) by integrating out uncertainty about b
gτ . Panel

yes
B, showing E(JM
), coincides with Panel A of Figure 7; it is included for symmetry. Panel C
no
of Figure 9 shows that E(JM
) is positive and increasing in both σg and σc , but its magnitude
yes
is much smaller than that of E(JM
). The reason is that the probability-weighted average of

the jumps in Panels B and C is close to zero (see Panel A) and the unconditional probability
of a policy change is less than 0.5. This probability, which is assessed at the beginning of
the downturn, ranges from 11% to 49%, depending on the values of σg and σc (it is 29% in
the benchmark case of σg = 2% and σc = 10%).

3.4.

The Diffusion Component of Stock Returns

Whereas the jump components are nonzero only at time τ , the diffusion components in
equations (33) and (37) drive the dynamics of returns and SDF for all t ∈ (0, T ). Both
components are affected by uncertainty about government policy. The jump component is
driven by the resolution of political uncertainty, whereas the diffusion component is driven by
policy uncertainty. Equations (35), (39), and (40) show that policy uncertainty increases the
volatility of SDF as well as the mean and variance of stock returns. After time τ , σπ,t , µM,t,
and σM,t all vary over time as increasing functions of σ
bt . Similar dependence on uncertainty
about gt is present before time τ . If the policy change occurs at time τ , uncertainty about
gt jumps up (since σg > σ
bτ ), causing upward jumps in σπ,t , µM,t, and σM,t.

Figure 10 plots the expected dynamics of σπ,t , µM,t and σM,t around a policy change. We

simulate many samples of shocks in the model, maintaining b
gt0 = 0 for t0 = 5 to keep the
downturn length at 5 years. (The results for downturn lengths of 1 and 10 years look very
24

similar.) We plot the paths of σπ,t, µM,t and σM,t averaged across the subset of samples in
which a policy change occurs in year τ = 10. The parameters are from Table 1, except for
σg , which takes three different values, 1%, 2%, and 3% per year.
Figure 10 is dominated by the upward jumps in σπ,t , µM,t and σM,t at the time of a policy
change. These jumps are induced by increases in uncertainty about gt , as discussed earlier.
For example, for σg = 2%, σπ,t jumps from 28% to 65% per year, µM,t jumps from 2% to 9%
per year, and σM,t jumps from 12% to 16% per year. The magnitudes of all three quantities
increase in σg : when σg = 3%, both µM,t and σM,t jump to about 25% per year. After time
τ , all quantities gradually fall as a result of the learning-induced gradual decline in b
σt .

Stock returns before time τ are affected by multiple forces. Let pt denote the probability
of a policy change at time τ , as perceived by investors at time t < τ . Fluctuations in pt
contribute to volatility: stock prices fluctuate as investors change their minds about what the
government is going to do. Conditional on a policy change, pt grows towards pτ = 1, and the
volatility induced by fluctuations in pt typically increases as time τ approaches. There are

also two opposite effects. First, σ
bt declines over time due to learning, thereby pushing σπ,t,

µM,t, and σM,t down. Second, when pt increases, the current value of gt becomes less likely
to matter after time τ , making stock prices less sensitive to b
gt . The rising probability of a
policy change makes the current policy less relevant, reducing the sensitivity of stock prices
to time-varying beliefs about this policy. Which of these effects prevails depends on the

parameter values. In Figure 10, all three quantities fall before τ , suggesting that the effect
of growing fluctuations in the probability of a policy change is weaker than the combined
effects of learning and the diminished sensitivity of prices to b
gt .23

Corollary 9. The correlation between the returns of any pair of stocks for t > τ is given by
ρt =

[σ + (T − t) σ
bt2 σ −1]
2

2

bt2σ −1 ] + σ12
[σ + (T − t) σ

.

(45)

For t < τ , the correlation is given in equation (A6) in the Appendix.
For t = τ , the instantaneous correlation is one.

Equation (45) shows that after time τ , the correlation ρt increases with b
σt. Intuitively,
uncertainty about gt increases each stock’s sensitivity to the common factor b
gt , thereby
making returns more correlated. Similar dependence of ρt on σ
bt is present also before time
23

In unreported results for LENGTH=1 year, both µM,t and σM,t fall before τ when σg = 1% and 2%, but
they rise when σg = 3%. In the latter case, the effect of growing fluctuations in the probability of a policy
change prevails over the combined effects of learning and the diminished sensitivity of stock prices to gbt .

25

τ , when ρt depends also on the probability of a policy change. At time τ , ρt = 1 due to the
resolution of political uncertainty, which results in a common jump in stock prices.
Panel D of Figure 10 plots the expected dynamics of ρt around a policy change at time
τ = 10. The correlation jumps up at time τ , for reasons discussed earlier. This jump is
substantial: from 30% to 62% when σg = 2%, and from 39% to 84% when σg = 3%. (We do
not plot the instantaneous jump in ρt to one at time τ .) After time τ , the correlation falls
due to learning. Before time τ , the correlation falls due to the previously-discussed effects
of learning and the diminished price sensitivity to b
gt .

Figure 11 is equivalent to Figure 10, except that it focuses on policy decisions that result

in no policy change. That is, we plot the paths of σπ,t , µM,t , σM,t, and ρt averaged across the
subset of simulated samples in which no policy change occurs at time τ . Unlike in Figure
10, all four quantities drop at τ for σg = 2% and 3%. The main reason behind the drop is
the resolution of political uncertainty at τ . As noted earlier, fluctuations in pt contribute to
stock price volatility before τ . Once the government makes its decision, pt stops fluctuating
and this component of volatility disappears. Under no policy change, there is no opposing
increase in uncertainty about gt (unlike in Figure 10), so the four quantities drop.
The only exception occurs for σg = 1%, for which the four quantities rise slightly at τ . In
this case, the resolution of political uncertainty is outweighed by the increase in stock price
sensitivity to b
gt after time τ . When σg is small, both b
gt and the threshold g(c) are expected

to be close to zero before τ , so that pt is typically nontrivial for t < τ even in those samples
in which no policy change occurs at τ . The nontrivial probability of a policy change reduces
the pre-τ sensitivity of stock prices to b
gt , as discussed earlier. This reduction in sensitivity
is more pronounced on the downside: when b
gt falls, pt increases, raising the probability that

the current gt will not matter after τ and thereby cushioning the stock price drop. However,
once pt jumps to zero at τ , the price sensitivity to b
gt increases, pushing volatility up.

3.5.

Price Dynamics When Policy Changes Are Precluded

In this subsection, we compare the model-implied stock prices with their counterparts in
the hypothetical scenario in which policy changes are precluded. This scenario matches our
model in all respects except that the government cannot change its policy at time τ (and
investors know that). First, we compare the aggregate stock market values at time 0, M0,
given the parameter values from Table 1. We find that M0 is smaller when policy changes

26

are precluded: 2.81 vs 3.25.24 However, this result is not general—while it holds for σg = 3%
as well, it reverses for σg = 1% (4.81 vs 4.67). Second, we conduct similar comparisons while
varying the time remaining until the policy decision. We find that if the policy decision is
close enough (eight years or less), the threat of systematic risk going up in the event of a
policy change reduces stock prices relative to the hypothetical scenario, even for σg = 2%.25
The government’s ability to change its policy can thus increase or decrease market values,
depending on the parameter values and the time remaining until the policy decision.
We also compare the expected dynamics of Mt when policy changes are allowed versus
when they are precluded, while conditioning on (14) and the parameters from Table 1. That
is, we compare the values of Mt averaged across the subsample of all simulations in which
a policy change occurs in our model. These average values are plotted in Panels A and
B of Figure 12. Panel A conditions on the downturn length of one year, whereas Panel
B conditions on five years. In both panels, Mt falls before time τ whether policy changes
are allowed or precluded, due to the ex-post conditioning on (14). (Declines in b
gτ tend to
be accompanied by declines in stock prices.) In addition, the average stock price drop at

time τ is clearly visible. Interestingly, in Panel B, Mt around time τ is mostly higher when

policy changes are allowed, but in Panel A, Mt is higher when policy changes are precluded.
That is, the government’s ability to change its policy reduces market values during short
downturns. In both panels, this ability amplifies the stock price decline before time τ .
Panels C and D of Figure 12 plot the expected dynamics of market volatility, σM,t,
conditional on (14). In both panels, after time τ , volatility is higher when policy changes
are allowed. Before time τ , though, the ability to change the policy can increase or decrease
volatility compared to the hypothetical scenario: increase when the downturn lasts one year
(Panel C), but decrease when it lasts five years (Panel D). On the one hand, the ability to
change the current policy decreases pre-τ volatility by reducing the sensitivity of stock prices
to news about the impact of the current policy. On the other hand, this ability increases
pre-τ volatility by introducing fluctuations in the agents’ assessment of the probability of a
policy change. The latter force prevails in Panel C, while the former prevails in Panel D.
Overall, we conclude that the government’s ability to change its policy substantially affects
the level and volatility of stock prices.
24
25

Market values are measured in units of book value at time 0. Recall that we set B0i = 1 for all i.
The results are available upon request. We do not plot them here to save space.

27

4.

Extension: Endogenous Timing of Policy Change

Our benchmark model assumes that the government can change its policy only at a given
time τ . This assumption buys us closed-form solutions for many quantities of interest, and
it allows us to formally prove our propositions and corollaries. In this section, we extend
the model by endogenizing the timing of the policy change. No closed-form solutions are
available but we can solve the problem numerically. To give a preview, we find that our
main results continue to hold in this setting. In addition, we find that policy changes that
happen earlier tend to produce more negative announcement returns.
We assume that the government can change its policy at any time τ ∈ [τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τn ],
where τi = i and n = 19, so the policy change can occur in any year (T = 20). Once the
change is made, it is irreversible. At each time τi , a new value of the political cost Ci is
drawn from the distribution in equation (6). The values of Ci are iid. After observing Ci , the
government decides whether to change its policy, maximizing the same objective as before.
Let V (b
gt , Bt , t) denote the value function given no policy change at or before time t:

  1−γ



BT
BT1−γ
V (b
gt , Bt, t) = Et max Eτ
. (46)
|No change at τ , Eτ C
|Change at τ
τ >t
1−γ
1−γ
This value represents a solution to a partial differential equation, with the final condition
V (b
gT , BT , T ) = BT1−γ /(1 − γ), as detailed in the Appendix. Conditional on a policy change
at a given time τ , the value function at that time is available in closed form:
V (Bτ , τ, c) =

Bτ1−γ c+µ(1−γ)(T −τ )+σg2 (T −τ )2 −γ(1−γ) σ2 (T −τ )
2
e
.
1−γ

(47)

The government changes its policy at time τ = τi if and only if
gτ , Bτi , τi ) .
V (Bτi , τi , c) > V (b

(48)

Figure 13 shows that our key results continue to hold when τ is endogenous. For the
parameter values from Table 1, Panel A plots EAR as a function of σg and σc . This panel
is analogous to Figure 4, in which τ is exogenous. As in Figure 4, EAR is negative and
its magnitude is increasing in both σg and σc . The magnitudes are generally larger than
in Figure 4: for example, in the benchmark case with σg = 2% and σc = 10%, EAR is
-1.9%, compared to -0.5% in Figure 4. The reason why the magnitudes are larger when τ
is endogenous is difficult to convey precisely because the results are obtained numerically.
However, some intuition emerges when we consider Propositions 2 and 4, which apply when τ
28

is exogenous. These propositions imply that a policy change occurs at time τ if b
gτ < g(c), and

that stock prices drop at the announcement if g ∗ < b
gτ < g(c). Under the bold assumption
that these results are approximately relevant also when τ is endogenous, the policy change

will occur at time τi if b
gτi < g(ci ) but b
gτi−1 > g(ci−1 ). Since b
gt has only just fallen below the

threshold at time τi (but not at time τi−1 ), it seems unlikely that b
gτi is so low that it is also

below g ∗, in which case the announcement return would be positive. This intuition is only
approximate, not only because Propositions 2 and 4 rely on exogenous τ but also because
the threshold g(ci ) is time-varying due to time variation in ci . Nonetheless, it is comforting
to see that our main result holds and even strengthens when we endogenize τ .
Panel B of Figure 13 plots the same quantity as Panel A, the expected announcement
return conditional on a policy change, but this time as a function of the time τ at which
the policy is changed. Recall that τ is optimally chosen by the government from the set
τ ∈ [1, 2, . . . , 19]. Whereas Panel A averages the announcement returns across all τ , Panel B
averages them only across those simulations in which the policy change occurs at the given
τ . We keep σc = 10% as in Table 1 and vary σg .26 There are two basic results: (i) the
announcement return is negative for all τ , and (ii) its magnitude is larger when τ is smaller.
For example, holding σg at 2%, the announcement return is -1% for τ = 15 but almost -5%
for τ = 5.27 This result is easy to understand. At each point in time, the government weighs
the costs and benefits of changing the policy. One important cost is that the irreversible
policy change destroys the option to wait (e.g., the political benefit from changing the policy
might be higher in the future). This option value of waiting declines as time passes. Early
on, while this option value is still high, it takes a large political benefit for the policy change
to occur. As a result, policy changes occurring at low τi ’s tend to be politically motivated
and highly unexpected, producing larger negative announcement returns.
Panels C and D of Figure 13 plot the expected dynamics of σM,t and ρt , respectively,
around a policy change. These dynamics are computed by averaging across those simulated
paths in which a policy change occurs at any τ ∈ [1, 2, . . . , 19]. The results are plotted
in event time, with time 0 marking the policy change (time τ ). Panels C and D are the
counterparts of the same panels in Figure 10 for an exogenously given τ . As in Figure 10,
both volatility and correlation jump up at the time of a policy change and decline afterwards.
The magnitudes of these effects are almost as large as those in Figure 10.
26

We vary σg because the effect of σc is predictable and weaker than the effect of σg .
The magnitudes are even more negative for τ < 5 but the simulation results then become less precise
due to the small probability of policy changes for small values of τ . To keep the number of simulations
manageable and the plot smooth rather than jagged, we do not plot the announcement returns for τ < 5.
27

29

Finally, we examine the expected dynamics of profitability and b
gt around a policy change.

In unreported results, we find that both profitability and gbt decline before the policy change.
This pattern indicates that policy changes tend to occur after downturns, as they do when

τ is exogenous (cf. Panel A of Figure 1). To summarize, all of our key results remain
unchanged when τ is endogenous.

5.

Extension: Investment Adjustment

In the benchmark model analyzed in Sections 2. and 3., the firms’ decision-making is not
modeled explicitly. Any investment decisions taken by firms are assumed to be reflected
in the profitability process in equation (1). This process might not adequately capture all
investment decisions. For example, prompted by policy uncertainty, a firm might disinvest by
shutting down its operations, making the process (1) obsolete. In this section, we extend the
model by allowing each firm to make a major investment decision at time τ . To preview our
results, we find that firms often reduce their investment in response to government-induced
uncertainty. We also find that EAR remains negative, as in the benchmark model.
Between times 0 and τ , each firm is fully invested in its risky technology (equation (1)),
as in the benchmark model. At time τ , each firm has the option to disinvest and switch all
of its capital into a risk-free storage technology whose constant return is normalized to zero.
If the firm decides to disinvest, its capital earns the zero rate of return from time τ until
time T ; otherwise its profitability continues to follow equation (1). Partial investment in the
two technologies is ruled out, for simplicity.
All firms make their investment decisions at the same time τ at which the government
makes its policy decision. This simplifying assumption captures the idea that firms decide
on their investment while facing uncertainty about the government’s future policy, and the
government decides on its policy while taking into account its impact on firm investment.
As before, the government and the firms have the same beliefs about government policies
(equations (3) and (8)). We solve for the Nash equilibrium in which the government’s policy
choice is optimal given the firms’ investment decisions, and each firm’s investment decision
is optimal given the decisions of all other firms as well as the government’s decision rule.
Proposition 9. In equilibrium at time τ , a randomly-selected fraction ατ ∈ [0, 1] of firms
continue investing in their risky technologies, while the remaining firms disinvest and park

30

their capital in the risk-free technology. The government changes its policy if and only if
gτ < g (c, ατ ) ,
b

(49)

where the threshold g (c, ατ ) and the equilibrium value of ατ are described below.
Similar to Proposition 2, Proposition 9 shows that a policy change occurs if gbτ is below

a threshold, so that a policy is replaced if it is perceived to have a sufficiently unfavorable

impact on profitability. A key difference from Proposition 2 is that the threshold g (c, ατ )
gτ .
depends on the fraction of investing firms, ατ , which in turn depends on b

To shed light on Proposition 9, we first take the government’s perspective. The govern-

ment makes its policy decision by taking the firms’ investment decisions, ατ , as given. Recall
that a policy change occurs if and only if the condition (12) holds. This condition involves
functions of the aggregate capital BT . Given ατ , the value of BT is given by
BT
= ατ e
Bτ

“
”
2
µ+g− σ2 (T −τ )+σ(ZT −Zτ )

+ (1 − ατ ) ,

(50)

where g ≡ g old if there is no policy change and g ≡ g new if there is a policy change. Using
equation (50), we find that the condition (12) holds if and only if
n
n
1−γ o
1−γ o
yes
no
ec Eτ ατ eε (τ,T ) + (1 − ατ )
< Eτ ατ eε (τ,T ) + (1 − ατ )
,
(51)
where

εi (τ, T ) ∼ N



µ + gi − σ 2/2 (T − τ ) , (T − τ )2 σi2 + σ 2 (T − τ ) ,

(52)

2
2
for i = yes, no, and gno = b
gτ , σno
=σ
bτ2 , gyes = 0, σyes
= σg2. The right-hand side of (51)
decreases with b
gτ , whereas the left-hand side does not depend on b
gτ . Therefore, the condition

(51) implies the cutoff rule in Proposition 9, where the cutoff g (c, ατ ) is the value of b
gτ for
which the left-hand side of (51) equals the right-hand side.

Next, we take the firms’ perspective. At the time of their investment decisions, firms do
not know whether the government’s policy will change. Even though firms observe b
gτ , they

do not observe g (c, ατ ) (because they do not observe c), so they are unable to fully anticipate

the government’s action. Firms invest in a way that maximizes their market value. Market
value obeys equation (17), where the state price density πt in equation (16) is computed
based on equation (50). If firm i decides to switch to the risk-free
τ , then
h technology
i
hat time
i
its market value is Mτi = Bτi (because BTi = Bτi , so that Eτ

πT
πτ

BTi = Eτ

πT
πτ

Bτi = Bτi ).

Therefore, each firm chooses to remain invested in the risky technology if and only if doing
so results in a market-to-book ratio greater than one at time τ .
31

If firm i decides at time τ to remain invested in its risky technology, its market value
right after time τ is given by
h
i

Eτ + eεyes(τ,T ) [ατ eεyes(τ,T ) +(1−ατ )]−γ

i,yes
i

h
i
if policy changes
 Mτ + = Bτ +
Eτ + [ατ eεyes(τ,T ) +(1−ατ )]−γ i
i
h
Mτ + =
Eτ + eεno (τ,T ) [ατ eεno (τ,T ) +(1−ατ )]−γ

i,no
i

i
h
 Mτ + = Bτ +
if policy does not change
Eτ + [ατ eεno (τ,T ) +(1−ατ )]−γ

(53)

Right before time τ , the market value of firm i is given by a weighted average of Mτi,yes
+
and Mτi,no
+ as in equation (23), except that the weights ωτ are given in equation (A9) in
the Appendix. The values of Mτi /Bτi are equal across i because all firms are identical ex
ante. Therefore, if Mτi /Bτi > 1, all firms invest in their risky technologies, and ατ = 1 in
equilibrium. For an interior solution 0 < ατ < 1 to occur, firms must be indifferent between
the risky and risk-free technologies, so that Mτi /Bτi = 1 for all i. Combining this condition
with equation (23), we obtain the condition for equilibrium with 0 < ατ < 1:28
 i yes
 i no
Mτ +
Mτ +
1 = ωτ
+ (1 − ωτ )
(54)
i
Bτ +
Bτi +
The right-hand-side of equation (54) depends on ατ , which affects both ωτ and the M/B
ratios. If there exists a value of ατ strictly between 0 and 1 for which equation (54) holds,
then this is the equilibrium value of ατ in Proposition 9. If instead the right-hand side of
equation (54) exceeds one for all ατ ∈ [0, 1], then ατ = 1 in equilibrium, and all the results
from Sections 2. and 3. hold. If the right-hand side of equation (54) is smaller than one for
all ατ ∈ [0, 1], then the equilibrium features ατ = 0, an uninteresting case of no investment.
For the parameter values in Table 1, the equilibrium solution is ατ = 1 (no disinvestment),
so that all the results from the benchmark model apply also to the problem analyzed here.
To analyze the effect of disinvestment, we reduce the value of µ from its benchmark value
of 10% to 2%, which is the largest integer percentage value for which ατ < 1 in equilibrium
(i.e., for all µ ≥ 3%, the equilibrium has ατ = 1). All other parameter values are in Table 1.
We set the downturn length to five years, as before. We solve the problem numerically and
plot the results in Figure 14.
Panel A of Figure 14 reports the equilibrium value of ατ as a function of σc and σg . We
see that higher values of σc or σg imply lower values of ατ . Fixing σc = 10% and increasing
σg from 1% to 2% to 3%, the fraction of firms that remain invested in the risky technology
decreases from 1 to 0.87 to 0.77, respectively. The effect of σc is weaker: fixing σg = 2%, ατ

28
The same condition is obtained as a first-order condition in an alternative formulation of the problem in
which a social planner chooses ατ to maximize the investors’ expected utility. See the Technical Appendix.

32

decreases from 0.88 to 0.85 as we increase σc from 0 to 20%. In short, both policy uncertainty
and political uncertainty reduce aggregate investment.
Panel B of Figure 14 plots EAR as a function of σc and σg . The plot is similar to that in
Panel A of Figure 7, which corresponds to the benchmark model (in which we force ατ = 1).
For σg = 1%, EAR is the same as in Figure 7 because ατ = 1 in equilibrium (see Panel A of
Figure 14). For σg = 2% and 3%, EAR is more negative than for σg = 1% but less negative
than its counterparts in Figure 7. For example, for σg = 2% and σc = 10%, EAR is -0.6%
compared to -1.1% in Figure 7, and the difference from Figure 7 is even larger for σg = 3%.
The reason is that a substantial fraction of firms disinvest in equilibrium (ατ < 1), thereby
reducing aggregate risk. By reducing their investment, firms essentially undo some of the
uncertainty associated with government policy. Nonetheless, EAR remains negative for all
values of σc and σg , as in the benchmark model.
Panels C and D of Figure 14 plot the expected dynamics of return volatility, σM,t, and
correlation, ρt , respectively, around a policy change at time τ = 10. Both quantities exhibit
patterns very similar to those in Panels C and D of Figure 10, which correspond to the
benchmark model (ατ = 1). The post-τ increases in σM,t and ρt are slightly smaller than in
Figure 10, as one would expect as a result of a reduction in aggregate risk, but the conclusions
are exactly the same. In short, the key asset pricing results from the benchmark model hold
also when we allow for disinvestment.

6.

Extension: Different Policy Exposures

Government policies typically affect all firms, but they may affect some firms more than
others. In this section, we extend our benchmark model by allowing firms to have different
exposures to government policy. We lose many closed-form solutions and propositions, but
we gain some additional insight into the cross-section of expected stock returns. In particular,
we find that firms with larger government exposures tend to have higher expected returns.
The government risk premium can be negative, though, and it is highly state-dependent.
We also find that EAR remains negative, as in the benchmark model.
Firms are divided into N sectors, n = 1, . . . , N, where N is finite. Each sector n is
characterized by a nonnegative “government beta” β n , which represents a loading on the
policy impact. Specifically, the profitability of each firm i in sector n is given by
dΠit = (µ + β n gt ) dt + σdZtn + σ1 dZti ,
33

(55)

where dZtn is a sector-specific shock, dZti is a firm-specific shock, and all Brownian motions
are independent of each other.29 Equation (55) replaces equation (1) in the benchmark model
from Section 2.; the rest of the model remains unchanged. The benchmark model is thus a
special case of this model with β n = 1 and N = 1. Similar to Proposition 1, by observing
each firm’s profitability, all agents effectively receive N signals
dsnt = (µ + β n gt ) dt + σdZtn ,

n = 1, . . . , N.

(56)

Let Bt denote the total capital of all firms and Btn denote the total capital of all firms in
sector n. We denote sector n’s share of total capital by wtn , so that
wtn =

Btn
,
Bt

n = 1, . . . , N.

(57)

The N ×1 vector of these shares, which we denote by wt , represents additional state variables
introduced by the presence of multiple sectors.
Proposition 10. The government changes its policy at time τ if and only if
gτ < g (c, wτ ) ,
b

(58)

where the threshold g (c, wτ ) is described in the Technical Appendix.
Proposition 10 shows that a policy is replaced if its impact on profitability is perceived
as sufficiently unfavorable. This result is similar to Proposition 2, except that the threshold
for b
gτ now depends also on the vector wt of the sector shares.
We solve for stock prices and their dynamics before time τ by using numerical methods.

The pricing results after time τ are in closed form. Those results highlight the importance
of the new state variable wt , which affects not only the level of stock prices but also their
volatility as well as the expected rates of return. All of the asset pricing results, along with
the results on learning, are presented and proved in the Technical Appendix.
Figure 15 plots various results obtained in a two-sector framework (i.e., N = 2). We
denote the two sectors by H and L. The government betas of the two sectors are β H and
β L, where β H ≥ β L. We vary these betas while holding their average equal to one. In the
baseline case, explored in Panel A, we set β H = 1.5 and β L = 0.5. We also vary the relative
size of the high-beta sector, which we denote by wt = BtH /(BtH + BtL ). In the baseline case,
examined in Panel A, we set w0 = 0.5, so that as of time 0, half the firms have high betas
and half have low betas. Unless specified otherwise, the parameters are from Table 1.
29
We could make the dZtn shocks correlated at the cost of additional analytical complexity. Given our
interest in the cross-sectional differences in stock returns as opposed to their level, such cross-correlation
seems to be of second-order importance, so we focus on the simpler case of no correlation.

34

6.1.

The Expected Announcement Return

Panel A of Figure 15 plots EAR, obtained by simulations for the baseline case, as a function
of σg and σc . This panel is the counterpart of Figure 4, which corresponds to the benchmark
model. As in Figure 4, EAR is always negative and its magnitude is increasing in both σg
and σc . The magnitudes of EARs are also close to those from Figure 4.
Panel B of Figure 15 plots EAR as a function of β H − β L, for three different values of w0.
The values of σg and σc are fixed at their baseline values from Table 1. When β H − β L = 0,
both sectors have the same government beta of one. EAR is then -0.6%, which is close to
the corresponding value of -0.5% in the benchmark model (Figure 4). These two values are
different even though all firms have a beta of one in both models. The reason is that the
speeds of learning in the two models are different. The two-sector model has two signals
about gt (equation (56)), whereas there is only one signal in the benchmark model (equation
(7)). As a result, learning in the two-sector model is faster.30 Therefore, the difference
between the prior and posterior variances is larger, and the discount rate effect is stronger;
hence the slightly more negative EAR. Panel B also shows that EAR is more negative for
larger values of w0 . For example, for β H − β L = 1, EAR is -0.4% for w0 = 0.2, -0.6% for
w0 = 0.5, and -0.8% for w0 = 0.8. When w0 is larger, the high-beta firms account for a larger
fraction of the aggregate market. As a result, the risk associated with learning about gt is
harder to diversify and shocks to b
gt are more highly correlated with the stochastic discount

factor. The increase in uncertainty at time τ thus generates a larger discount rate effect,
leading to a more negative EAR when w0 is larger. Finally, it is useful to consider the case
of β H − β L = 2, in which β H = 2 and β L = 0. In the limiting case w0 → 0, all firms have
zero beta; as a result, policy changes become irrelevant and EAR→ 0.

6.2.

Government Betas and Expected Stock Returns

Given the government’s pervasive effect on the private sector, policy uncertainty is unlikely
to be fully diversifiable. It thus seems natural to ask whether firms that are more exposed
to policy uncertainty offer higher expected returns. In this subsection, we relate government
betas to expected stock returns. The instantaneous expected stock returns are given by the
drifts of the stocks’ return processes. We denote these drifts for sectors H and L at time t
L
by µH
t and µt , respectively.
30

We can prove that learning in the multiple-sector model is faster than in the benchmark model under
the condition β 0 β > 1, where β is an N × 1 vector of β n ’s. This condition is trivially satisfied here.

35

L
H
L
Panels C and D of Figure 15 plot µH
t − µt as a function of β − β . We consider three

different values of wt and set t = 5 years (which is half-way between time 0 and time τ ). We
set wt rather than w0 as in the previous paragraph because our focus is on the conditional
expected return at time t rather than EAR as of time 0.
L
Panels C and D show that as the share of sector H increases, so does µH
t − µt , holding

β H −β L constant. There are two reasons for this result. First, a larger wt makes the b
gt shocks
more powerful, as explained above. As a result, a higher government beta has a larger effect
on the expected return. Second, there is an interesting size effect even when both sectors

have equal government betas (β H − β L = 0). Both panels show that equal betas imply equal
L
risk premia (i.e., µH
t − µt = 0) only when both sectors are equally large (wt = 0.5). When
L
wt 6= 0.5, the risk premia are different. For example, wt = 0.8 implies µH
t − µt = 0.7% per
L
year, and wt = 0.2 implies µH
t − µt = −0.7%. Firms in the larger sector command a higher

risk premium because their capital Bti covaries more closely with aggregate capital Bt, and
L
the higher covariance makes the larger-sector firms riskier. This size effect can make µH
t − µt
negative even when β H − β L is positive if wt is low; we observe such instances in both panels
when wt = 0.2.
To abstract from the size effect, suppose both sectors are equally large (wt = 0.5). In
L
that case, Panels C and D always show µH
t − µt > 0, indicating that the higher-beta firms
L
H
L
earn higher expected returns. In addition, µH
t − µt is generally increasing in β − β . The

only exception occurs in Panel D for large values of β H − β L . The reason is that in Panel
D, we have gbt = −2%. With b
gt < 0, the H sector is expected to shrink relative to the L

sector (because it loads more heavily on b
gt ), especially when β H − β L is large. As a result,
the expected future impact of b
gt is diminished, reducing the impact of the b
gt shocks on stock

prices when b
gt < 0 and β H −β L is large. With this caveat, we can state that larger differences
in government betas generally translate into larger differences in expected returns.
L
Finally, a comparison of Panels C and D shows that µH
t − µt is substantially larger for

gbt = 2% (Panel C) than for gbt = −2% (Panel D). The b
gt shocks are less powerful in Panel
D, for two reasons. The first reason, related to the expected shrinkage of the H sector, is

explained in the previous paragraph. The second reason is that the probability of a policy
change is higher in Panel D. When b
gt = 2%, the prevailing policy is likely to be retained;

as a result, the b
gt shocks are likely to be permanent. In contrast, the same shocks have a
shorter expected duration when b
gt = −2% because the policy change is then more likely.

Since the b
gt shocks are expected to be longer-lasting when gbt is higher, the risk premium

associated with exposure to these shocks is larger as well. Overall, Panels C and D show that
36

the premium for government beta risk is typically positive but also highly state-dependent.
In related empirical work, Belo, Gala, and Li (2011) find that firms with higher exposures
to the government sector (measured by the fraction of sales generated by government spending) earn higher average stock returns, but only during Democratic presidential terms; the
relation flips during Republican terms.31 The match between their analysis and ours is not
perfect. They measure government spending, whereas we focus on government policy more
generally. They measure return exposure to government, whereas our government betas
are profitability exposures. They study Democrats versus Republicans, whereas our simple
model does not distinguish between different types of government. Despite these differences,
it seems interesting that they estimate a state-dependent government risk premium. More
research into this state dependence is clearly warranted.

7.

Conclusions

We conduct a theoretical analysis of the effects of changes in government policy on stock
prices. Our simple general equilibrium model makes numerous testable predictions. Stock
market returns at the announcements of policy changes should be negative unless the policy
being replaced is perceived as sufficiently harmful to profitability. Averaging across all
policy changes, the expected announcement return should be negative. The magnitude of
this negative return should be large if uncertainty about government policy is large, as well
as if the policy change is preceded by a short or shallow downturn. The distribution of stock
returns at the announcements of policy changes should be left-skewed. Policy changes should
make stock returns more volatile and more highly correlated across firms. The average stock
market return at the announcements of policy decisions, without conditioning on whether
these decisions change the policy or not, should be positive.
Our key result—that stock prices are expected to fall at the announcement of a policy
change—hinges on our assumption that the government is quasi-benevolent. Due to that assumption, policy changes that raise stock prices are largely anticipated. Policy changes that
reduce prices contain a larger element of surprise, resulting in larger negative announcement returns. The result might flip around if the government were instead perceived as
malevolent because policy changes that benefit investors would then be largely unexpected
and thus associated with large positive announcement returns. In reality, the government’s
31

In another empirical study of political cycles, Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003) find that the average
stock market return is higher under Democratic presidencies than under Republican presidencies.

37

objectives are surely more complex than benevolence or malevolence, but they are likely
to have a benevolent tilt due to the mechanics of a democratic process. For example, the
government might maximize the probability of reelection, which is imperfectly but positively
related to the agents’ material well-being.32 Analyzing alternative objective functions for the
government in the context of our model is an interesting direction for future research.
Our model makes the simplifying assumption that the prevailing government policy can
only be replaced by a single policy that is identical a priori. It would be useful to extend the
model to allow the government to choose from multiple policies. The policy decision would
then resolve the uncertainty about which policy is chosen. As long as all potential new
policies are identical a priori, knowing which policy is chosen is irrelevant, and the multiplepolicy setting collapses to our single-policy setting. The convergence to a single-policy setting
obtains also at the opposite extreme, if the potential new policies are so different from each
other that one of them dominates a priori. In the intermediate cases, though, the results
might depend on the prior heterogeneity in interesting ways. We are currently analyzing the
multiple-policy setting in a work in progress.
Another interesting extension would endogenize the political cost. We treat this cost as
exogenous, in the interest of simplicity, but it would be useful to build the microfoundations
for it based on the insights from the political economy literature. Such an extension could
establish new theoretical links between the financial markets and various political economy
variables. Another theoretical extension could make the government and the investors asymmetrically informed. While our focus is on stocks, future work can also investigate the effects
of uncertainty about government policy on the prices of other assets, such as bonds.
There is also need for empirical work. The effects of policy changes on asset prices
have been analyzed in various contexts, with mixed results.33 A broader analysis of policy
changes, or reforms, would be beneficial. One challenge for the empirical work is the timing
of the policy decision. In some cases, this timing is clear.34 However, most reforms occur
32

See Downs (1957) for an early model in which the government maximizes the probability of reelection.
After surveying the empirical literature, Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier (2000) conclude that economic indicators
explain most of the variance in government support. A more recent survey by Anderson (2007) finds that
the relation between economic outcomes and election outcomes is imperfect and complicated. Brender and
Drazen (2008) find that this relation is significant only among the less developed countries.
33
For example, Thorbecke (1997), Rigobon and Sack (2004), and Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) examine the
effects of changes in monetary policy on stock prices. Klingebiel, Kroszner, Laeven, and Oijen (2001) examine
stock market responses to the announcements of bank restructuring policies by East Asian governments
during the 1997-98 crisis. Ait-Sahalia et al (2010) investigate the effects of policy changes during the recent
financial crisis on interbank credit and liquidity risk premia.
34
One example is the abrupt shift in the too-big-to-fail policy, mentioned in the introduction. The U.S.
government’s decision to let Lehman Brothers fail was followed by a 4.7% drop in the S&P 500 index on

38

gradually, clearing multiple hurdles. For example, the ongoing reform of U.S. financial
regulation has involved separate passages of related bills by the House and the Senate,
a subsequent reconciliation, and a continuing emergence of specific regulatory measures.
According to our model, stock prices should respond at each step of the way, with bigger
price responses following bigger increases in the probability of a policy change.35 Identifying
the pivotal steps of the key reforms is a nontrivial task. For example, Cutler (1988) examines
the stock market reaction to the Tax Reform Act of 1986. He identifies two key events in
the bill’s progress—the vote by the House for the bill in December 1985, and the vote for
a similar bill by the Senate Finance Committee in May 1986—and argues that both events
surprised the market.36 With the whole paper in the American Economic Review devoted
to a single policy change, it seems clear that a careful empirical analysis of multiple policy
changes is well beyond the scope of this study. It also seems clear that such analysis would
be interesting. Our model provides a simple benchmark for the empirical evidence. Overall,
we have much to learn about the role of the government in asset pricing.

September 15, 2008. Another example, fresh as of this writing, is Germany’s surprise announcement of a
partial ban on naked short-selling late on May 18, 2010. This announcement was followed by roughly 2%
drops in the European share indices in the following morning (e.g., Germany’s DAX dropped 1.9%). This
drop is consistent with our model, but not with theories predicting that short-sale constraints lift asset prices.
35
A key step in the financial regulation reform took place on Thursday May 20, 2010. At 2.31pm, the
Senate voted by the narrowest possible margin (60 to 40) to overcome filibusters and send the bill to a final
vote. A CNN Money article on the same afternoon read: “Wall Street reform cleared a crucial test vote
on Thursday, all but assuring final Senate passage of the most sweeping regulatory overhaul since the New
Deal.” By the end of the day, the S&P 500 index fell 3.9%, with about half of the decline occurring in the
last hour. The Senate passed the reform bill at 8.25pm on the same day. The following morning, the U.S.
stock market fell about 1% in the first minute of trade, followed by a rebound later in the day.
36
Cutler reports that on the day after the late-night favorable House vote, the S&P 500 index fell by
0.40%; on the day after the late-night favorable Senate Finance Committee vote, the index fell by 0.49%.

39

Table 1
Parameter Choices
This table reports the parameter values used in the simulations. All variables are reported on an
annual basis (except for γ, which denotes risk aversion).

σg
0.02

σc

µ

0.10 0.10

σ

σ1

0.05 0.10

40

T

τ

20 10

γ
5

Panel A. Policy Change
3

Realized Profitability
Expected Profitability
Threshold

Profitability (%)

2
1
0
−1
−2
−3

0

2

4

6

8

10
Time

12

14

16

18

20

Panel B. No Policy Change
3

Profitability (%)

2
1
0
−1

Realized Profitability
Expected Profitability
Threshold

−2
−3

0

2

4

6

8

10
Time

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 1. Profitability dynamics and the policy decision. This figure plots the expected dynamics
of b
gt (solid line) and realized profitability (dashed line) under the parameter values from Table 1. Realized
profitability is the average profitability across all firms, plotted in excess of µ so that its unconditional mean
is zero. The figure also plots the threshold g(c) (dotted line). All three lines are average paths across many
simulated samples. The top panel averages across the samples in which a policy change occurred at time
τ = 10, whereas the bottom panel conditions on no policy change.

41

Panel B. σ c = 20%, σ g = 1%

1

1

0

0
Profitability (%)

Profitability (%)

Panel A. σ c = 0, σ g = 1%

−1
−2
−3

Realized Profitability
Expected Profitability
Threshold

−4
−5

0

5

10
Time

15

−1
−2
−3

Realized Profitability
Expected Profitability
Threshold

−4
−5

20

0

1

1

0

0

−1
−2
−3
−4
−5

10
Time

15

20

Panel D. σ c = 20%, σ g = 3%

Profitability (%)

Profitability (%)

Panel C. σ c = 0, σ g = 3%

5

−1
−2
−3
−4

0

5

10
Time

15

−5

20

0

5

10
Time

15

20

Figure 2. Profitability dynamics conditional on a policy change: The roles of policy uncergt (solid line) and realized
tainty and political uncertainty. This figure plots the expected dynamics of b
profitability (dashed line) conditional on a policy change at time τ = 10. Realized profitability is the average
profitability across all firms, plotted in excess of µ so that its unconditional mean is zero. The figure also
plots the threshold g(c) (dotted line). All three lines are average paths across many simulated samples in
which a policy change occurred at time τ . The parameter values are in Table 1 except for policy uncertainty
(σg ) and political uncertainty (σc), which vary across the four panels.

42

Panel B.

Frequency distribution

Panel A.
200

200

150

150

100

100

50

50

0

0
ĝτ g∗

g∗

0

g(0)

g(0)

0

Panel D.

Panel C.

Frequency distribution

ĝτ

200

200

150

150

100

100

50

50

0

0
g∗

g(0)

ĝτ

g∗

0

g(0)

0 ĝτ

Figure 3. Probability of a policy change. The shaded area represents the probability of a policy change,
as perceived by the investors just before time τ . The bell curve represents the normal distribution of the
random threshold g(c). The four panels illustrate four possible locations of b
gτ relative to g∗ , g(0), and zero.
∗
The vertical dotted lines are drawn at g , g(0), and zero. The normal distribution as well as the values of
g∗ and g(0) are computed based on the parameter values in Table 1.

43

0

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6

Return (%)

−0.8

−1

−1.2

−1.4

−1.6
σg = 1%

−1.8

−2

σg = 2%
σg = 3%
0

2

4

6

8

10
σ (%)

12

14

16

18

20

c

Figure 4. Expected announcement return. This figure plots the expectation of the announcement
return R(b
gτ ), which is the instantaneous stock return at the announcement of a policy change at time τ .
The expectation integrates out uncertainty about gbτ as perceived at time 0, as well as uncertainty about c
conditional on the policy being changed. We vary σg and σc, and all other parameters are from Table 1.

44

Panel A. Announcement Return

Return (%)

0
−5
−10
−15
−20
−2.5

Length = 10
Length = 5
Length = 1

−2

−1.5

−1
Depth

−0.5

0

0.5

0

0.5

Panel B. Probability of a Policy Change
1

Probability

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−2.5

Length = 10
Length = 5
Length = 1
−2

−1.5

−1
Depth

−0.5

Figure 5. Announcement return and the downturn length and depth. Panel A plots the announcement return R(b
gτ ), the instantaneous stock return at the announcement of a policy change at time τ , as a
function of the length and depth of the downturn that precedes the policy change. The downturn length is
computed as τ − t0 > 0, where b
gt0 = 0. The downturn depth is given by the number of standard deviations
by which b
gt drops during the downturn. Panel B plots the corresponding probability of a policy change, as
perceived by investors just before time τ . The parameters are from Table 1.

45

Panel A. Announcement Return, σg = 1%

Panel B. Announcement Return, σg = 3%

0

0

Return (%)

Return (%)

−5
−5

−10

−2

−1

0
Depth

−15
−20
−25

1

−30
−5

2

−4

−3

−2
Depth

−1

0

Panel C. Probability of a Policy Change, σg = 1%
1

Panel D. Probability of a Policy Change, σg = 3%
1

0.8

0.8
Probability

Probability

−15

Length = 10
Length = 5
Length = 1

−10

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.6
0.4
0.2

−2

−1

0
Depth

1

0
−5

2

−4

−3

−2
Depth

−1

0

Figure 6. Announcement return and the downturn length and depth: The role of policy
gτ ), the instantaneous stock return at the
uncertainty. Panels A and B plot the announcement return R(b
announcement of a policy change at time τ , as a function of the length and depth of the downturn that
precedes the policy change. The downturn length is computed as τ − t0 > 0, where gbt0 = 0. The downturn
depth is given by the number of standard deviations by which b
gt drops during the downturn. Panels C and
D plot the corresponding probabilities of a policy change, as perceived by investors just before time τ . The
parameters are from Table 1, except that the baseline value σg = 2% is replaced by σg = 1% (Panels A and
C) and σg = 3% (Panels B and D).

46

Panel A. Expected Announcement Return. Length = 5 years

0

Return (%)

−1
−2
−3
−4

σg = 1%
σ = 2%

−5
−6

g

σg = 3%

0

2

4

6

8

10
σc (%)

12

14

16

18

20

18

20

Panel B. Expected Announcement Return. Length = 1 years

0

Return (%)

−5

−10
σ = 1%
g

−15

σg = 2%
σ = 3%

−20

g

0

2

4

6

8

10
σc (%)

12

14

16

Figure 7. Expected announcement return and the downturn length. This figure plots the expectation of the announcement return R(b
gτ ), which is the instantaneous stock return at the announcement of a
policy change at time τ . The expectation integrates out uncertainty about b
gτ as perceived at the beginning
of the downturn, as well as uncertainty about c conditional on the policy being changed. The downturn
length is τ − t0 = 5 years in Panel A and 1 year in Panel B. We vary σg and σc , and all other parameters
are from Table 1.

47

Panel A. σc = 10%

50

σ =1%

Frequency Distribution

g

40

σ =2%
g

σ =3%
g

30
20
10
0
−20

−15

−10

−5

0

−5

0

Return (%)
Panel B. σc = 20%

Frequency Distribution

40

30

σg = 1 %
σg = 2 %
σg = 3 %

20

10

0
−20

−15

−10
Return (%)

Figure 8. Probability distribution of stock returns on the day of the announcement of a policy
change. This figure plots the probability distribution of stock returns on the day when a policy change
is announced. These per-day stock returns have two components: a jump component R(b
gτ ) pertaining
to the instant of the announcement, and the diffusion component Mτ /Mτ−∆τ − 1 covering the rest of the
announcement day (∆τ = 1/252 years). This distribution is comparable with an empirical distribution of
daily announcement returns. The downturn length is τ − t0 = 5 years. We vary σg and σc , and all other
parameters are from Table 1.

48

Panel A. Expected Return at Announcement of a Policy Decision
Return (%)

0.4

σ = 1%
g

0.3

σg = 2%

0.2

σ = 3%
g

0.1
0

0

2

4

6

8

10
σc (%)

12

14

16

18

20

18

20

18

20

Panel B. Expected Return at Announcement of Policy Change
Return (%)

0
−1
−2

σ = 1%

−3

σg = 2%

g

−4
−5

σ = 3%
g

0

2

4

6

8

10
σ (%)

12

14

16

c

Panel C. Expected Return at Announcement of No Policy Change

Return (%)

5

σg = 1%

4

σ = 2%
g

3

σg = 3%

2
1
0

0

2

4

6

8

10
σc (%)

12

14

16

Figure 9. Expected return at the announcement of a policy decision. Panel A plots the expected
value of the jump in stock prices at the announcement of a policy decision, without conditioning on whether
the decision is to change the policy or not. This value, E(JM ), represents the unconditional risk premium
investors demand for facing a jump in SDF at the announcement. Panel B reports the expected jump
yes
conditional on the announcement of a policy change, E(JM
). This panel coincides with Panel A of Figure
no
7. Panel C reports the expected jump conditional on the announcement of no policy change, E(JM
). All
three expectations integrate out uncertainty about b
gτ as perceived at the beginning of the downturn. The
downturn length is τ − t0 = 5 years. We vary σg and σc, and all other parameters are from Table 1.

49

Panel A. SDF Volatility

120

σg=1%
Percent per year

σg=2%

100
Percent per year

Panel B. Expected Return

30

σg=3%

80
60
40
20

σg=1%

25

σg=2%

20

σg=3%

15
10
5

9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

0

11

9

Panel C. Return Volatility

100

σg=1%
σg=2%

25

10.5

11

σg=1%
σg=2%

80

σg=3%

20

15

10

10
Time

Panel D. Correlation

Percent

Percent per year

30

9.5

σg=3%

60

40

9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

20

11

9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

11

Figure 10. Properties of returns around policy decisions that result in a policy change. This
figure plots the expected dynamics of the volatility of the stochastic discount factor, σπ,t (Panel A), the
conditional expected stock market return, µM,t (Panel B), the conditional volatility of stock market returns,
σM,t (Panel C), and the pairwise correlation between stocks, ρt (Panel D), all conditional on a policy change
at time τ = 10. The jump-related components at time τ are not plotted. The downturn length is τ − t0 = 5
years, so that b
g5 = 0. The parameters are in Table 1, except for σg , which takes three different values, 1%,
2%, and 3% per year.

50

Panel A. SDF Volatility
55

σg=1%

σg=2%
σg=3%

45
40
35
30

σg=1%

σg=2%

5
Percent per year

50
Percent per year

Panel B. Expected Return
6

σg=3%
4
3
2

9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

1

11

9

Panel C. Return Volatility
16

11

σg=1%

55

σg=2%

50

σg=3%

Percent

Percent per year

10.5

60

σg=2%

14

10
Time

Panel D. Correlation
σg=1%

15

9.5

13

σg=3%

45
40
35

12
11

30
9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

25

11

9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

11

Figure 11. Properties of returns around policy decisions that result in no policy change. This
figure plots the expected dynamics of the volatility of the stochastic discount factor, σπ,t (Panel A), the
conditional expected stock market return, µM,t (Panel B), the conditional volatility of stock market returns,
σM,t (Panel C), and the pairwise correlation between stocks, ρt (Panel D), all conditional on no policy change
at time τ = 10. The jump-related components at time τ are not plotted. The downturn length is τ − t0 = 5
years, so that b
g5 = 0. The parameters are in Table 1, except for σg , which takes three different values, 1%,
2%, and 3% per year.

51

Panel A. Market Value, Length = 1
2.5

Panel B. Market Value, Length = 5
2.5

Policy change allowed
Policy change precluded

2.4

2.45

2.3

2.4

2.2

2.35

2.1

2.3

2

9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

2.25

11

9

Panel C. Volatility, Length = 1

9.5

10
Time

10.5

11

Panel D. Volatility, Length = 5
18

18

Percent per year

Percent per year

17
16
15
14

16

14

12

13
12

9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

10

11

9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

11

Figure 12. The level and volatility of stock prices around policy changes. This figure plots the
dynamics of the level and volatility of stock prices around policy changes at time τ = 10 in two scenarios:
(i) when policy changes are allowed (our model—solid line), and (ii) when policy changes are precluded
(hypothetical scenario—dashed line). Panels A and B plot the expected dynamics of the stock market value
Mt , whereas Panels C and D plot the expected dynamics of stock market volatility σM,t . Market value is in
units of book value at time 0; volatility is in percent per year. The downturn length is τ − t0 = 1 year in
Panels A and C, but 5 years in Panels B and D. The parameters are in Table 1.

52

Panel B. Announcement Return
0

−1

−2

−2

−4

Percent

Percent

Panel A. Announcement Return
0

σg = 1%

−3

−6

σg = 1%

σg = 2%
−4
0

5

10
σc (%)

15

−10

20

Panel C. Return Volatility

Percent per year

18
16

σg = 3%
5

10
15
Policy Announcement Date

20

Panel D. Correlation
70

σg = 1%
σg = 2%

60

σg = 3%
Percent

20

σg = 2%

−8

σg = 3%

14

50

σg = 1%
σg = 2%
σg = 3%

40

12

30

10
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Time Relative to Policy Announcement Date

20
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Time Relative to Policy Announcement Date

Figure 13. Endogenous timing of a policy change. Panel A plots the expected stock return, EAR,
at the endogenously-timed announcement of a policy change. The timing of the policy change is optimally
chosen by the government from the set τ ∈ [1, 2, . . . , 19]. Whereas Panel A averages returns across all
τ , Panel B plots EAR as a function of τ . Panels C and D plot the expected dynamics of σM,t and ρt ,
respectively, around a policy change. The results are plotted in event time, with time 0 marking the policy
change (time τ ). The parameters are in Table 1, except for σg , which takes three different values, 1%, 2%,
and 3% per year.

53

Panel A. Equilibrium α

Panel B. Announcement Return

100

0
σg = 1%

95

σ = 2%
g

α (%)

Return (%)

σ = 3%

90

g

85
80

−0.5

−1

σ = 1%
g

σg = 2%

75

σ = 3%

70

0

5

10
σc (%)

15

−1.5

20

g

0

5

Panel C. Return Volatility

25

σ =2%
g

20

σg=1%
σ =2%
g

80

σ =3%
g

Percent

Percent per year

15

Panel D. Correlation

100

σg=1%

20

10
σc (%)

σ =3%
g

60

15
40

10

9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

20

11

9

9.5

10
Time

10.5

11

Figure 14. Investment adjustment. This figure plots the results from the extension of the benchmark
model in which firms can disinvest at time τ . Panel A plots the equilibrium fraction of firms that choose to
remain invested in the risky technology after the policy change. Panel B plots the corresponding stock return
expected at the announcement of a policy change, or EAR. Panels C and D plot the expected dynamics of
σM,t and ρt , respectively, around a policy change at time τ = 10. The parameters are in Table 1, except
that µ = 0.02 (we reduce µ from its benchmark value to obtain α < 1 in equilibrium) and σg takes three
different values, 1%, 2%, and 3% per year. The downturn length is set to 5 years in all four panels.

54

B. EAR and β Heterogeneity

A. Expected Announcement Return
0

0

w0 = 0.2
−0.2
Percent

Percent

−0.5

−1

σ = 1%

w0 = 0.5
w0 = 0.8

−0.4
−0.6

g

−1.5

σg = 2%

−0.8

σ = 3%
g

−2

0

5

10
σ (%)

15

−1

20

0

0.5

1.5

2

L

β −β

c

C. µH − µL for ĝt = 2%

D. µH − µL for ĝt = −2%

10

10

wt = 0.2

8

wt = 0.5
wt = 0.8

6
4

0

0
1
H

1.5

2

wt = 0.8

4
2

0.5

wt = 0.5

6

2

0

wt = 0.2

8
Percent

Percent

1
H

0

L

0.5

1
H

β −β

1.5

2

L

β −β

Figure 15. Different government policy exposures. This figure plots the results from the extension
of the benchmark model in which there are two types of firms with different exposures to government policy,
β H and β L . Panel A plots the stock return expected at the announcement of a policy change, or EAR, when
half of the firms as of time 0 have β H = 1.5 and the other half have β L = 0.5. Panel B plots EAR as a
function of β H − β L while varying w0 , the fraction of high-beta firms as of time 0. Panels C and D plot the
difference in the conditional expected returns of the high-beta and low-beta firms, µH − µL , as a function
of β H − β L while varying wt , the fraction of high-beta firms as of time t = 5 years. In Panel C, b
gt = 2%,
whereas in Panel D, b
gt = −2%. In Panels B, C, and D, we vary β H − β L while holding the average of the
two betas constant, (β H + β L )/2 = 1. Unless specified otherwise, the parameters are from Table 1.

55

Appendix
The Appendix contains the formulas that are mentioned in the text but omitted for the
sake of brevity. The proofs of all results are available in the companion Technical Appendix,
which is downloadable from the authors’ websites.
Proposition A1. In the benchmark model for t ≤ τ , the state price density is given by
πt = Bt−γ Ω (b
gt , t) ,

(A1)

where
yes
no
Ω (b
gt , t) = pyes
+ (1 − pno
t Gt
t ) Gt
γ2

2 2
bt2
σg +(τ −t)2 σ
b

Gyes
= e−γµ(T −t)−γbgt (τ −t)+ 2 ((T −τ )
t
γ2

= e−γ(µ+bgt )(T −t)+ 2
Gno
t
and
pyes
t
pno
t



2

)+γ(1+γ) σ2

(T −t)

2

(T −t)2 σ
bt2 +γ(1+γ) σ2 (T −t)


σc2 /2
σc2
2
2
= N g(0); b
,b
σ −σ
bτ +
gt −
(τ − t) +
(T − τ ) (1 − γ) t
(T − τ )2 (1 − γ)2



 2
σc2/2
σc2
2
2
2
= N g(0); b
bτ +
,σ
b − στ +
gt − γ b
σt (T − t) − (T − τ ) σ
(T − τ ) (1 − γ) t
(T − τ )2 (1 − γ)2
γb
σt2

Corollary A1 (used in Proposition 6). In the benchmark model for t ≤ τ , the volatility of
the stochastic discount factor is given by
σπ,t = γσ −

1
∂Ω (b
gt , t) 2 −1
σ
bt σ .
Ω (b
gt , t) ∂b
gt

(A2)

Proposition A2. In the benchmark model for t ≤ τ , the stock price for firm i is given by
Mti = Bti

Φ (b
gt , t)
,
Ω (b
gt , t)

(A3)

where
yes
no
Φ (b
gt , t) = pyes
+ (1 − pno
t Kt
t ) Kt

Ktyes = e(1−γ)µ(T −t)+(1−γ)bgt (τ −t)+

(1−γ)2
2

Ktno = e(1−γ)µ(T −t)+(1−γ)bgt (T −t)+
and
pyes
t
pno
t



2

((T −τ )2 σg2 +(τ −t)2 σbt2 )−(1−γ)γ σ2 (T −t)

2
(1−γ) 2 2
σ
bt (T −t)2 −(1−γ)γ σ2 (T −t)
2


σc2/2
σc2
2
2
= N g(0); b
(τ − t) +
,σ
b −σ
bτ +
gt + (1 −
(T − τ ) (1 − γ) t
(T − τ )2 (1 − γ)2


 2

σc2/2
σc2
2
2
2
= N g(0); b
bt (T − t) − (T − τ ) σ
bτ +
,σ
b − στ +
gt + (1 − γ) σ
2
2
(T − τ ) (1 − γ) t
(T − τ ) (1 − γ)
γ) σ
bt2

56

Corollary A2 (used in Proposition 7). In the benchmark model for t ≤ τ , the mean and
volatility parameters of the return process in Proposition 7 are given by


∂Φ (b
gt , t) /∂b
gt ∂Ω (b
gt , t) /∂b
gt
σM,t = σ +
−
σ
bt2 σ −1
(A4)
Φ (b
gt , t)
Ω (b
gt , t)
µM = σπ,tσM,t ,
(A5)
where σπ,t and σM,t are given in equations (A2) and (A4), respectively.
Corollary A3 (used in Corollary 9). In the benchmark model for t < τ , the correlation
between the returns on any pair of stocks is given by
2
σM,t
ρt = 2
.
2
σ1 + σM,t

(A6)

Proposition A3. Let the timing of the policy change be endogenous as in Section 4. For
every t ∈ [τi , τi+1 ), the indirect utility function V (b
gt , Bt , t) from equation (46) is given by
V (b
gt , Bt , t) = Bt1−γ Φ (b
gt , t) ,

(A7)

where Φ (b
gt , t) satisfies the partial differential equation


∂Φ (b
gt , t)
1
2
0 =
gt ) − γ (1 − γ) σ Φ (b
gt , t)
+ (1 − γ) (µ + b
∂t
2
gt , t) 22 −2
∂Φ (b
gt , t) 2
1 ∂ 2Φ (b
+
σ
bt σ + (1 − γ)
σt .
b
2
2
∂b
gt
∂b
gt

(A8)

The boundary conditions at time τi are given by



1 c+(1−γ)µ(T −τi)+ 1 (1−γ)2 σg2 (T −τi )2 −γ(1−γ) σ2 (T −τi)
2
2
Φ (b
gτi , τi ) = Eτi max Φ (b
gτi , τi ) ,
,
e
1−γ
where the expectation is taken with respect to c just before the policy decision at time τi .
1
The final condition at time T is Φ (b
gT , T ) = 1−γ
.

Note on Section 5.: Right before time τ , the market value of firm i is given by a weighted
i,no
average of Mτi,yes
+ and Mτ + as in equation (23), except that the weights ωτ are given by
ωτ =

pτ
,
pτ + (1 − pτ )Hτ

(A9)

where
Eτ
Hτ =

n

no (τ,T )

ατ eε

+ (1 − ατ )

−γ o

o
n
−γ
Eτ [ατ eεyes(τ,T ) + (1 − ατ )]

and pτ is the probability of a policy change as perceived just before time τ (i.e., the probability
that the condition (49) holds). This probability is computed numerically.
57

REFERENCES
Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Jochen Andritzky, Andreas Jobst, Sylwia Nowak, and Natalia Tamirisa,
2010, Market response to policy initiatives during the global financial crisis, Working
paper, NBER No. 15809.
Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna, and Francesco Trebbi, 2006, Who adjusts and when? The
political economy of reforms, IMF Staff Papers 53, 1–29.
Alesina, Alberto, and Dani Rodrik, 1994, Distributive politics and economic growth, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 465–490.
Anderson, Christopher J., 2007, The end of economic voting? Contingency dilemmas and
the limits of democratic accountability, Annual Review of Political Science 10, 271–296.
Belo, Frederico, Vito D. Gala, and Jun Li, 2011, Government spending, political cycles, and
the cross-section of stock returns, Working paper, University of Minnesota.
Bernanke, Ben S., 1983, Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 85-106.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Kenneth N. Kuttner, 2005, What explains the stock market’s reaction
to Federal Reserve policy?, Journal of Finance 60, 1221–1257.
Bloom, Nicholas, 2009, The impact of uncertainty shocks, Econometrica 77, 623-685.
Boutchkova, Maria, Hitesh Doshi, Art Durnev, and Alexander Molchanov, 2010, Precarious
politics and return volatility, Working paper, McGill University.
Brender, Adi, and Allan Drazen, 2008, How do budget deficits and economic growth affect
reelection prospects? Evidence from a large panel of countries, American Economic
Review 98, 2203–2220.
Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly, 1996, Inflation’s children: Tales of crises that beget
reforms, American Economic Review P&P 86, 213–217.
Callander, Steven, 2008, Searching for good policies, Working paper, Northwestern Univ.
Coate, Stephen, and Stephen Morris, 1995, On the form of transfers to special interests,
Journal of Political Economy 103, 1210–1235.
Croce, Maximiliano M., Howard Kung, Thien T. Nguyen, and Lukas Schmid, 2011, Fiscal
policies and asset prices, Working paper, UNC.
Cutler, David M., 1988, Tax reform and the stock market: An asset price approach, American
Economic Review 78, 1107–1117.
Dixit, Avinash, 1989, Entry and exit decisions under uncertainty, Journal of Political Economy 97, 620–638.
58

Downs, Anthony, 1957, An Economic Theory of Democracy, Harper, New York, NY.
Drazen, Allan, 2000, Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
Drazen, Allan, and Elhanan Helpman, 1990, Inflationary consequences of anticipated macroeconomic policies, Review of Economic Studies 57, 147–164.
Drazen, Allan, and William Easterly, 2001, Do crises induce reform? Simple empirical tests
of conventional wisdom, Economics and Politics 13, 129–157.
Durnev, Art, 2011, The real effects of political uncertainty, Working paper, McGill Univ.
Erb, Claude B., Campbell R. Harvey, and Tadas E. Viskanta, 1996, Political risk, economic
risk, and financial risk, Financial Analysts Journal, December, 29–46.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Dani Rodrik, 1991, Resistance to reform: Status quo bias in the
presence of individual-specific uncertainty, American Economic Review 81, 1146–1155.
Gomes, Francisco J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Luis M. Viceira, 2008, The excess burden of
government indecision, Working paper, London Business School.
Gomes, Francisco J., Alexander Michaelides, and Valery Polkovnichenko, 2009, Fiscal policy
in an incomplete markets economy, Working paper, London Business School.
Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman, 1994, Protection for sale, American Economic
Review 84, 833–850.
Hassett, Kevin A., and Gilbert E. Metcalf, 1999, Investment with uncertain tax policy: Does
random tax policy discourage investment? The Economic Journal 109, 372–393.
Hermes, Niels, and Robert Lensink, 2001, Capital flight and the uncertainty of government
policies, Economics Letters 71, 377-381.
Julio, Brandon, and Youngsuk Yook, 2011, Corporate financial policy under political uncertainty: International evidence from national elections, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Klingebiel, Daniela, Randy Kroszner, Luc Laeven, and Pieter van Oijen, 2001, “Stock market
responses to bank restructuring policies during the East Asian crisis,” World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper No. 2571.
Lewis-Beck, Michael S., and Mary Stegmaier, 2000, Economic determinants of electoral
outcomes, Annual Review of Political Science 3, 183-219.
McDonald, Robert, and Daniel Siegel, 1986, The value of waiting to invest, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 101, 707–728.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott, 2005, Taxes, regulations, and the value of
U.S. and U.K. corporations, Review of Economic Studies 72, 767–796.

59

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 1994, Is inequality harmful for growth?, American
Economic Review 84, 600–621.
Pindyck, Robert S., 1988, Irreversible investment, capacity choice, and the value of the firm,
American Economic Review 78, 969–985.
Rigobon, Roberto, and Brian Sack, 2004, The impact of monetary policy on asset prices,
Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 1553-1575.
Rodrik, Dani, 1991, Policy uncertainty and private investment in developing countries, Journal of Development Economics 36, 229–242.
Rodrik, Dani, 1996, Understanding economic policy reform, Journal of Economic Literature
34, 9–41.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan, 1999, Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and Reform, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Santa-Clara, Pedro, and Rossen Valkanov, 2003, The presidential puzzle: Political cycles
and the stock market, Journal of Finance 58, 1841–1872.
Savor, Pavel, and Mungo I. Wilson, 2010, How much do investors care about macroeconomic
risk? Evidence from scheduled economic announcements, Working paper, Wharton.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1993, Corruption, Quarterly Journal of Economics
108, 599–617.
Sialm, Clemens, 2006, Stochastic taxation and asset pricing in dynamic general equilibrium,
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 30, 511–540.
Sialm, Clemens, 2009, Tax changes and asset pricing, American Economic Review 99, 1356–
1383.
Strulovici, Bruno, 2010, Learning while voting: Determinants of collective experimentation,
Econometrica, forthcoming.
Thorbecke, Willem, 1997, On stock market returns and monetary policy, Journal of Finance
52, 635–654.
Ulrich, Maxim, 2011, How does the bond market perceive government interventions?, Working paper, Columbia University.
Yonce, Adam, 2009, Political cycles and corporate investment, Working paper, Berkeley.

60

