                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   AGGREGATE RISK AND THE CHOICE BETWEEN CASH AND LINES OF CREDIT

                                          Viral V. Acharya
                                           Heitor Almeida
                                          Murillo Campello

                                        Working Paper 16122
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16122


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




Our paper benefited from comments from Hui Chen and Ran Duchin (discussants), and seminar participants
at the 2010 AEA meetings, Moodys/NYU Stern 2010 Credit Risk Conference, DePaul University,
New York University, University of Illinois, UCLA, and Emory University. We thank Florin Vasvari
and Anurag Gupta for help with the data on lines of credit and Michael Roberts and Florin Vasvari
for matching of these data to COMPUSTAT. Fabricio D'Almeida, Rustom Irani, Hanh Le and Quoc
Nguyen provided excellent research assistance. We are also grateful to Jaewon Choi for sharing with
us his data on firm betas, and to Thomas Philippon and Ran Duchin for sharing their programs to compute
asset and financing gap betas. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Viral V. Acharya, Heitor Almeida, and Murillo Campello. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Aggregate Risk and the Choice between Cash and Lines of Credit
Viral V. Acharya, Heitor Almeida, and Murillo Campello
NBER Working Paper No. 16122
June 2010
JEL No. G32

                                              ABSTRACT

We argue that a firm's aggregate risk is a key determinant of whether it manages its future liquidity
needs through cash reserves or bank lines of credit. Banks create liquidity for firms by pooling their
idiosyncratic risks. As a result, firms with high aggregate risk find it costly to get credit lines from
banks and opt for cash reserves in spite of higher opportunity costs and liquidity premium. We verify
our model's hypothesis empirically by showing that firms with high asset beta have a higher ratio of
cash reserves to lines of credit, controlling for other determinants of liquidity policy. This effect of
asset beta on liquidity management is economically significant, especially for financially constrained
firms; is robust to variation in the proxies for firms' exposure to aggregate risk and availability of credit
lines; works at the firm level as well as the industry level; and is significantly stronger in times when
aggregate risk is high. Consistent with the channel that drives these effects in our model, we find that
firms with high asset beta face higher spreads on bank credit lines.


Viral V. Acharya                                      Murillo Campello
Stern School of Business                              University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
New York University                                   4039 BIF
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84                        515 East Gregory Drive, MC- 520
New York, NY 10012                                    Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER                                              and NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu                                campello@illinois.edu

Heitor Almeida
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive, 4037 BIF
Champaign, IL, 61820
and NBER
halmeida@illinois.edu
        “A Federal Reserve survey earlier this year found that about one-third of U.S. banks have tightened their
standards on loans they make to businesses of all sizes. And about 45% of banks told the Fed that they are
charging more for credit lines to large and midsize companies. Banks such as Citigroup Inc., which has been
battered by billions of dollars in write-downs and other losses, are especially likely to play hardball, resisting
pleas for more credit or pushing borrowers to pay more for loan modifications... The tightening of credit
by once-patient lenders is why Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s Investors Service have projected corporate
defaults to grow fivefold or more from the record lows of 2007.”

                                                                –The Wall Street Journal, March 8, 2008



1        Introduction

How do firms manage their future liquidity needs? This question has become increasingly impor-
tant for both academic research and corporate finance in practice. Survey evidence from CFOs
indicates that liquidity management tools such as cash and credit lines are essential components
of a firm’s financial policy (Lins, Servaes, and Tufano (2007), Campello, Giambona, Graham, and
Harvey (2009)). Consistent with the survey evidence, the empirical literature also suggests that the
financing of future investments is a key determinant of corporate cash policy (e.g., Opler, Pinkowitz,
Stulz, and Williamson (1999), Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2004, 2009), Denis and Sibilikov
(2007), and Duchin (2009)). More recently, bank lines of credit have been shown to be an important
source of financing for many companies in the U.S. (see Sufi (2009) and Yun (2009)). Despite this
growing literature, we still know little about what are the fundamental determinants of the choice
between cash holdings and bank credit lines in corporate liquidity management.1
        There is limited theoretical work on the reasons why firms may use “pre-committed” sources of
funds (such as cash or credit lines) to manage their future liquidity needs.2 In principle, a firm can use
other sources of funding for long-term liquidity management, such as future operating cash flows or
proceeds from future debt issuances. However, these alternatives expose the firm to additional risks
because their availability depends directly on firm performance. Holmstrom and Tirole (1997, 1998),
for example, show that relying on future issuance of external claims is insuﬃcient to provide liquidity
for firms that face costly external financing. Similarly, Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007) show
that cash holdings dominate spare debt capacity for financially constrained firms that expect to have
    1
     The results in Sufi suggest that cash and credit lines are substitutes for firms that perform poorly. If firms’ cash
flows deteriorate, their access to outstanding lines of credit is restricted by covenants, forcing firms to switch to cash.
Sufi’s analysis does not explain how firms choose between cash and credit lines in the first place. A recent paper by
Disatnik, Duchin and Schmidt (2010) further explores this idea and shows that firms that find it easier to hedge cash
flow risk use more credit lines to manage their liquidity needs.
   2
     A typical line of credit is a borrowing facility with a maximum amount that a financial institution is committed
to lend to the borrower over a given period and a pre-specified interest rate (usually specified as a fixed spread over
some reference rate, such as LIBOR). These facilities include various fees charged by the lender including an up-front
annual fee on the total amount committed and a usage annual fee on the available unused portion. See Shockley and
Thakor (1997) for a detailed discussion.


                                                            1
their financing needs concentrated in states of the world in which their cash flows are low. Notably,
these models of liquidity insurance are silent on the trade-oﬀs between cash and credit lines.3
       This paper attempts to fill this important gap in the liquidity management literature. Building on
Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) and Tirole (2006), we develop a model of the trade-oﬀs firms face when
choosing between holding cash and securing a credit line. The key insight of our model is that a firm’s
exposure to aggregate risks (say, its “beta”) is a fundamental determinant of its liquidity management
choices. The intuition for our main result is as follows. In the presence of a liquidity premium (e.g.,
a low return on corporate cash holdings), firms find it costly to hold cash. Firms may instead prefer
to manage their liquidity through bank credit lines, which do not require them to hold liquid assets.
Under a credit line agreement, the bank only needs to provide the firm with funds when the firm
faces a liquidity shortfall. In exchange, the bank collects payments from the firm in states of the
world in which the firm does not need the credit line (e.g., commitment fees). The line of credit can
thus be seen as an insurance contract. Provided that the bank can oﬀer this insurance at “actuarially
fair” terms, lines of credit will strictly dominate cash holdings in corporate liquidity management.
       The drawback of credit lines arises from the observation that banks may not be able to provide
liquidity insurance for all firms in the economy at all times. Consider, for example, a situation in
which the entire corporate sector has a liquidity shortfall. In this state of the world, banks will be
unable to provide liquidity to the corporate sector because the demand for funds under the credit
line facilities (drawdowns) will sharply exceed the supply of funds coming from the healthy firms.
In other words, the ability of the banking sector to meet corporate liquidity needs will depend on
the extent to which firms are subject to correlated (systematic) liquidity shocks. Aggregate risk will
thus create a cost of credit lines.
       We explore this trade-oﬀ between aggregate risk and liquidity premia to derive optimal corpo-
rate liquidity policy in an equilibrium model in which firms are heterogeneous in their (unlevered)
asset beta; that is, in the extent to which they are exposed to aggregate risk. Our main result is
that while low beta firms will manage their liquidity through bank credit lines, high beta firms may
optimally choose to hold cash in equilibrium, despite the existence of liquidity premia. Specifically,
high beta firms will optimally face worse contractual terms when opening bank credit lines and will
thus demand less credit lines and more cash in equilibrium, relative to low beta firms. Because the
banking sector manages mostly idiosyncratic risk, it can provide liquidity for firms in bad states
of the world, sustaining the equilibrium. In short, firm exposure to systematic risks increases the
demand for cash and reduces the demand for credit lines.4
   3
      A recent paper by Bolton, Chen and Wang (2009) introduces both cash and credit lines in a dynamic investment
model with costly external finance. In their model, the size of the credit line facility is given exogenously, and thus
they do not analyze the ex-ante trade-oﬀ between cash and credit lines.
    4
      Broadly speaking, the result that bank lines of credit will be more expensive for firms with greater aggregate
risk can be interpreted as a greater cost of purchasing insurance from the intermediation sector against states with
greater aggregate risk. This cost manifests itself as a higher risk premium in out-of-the-money put options on the


                                                          2
   In addition to this basic result, the model generates a few new economic insights. These insights
motivate some of our empirical analysis. First, the trade-oﬀ between cash and credit lines becomes
more important as the amount of systematic risk in the economy increases. Second, the trade-oﬀ
between cash and credit lines should be more important for firms that find it more costly to raise
external capital. In the absence of costly external financing there is no role for corporate liquidity
policy, and thus the choice between cash and credit lines becomes irrelevant. Third, the model
suggests that a firm’s exposure to risks that are systematic to the banking industry should aﬀect the
determination of its liquidity policy. In particular, firms that are more sensitive to banking industry
downturns should be more likely to hold cash for liquidity management.
   We test our model’s implications using data over the 1987—2008 period. We use two alternative
data sources to construct a proxy for the availability of credit lines. Our first sample is drawn from the
LPC-Deal Scan database. These data allow us to construct a large sample of credit line initiations.
However, the LPC-Deal Scan data have two potential drawbacks. First, they are largely based on
syndicated loans, thus biased towards large deals (consequently large firms). Second, they do not
reveal the extent to which existing lines have been used (drawdowns). To overcome these issues, we
also use an alternative sample that contains detailed information on the credit lines initiated and used
by a random sample of 300 firms between 1996 and 2003. These data are drawn from Sufi (2009).
Using both LPC-Deal Scan and Sufi’s data sets, we measure the fraction of corporate liquidity that
is provided by lines of credit as the ratio of total credit lines to the sum of total credit lines plus cash.
For short, we call this variable LC-to-Cash ratio. As discussed by Sufi, while some firms may have
higher demand for total liquidity due to variables such as better investment opportunities, the LC-to-
Cash ratio isolates the relative usage of lines of credit versus cash in corporate liquidity management.
   Our main hypothesis states that a firm’s exposure to systematic risk should be negatively related
to its LC-to-Cash. We measure this exposure using asset betas. While equity betas are easy to
compute using stock price data, they are mechanically related to leverage due to simple leverage
eﬀects (high leverage firms will tend to have larger betas). Since greater reliance on credit lines will
typically increase the firm’s leverage, the leverage eﬀect would then bias our estimates of the eﬀect of
betas on corporate liquidity management. To overcome this problem, we unlever equity betas in two
alternative ways. The simplest way to unlever betas is to use a model that backs out the “mechanical”
eﬀect of leverage, using for example, a Merton-KMV-type model for firm value. We call the set of
betas that we obtain using this method Beta KMV. The second way to unlever betas and variances is
to directly compute data on firm asset returns. Our data on this alternative beta measure come from
Choi (2009), who computes bond and bank loan returns and combines them with stock returns into
an asset return measure that uses relative market values of the diﬀerent financial claims as weights.
   We test the model’s central result by relating asset betas to LC-to-Cash ratios. Figure 3 below,
stock market index as a whole, documented by Bondarenko (2003), among others.


                                                      3
which is based on industry-averages for the whole time period of 1987 to 2008, gives a visual illustra-
tion of our main result: exposure to systematic risk (asset betas) has a statistically and economically
significant eﬀect on the fraction of corporate liquidity that is provided by credit lines. To give a
concrete example, consider a comparison between the SIC 344 industry (Fabricated Metals) and SIC
367 (Electronic Components). The former industry is characterized by heavy reliance on credit lines
for liquidity management (average LC-to-Cash is 0.43 in our time period), while the latter shows
greater reliance on cash (LC-to-Cash = 0.18). These LC/cash choices correspond to the diﬀerences
in unlevered industry betas across the two industries. SIC 344 has an average Beta KMV of 0.83
in our time period, while SIC 367’s average asset beta equals 1.56.5 These liquidity patterns are
explained by the model we introduce in this paper.
      We also run a battery of empirical specifications that control for other potential determinants
of the fraction of corporate liquidity that is provided by credit lines. First, similarly to Sufi (2009),
we use panel data to show that profitable, large, low Q, low net worth firms are more likely to use
bank credit lines. These patterns hold both in the LPC-Deal Scan and also in Sufi’s data, indicating
that the large sample of line of credit usage that is based on LPC-Deal Scan has similar empirical
properties to the smaller, more detailed data constructed by Sufi. More importantly, we find that
the relationship between aggregate risk and the choice between cash and credit lines holds after
controlling for total risk and the variables considered in previous work on credit lines. For example, in
our benchmark specification (which uses Beta KMV and the LPC-Deal Scan proxy for LC-to-Cash),
we find that an increase in asset beta from 0.8 to 1.5 (this is less than a one-standard deviation in beta
in our sample) decreases a firm’s reliance on credit lines by approximately 0.06 (approximately 15%
of the standard deviation and 20% of the average value of the LC-to-Cash variable in our sample).
      The negative relationship between asset beta and LC-to-Cash holds for all diﬀerent proxies of
asset betas and line of credit usage that we employ. First, we show that this result also holds when
we use Sufi’s (2009) sample to calculate firms’ reliance on credit lines for liquidity management, both
for total and unused credit lines. Second, the results are also robust to variations in the methodology
used to compute betas, including Choi’s (2009) asset-return based betas, betas that are unlevered
using net rather than gross debt (to account for a possible eﬀect of cash on asset betas), “tail betas”
(that capture a firm’s exposure to systematic risks in bad times), and cash flow-based betas (com-
puted by relating a firm’s financing needs to the aggregate financing need in the entire universe of
firms in the sample).
      We also provide evidence for the auxiliary implications of the model. First, we compute a firm’s
“bank beta” to test the model’s implication that a firm’s exposure to banking sector’s risks should
influence the firm’s liquidity policy. Our evidence suggests that firms that are more sensitive to
banking industry downturns are more likely to hold cash for liquidity management. Second, we sort
  5
      These betas represent the 1987—2008 average, unlevered, value-weighted industry betas for the respective industries.


                                                             4
firms according to observable proxies for financing constraints to test whether the eﬀect of asset
beta on LC-to-Cash is driven by firms that are likely to be financially constrained. The relationship
between asset beta and the usage of credit lines holds only in the “constrained” subsamples (e.g.,
those containing only small and low payout firms). Third, we examine whether the eﬀect of asset
beta on the choice between cash and credit lines increases during times when aggregate risk is likely
to matter the most. In particular, we estimate cross-sectional regressions of LC-to-Cash on betas
every year, and we relate the time series variation in the coeﬃcient to the level of aggregate risk, as
measured by VIX, the implied volatility of the stock market index returns from options data. VIX
captures both aggregate volatility, as well as the financial sector’s appetite to bear that risk. The
results indicate that a firm’s exposure to systematic risk matters most in times when VIX is high.
   In our model, firms with high aggregate risk exposure hold more cash relative to lines of credit
since they face a higher cost of bank lines of credit compared to firms with low aggregate risk ex-
posure. To investigate this channel, we perform a final important test. In particular, we study the
relationship between firms’ asset beta and the spreads that they commit to pay on bank lines of
credit. Indeed, we find that high asset beta firms pay significantly higher spreads when opening and
drawing on their credit lines, controlling for other deal terms and firm characteristics.
   In addition to the literature discussed above, our paper is related to existing work on bank lending
during liquidity crises. Gatev and Strahan (2005) and Gatev, Schuermann, and Strahan (2005), show
that when commercial paper to treasury bill spread widens, banks experience an inflow of deposits.
This, in turn, helps them to honor their loan commitments. The flight of depositors to banks may
be due to banks having greater expertise in screening borrowers during stress times (cf. Kashyap,
Rajan, and Stein (2002)). Alternatively, the flight to bank deposits may be explained by the FDIC
insurance (see Pennacchi (2006) for evidence). This line of research helps explain why banks are the
natural providers of liquidity insurance for the corporate sector. In particular, the flight to bank
deposits in bad times may counteract the eﬀect of aggregate risk in liquidity management that we
identify. To address this, we confirm that in times of high aggregate volatility (VIX ), firm’s liquidity
management responds more to aggregate risk exposure, even after controlling for flight to quality,
captured by a widening of the commercial paper (CP) to treasury bill spread. Our paper contributes
to this literature by pointing out to an important limitation of bank-provided liquidity insurance:
firms’ exposure to systematic risks.
   The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we develop our model and derive its em-
pirical implications. We present the empirical tests in Section 3. Section 4 oﬀers concluding remarks.




                                                   5
2        Model

Our model is based on Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) and Tirole (2006), who consider the role of
aggregate risk in aﬀecting corporate liquidity policy. We introduce firm heterogeneity in their frame-
work to analyze the trade-oﬀs between cash and credit lines.
        The economy has a unit mass of firms. Each firm has access to an investment project that requires
fixed investment I at date 0.6 The investment opportunity also requires an additional investment at
date 1, of uncertain size. This additional investment represents the firms’ liquidity need at date 1. We
assume that the date-1 investment need can be either equal to ρ, with probability λ, or 0, with prob-
ability (1−λ). There is no discounting and everyone is risk-neutral, so that the discount factor is one.
        Firms are symmetric in all aspects, with one important exception. They diﬀer in the extent to
which their liquidity shocks are correlated with each other. A fraction θ of the firms has perfectly
correlated liquidity shocks; that is, they all either have a date-1 investment need, or not. We call
these firms systematic firms. The other fraction of firms (1 − θ) has independent investment needs;
that is, the probability that a firm needs ρ is independent of whether other firms need ρ or 0. These
are the non-systematic firms. We can think of this set up as one in which an aggregate state realizes
first. The realized state then determines whether or not systematic firms have liquidity shocks.
        We refer to states as follows. We let the aggregate state in which systematic firms have a liquidity
shock be denoted by λθ . Similarly, (1 − λθ ) is the state in which systematic firms have no liquidity
demand. After the realization of this aggregate state, non-systematic firms learn whether they have
liquidity shocks. The state in which non-systematic firms do get a shock is denoted as λ and the
other state as (1 − λ). Note that the likelihood of both λ and λθ states is λ. In other words, to avoid
additional notation, we denote states by their probability, but single out the state in which systematic
firms are all hit by a liquidity shock with the superscript θ. The set up is summarized in Figure 1.

                                            − Figure 1 about here −

        A firm will only continue its date-0 investment until date 2 if it can meet the date-1 liquidity
need. If the liquidity need is not met, then the firm is liquidated and the project produces a cash
flow equal to zero. If the firm continues, the investment produces a date-2 cash flow R which obtains
with probability p. With probability 1 − p, the investment produces nothing. The probability of
success depends on the input of specific human capital by the firms’ managers. If the managers
exert high eﬀort, the probability of success is equal to pG . Otherwise, the probability is pB , but the
managers consume a private benefit equal to B. While the cash flow R is verifiable, the managerial
eﬀort and the private benefit are not verifiable and contractible. Because of the moral hazard due
this private benefit, managers must keep a high enough stake in the project to be induced to exert
    6
     In Tirole (2006), the firm has date-0 wealth A but this plays no significant role in our model. Hence, we have set
it equal to zero.


                                                          6
eﬀort. We assume that the investment is negative NPV if the managers do not exert eﬀort, implying
the following incentive constraint:

                                       pG RM    ≥ pB RM + B, or                                    (1)
                                                   B
                                          RM    ≥     ,
                                                  ∆p
where RM is the managers’ compensation and ∆p = pG − pB . This moral hazard problem im-
plies that the firms’ cash flows cannot be pledged in their entirety to outside investors. Following
Holmstrom and Tirole, we define:
                                                     B
                                      ρ0 ≡ pG (R −      ) < ρ1 ≡ pG R.                             (2)
                                                     ∆p
The parameter ρ0 represents the investment’s pledgeable income, and ρ1 its total expected payoﬀ.
   In addition, we assume that the project can be partially liquidated at date 1. Specifically, a firm
can choose to continue only a fraction x < 1 of its investment project, in which case (in its liquidity
shock state, λ or λθ ) it requires a date-1 investment of xρ. It then produces total expected cash flow
equal to xρ1 , and pledgeable income equal to xρ0 . In other words, the project can be linearly scaled
down at date 1.
   We make the following assumption:

                                               ρ0 < ρ < ρ1 .                                       (3)

The assumption that ρ < ρ1 implies that the eﬃcient level of x is xF B = 1. However, the firm’s
pledgeable income is lower than the liquidity shock. This might force the firm to liquidate some of its
projects and thus have x∗ < 1 in equilibrium. In particular, in the absence of liquidity management
we would have x∗ = 0 (since xρ > xρ0 for all positive x). In particular, firms have a shortfall equal
to x(ρ − ρ0 ) when hit by a liquidity shock. For each x, they can raise xρ0 in the market at date-1.
As in Holmstrom and Tirole, we assume that the firm can fully dilute the date-0 investors at date-1.
In other words, the firm can issue securities that are senior to the date-0 claim to finance a part of
the required investment xρ (alternatively, we can assume eﬃcient renegotiation of the date-0 claim).
   Finally, we assume that even when x = 1, each project produces enough pledgeable income to
finance the initial investment I, and the date-1 investment ρ:

                                        I < (1 − λ)ρ0 + λ(ρ0 − ρ).                                 (4)

In particular, notice that this implies that (1 − λ)ρ0 > λ(ρ − ρ0 ).

2.1   Solution using credit lines

We assume that the economy has a single, large intermediary who will manage liquidity for all firms
(“the bank”) by oﬀering lines of credit. The credit line works as follows. The firm commits to

                                                      7
making a payment to the bank in states of the world in which liquidity is not needed. We denote
this payment (“commitment fee”) by y. In return, the bank commits to lending to the firm at a
pre-specified interest rate, up to a maximum limit. We denote the maximum size of the line by w.
In addition, the bank lends enough money (I) to the firms at date 0 so that they can start their
projects, in exchange for a promised date-2 debt payment D.
   To fix ideas, let us imagine for now that firms have zero cash holdings. In the next section we
will allow firms to both hold cash, and also open bank credit lines.
   In order for the credit line to allow firms to invest up to amount x in state λ, it must be that:

                                           w(x) ≥ x(ρ − ρ0 ).                                      (5)

In return, in state (1 − λ), the financial intermediary can receive up to the firm’s pledgeable income,
either through the date-1 commitment fee y, or through the date-2 payment D. We thus have the
budget constraint:
                                               y + pG D ≤ ρ0 .                                     (6)

The intermediary’s break even constraint is:

                                      I + λx(ρ − ρ0 ) ≤ (1 − λ)ρ0 .                                (7)

   Finally, the firm’s payoﬀ is:

                                   U (x) = (1 − λ)ρ1 + λ(ρ1 − ρ)x − I.                             (8)

Given assumption (4), equation (7) will be satisfied by x = 1, and thus the credit line allows firms
to achieve the first-best investment policy.
   The potential problem with the credit line is adequacy of bank liquidity. To provide liquidity for
the entire corporate sector, the intermediary must have enough available funds in all states of the
world. Since a fraction θ of firms will always demand liquidity in the same state, it is possible that
the intermediary will run out of funds in the bad aggregate state. In order to see this, notice that
in order obtain x = 1 in state λθ , the following inequality must be obeyed:

                              (1 − θ)(1 − λ)ρ0 ≥ [θ + (1 − θ)λ] (ρ − ρ0 ).                         (9)

The left-hand side represents the total pledgeable income that the intermediary has in that state,
coming from the non-systematic firms that do not have liquidity needs. The right-hand side rep-
resents the economy’s total liquidity needs, from the systematic firms and from the fraction of
non-systematic firms that have liquidity needs. Clearly, from (4) there will be a θmax > 0, such that
this condition is met for all θ < θmax . This leads to an intuitive result:



                                                     8
Proposition 1 The intermediary solution with lines of credit achieves the first-best investment pol-
icy if and only if systematic risk is suﬃciently low (θ < θmax ), where θmax is given by the condition:
                                                    ρ0 − λρ
                                           θmax =            .                                     (10)
                                                    (1 − λ)ρ



2.2     The choice between cash and credit lines

We now allow firms to hold both cash and open credit lines, and analyze the properties of the
equilibria that obtain for diﬀerent parameter values. Analyzing this trade-oﬀ constitutes the most
important and novel contribution of our paper.

2.2.1    Firms’ optimization problem

In order to characterize the diﬀerent equilibria, we start by introducing some notation. We let Lθ
(alternatively, L1−θ ) represent the liquidity demand by systematic (non-systematic) firms. Similarly,
xθ (x1−θ ) represents the investment level that systematic (non-systematic) firms can achieve in equi-
librium (under their preferred liquidity policy). In addition, the credit line contracts that are oﬀered
by the bank can also diﬀer across firm types. That is, we assume that a firm’s type is observable
by the bank at the time of contracting. This assumption implies that the credit line contract is also
indexed by firm type; specifically, (Dθ , wθ , y θ ) represents the contract oﬀered to systematic firms
and (D1−θ , w1−θ , y 1−θ ) represents the contract oﬀered to non-systematic firms. For now, we assume
that the bank cannot itself carry liquid funds and explain later why this is in fact the equilibrium
outcome in the model.
   Firms will optimize their payoﬀ subject to the constraint that they must be able to finance the
initial investment I, and the continuation investment x. In addition, the bank must break even. For
each firm type i = (θ, 1 − θ), the relevant constraints can be written as:

                                   wi + Li = xi (ρ − ρ0 )                                          (11)
                             I + qLi + λwi = (1 − λ)(Li + y i + pG Di )
                                 y i + pG Di ≤ ρ0 .

The first equation ensures that the firm can finance the continuation investment level xi , given its
liquidity policy (wi , Li ). The second equation is the bank break-even constraint. The bank provides
financing for the initial investment and the liquid holdings qLi , and in addition provides financing
through the credit line in state λ (equal to wi ). In exchange, the bank receives the sum of the
firm’s liquid holdings, the credit line commitment fee, and the date-2 debt payment Di . The third
inequality guarantees that the firm has enough pledgeable income to make the payment y i + pG Di
in the state when it is not hit by the liquidity shock.

                                                    9
    In addition to the break-even constraint, the bank must have enough liquidity to honor its credit
line commitments, in both aggregate states. As explained above, this constraint can bind in state
λθ , in which all systematic firms may demand liquidity. Each systematic firm demands liquidity
equal to xθ (ρ − ρ0 ) − Lθ , and there is a mass θ of such firms. In addition, non-systematic firms that
do not have an investment need demand liquidity equal to x1−θ (ρ − ρ0 ) − L1−θ . There are (1 − θ)λ
such firms. To honor its credit lines, the bank can draw on the liquidity provided by the fraction of
non-systematic firms that does not need liquidity, a mass equal to (1 −θ)(1 − λ). The bank receives a
payment equal to L1−θ +y 1−θ +pG D1−θ from each of them, a payment that cannot exceed L1−θ + ρ0 .
Thus, the bank’s liquidity constraint requires that:

            θ[xθ (ρ − ρ0 ) − Lθ ] + (1 − θ)λ[x1−θ (ρ − ρ0 ) − L1−θ ] ≤ (1 − θ)(1 − λ)[L1−θ + ρ0 ].   (12)

As will become clear below, this inequality will impose a constraint on the maximum size of the
credit line that is available to systematic firms. For now, we write this constraint as follows:

                                                 wθ ≤ wmax .                                         (13)

    We can collapse the constraints in (11) into a single constraint, and thus write the firm’s opti-
mization problem as follows:

                              max U i =        (1 − λ)ρ1 + λ(ρ1 − ρ)xi − (q − 1)Li − I s.t.          (14)
                              xi ,Li

                I + (q − 1)Li + λxi ρ ≤ (1 − λ)ρ0 + λxi ρ0
                                       wθ ≤ wmax

    This optimization problem determines firms’ optimal cash holdings and continuation investment,
which we write as a function of the liquidity premium, Li (q) and xi (q). In equilibrium, the total
demand from cash coming from systematic and non-systematic firms cannot exceed the supply of
liquid funds:
                                        θLθ (q) + (1 − θ)L1−θ (q) ≤ Ls .                             (15)

This equilibrium condition determines the cost of holding cash, q. We denote the equilibrium price
by q ∗ .

2.2.2      Optimal firm policies

The first point to notice is that non-systematic firms will never find it optimal to hold cash. In the
optimization problem (14), firms’ payoﬀs decrease with cash holdings Li if q ∗ > 1, and they are
independent of Li if q ∗ = 1. Thus, the only situation in which a firm might find it optimal to hold
cash is when the constraint xθ (ρ − ρ0 ) − Lθ ≤ wmax is binding. But this constraint can only bind
for systematic firms.

                                                      10
   Notice also that if Li = 0 the solution of the optimization problem (14) is xi = 1 (the eﬃcient
investment policy). Thus, non-systematic firms always invest optimally, x1−θ = 1.
   Given that non-systematic firms use credit lines to manage liquidity and invest optimally, we can
rewrite constraint (12) in simpler form as:

                θ[xθ (ρ − ρ0 ) − Lθ ] + (1 − θ)λ(ρ − ρ0 ) ≤ (1 − θ)(1 − λ)ρ0 , or                    (16)
                                                             (1 − θ)(ρ0 − λρ)
                                         xθ (ρ − ρ0 ) − Lθ ≤                   ≡ wmax .
                                                                     θ
                                                                               (1−θ)(ρ0 −λρ)
   Thus, the maximum size of the credit line for systematic firms is wmax =          θ       .   The term
(1 − θ)(ρ0 − λρ) represents the total amount of excess liquidity that is available from non-systematic
firms in state λθ . By equation (4), this is positive. The bank can then allocate this excess liquidity
to the fraction θ of firms that are systematic.
   Lemma 1 states the optimal policy of systematic firms, which we prove in the appendix.

Lemma 1 Investment policy of systematic firms, xθ , depends upon the liquidity premium, q, as
follows:

  1. If ρ − ρ0 ≤ wmax , then xθ (q) = 1 for all q.

  2. If ρ − ρ0 > wmax , define two threshold values of q, q1 and q2 as follows:



                                                    ρ0 − λρ − I
                                       q1 = 1 +                  ,                                   (17)
                                                  ρ − ρ0 − wmax
                                                       λ(ρ1 − ρ)
                                              q2 = 1 +           .                                   (18)
                                                         ρ − ρ0

      Then, xθ satisfies:

                      xθ (q) = 1 if q ≤ min(q1 , q2 )                                                (19)
                               (1 − λ)ρ0 − I + (q − 1)wmax
                             =                                if q2 ≥ q > q1
                                     (λ + q − 1)(ρ − ρ0 )
                             ∈ [0, 1] (indiﬀerence over entire range) if q1 > q = q2
                             = 0 if q > q2 .


   In words, systematic firms will invest eﬃciently if their total liquidity demand (ρ − ρ0 ) can be
satisfied by credit lines (of maximum size wmax ), or if the cost of holding cash q is low enough. If
the maximum available credit line is low, and the cost of carrying cash is high, then systematic firms
will optimally reduce their optimal continuation investment (xθ < 1). If the cost of carrying cash is
high enough, then systematic firms may need to fully liquidate their projects (xθ = 0).


                                                     11
       Given the optimal investment in Lemma 1, the demand for cash is given by Lθ (q) = 0 if ρ − ρ0 ≤
wmax , and by the following condition

                                          Lθ (xθ ) = xθ (ρ − ρ0 ) − wmax ,                                       (20)

when ρ − ρ0 > wmax , for the optimal xθ (q) in Lemma 1.

2.2.3      Equilibria

The particular equilibrium that obtains in the model will depend on the fraction of systematic firms
in the economy (θ), and the supply of liquid funds (Ls ).
       First, notice that if ρ − ρ0 ≤ wmax (that is, if the fraction of systematic firms in the economy
is small, (θ ≤ θmax ), then there is no cash demand and the equilibrium liquidity premium is zero
(q∗ = 1). Firms use credit lines to manage liquidity and they invest eﬃciently (xθ = x1−θ = 1).
       On the flip side, if ρ − ρ0 > wmax (that is, θ > θmax ), then systematic firms will need to use cash
in equilibrium. Equilibrium requires that the demand for cash does not exceed supply:

                                   θLθ (q) = θ[xθ (q)(ρ − ρ0 ) − wmax ] ≤ Ls .                                   (21)

       Given this equilibrium condition, we can find the minimum level of liquidity supply Ls , such that
systematic firms can sustain an eﬃcient investment policy, xθ (q) = 1. This is given by:

                                          θ[(ρ − ρ0 ) − wmax ] = Ls1 (θ).                                        (22)

       If Ls ≥ Ls1 (θ), then systematic firms invest eﬃciently, xθ = 1, demand a credit line equal to
wmax , and have cash holdings equal to Lθ = (ρ − ρ0 ) − wmax . The equilibrium liquidity premium is
zero, q∗ = 1.
       When Ls drops below Ls1 (θ), then the cash demand by systematic firms must fall to make it
compatible with supply. This is accomplished by an increase in the liquidity premium that reduces
cash demand. In equilibrium, we have q ∗ > 1, xθ (q∗ ) < 1, and equation (21) holding with equality
(such that the demand for cash equals the reduced supply):7

                                        θ[xθ (q ∗ )(ρ − ρ0 ) − wmax ] = Ls .                                     (23)

2.3      Summary of results

We summarize the model’s results in form of the following detailed proposition:

Proposition 2 When firms can choose between both cash holdings and bank-provided lines of credit,
the following equilibria are possible depending on the extent of aggregate risk and the supply of liquid
assets in the economy:
   7
    There are two cases to consider here, depending on whether q1 is higher or lower than q2 . Please see the appendix
for deatils.


                                                         12
  1. If the amount of systematic risk in the economy is low (θ ≤ θmax ), where θmax is as given
      in Proposition 1, then all firms can use credit lines to manage their liquidity. They invest
      eﬃciently and credit line contracts are independent of firms’ exposure to systematic risk.

  2. If the amount of systematic risk in the economy is high (θ > θmax ), then firms that have
      more exposure to systematic risk will be more likely to hold cash (relative to credit lines) in
      their liquidity management. The bank’s liquidity constraint requires that credit line contracts
      discriminate between idiosyncratic and systematic risk. There are two sub-cases to consider,
      which vary according to the supply of liquid assets in the economy (see Figure 2 for the case
      when q1 < q2 ):

      (a) If the supply of liquid assets is higher than a minimum cutoﬀ Ls1 (θ) defined by Ls1 (θ) =
                                                      (1−θ)(ρ0 −λρ)
           θ[(ρ − ρ0 ) − wmax (θ)] and wmax (θ) =           θ       ,   then in equilibrium all firms invest
           eﬃciently (irrespective of their exposure to systematic risk), and there is no liquidity
           premium. Firms use both cash and credit lines to manage systematic risk, and they use
           credit lines to manage idiosyncratic risk.
       (b) If the supply of liquid assets is lower than Ls1 (θ), then systematic liquidity risk generates
           a liquidity premium and investment distortions. Firms that have greater exposure to
           systematic risk hold more cash, and under-invest in the event of a liquidity shock.




                                        − Figure 2 about here −

   In all of these situations, there is no role for cash held inside the intermediary. In equilibrium,
cash is held only to manage systematic risk. Thus, firms gain no diversification benefits by deposit-
ing the cash with the intermediary (they all need the cash in the same state of the world, and so
the intermediary must carry the same amount of cash that the firms do). Firms would benefit from
diversification when managing non-systematic risk, but for that they are always better oﬀ using the
credit line (which does not involve a liquidity premium).

2.4   Empirical implications

The model generates the following implications, which we examine in the next section.

  1. A firm’s exposure to systematic risk is an important determinant of whether it manages its
      future liquidity needs through cash reserves or bank-provided lines of credit. In particular, an
      increase in a firm’s exposure to aggregate risk should increase its propensity to use cash for
      corporate liquidity management, relative to credit lines. We test this prediction by relating the
      fraction of total corporate liquidity that is held in the form of credit lines to a firm’s asset beta.

                                                    13
   2. The trade-oﬀ between cash and credit lines becomes more important as the amount of system-
       atic risk in the economy increases. Following previous research, we test this implication by
       examining whether the eﬀect of asset beta on the choice between cash and credit lines increases
       in times of high aggregate risk. We measure aggregate risk using VIX, the implied volatility
       of the stock market index returns from options data. VIX captures both aggregate volatility,
       as well as the financial sector’s appetite to bear that risk.

   3. The trade-oﬀ between cash and credit lines is more important for firms that find it more costly
       to raise external capital. In the absence of financing constraints there is no role for corporate
       liquidity policy, thus the choice between cash and credit lines becomes irrelevant. We test this
       model implication by sorting firms according to observable proxies for financing constraints,
       and examining whether the eﬀect of asset beta on the choice between cash and credit lines is
       driven by firms that are likely to be financially constrained.

   4. A firm’s exposure to risks that are systematic to the banking industry is particularly important
       for the determination of its liquidity policy. In the model, bank systematic risk has a one-to-one
       relation with firm systematic risk, given that there is only one source of risk in the economy
       (firms’ liquidity shock). However, one might imagine that in reality banks face other sources
       of systematic risk (coming, for example, from consumers’ liquidity demand) and that firms are
       diﬀerentially exposed to such risks. Accordingly, a “firm-bank asset beta” should also drive
       corporate liquidity policy. Firms that are more sensitive to banking industry downturns should
       be more likely to hold cash for liquidity management.

   5. Firms with higher systematic risk exposure should face worse contractual terms when raising
       bank credit lines. In the model, if the amount of systematic risk in the economy is high, then
       the bank’s liquidity constraint requires that credit line contracts discriminate between idio-
       syncratic and systematic risk. In particular, systematic firms should face worse contractual
       terms since they are the ones that drive the bank’s liquidity constraint. One diﬃculty with
       testing this implication is that there are several contractual dimensions that could be used by
       the bank to separate firms, including quantity constraints, spreads, maturity, and covenants.
       With this caveat in mind, we test this implication by relating asset beta to credit spreads, after
       controlling for firm characteristics and other contractual terms. Given the endogeneity of the
       control variables, this evidence should be interpreted as suggestive rather than conclusive.8
   8
     Our model has the additional empirical implication that the liquidity risk premium is higher when there is an
economic downturn since in such times there is greater aggregate risk and lines of credit become more expensive. This
is similar to the result of Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009), but in their model, the eﬀect arises from the fact that firms’
cash flows are lower in economic downturns and they are less naturally hedged against future liquidity needs.




                                                          14
3        Empirical tests
3.1       Sample selection criteria

The main implication of our model is that firms are more likely to use cash in their liquidity man-
agement if they are subject to a greater amount of systematic risk. We use two alternative sources
to construct our line of credit data. Our first sample (which we call LPC Sample) is drawn from
LPC-Deal Scan. These data allow us to construct a large sample of credit line initiations. We note,
however, that the LPC-Deal Scan data have two potential drawbacks. First, they are mostly based
on syndicated loans, thus are potentially biased towards large deals and consequently towards large
firms. Second, they do not allow us to measure line of credit drawdowns (the fraction of existing
lines that has been used in the past). To overcome these issues, we also construct an alternative
sample that contains detailed information on the credit lines initiated and used by a random sample
of 300 COMPUSTAT firms. These data are provided by Amir Sufi on his website and were used on
Sufi (2009). We call this sample Random Sample. Using these data reduces the sample size for our
tests. We regard these two samples as providing complementary information on the usage of credit
lines for the purposes of this paper. In addition, this allows us to document that several previously
reported patterns prevail in both samples.
        To construct the LPC Sample, we start from a sample of loans in LPC-Deal Scan in the period of
1987 to 2008 for which we can obtain the firm identifier gvkey (which we later use to match to COM-
PUSTAT).9 We drop utilities, quasi-public and financial firms from the sample (SIC codes greater
than 5999 and lower than 7000, greater than 4899 and lower than 5000, and greater than 8999). We
consider only short term and long term credit lines, which are defined as those that have the LPC
field “loantype” equal to “364-day Facility,” “Revolver/Line < 1 Yr,” “Revolver/Line >= 1 Yr,”
or “Revolver/Line.” We drop loans that appear to be repeated (same gvkey and loan_id ). In some
cases, the same firm has more than one credit line initiation in the same quarter. In these cases, we
sum the facility amounts (the total available credit in each line) for each firm-quarter, and average
the other variables using the facility amount as weights. We let LCi,t denote the total value of credit
lines initiated in quarter t by firm i, and let M aturityi,t denote the average maturity of these lines
in quarters. We also collect data on the spreads paid by firms when raising these lines. All-in drawn
spread captures the total (fees and interests) annual spread paid over LIBOR for each dollar drawn
down from the facility. Undrawn spread is the total (fees and interest) annual spread over LIBOR,
for each dollar available under commitment. This sample is then matched to COMPUSTAT annual
data, as described below.
        To construct the Random Sample, we start from the sample used in Sufi (2009), which contains
    9
    We use several procedures to obtain gvkeys, including a file provided by Michael Roberts, which was used in Chava
and Roberts (2008), firm tickers (which are available in LPC), and manual matching using firm names.



                                                         15
1,908 firm-years (300 firms) between 1996 and 2003. Sufi’s data set includes information on the
total credit line facilities available to firm j in the random sample during an year t between 1996 to
2003 (Total Line j,t ), and the amount of credit in these lines that is still available to firm j in year t
(Unused Line j,t ). We use this information to construct our proxies for credit line usage. These data
are then matched to annual data from COMPUSTAT.
    Finally, we merge these data with data on firm-level betas and stock-price based volatility mea-
sures. These data are described in more detail below.

3.2     Variable definitions

Our tests combine data that comes from multiple sources. It is useful to explain in detail how we
construct our variables.

3.2.1    COMPUSTAT variables

We follow Sufi (2009) in the definitions of the variables that we use for our credit line tests. We
use a book asset measure that deducts the amount of cash holdings, that is, firm Assets are defined
as at — che. The other COMPUSTAT-based variables that we examine in our tests are defined as
follows (in terms of annual COMPUSTAT fields). Cash is given by che. Tangibility is equal to ppent
scaled by assets. Size is defined as the log of assets. Q is defined as a cash-adjusted, market-to-book
asset ratio, (Assets + prcc_fc×sho — ceq)/Assets.10 NetWorth is defined as (ceq — che)/Assets.
Profitability is the ratio of EBITDA over assets. Age is measured as the diﬀerence between the
current year and the first year in which the firm appeared in COMPUSTAT. Industry sales volatility
(IndSaleVol) is the (3-digit SIC) industry median value of the within-year standard deviation of
quarterly changes in firm sales (saleq minus its lagged value) scaled by the average asset value (atq)
in the year. Profit volatility (ProfitVol ) is the firm-level standard deviation of annual changes in the
level of EBITDA, calculated using four lags, and scaled by average assets in the lagged period. We
winsorize all COMPUSTAT variables at the 5th and 95th percentiles.

3.2.2    Line of credit data

When using Random Sample, we measure the fraction of total corporate liquidity that is provided
by credit lines for firm i in year t using both total and unused credit lines:
                                                            T otal Linei,t
                             Total LC-to-Cash i,t =                             ,                           (24)
                                                       T otal Linei,t + Cashi,t

                                                           U nused Linei,t
                           Unused LC-to-Cash i,t =                               .                          (25)
                                                       U nused Linei,t + Cashi,t
  10
     Sufi (2009) also deducts deferred taxes from the numerator. We excluded deferred taxes from this calculation
because including it causes a significant drop in the number of observations when using sample B.



                                                       16
As discussed by Sufi, while some firms may have higher demand for total liquidity due to better
investment opportunities, these LC-to-Cash ratios should isolate the relative usage of lines of credit
versus cash in corporate liquidity management.
      When using LPC Sample, we construct a proxy for line of credit usage in the following way.
For each firm-quarter, we measure credit line availability at date t by summing all existing credit
lines that have not yet matured. This calculation assumes that LCs remain open until they mature.
Specifically, we define our measure of line of credit availability for each firm-quarter (j, s) as:
                                                X
                               T otal LCj,s =         LCj,t Γ(M aturityj,t ≥ s − t),                            (26)
                                                t≤s

where Γ(.) represents the indicator function, and the variables LC and M aturity are defined above.
We convert these firm-quarter measures into firm-year measures by computing the average value of
T otal LC in each year. We then measure the fraction of corporate liquidity that is provided by
investment-related lines of credit for firm j in quarter s using the following variable:
                                                             T otal LCj,t
                                   LC-to-Cash j,t =                            .                                (27)
                                                        T otal LCj,t + Cashj,t

This ratio is closely related to the Total LC-to-Cash ratio of equation (24).

3.2.3      Data on betas and volatilities

We measure firms’ exposure to systematic risk using asset (unlevered) betas.11 While equity betas
are easy to compute using stock price data, they are mechanically related to leverage: high leverage
firms will tend to have larger betas. Because greater reliance on credit lines will typically increase the
firm’s leverage, the leverage eﬀect would then bias our estimates of the eﬀect of betas on corporate
liquidity management.
      To overcome this problem, we unlever equity betas in two alternative ways. The simplest way to
unlever betas is to use a model that backs out the “mechanical” eﬀect of leverage, using for example
a Merton-KMV type model for firm value. Our first set of betas is computed using such a model,
starting from yearly equity betas that are estimated using the past 12 monthly stock returns for
each firm (using CRSP data). To compute the face value of debt for each firm, we use the firm’s
total book value of short-term debt plus one-half of the book value of long-term debt.12 We call the
set of betas that we obtain using this method Beta KMV. We also compute a measure of total asset
volatility, which is used as a control in some of the regressions below. This measure (denoted Var
KMV ) is estimated yearly using the past 12 monthly stock returns and the KMV-Merton model.
      The second way to unlever betas and variances is to directly compute data on firm asset returns.
The data we use come from Choi (2009). Choi computes bond and bank loan returns using several
 11
      Similar to the COMPUSTAT data items, all measures of beta described below are winsorized at a 5% level.
 12
      This is a knwon rule-of-thumb used to fit a KMV-type model to an annual horizon.


                                                          17
data sources and then combines them with stock returns into an asset return measure that uses rela-
tive market values of the diﬀerent financial claims as weights. The firm-level asset return measure is
then used to compute annual betas against the aggregate equity market. We call this beta measure
Beta Asset, and the associated return variance measure Var Asset. Given the stricter requirements
(including some proprietary information), these data are only available for a subset of our firms.13
Because of data availability, we use Beta KMV as our benchmark measure of beta, but we verify
that the results are robust to the use of this alternative unlevering method.
      One potential concern with theses beta measures is that they may be mechanically influenced
by a firm’s cash holdings. Since corporate cash holdings are typically held in the form of riskless
securities, high cash firms could have lower asset betas. Notice that this possibility would make it
less likely for us to find a positive relationship between asset betas and cash. However, we also verify
whether this eﬀect has a significant bearing on our results by computing KMV-type asset betas that
are unlevered using net debt (e.g., debt minus cash) rather than gross debt. We call this variable Beta
Cash, which is computed at the level of the industry to further mitigate endogeneity. Specifically,
we measure Beta Cash as the median cash-adjusted asset beta in the firm’s 3-digit SIC industry.
      We also compute a firm’s “bank beta” (which we call Beta Bank ) to test the model’s implication
that a firm’s exposure to banking sector’s risks should influence the firm’s liquidity policy. We com-
pute this beta by unlevering the firm’s equity beta relative to an index of bank stock returns, which
is computed using a value-weighted average of the stock returns of all banks that are present in the
LPC-Deal Scan database. We use the LPC banks to compute the aggregate bank stock return to
ensure that our measure of the banking sector’s risk captures a risk that is relevant for the firms in
our sample.
      In the model, a firm’s exposure to systematic risks matters mostly on the downside (because a
firm may need liquidity when other firms are likely to be in trouble). To capture a firm’s exposure to
large negative shocks, we follow Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and Richardson (2010) and compute
the firm’s Tail Beta. The firm’s tail beta is defined as the ratio of Marginal Expected Shortfall (MES)
of a firm, divided by Expected Shortfall (ES) of the market, where MES is the average percentage
loss suﬀered by a firm on days when the CRSP value-weighted market return is in its worst 5% days
in the previous year, and ES is the average percentage loss suﬀered by the market on those same
days. MES is a common risk measure used by firms for enterprise-wide risk aggregation. This beta
is then unlevered using the same procedure used to compute Beta KMV.
      All of the betas described above are computed using market prices. Using market data is desirable
because of their high frequency. However, the model’s argument is based on the correlation between a
firm’s liquidity needs (the diﬀerence between required investments and pledgeable cash flows) and the
liquidity need for the overall economy (which aﬀects the banking sector’s ability to provide liquidity).
 13
      We refer the reader to Choi’s original paper for further details on the construction of Beta Asset.


                                                            18
While market-based betas should capture this correlation, it is desirable to verify whether a beta that
is based more directly on cash flows and investment also contains information about firm’s choices
between cash and credit lines.14 In order to do this, we compute each firm’s financing gap beta (Beta
Gap) in the following way. In each year, we compute a firm’s financing gap at the level of the 3-digit
SIC industry by taking the diﬀerence between total industry investment and total industry cash flow,
scaled by assets (at).15 Then we compute the beta of the firm’s financing gap with respect to the ag-
gregate financing gap (the diﬀerence between investment and cash flows for the entire COMPUSTAT
sample), using 10 years of data. We define the firm’s financing gap at the industry gap to mitigate
the endogeneity of firm-specific investment, and to reduce the error in measuring the gap betas.16
       One shortcoming of the measures of systematic risk that we construct is that they are noisy
and prone to measurement error. While this problem cannot be fully resolved, it can be amelio-
rated by adopting a strategy dealing with classical errors-in-variables. We follow the traditional
Griliches and Hausman (1986) approach to measurement problem and instrument the endogenous
variable (our beta proxy) with lags of itself. We experimented with alternative lag structures and
chose a parsimonious form that satisfies the restriction conditions needed to validate the approach.17
Throughout the tests performed below, we report auxiliary statistics that speak to the relevance
(first-stage F -tests) and validity (Hansen’s J -stats) of our instrumental variables regressions.

3.3      Empirical tests and results
3.3.1      Summary statistics

We start by summarizing our data in Table 1. Panel A reports summary statistics for the LPC-Deal
Scan sample (for firm-years in which Beta KM V data are available), and Panel B uses Sufi’s sample.
Notice that the size of the sample in Panel A is much larger, and that the data for Beta Asset are
available only for approximately one third of the firm-years for which Beta KM V data are available.
As expected, the average values of asset betas are very close to each other, with average values close
to one. The two alternative measures of variance also appear to be very close to each other.

                                             − Table 1 about here −

       Comparing Panel A and Panel B, notice that the distribution for most of the variables is very
similar across the two samples. The main diﬀerence between the two samples is that the LPC-Deal
Scan data is biased towards large firms (as discussed above). For example, median assets are equal
to 270 million in LPC Sample, and 116 million in Random Sample. Consistent with this diﬀerence,
  14
      We thank Ran Duchin for suggesting this analysis.
  15
      We use Compustat item capx to measure investment (ib), and define cash flow as earnings before extraordinary
items (ib).
   16
      We restrict the sample to industry-years with at least 15 firms, to further improve measurement.
   17
      An alternative way to address measurement error is to compute betas at a “portfolio”, rather than at a firm-level.
We explore this idea as well, by using industry betas rather than firm-level betas in some specifications below.


                                                          19
the firms in LPC Sample are also older, and have higher average Qs and EBITDA volatility. The
measure of line of credit availability in LPC Sample (LC-to-Cash) is lower than those in Random
Sample (Total LC-to-Cash and Unused LC-to-Cash). For example, the average value of LC-to-Cash
in LPC Sample is 0.33, while the average value of Total LC-to-Cash is 0.51. This diﬀerence reflects
the fact that LPC-Deal Scan may fail to report some credit lines that are available in Sufi’s data,
though it could also reflect the diﬀerent sample compositions.
       In Table 2, we examine the correlation among the diﬀerent betas that we use in this study. We
also include the asset volatility proxies (Var KMV and Var Asset). Not surprisingly, all the beta
proxies that are based on asset return data are highly correlated. The lowest correlations are those
between Beta Gap and the asset-return based betas (approximately 0.10). The correlations among
the other betas (all of them based on asset return data) hover between 0.4 and 0.9.

                                          − Table 2 about here −

       To examine the eﬀect of aggregate risk on the choice between cash and credit lines, we perform
a number of diﬀerent sets of tests. We describe these tests in turn.

3.3.2      Industry analysis

To provide a visual illustration of the eﬀect of betas on corporate liquidity management, we plot
in Figure 3 the average industry value for LC-to-Cash for our entire time period of 1987 to 2008,
against average (value-weighted) industry asset betas (using Beta KMV ).18 The figure depicts a
strong negative relation between asset betas and the usage of credit lines. The eﬀect of beta on
liquidity management also appears to be economically significant. To give a concrete example,
consider a comparison between the SIC 344 industry (Fabricated Metals) and SIC 367 (Electronic
Components). The former industry is characterized by heavy reliance on credit lines for liquidity
management (average LC-to-Cash is 0.43 in our time period), while the latter shows greater reliance
on cash (LC-to-Cash = 0.18). These LC/cash choices correspond to the diﬀerences in unlevered
industry betas across the two industries. SIC 344 has an average Beta KMV of 0.83 in our time
period, while SIC 367’s average asset beta equals 1.56. We also report the output of a simple
regression of LC-to-Cash on Beta KMV. This regression slope is −0.09, significant at a 1% level (t-
stat = −2.76). This empirical relation supports the implications of the model developed in Section 2.

                                         − Figure 3 about here −
  18
    Below, we also examine whether the industry betas depicted in Figure 3 are correlated with LC-to-Cash after
controlling for other firm-level determinants of liquidity management.




                                                      20
3.3.3   Firm-level regressions

The plot in Figure 3 uses raw data and thus does not address the possibility that the relation be-
tween aggregate risk and line of credit may be driven by other variables. For example, the evidence
in Sufi (2009) suggests that risky firms (equivalent to ProfitVol above) are less likely to use credit
lines. Since betas are correlated with total risk, it is important to show that the relation between
beta and credit line usage remains after controlling for risk.
   Our benchmark empirical specification closely follows of Sufi (2009). We add to his regression
by including our measure of systematic risk:

         LC-to-Cashi,t = α + β 1 BetaKMV i,t + β 2 ln(Age)i,t + β 3 (Profitability)i,t−1               (28)
                             +β 4 Size i,t−1 + β 5 Qi,t−1 + β 6 N etworthi,t−1 + β 7 IndSalesV olj,t
                                                   X
                             +β 8 ProfitV oli,t +       Y eart + ²i,t ,
                                                   t

where Year absorbs time-specific eﬀects, respectively. Our model predicts that the coeﬃcient β 1
should be negative. We also run the same regression replacing Beta KMV with our other proxies
for a firm’s exposure to systematic risk (see Section 3.2.3). And we use diﬀerent proxies for LC-to-
Cash, which are based both on LPC-Deal Scan and Sufi’s data. In some specifications we also include
industry dummies (following Sufi we use 1-digit SIC industry dummies in our empirical models) and
the variance measures that are based on stock and asset returns (Var KMV and Var Asset).
   The results for the Beta KMV and LPC-Deal Scan data are presented in Table 3. In column
(1), we replicate Sufi’s (2009) results (see his Table 3). Just like Sufi, we find that profitable, large,
low Q, low net worth, seasonal firms are more likely to use bank credit lines. This is particularly
important given the fact that our dependent variable is not as precisely measured as that in Sufi.
In column (2) we introduce our measure of systematic risk and find that the choice between lines
of credit and cash is heavily influenced by that measure. Specifically, the coeﬃcient on Beta KMV
suggests that a one-standard deviation increase in asset beta (approximately one) decreases firm’s
reliance on credit lines by approximately 0.089 (more than 20% of the standard deviation of the
LC-to-Cash variable). This result is robust to the inclusion of industry dummies (column (3)), and
stock-return based variance measures (column (4)). Since the variance measures are computed in a
similar way to beta, in columns (5) and (6) we experiment with a specification in which the variance
measure is also instrumented with its two first lags. This change in specification has no significant
eﬀect on the Beta KMV coeﬃcients.

                                        − Table 3 about here −

   It is important that we consider the validity of our instrumental variables approach to the mis-
measurement problem. The first statistic we consider in this examination is the first-stage exclusion

                                                       21
F -tests for our set of instruments. Their associated p-values are all lower to 1% (confirming the
explanatory power of our instruments). We also examine the validity of the exclusion restrictions
associated with our set of instruments. We do this using Hansen’s (1982) J -test statistic for overiden-
tifying restrictions. The p-values associated with Hansen’s test statistic are reported in the last row
of Table 3. The high p-values reported in the table imply the acceptance of the null hypothesis that
the identification restrictions that justify the instruments chosen are met in the data. Specifically,
these reported statistics suggest that we do not reject the joint null hypothesis that our instruments
are uncorrelated with the error term in the leverage regression and the model is well-specified.
       Table 4 uses Sufi’s (2009) measures of LC-to-Cash rather than LPC-Deal Scan data. In the
first two columns, we replicate the results in Sufi’s Table 3, for both total and unused measures of
LC-to-Cash. Notice that the coeﬃcients are virtually identical to those in Sufi. We then introduce
our KMV-based proxy for aggregate risk exposure (Beta KMV ). As in Table 3, the coeﬃcients
are statistically and economically significant, both before and after controlling for asset variance
(Var KMV ). These results suggest that the relation between asset betas and liquidity management
that we uncover in this paper is economically significant and robust to diﬀerent ways of computing
exposure to systematic risk and reliance on credit lines for liquidity management.

                                            − Table 4 about here −

       Tables 5 and 6 replace beta KMV with our alternative beta measures. Table 5 shows the results for
the LPC-Deal Scan sample,19 while Table 6 shows the results for Sufi’s (2009) sample. The results in
the first column of Table 5 suggest that the results reported in Table 3 are robust to the method used
to unlever betas. Beta Asset (which is based directly on asset return data) has a similar relationship
to liquidity policy as that uncovered in Table 2. The economic magnitude of the coeﬃcient on Beta
Asset is in fact larger than that reported in Table 2. Using industry-level cash-adjusted betas, Beta
Cash, also produces similar results (column (2)). In column (3), we show that a firm’s exposure to
banking sector risks (Beta Bank ) aﬀects liquidity policy in a way that is consistent with the theory.
The coeﬃcients are also economically significant. Specifically, a one-standard deviation increase
in Beta Bank (which is equal to 0.7) decreases LC-to-Cash by 0.21, which is half of the standard
deviation of the LC-to-Cash variable. Column (4) shows that a firm’s exposure to tail risks is also
correlated with liquidity policy. Firms which tend to do poorly during market downturns have a
significantly lower LC-to-Cash ratio. Column (5) replaces market-based beta measures with the
financing gap beta (Beta Gap). Consistent with the theory, Beta Gap is significantly related to the
LC-to-Cash ratio, though economic significance is smaller than for the market measures (possibly
due to residual measurement error in these cash-flow based betas).20 Finally, in column (6) we use
  19
      To economize space we do not report the results using industry dummies in Table 5. All results continue to hold
if we do so.
   20
      The coeﬃcient in column (5) suggests that a one-standard deviation increase in Beta Gap decreases LC-to-Cash


                                                         22
value-weighted industry betas rather than firm-level betas in the regression. Using industry betas is
an alternative way to address the possibility that firm-level betas are measured with error. Thus, in
column (6) we do not instrument betas with the first two lags (as we do in the other columns). The
results again suggest a significant relationship between asset beta and the LC-to-Cash ratio.

                                       − Table 5 about here −

   Table 6 replicates the analysis in Table 5 for Sufi’s (2009) sample. The results show that the
relationship between beta and liquidity management also holds when using that sample, for both
measures of liquidity management (using total and unused credit lines). The only diﬀerence between
the results in Table 5 and Table 6 is that in some cases the statistical significance of the beta coef-
ficients is lower in Table 6 (such as for Beta Bank and Beta Gap). This diﬀerence is probably due
to the decrease in the number of observations in Table 6, relative to Table 5.

                                       − Table 6 about here −

3.3.4   SUR models for cash and credit lines

As discussed by Sufi (2009), the variable LC-to-Cash has the advantage of isolating the relative
importance of credit lines versus cash for corporate liquidity management, while controlling for the
firm’s total liquidity demand. Our theory also makes predictions about the relative usage of cash
versus credit lines. Accordingly, our tests focus on LC-to-Cash.
   Naturally, it is interesting to examine how asset betas impact the firm’s choice of cash and credit
lines separately. In order to do this, we use a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) model, in which
we regress measures of line of credit usage and cash holdings (both scaled by assets net of cash)
on betas and the control variables listed in equation (28). To address measurement error, these
regressions use predicted values of beta on the right-hand side, using a model that includes two lags
of beta and the other control variables. The results are presented in Table 7.

                                       − Table 7 about here −

   When using the LPC-Deal Scan data, we find that asset betas impact mostly the firm’s cash hold-
ings, while they are insignificantly related to the firm’s demand for credit lines. However, using Sufi’s
data (in particular the measure that includes all credit lines, both used and unused) we find evidence
that asset betas both increase cash and also reduce the demand for credit lines (see columns (5) and
(6)). One possible explanation for this finding is the better coverage of line of credit data in Sufi’s
sample. These results are interesting in their own right and more fully characterize our main insights.
by approximately 1.5%.




                                                   23
3.3.5      Sorting firms according to proxies for financing constraints

As the model in Section 2 makes it clear, the choice between cash and credit lines should be most
relevant for firms that are financially constrained. This line of argument suggests that the relation-
ship that we find above should be driven by firms that find it more costly to raise external funds.
In this section we employ specifications in which we sort firms into “financially constrained” and
“financially unconstrained” categories. We do not have strong priors about which approach is best
and follow prior studies in using multiple alternative schemes to partition our sample:

       • Scheme #1: We rank firms based on their payout ratio and assign to the financially constrained
         (unconstrained) group those firms in the bottom (top) three deciles of the annual payout distri-
         bution. The intuition that financially constrained firms have significantly lower payout ratios
         follows from Fazzari et al. (1988), among many others, in the financial constraints literature.
         In the capital structure literature, Fama and French (2002) use payout ratios as a measure of
         diﬃculties firms may face in assessing the financial markets.

       • Scheme #2: We rank firms based on their asset size, and assign to the financially constrained
         (unconstrained) group those firms in the bottom (top) three deciles of the size distribution.
         This approach resembles that of Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995), who also distinguish be-
         tween groups of financially constrained and unconstrained firms on the basis of size. Fama and
         French (2002) and Frank and Goyal (2003) also associate firm size with the degree of external
         financing frictions. The argument for size as a good observable measure of financial constraints
         is that small firms are typically young, less well known, and thus more vulnerable to credit
         imperfections.

       • Scheme #3: We rank firms based on whether they have bond and commercial paper ratings.
         A firm is deemed to be constrained if it has neither a bond nor a commercial paper rating. it
         is unconstrained if it has both a bond and a commercial paper rating.

       We repeat the regressions performed in Table 2, but now separately for financially constrained
and unconstrained subsamples. Table 6 presents the results we obtain. The table shows that the
relationship between beta and the usage of credit lines holds only in the constrained samples, for all
criteria.21 These results are once again consistent with the model in Section 2.

                                             − Table 8 about here −
  21
     While the beta coeﬃcient for the non-rated sample is only marginally significant (p-value of 0.107), its magnitude
is significantly more negative than that of the sub-sample of firms that have both bond and commercial paper ratings.




                                                          24
3.3.6       Year-by-year regressions and macroeconomic eﬀects

Next, we provide evidence on the time variation of the relationship between systematic risk (Beta
KMV ) and credit line usage (LC-to-Cash). To do this, we run the regression in equation (28) every
year between 1988 and 2008, collect the coeﬃcients β 1 for each time period, and examine their re-
lationship to a proxy for overall risk in the economy, V IX (the implied volatility on S&P 500 index
options).22 A simple regression of β 1,t on V IXt produces a negative coeﬃcient of −0.094, with a
t-statistic of 1.87. This suggests that when V IX goes up, the eﬀect of beta on the LC-to-Cash ratio
(captured by β 1,t ) becomes more pronounced.
       In addition to this simple regression, we also experiment with alternative specifications in which
we include additional macroeconomic variables. For example, previous banking literature suggests
that during crises, banks experience an inflow of deposits coming from the commercial paper market.
This eﬀect, in turn, helps them to honor their loan commitments (e.g., Gatev and Strahan (2005)).
Banks’ increased ability to honor their loan commitments during bad times may then counteract
the eﬀect of V IX on corporate liquidity management. As shown by Gatev and Strahan, this inflow
eﬀect tends to happen in times when the spread of commercial paper over treasury rates is high.
Accordingly, we include the CP—treasury spread in the regression that explains the time variation in
β 1,t .23 We also include a time trend, and real GDP growth to capture general economic conditions.
We obtain the following result, which we report in the text. The t-statistics associated with each
estimate are reported in parenthesis:

β 1,t = 0.015− 0.099 ×VIX t − 0.088 ×GDPGrowth t +0.021×CP—Treasury Spread t − 0.001 ×TimeTrend t
          (0.94)   (−1.87)        (−0.35)                    (1.16)                           (−1.49)
                                                                                                        (29)
       This regression shows that the Beta KMV coeﬃcient is significantly more negative in periods
when VIX is high, controlling for variation in other economic variables. That is, riskier firms resort
more to cash (as opposed to lines of credit) in periods of elevated aggregate risk. The positive
coeﬃcient on the CP—Treasury Spread indicates that the flight to bank deposits in bad times does
mitigate some of the eﬀect of VIX on liquidity management (consistent with arguments in the existing
literature).

3.3.7       Asset beta and loan spreads

The empirical facts uncovered so far all suggest that firms with high aggregate risk exposure hold
more cash relative to lines of credit. This eﬀect arises in our theoretical model since firms with
greater aggregate risk exposure face a higher cost of bank lines of credit. To investigate this channel,
we perform a final important test. Specifically, we provide evidence on the relationship between
  22
       We divide VIX by 100 to increase the magnitude of the coeﬃcients.
  23
       The CP-treasury spread is measured using 3-month CP and treasury rates (data from the FRB).



                                                        25
systematic risk (BetaKMV ) and the spreads paid by firms on their credit lines. To do this, we
regress the average annual spreads paid by firm i in deals initiated in year t,24 on Beta KMV and
controls. We control for other deal terms including the size of credit line facilities raised in year t
                        LC
                       i,t
scaled by assets ( Assets i,t
                              ), and the average maturity of the credit lines raised in year t (M aturityi,t ).
We also control for the level of the LIBOR in the quarter when the credit line was raised.25 Our
empirical model has the following form:
                                         LCi,t                                             X
Spreadi,t=μ0 +μ1 BetaKMV i,t +μ2 (                )+μ3 M aturityi,t +μ4 LIBORi,t +μ5 Xi,t +   Y eart +²i,t ,
                                        Assetsi,t                                           t
                                                                                                      (30)
where X is the vector of firm characteristics used in equation (28). As in previous estimations,
BetaKMV i,t is instrumented with its first two lags to address measurement error in beta.
         The results are presented in Table 9. We first run a regression with no controls other than year
dummies (column (1)), using All-in drawn spread i,t as the dependent variable. The coeﬃcient on
BetaKMV is positive and significant, suggesting that high asset beta firms pay higher spreads on
their credit lines. The coeﬃcient estimate of 0.24 indicates that an increase in asset beta from 0.75
to 1.5 is associated with an increase of 18 basis points on credit line spreads (approximately 20% of
the standard deviation in All-in drawn spread ). Columns (2) and (3) suggest that this association
is robust to the introduction of other deal terms and firm characteristics in the regression (though
economic significance is lower after controlling for firm characteristics). Columns (4) through (6)
show similar results for the alternative spread measure (Undrawn spread ). The evidence suggests
that an increase in Beta from 0.75 to 1.5 increases undrawn spreads by 3 to 4 basis points, 20% of
the standard deviation reported in Table 1.


                                           − Table 9 about here −

         As discussed above, these results must be interpreted with caution given the diﬃculty of simulta-
neously addressing the endogeneity of the diﬀerent contractual terms. Nevertheless, Table 9 provides
suggestive evidence that firms with high exposure to systematic risk face worse contractual terms
when initiating credit lines.


4         Concluding Remarks

We show that aggregate risk aﬀects firms’ choice between cash and credit lines. For firms with high
exposure to systematic risk, the folk statement that “cash is king” appears to be true. In contrast,
    24
     This annual average is weighted by the amount raised in each credit line deal.
    25
     To be clear, the data on LIBOR refers to the level of LIBOR in the quarter in which firm i initiates the credit
line. We annualize this variable by computing the facility size-weighted, firm-year average (LIBORi,t ). Notice that
since firms initiate credit lines in diﬀerent quarters, this variable varies both over time and across firms.



                                                        26
for firms that only need to manage their idiosyncratic liquidity risk, bank credit lines dominate cash
holdings. In our empirical tests we measure a firm’s exposure to systematic risk using asset betas.
Our results show a negative, statistically significant and economically large eﬀect of asset betas on
the fraction of total liquidity that is held via credit lines. This eﬀect increases during times when
systematic risk is high, and is stronger among groups of firms that are more likely to be financially
constrained (such as small firms). These results shed light on an important trade-oﬀ between cash
and credit lines for corporate liquidity management, and they suggest a new role for aggregate risk
(beta) in corporate finance.
   There are many ways in which our paper can be extended. One of the most interesting ex-
tensions has to do with the role of bank capital for corporate liquidity management. The current
framework has no role for bank capital, given that cash can be eﬃciently held inside the corporate
sector. However, in a more general framework this conclusion may not hold. In order for banks
to be able to build an “excess” liquidity buﬀer and help in aggregate crises, they must be special
and earn some rents (such as information rents). Such an argument suggests that securitization
may limit the ability of banks to intermediate in aggregate crises. Bank rents can also come from
market concentration. This argument suggests that concentrated and scope-restricted banks may be
able to intermediate better in aggregate crises. In either case, a firm’s decision to manage liquidity
needs through cash holdings or lines of credit should be aﬀected by unexpected shocks to capital
of its relationship bank(s), especially during crises (when other better-capitalized banks also find
it diﬃcult to oﬀer further lines of credit given heightened aggregate risk levels). Finally, in such a
framework of bank capital, government bailouts and/or guarantees during aggregate crises can lead
to ex-ante under-investment in bank capital, generate moral hazard in the form of banks issuing lines
of credit to risky firms, and potentially lead to excessive aggregate risk in the economy. In all, these
arguments highlight that it is important for researchers and policy-makers to better understand
these dynamics of liquidity management in the economy.




                                                  27
                                       References
Acharya, V., H. Almeida, and M. Campello, 2007, “Is Cash Negative Debt? A Hedging Perspective
    on Corporate Financial Policies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 515-554.

Acharya, V., L. H. Pedersen, T. Philippon and M. Richardson, 2010, Measuring Systemic Risk,
    Working Paper, NYU-Stern.

Almeida, H., M. Campello, and M. Weisbach, 2004, “The Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash,” Journal
   of Finance 59, 1777-1804.

Almeida, H., M. Campello, and M. Weisbach, 2009, “Corporate Financial and Investment Policies
   when Future Financing is not Frictionless,” forthcoming Journal of Corporate Finance.

Bolton, P., H. Chen and N. Wang, 2009, “A Unified Theory of Tobin’s q, Corporate Investment,
    Financing, and Risk Management”, working paper, Columbia University and MIT.

Bondarenko, O., 2003, “Why Are Put Options So Expensive?” Working paper, University of Illinois
   at Chicago.

Campello, M., E. Giambona, J. Graham, and C. Harvey, 2009, “ Liquidity Management and Cor-
   porate Investment During a Financial Crisis,” Working Paper, University of Illinois and Duke
   University.

Chava, S., and M. Roberts, 2008, “How Does Financing Impact Investment? The Role of Debt
    Covenant Violations,” Journal of Finance 63, 208-221.

Choi, J., 2009, “What Drives the Value Premium: Assets or Leverage?” Working Paper, Penn State
    University.

Denis, D., and V. Sibilikov, 2007, “Financial Constraints, Investment, and the Value of Cash
    Holdings”, forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

Disatnik, D., R. Duchin and B. Schmidt, 2010, “Cash Flow Hedging and Liquidity Choices”. Work-
    ing paper, Tel Aviv University, Michigan University and Emory University.

Duchin, R., 2009, “Cash Holdings and Corporate Diversification,” Working Paper, University of
   Michigan.

Eisfeldt, Andrea and Adriano Rampini (2009) “Financing Shortfalls and the Value of Aggregate
     Liquidity,” Working Paper, Duke University.

Fama, E., and K. R. French, 2002, “Testing Tradeoﬀ and Pecking Order Predictions about Divi-
   dends and Debt,” Review of Financial Studies 15, 1-33.

Fazzari, S., R. G. Hubbard, and B. Petersen, 1988, “Financing Constraints and Corporate Invest-
    ment,” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141-195.

Frank, M., and V. Goyal, 2003, “Testing the Pecking Order Theory of Capital Structure,” Journal
    of Financial Economics 67, 217-248.


                                             28
Gatev, E., and P. Strahan, 2006, “Banks’ Advantage in Hedging Liquidity Risk: Theory and
    Evidence from the Commercial Paper Market,” Journal of Finance 61, 867-892.

Gatev, E., T. Schuermann, and P. Strahan, 2005, “How Do Banks Manage Liquidity Risk? Evidence
    from Deposit and Equity Markets in the Fall of 1998.” In: M. Carey and R. Stulz, Editors,
    Risks of Financial Institutions, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Gilchrist, S., and C. Himmelberg, 1995, “Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow for Investment,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 541-572.

Griliches, Z., and J. Hausman, 1986, “Errors in Variables in Panel Data,” Journal of Econometrics
     31, 93-118.

Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole, 1997, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
    Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.

Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole, 1998, “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of Political
    Economy 106, 1—40.

Kahl, M., A. Shivdasani, and Y. Wang, 2008, “Do Firms Use Commercial Paper to Enhance
    Financial Flexibility?” Working Paper, University of North Carolina.

Kashyap, A.K., R.G. Raghuram, and J.C. Stein, 2002, “Banks as Liquidity Providers: An Expla-
    nation for the Co-Existence of Lending and Deposit-Taking,” Journal of Finance 57, 33-73.

Lins, K., H. Servaes, and P. Tufano, 2007, “What Drives Corporate Liquidity? An International
     Survey of Strategic Cash and Lines of Credit,” Working Paper, Harvard University.

Opler, T., L. Pinkowitz, R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 1999, “The Determinants and Implications
    of Corporate Cash Holdings,” Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3-46.

Pennacchi, G., 2006, “Deposit Insurance, Bank Regulation, and Financial System Risks,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics 53, 1-30.

Shockley, R., and A. Thakor, 1997, “Bank Loan Commitment Contracts: Data, Theory and Tests,”
    Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29, 517-534.

Sufi, A., 2009, “Bank Lines of Credit in Corporate Finance: An Empirical Analysis,” Review of
     Financial Studies 22, 1057-1088.

Yun, H., 2009, “The Choice of Corporate Liquidity and Corporate Governance,” forthcoming,
    Review of Financial Studies.




                                               29
Appendix A Proof of Lemma 1
First, notice that if constraint (13) is satisfied for xθ = 1 and Lθ = 0, then systematic firms will
not find it optimal to hold cash (since the solution to (14) would then be equivalent to that of
non-systematic firms). This situation arises when:

                                             ρ − ρ0 ≤ wmax .                                        (31)

In such case, both systematic and non-systematic firms can use credit lines to manage liquidity.
Notice that this corresponds to scenarios in which θ ≤ θmax in Proposition 1.
    If in turn ρ − ρ0 > wmax , systematic firms will generally demand cash in addition to credit lines.
For each xθ , their cash demand is given by equation (20).
    Next, we consider the firm’s optimal investment policy xθ as a function of the liquidity premium
q, xθ (q). The firm’s liquidity demand can then be derived from equation (20). To find the firm’s
optimal policy, notice that the firm’s payoﬀ increases with xθ as long as q < q2 which is defined as:
                                                      λ(ρ1 − ρ)
                                           q2 = 1 +             .                                   (32)
                                                       ρ − ρ0

In the range of prices such that q < q2 , the firm’s optimal choice would be xθ = 1. If q > q2 , the
firm’s optimal choice is xθ = 0. The firm is indiﬀerent between all xθ ∈ [0, 1] when q = q2 . In
addition to these payoﬀ considerations, the budget constraint in problem (14) can also bind for a
positive level of xθ . The budget constraint can be written as:
                              h                   i
                   I + (q − 1) xθ (ρ − ρ0 ) − wmax + λxθ ρ ≤ (1 − λ)ρ0 + λxθ ρ0 , or            (33)


                                         (1 − λ)ρ0 − I + (q − 1)wmax
                                  xθ ≤                               .                              (34)
                                             (λ + q − 1)(ρ − ρ0 )
The right-hand side of equation (34) is greater than one since (1 − λ)ρ0 − I − λ(ρ − ρ0 ) > 0 (by (4)).
Thus, there exists a maximum level of q such that the budget constraint is obeyed for xθ = 1. Call
this level q1 . We can solve for q1 as:
                                                     ρ0 − λρ − I
                                         q1 = 1 +                 .                                 (35)
                                                    ρ − ρ0 − wmax

    Clearly, for q < min(q1 , q2 ) we will have xθ (q) = 1. As q increases, either the firm’s budget
constraint binds, or its payoﬀ becomes decreasing in cash holdings. The firm’s specific level of x(q)
will then depend on whether q1 is larger than q2 .


Appendix B Characterization of the equilibrium when Ls < Ls1 (θ)
Suppose first that q1 > q2 , such that the firm’s budget constraint never binds in equilibrium. In this
case, if Ls < Ls1 we will have that q ∗ = q2 > 1. To see why, notice that if q < q2 then systematic firms
would choose xθ = 1, which is not compatible with equilibrium. If q > q2 , then xθ = 1, generating
an excess supply of cash. Thus, we must have q∗ = q2 . Since systematic firms are indiﬀerent between
any xθ between 0 and 1 when q = q2 , we can sustain an equilibrium such that:

                                    θ[xθ (q2 )(ρ − ρ0 ) − wmax ] = Ls .                             (36)

                                                      30
     This is the unique equilibrium of the model. To see why, notice that for xθ > xθ (q2 ), cash
demand would be larger than supply, and if xθ < xθ (q2 ), cash supply would be greater than demand
and thus the cost of cash would drop to q = 1.
     If q1 < q2 , then the firm’s budget constraint will bind in equilibrium, and we will have q1 < q∗ ≤
q2 . The cost of cash q∗ is such that the demand for cash exactly equals supply:

                                    θ[xθ (q ∗ )(ρ − ρ0 ) − wmax ] = Ls .                             (37)

Since q1 < q∗ , then xθ (q ∗ ) < 1. Since q ∗ ≤ q2 , then systematic firms would like to increase their
demand for cash beyond xθ (q ∗ ), but they cannot aﬀord to do so. Thus, q∗ is the equilibrium cost of
cash in this case.
   Finally, notice that since the cost of cash cannot be greater than q2 , there is a level of liquidity
supply (denoted by Lsmin ) such that for all Ls < Lsmin , the equilibrium is q ∗ = q2 . Lsmin is such that
the maximum level of xθ that satisfies the budget constraint when q = q2 yields a demand for cash
exactly equal to Lsmin :
                                    θ[xθ (q2 )(ρ − ρ0 ) − wmax ] = Lsmin .                            (38)




                                                    31
Table 1: Summary statistics
This table reports basic summary statistics for empirical proxies related to firm characteristics. LC-to-Cash is
the fraction of corporate liquidity that is provided by lines of credit, specifically the ratio of the firm’s total
amount of open credit lines to the sum of open credit lines plus cash balances. Assets are firm assets net of cash,
measured in millions of dollars. Tangibility is PPE over assets. Q is defined as a cash-adjusted, market-to-book
assets ratio. NetWorth is the book value of equity minus cash over total assets. Profitability is the ratio of
EBITDA over net assets. Industry sales volatility (IndSaleVol) is the (3-digit SIC) industry median value of the
within-year standard deviation of quarterly changes in firm sales, scaled by the average quarterly gross asset
value in the year. Profitability is the firm-level standard deviation of annual changes in the level of EBITDA,
calculated using four lags, and scaled by average gross assets in the lagged period. Firm Age is measured
as the difference between the current year and the first year in which the firm appeared in COMPUSTAT.
Unused LC-to-Cash and Total LC-to-Cash measure the fraction of total corporate liquidity that is provided
by credit lines using unused and total credit lines respectively. BetaKMV is the firm’s asset (unlevered) beta,
calculated from equity (levered) betas and a Merton-KMV formula. betaAsset is another proxy for the firm’s
asset (unlevered) beta, calculated directly from data on asset returns as in Choi (2009). VarKMV and varAsset
are the corresponding values for total asset variance. BetaCash is the (3-digit SIC industry median) asset Beta,
adjusted for cash holdings. BetaBank is the firm’s beta with respect to an index of bank stock returns. BetaTail
is a measure of beta that is based on the average stock return of a firm in the days in which the stock market
had its worst 5% returns in the year. BetaGap is computed using the difference between investment and cash
flows at the 3-digit SIC level, and the aggregate financing gap. All-in drawn spread is the average for all deals
observed for a single firm in a given year. The average is computed using the size of the loan facility as weights,
and is measured in basis points. Undrawn spread is computed similarly, but it includes only the spread on the
undrawn portion of the credit line.
                         Panel A: LPC credit line data
Variables              Mean        StDev     Median     25%       75%       Firm-years
LC-to-Cash             0.325       0.404      0.000    0.000      0.781       44598
CashHold_A              0.148      0.216      0.053     0.016     0.173       44817
Total LC                0.146       1.316      0.000    0.000     0.173       44817
Tangibility             0.350      0.232       0.297    0.164     0.498       43250
Assets                2594.093   17246.889   270.431   68.545   1094.000      43309
Q                      1.961       1.314      1.475     1.114    2.227        43288
Networth               0.381       0.248      0.404     0.254     0.558       43288
Profitability          0.137       0.120      0.141     0.085    0.203        43309
IndSalesVol             0.043      0.031       0.034    0.022     0.050       44823
ProfitVol               0.063       0.053      0.044    0.024     0.083       44821
Firm age               18.855      14.339     14.000    7.000    29.000       44825
betaKMV                0.986       1.032      0.856     0.290     1.545       44402
betaCash                0.970      0.574       0.920    0.602    1.292        44714
betaBank                0.445      0.703       0.390    0.013    0.813        44440
betaTail                0.742      0.567      0.697     0.324     1.099       44367
betaGap                 0.928       3.018      1.156   -1.268    4.000        44825
All-in drawn spread   177.134     112.356    175.000   75.000   255.000       11408
Undrawn spread         31.520     16.727      30.000   16.250    50.000        9865
varKMV                  0.017       0.019      0.009    0.005    0.020        44825
betaAsset               0.919      0.926       0.756    0.303     1.343       14646
varAsset                0.012      0.017       0.005    0.003    0.013        14646




                                 Panel B: Sufi data
Variables              Mean        StDev     Median     25%      75%       Firm-years
Unused LC-to-Cash       0.450       0.373     0.455    0.000     0.822       1906
Total LC-to-Cash        0.512       0.388     0.569    0.000     0.900       1908
Tangibility             0.332      0.230      0.275     0.146    0.481       1908
Assets                1441.409    7682.261   116.411   23.981   522.201      1908
Q                       2.787       3.185     1.524     1.069    2.726       1905
Networth                0.426       0.300     0.453     0.284    0.633       1905
Profitability           0.015       0.413     0.126     0.040    0.198       1908
IndSalesVol            0.043        0.026     0.036     0.024    0.051       1908
ProfitVol               0.089       0.078     0.061     0.028    0.126       1908
Firm age               16.037      13.399    10.000     6.000   23.000       1908
betaKMV                 1.002       1.068     0.804     0.286    1.609       1559
varKMV                  0.026       0.026     0.015     0.007    0.038       1568
Table 2: Correlations among different proxies for asset beta.
See Table 1 for a description of the variables.

                      betaKMV      betaCash       betaBank   betaTail   betaGap   betaAsset   varAsset

         betaCash       0.4255
         betaBank       0.6598      0.3129
         betaTail       0.4421      0.3734         0.2484
         betaGap        0.1022      0.3016         0.0828    0.1432
         betaAsset      0.9000      0.4596         0.6718    0.5204     0.2072
         varAsset       0.5002      0.4712         0.2253    0.3594     0.2593     0.5554
         varKMV         0.5541      0.4094         0.2710    0.2877     0.1233     0.5306     0.9597
Table 3: The Choice Between Cash and Credit Lines - KMV Betas
This Table reports regressions of a measure of line of credit usage in corporate liquidity policy on asset (un-
levered) beta and controls. The dependent variable is LC-to-Cash, defined in Table 1. betaKMV is the firm’s
asset (unlevered) beta, calculated from equity (levered) betas and a Merton-KMV formula. varKMV is the
corresponding value for total asset variance. BetaKMV is instrumented with its first two lags in all regressions.
In columns (5) and (6) we also instrument varKMV with its first two lags. All other variables are described in
Table 1.

                                                       Dependent variable: LC-to-Cash
                                (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)          (6)

betaKMV                                    -0.089***      -0.083***     -0.113***       -0.067**     -0.059*
                                            (-5.626)       (-4.947)      (-4.749)       (-2.181)     (-1.778)
varKMV                                                                  1.721***         -1.506       -1.681
                                                                         (2.906)        (-1.133)     (-1.209)
Profitability                0.136***      0.089***       0.101***      0.128***          0.055        0.063
                              (5.435)       (2.962)        (3.274)       (4.194)         (1.430)      (1.633)
Tangibility                    0.012         0.030          0.004         0.030           0.031        0.004
                              (0.606)       (1.437)        (0.173)       (1.393)         (1.467)      (0.168)
Size                         0.044***      0.053***       0.051***      0.057***        0.049***     0.047***
                              (16.15)       (16.87)        (16.15)       (14.70)         (9.612)      (8.726)
Networth                     -0.138***     -0.124***      -0.132***     -0.120***       -0.127***    -0.136***
                              (-9.817)      (-7.500)       (-8.008)      (-7.080)        (-7.389)     (-7.883)
Q                            -0.055***     -0.050***      -0.050***     -0.051***       -0.049***    -0.049***
                              (-23.84)      (-14.88)       (-14.21)      (-15.56)        (-15.65)     (-14.94)
IndSalesVol                   -0.197         -0.031         -0.219        -0.047         -0.018       -0.208
                             (-1.343)       (-0.227)       (-1.349)      (-0.336)       (-0.130)     (-1.279)
ProfitVol                    -0.250***       0.051          0.033         -0.037          0.129        0.121
                              (-3.751)      (0.581)        (0.380)       (-0.467)        (1.408)      (1.316)
Ln Firm age                  -0.047***     -0.051***      -0.052***     -0.049***       -0.052***    -0.053***
                              (-7.933)      (-6.787)       (-6.819)      (-6.579)        (-6.989)     (-7.049)
Constant                     0.379***      0.552***       0.465***      0.508***        0.591***     0.511***
                              (5.710)       (17.05)        (6.044)       (15.86)         (13.20)      (6.064)
Industry Fixed-effect           Yes           No             Yes           No             No           Yes
Year Fixed-effect               No            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
First-stage F-stat p-value                   0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000        0.000
Hansen J-stat p-value                        0.312          0.385         0.396          0.011        0.013
Observations                  43009          35372          35372         35372          35372        35372
R2                            0.173          0.165          0.168         0.166          0.166        0.169

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 4: Using Sufi’s (2009) line of credit data
This Table reports regressions of a measure of line of credit usage in corporate liquidity policy on asset (unlevered)
beta and controls. The dependent variables are Unused LC-to-Cash and Total LC-to-Cash, defined in Table
1. betaKMV is the firm’s asset (unlevered) beta, calculated from equity (levered) betas and a Merton-KMV
formula. varKMV is the corresponding value for total asset variance. All Beta measures are instrumented with
their first two lags. In columns (4) and (6) the variance measures are also instrumented with their first two
lags. All other variables are described in Table 1.

                                                              Dependent variable:
                               Total         Unused          Total          Total          Unused         Unused
                             LC-to-Cash     LC-to-Cash     LC-to-Cash   LC-to-Cash        LC-to-Cash     LC-to-Cash
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)

betaKMV                                                     -0.336***      -0.419***      -0.270***       -0.322**
                                                             (-5.489)       (-2.801)       (-4.893)       (-2.438)
varKMV                                                                       3.114                          1.649
                                                                            (0.654)                        (0.387)
Profitability                 0.078**         0.061*          -0.013          0.003         -0.012          -0.004
                              (2.269)         (1.955)        (-0.226)       (0.0518)       (-0.238)       (-0.0736)
Tangibility                    0.040           0.025          -0.089         -0.081         -0.091          -0.088
                              (0.560)         (0.371)        (-1.098)       (-0.938)       (-1.184)        (-1.092)
Size                          0.047***       0.053***       0.071***       0.083***        0.074***       0.081***
                               (5.110)        (6.106)        (5.593)        (3.621)         (6.481)        (3.992)
Networth                      -0.097**        -0.054          -0.077         -0.072         -0.043          -0.040
                              (-2.293)       (-1.396)        (-1.345)       (-1.141)       (-0.819)        (-0.708)
Q                            -0.036***       -0.029***      -0.019***        -0.016        -0.016**         -0.013
                              (-8.495)        (-7.263)       (-2.656)       (-1.516)       (-2.398)        (-1.479)
IndSalesVol                   1.094*           1.042          -0.156         -0.138          -0.073         -0.075
                              (1.691)         (1.549)        (-0.215)       (-0.186)       (-0.0927)      (-0.0951)
ProfitVol                    -0.596***       -0.554***        0.315          0.272           0.198          0.192
                              (-3.209)        (-3.162)       (1.022)        (0.887)         (0.711)        (0.716)
Ln Firm age                   -0.039*         -0.023        -0.086***      -0.083***       -0.061**       -0.061**
                              (-1.846)       (-1.125)        (-2.818)       (-2.731)       (-2.101)       (-2.102)
Constant                      0.748***         0.148         0.306**         0.250           0.165          0.141
                               (8.612)        (1.377)        (2.359)        (1.516)         (1.332)        (0.945)
Industry Fixed-effect           Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Year Fixed-effect               No              No             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
First-stage F-stat p-value                                    0.000          0.016           0.000          0.016
Hansen J-stat p-value                                         0.283          0.569           0.174          0.295
Observations                   1905            1903           1321           1321            1319           1319
R2                             0.401           0.371          0.437          0.444           0.399          0.406

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 5: The Choice Between Cash and Credit Lines - Varying Betas
This Table reports regressions of a measure of line of credit usage in corporate liquidity policy on asset (unlevered)
beta and controls. All variables are described in Table 1. In columns (1) to (5), Beta measures are instrumented
with their first two lags. In column (6), we use an industry beta rather than the firm-level instrumented beta
in the regression.

                                                          Dependent variable: LC-to-Cash
                                (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)

betaAsset                    -0.156***
                              (-7.582)
betaCash                                     -0.127***
                                              (-9.258)
betaBank                                                    -0.297***
                                                             (-5.573)
betaTail                                                                    -0.146***
                                                                             (-8.133)
betaGap                                                                                     -0.010***
                                                                                             (-3.428)
betaKMV                                                                                                    -0.029***
                                                                                                            (-4.919)
Profitability                  0.055         0.116***        0.070**        0.117***        0.117***       0.124***
                              (0.860)         (5.088)        (2.141)         (4.041)         (4.779)        (5.008)
Tangibility                    0.015           -0.004          -0.001         0.028           0.025         0.048**
                              (0.364)         (-0.239)       (-0.0483)       (1.331)         (1.320)        (2.400)
Size                          0.043***       0.050***        0.055***       0.061***        0.049***       0.042***
                               (7.126)        (19.96)         (16.40)        (17.53)         (17.87)        (14.52)
Networth                     -0.103***       -0.109***      -0.114***       -0.110***       -0.124***      -0.114***
                              (-3.346)        (-8.612)       (-6.534)        (-6.685)        (-9.080)       (-8.204)
Q                            -0.051***       -0.049***      -0.048***       -0.043***       -0.056***      -0.052***
                              (-8.631)        (-23.03)       (-12.99)        (-12.50)        (-25.42)       (-22.09)
IndSalesVol                    -0.079          -0.128          0.012          0.020          -0.187          0.132
                              (-0.304)        (-1.066)       (0.0895)        (0.144)        (-1.356)        (0.826)
ProfitVol                      -0.156          -0.013         0.114           0.083         -0.254***      -0.198***
                              (-0.855)        (-0.199)       (1.152)         (1.012)         (-3.608)       (-2.785)
Ln Firm age                   -0.027**       -0.048***      -0.053***       -0.052***       -0.042***      -0.046***
                              (-1.995)        (-8.494)       (-6.842)        (-7.038)        (-6.678)       (-6.902)
Constant                      0.581***       0.614***        0.543***       0.503***        0.453***       0.362***
                               (9.837)        (21.43)         (16.69)        (16.49)         (16.66)        (13.52)
Industry Fixed-effect           No              No             No              No             No              No
Year Fixed-effect               Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             No
First-stage F-stat p-value     0.000           0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000
Hansen J-stat p-value          0.101           0.005          0.555           0.000          0.873
Observations                   9536            46865          35499           35343          37485           31811
R2                             0.198           0.162          0.163           0.167          0.155           0.164

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 6: The Choice Between Cash and Credit Lines - Varying Betas,
Sufi (2009) sample
This Table reports regressions of measures of line of credit usage in corporate liquidity policy on asset (unlevered)
beta and controls. All variables are described in Table 1. In both panels, in columns (1) to (5) Beta measures
are instrumented with their first two lags. In column (6), we use an industry beta rather than the firm-level
instrumented beta in the regression.

                                                        Panel A
                                                           Dependent variable: LC-to-Cash
                                (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)           (5)           (6)

betaAsset                    -0.265***
                              (-3.330)
betaCash                                    -0.238***
                                             (-5.327)
betaBank                                                     -0.619***
                                                              (-2.866)
betaTail                                                                     -0.285**
                                                                             (-2.326)
betaGap                                                                                      -0.012
                                                                                            (-1.318)
betaKMV                                                                                                   -0.096***
                                                                                                           (-3.616)
Profitability                -0.134**        0.100***          0.048          0.229**        0.061*        0.108***
                             (-2.094)         (2.762)         (0.845)         (2.489)        (1.760)        (2.843)
Tangibility                    -0.079         -0.030           -0.026          0.037          0.088         0.098
                              (-0.651)       (-0.433)         (-0.273)        (0.343)        (1.183)       (1.117)
Size                         0.109***        0.048***        0.077***         0.032*        0.047***       0.037***
                              (7.573)         (5.025)         (4.474)         (1.882)        (4.852)        (3.242)
Networth                       -0.090         -0.057          -0.127*          -0.159       -0.076*        -0.103**
                              (-1.157)       (-1.356)         (-1.912)        (-1.430)      (-1.814)       (-2.378)
Q                             -0.015*       -0.031***        -0.031***       -0.033***      -0.038***     -0.035***
                              (-1.957)       (-7.147)         (-3.938)        (-2.731)       (-8.880)      (-8.413)
IndSalesVol                    1.299          0.452            0.370           0.245        1.471**        1.790**
                              (1.375)        (0.845)          (0.467)         (0.318)       (2.541)        (2.373)
profitVol                     1.033*          -0.252           0.236           -0.241       -0.655***      -0.381*
                              (1.922)        (-1.224)         (0.604)         (-0.821)       (-3.131)      (-1.734)
Ln Firm Age                    -0.040        -0.041**         -0.080**       -0.077**        -0.032         -0.030
                              (-1.006)       (-1.961)         (-2.344)       (-2.363)       (-1.450)       (-1.156)
Constant                                     0.680***         0.367*                        0.371***       0.565***
                                              (6.857)         (1.955)                        (4.093)        (5.174)
Industry Fixed-effect           Yes            No               Yes             Yes            No            No
Year Fixed-effect               Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes           No
First-stage F-stat p-value     0.004          0.000            0.011           0.000          0.000
Hansen J-stat p-value          0.063          0.041            0.043           0.086          0.023
Observations                    434           1866             1322             866           1659          1241
R2                             0.651          0.427            0.416           0.366          0.401         0.383

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                                                      Panel B
                                                       Dependent variable: Unused LC-to-Cash
                                (1)           (2)               (3)             (4)               (5)         (6)

betaAsset                    -0.257***
                              (-3.591)
betaCash                                   -0.170***
                                            (-3.879)
betaBank                                                      -0.523**
                                                              (-2.406)
betaTail                                                                      -0.210
                                                                             (-1.422)
betaGap                                                                                         -0.013
                                                                                               (-1.302)
betaKMV                                                                                                    -0.073***
                                                                                                            (-2.854)
Profitability                -0.127**       0.084**            0.036         0.247**             0.049     0.081**
                             (-2.175)       (2.500)           (0.636)        (2.384)            (1.516)    (2.358)
Tangibility                  -0.220*        -0.027             -0.057          0.058             0.054       0.040
                             (-1.889)      (-0.367)           (-0.584)        (0.411)           (0.687)     (0.483)
Size                         0.100***      0.045***          0.068***          0.016           0.049***    0.041***
                              (6.858)       (4.669)           (4.026)         (0.857)           (5.103)     (4.007)
Networth                      -0.094        -0.044            -0.132**       -0.181*            -0.052     -0.083**
                             (-1.203)      (-1.152)           (-2.159)       (-1.740)          (-1.341)    (-2.130)
Q                             -0.012       -0.025***         -0.025***       -0.028**          -0.029***   -0.029***
                             (-1.591)       (-6.459)          (-3.772)       (-2.244)           (-7.449)    (-7.450)
IndSalesVol                  3.049**         0.820             0.438          0.054            1.420**     1.652**
                             (2.209)        (1.183)           (0.385)        (0.0415)          (2.170)     (2.160)
profitVol                      0.787        -0.259             0.200          -0.389           -0.518**    -0.373*
                              (1.502)      (-1.269)           (0.562)        (-1.253)          (-2.541)    (-1.769)
Ln Firm Age                   -0.053        -0.017             -0.063         -0.048            -0.012      -0.008
                             (-1.306)      (-0.727)           (-1.487)       (-1.074)          (-0.491)    (-0.320)
Constant                                   0.458***            0.304                           0.232***    0.402***
                                            (4.695)           (1.373)                           (2.632)     (3.977)
Industry Fixed-effect           Yes           No                Yes            Yes                No          No
Year Fixed-effect               Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes         No
First-stage F-stat p-value     0.003         0.000             0.022          0.000              0.000
Hansen J-stat p-value          0.081         0.337             0.080          0.155              0.262
Observations                    348          1437               963            574               1396        1241
R2                             0.632         0.388             0.388          0.310              0.373       0.352

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 7: SUR models for cash and credit lines
This Table reports seemingly unrelated regressions of line of credit usage and cash holdings on asset (unlevered)
beta and controls. The dependent variables in columns (1) to (4) are Total LC (total lines of credit divided by
assets net of cash), and cash (cash holdings divided by assets net of cash). In columns (1) and (2) we measure
Total LC using the LPC-Deal Scan sample (described in Panel A of Table 1), and in columns (3) and (4) we
use Sufi (2009) data, described in Panel B of Table 1. The dependent variables in columns (5) to (6) are
Unused LC (total lines of credit divided by assets net of cash), and cash (cash holdings divided by assets net of
cash). betaKMV is the firm’s asset (unlevered) beta, calculated from equity (levered) betas and a Merton-KMV
formula. varKMV is the corresponding value for total asset variance. All Beta measures are instrumented with
their first two lags. All other variables are described in Table 1.
                                                                  Dependent variables:
                                            Total LC                                           Total LC-to-Cash
                                 (1)                        (2)                          (3)                      (4)

betaKMV                        0.020                       0.030                   -0.338***                  -0.302***
                               (0.55)                      (0.72)                    (8.70)                      (7.51)
varKMV                                                      -0.84                                             -1.687***
                                                          (-1.63)                                               (-4.12)
Profitability                   -0.148*                  -0.177**                     -0.010                     -0.030
                                (-1.84)                   (-2.13)                    (-0.42)                    (-1.03)
Tangibility                      -0.060                    -0.060                   -0.097**                   -0.107**
                                (-1.53)                  (-1.590)                   (-2.240)                    (-2.46)
Size                           -0.014**                  -0.016**                  0.073***                    0.067***
                                (-2.31)                   (-2.51)                    (12.29)                    (11.00)
Networth                      -0.163***                 -0.164***                  -0.084***                  -0.084***
                                (-4.71)                   (-4.56)                    (-2.82)                    (-2.80)
Q                             -0.032***                 -0.031***                  -0.020***                  -0.022***
                                (-3.53)                   (-3.33)                    (-4.94)                    (-5.39)
IndSalesVol                      0.140                     0.150                      -0.220                     -0.220
                                 (0.46)                    (0.48)                    (-0.58)                    (-0.57)
ProfitVol                        -0.180                   -0.12 0                    0.317*                     0.384**
                                (-0.89)                   (-0.54)                     (1.90)                     (2.26)
Ln Firm age                       -0.01                     -0.01                  -0.086***                  -0.088***
                                (-0.66)                   (-0.69)                    (-5.85)                    (-6.00)
Constant                                                 0.512***                   0.384***                  0.422***
                                                           (3.59)                     (3.30)                     (3.65)
Observations                   36315                       35524                       1348                       1321
R2                              0.01                         0.01                      0.44                       0.45
                                                          Dependent variable: CashHold_A
betaKMV                       0.128***                   0.118***                 0.350***                     0.341***
                               (25.26)                    (22.89)                   (6.971)                     (6.572)
varKMV                                                  0.821***                                                  0.28
                                                          (13.48)                                               (0.520)
Profitability                 -0.035***                   -0.018*                 -0.190***                   -0.142***
                               (-3.626)                  (-1.842)                  (-5.133)                    (-3.684)
Tangibility                   -0.013***                 -0.013***                      0                          0.03
                               (-2.907)                  (-2.714)                 (0.00936)                     (0.448)
Size                          -0.026***                 -0.025***                 -0.105***                   -0.106***
                               (-36.86)                  (-33.47)                  (-13.66)                    (-13.46)
Networth                      -0.049***                 -0.054***                 -0.291***                   -0.319***
                               (-11.73)                  (-12.82)                  (-7.548)                    (-8.191)
Q                              0.054***                  0.054***                 0.046***                     0.048***
                                (50.22)                   (50.10)                   (8.911)                     (9.110)
IndSalesVol                      0.03                       0.02                     0.76                         0.52
                                (0.704)                   (0.536)                   (1.522)                     (1.030)
ProfitVol                      0.086***                  0.052**                  -0.960***                   -0.943***
                                (3.468)                   (2.065)                  (-4.464)                    (-4.304)
Ln Firm age                    0.005***                 0.006***                   0.085***                    0.084***
                                (2.935)                   (3.847)                   (4.449)                     (4.436)
Constant                                                 0.150***                   0.244*
                                                          (9.507)                   (1.934)
Observations                   36315                       35524                     1348                         1321
R2                              0.33                        0.34                     0.53                         0.53

Robust z-statistics in parentheses .* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 8: Sorting on Proxies for Financing Constraints
This Table reports regressions of a measure of line of credit usage in corporate liquidity policy on asset (un-
levered) beta and controls. The dependent variable is LC-to-Cash, defined in Table 1. betaKMV is the firm’s
asset (unlevered) beta, calculated from equity (levered) betas and a Merton-KMV formula. varKMV is the
corresponding value for total asset variance. All beta and variance measures are instrumented with their first
two lags. In column (1) we use a sample of small firms (those with assets in the 30th percentile and lower). In
column (2) we use a sample of large firms (those with assets in the 70th percentile and higher). In column (3)
we use a sample of firms with low payouts (those with payout in the 30th percentile and lower). In column (4)
we use a sample of firms with high payouts (those with payout in the 70th percentile and higher). In column
(5) we use a sample of firms that have neither a bond, nor a commercial paper rating. In column (6) we use a
sample of firms that have both bond and commercial paper ratings. All other variables are described in Table
1.

                                                      Dependent variable: LC-to-Cash
                               (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)              (6)
                              Small        Large       Low payout     High payout      Non-rated          Rated
                              firms        firms          firms           firms          firms            firms

betaKMV                      -0.227**      -0.020       -0.184***         0.006          -0.070            0.073
                             (-2.206)     (-0.392)       (-3.655)        (0.115)        (-1.613)          (0.639)
varKMV                        6.282       -6.350**        2.404          -4.494**        -0.701          -13.558
                             (1.587)      (-2.267)       (1.178)         (-2.100)       (-0.389)         (-1.596)
Profitability                0.128*        0.174*        0.208***         -0.048          0.023            0.191
                             (1.723)       (1.749)        (3.765)        (-0.786)        (0.528)          (0.742)
Tangibility                   -0.009        0.022         0.009          0.051*           0.036            0.030
                             (-0.286)      (0.582)       (0.360)         (1.650)         (1.519)          (0.403)
Size                         0.107***       0.004        0.073***        0.038***       0.056***           0.005
                              (4.917)      (0.444)        (8.187)         (5.632)        (6.611)          (0.281)
Networth                     -0.054*     -0.174***      -0.082***       -0.157***      -0.116***         -0.235***
                             (-1.810)     (-4.512)       (-3.535)        (-5.895)       (-5.991)          (-3.064)
Q                             -0.006     -0.065***      -0.027***       -0.050***      -0.045***         -0.054***
                             (-0.523)     (-9.407)       (-4.709)        (-10.64)       (-11.37)          (-3.151)
IndSalesVol                   0.256        -0.028         0.085           -0.153          0.093            0.145
                             (1.044)      (-0.116)       (0.449)         (-0.788)        (0.600)          (0.325)
ProfitVol                     -0.182      0.416**         -0.052          0.176           0.152            0.386
                             (-0.954)     (1.976)        (-0.440)        (1.186)         (1.512)          (0.640)
Ln Firm age                   -0.005     -0.038***      -0.038***       -0.047***      -0.054***         -0.048*
                             (-0.329)     (-2.978)       (-3.837)        (-4.433)       (-5.975)         (-1.811)
Constant                      -0.035      0.939***       0.374***        0.644***       0.507***         0.918***
                             (-0.223)      (10.23)        (5.080)         (10.75)        (7.605)          (4.359)
Year Fixed-effect              Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes
First-stage F-stat p-value    0.003        0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000             0.000
Hansen J-stat p-value         0.904        0.001          0.248           0.011          0.346             0.223
Observations                  8436         12578          14908           14162          22548             4344
R2                            0.102        0.143          0.178           0.164          0.135             0.142

Robust z-statistics in parentheses .* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 9: KMV Betas and Credit Line Spreads
This Table reports regressions of line of credit spreads on asset (unlevered) beta and controls. Maturity is the
average maturity of deals initiated in a given year, for each firm. LIBOR is the level of the LIBOR (in basis
points) in the quarter in which a deal was initiated, for each firm. New LC is the total size of deals initiated in
a firm-year, scaled by assets. All other variables are described in Table 1. KMV Beta is instrumented with its
first two lags.

                                                                  Dependent variables:
                                          All-in drawn spread                              Undrawn spread
                                (1)               (2)               (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)

betaKMV                      24.415***        23.299***          13.894**       4.342***     4.160***       4.810***
                              (3.138)          (2.989)            (2.227)        (3.179)      (3.161)        (3.847)
Maturity                                      -0.933***           0.391*                     0.637***       0.674***
                                               (-2.586)           (1.750)                     (11.38)        (16.17)
LIBOR                                           -0.038            -0.006                       -0.003         0.000
                                               (-1.182)          (-0.278)                     (-0.671)       (0.0358)
New LC                                         13.907           -22.835***                     1.219        -2.638***
                                               (0.878)            (-3.695)                    (0.693)        (-4.002)
Profitability                                                   -185.958***                                 -15.449***
                                                                  (-11.61)                                    (-5.213)
Tangibility                                                     14.211***                                   3.628***
                                                                 (2.614)                                     (3.406)
Size                                                            -37.274***                                  -4.555***
                                                                  (-47.42)                                   (-29.31)
Networth                                                        -124.437***                                 -19.157***
                                                                  (-20.53)                                    (-18.30)
Q                                                               -14.937***                                  -3.185***
                                                                  (-10.01)                                   (-11.81)
IndSalesVol                                                       31.215                                      -1.571
                                                                  (0.852)                                    (-0.223)
ProfitVol                                                       212.244***                                  22.924***
                                                                  (6.045)                                    (3.628)
Constant                     149.371***      171.216***         504.532***     24.713***     19.293***      62.630***
                               (13.13)         (10.27)            (39.00)       (12.63)       (7.396)        (26.10)
Year Fixed-effect               Yes              Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes
First-stage F-stat p-value     0.000            0.000              0.000          0.000        0.000          0.000
Hansen J-stat p-value          0.670            0.515              0.013          0.125        0.105          0.760
Observations                   6799             6551               6532           5996         5877           5859
R2                             0.052            0.057              0.552          0.054        0.086          0.415

Robust z-statistics in parentheses .* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Figure 1: Timeline of the model
Figure 2: Equilibrium with cash holdings for systematic
firms when systematic risk is high (θ ≥ θmax)
Figure 3: Aggregate risk and the choice between cash and credit lines at
the industry level.
This figure displays the average industry value for LC‐to‐Cash, plotted against average industry
betas (across our entire sample period of 1987 to 2008). LC‐to‐Cash is the ratio of the firm’s
total amount of open credit lines divided by total liquidity, which is defined as total open credit
lines plus cash balances. We use the beta KMV in this Figure. Beta KMV is the firm’s asset
(unlevered) beta, calculated from equity (levered) betas and a Merton‐KMV formula. The
industry is defined at the 3‐digit SIC level. Industry betas are computed using value‐weighted
industry stock returns, and unlevered using the industry's leverage ratio. Industry‐years with
less than 15 firms are dropped from the calculations. We also report the output of a simple
regression of LC‐to‐Cash on beta KMV.


                    Line of Credit Usage by 3-digit SIC Industry
        .5
        .4
   LC-to-Cash
      .3.2
        .1




                0              .5                  1                   1.5                  2
                                               Beta KMV


LC‐to‐Cash = 0.42 ‐ 0.09*Beta KMV
            (12.3) (‐2.8)
