                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SETTING THE INITIAL TIME-PROFILE OF CLIMATE POLICY:
               THE ECONOMICS OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY PHASE-INS

                                       Roberton C. Williams III

                                         Working Paper 16120
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16120


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




For their helpful comments and suggestions, I thank Don Fullerton, Stephen Holland, and participants
in the NBER Conference on The Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Roberton C. Williams III. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Setting the Initial Time-Profile of Climate Policy: The Economics of Environmental Policy
Phase-Ins
Roberton C. Williams III
NBER Working Paper No. 16120
June 2010
JEL No. D62,H23,Q52,Q54,Q58

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper considers the question of under what circumstances a new environmental regulation should
“phase in” gradually over time, rather than being immediately implemented at full force. The paper
focuses particularly on climate policy, though its insights are more general. It shows that while adjustment
costs provide a strong efficiency argument for phasing in a quantity-based regulation (or allowing
intertemporal flexibility that creates the equivalent of a phase-in), this argument does not apply for
price-based regulation. Indeed, in many cases, it will be more efficient to do just the opposite, setting
an initially very high emissions price that then falls as the policy phases in. This difference in results
comes not from any fundamental difference between price and quantity policies: under either policy,
the efficient quantity of abatement rises over time, while the efficient price stays constant or even falls.
But other considerations, such as distributional concerns or monitoring and enforcement issues, may
still argue for a gradual phase-in even for a price-based policy.


Roberton C. Williams III
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of Maryland,
Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
rwilliams@arec.umd.edu
       This paper considers the question of under what circumstances a new environmental

regulation should “phase in” gradually over time, starting with an initially lax regulation and

then gradually tightening, rather than being immediately implemented at full force. Phase-ins

are a very common – perhaps ubiquitous – feature of new environmental regulations, and can

greatly influence the near-term costs and benefits of policy.

       This differs from the broader, longer-term question of whether regulation should tighten

over time. There are other reasons why it might be efficient for regulation to gradually tighten

(e.g., if incomes are rising and thus the willingness to pay for a cleaner environment is also

rising). The key distinction is that with a phase-in, the reason for gradually tightening over time

is because the policy is new. A natural argument for a phase-in is that it provides time for

individuals and firms to adjust to the new policy. Therefore, much of this paper focuses on the

role of adjustment costs.

       Prior work on the broader issue of the optimal time-profile of climate policy has

indirectly addressed the issue of phase-ins. For example, Wigley et al. (1996) shows that

because of capital adjustment costs, the least-cost path to achieve a given atmospheric

concentration of CO2 departs only gradually from the business-as-usual path, thus implicitly

suggesting some sort of phased-in policy. And a substantial literature focuses on the question of

whether learning-by-doing accelerates or slows the optimal pace of carbon abatement (e.g.,

Goulder and Mathai, 2000, or Manne and Richels, 2004), a question that implicitly relates to

phase-ins. However, none of these papers specifically considers the phase-in question, or

separates out this question from other influences on the optimal abatement path. And to my

knowledge, no prior work even implicitly addresses the phase-in question in a general context, or

in any specific environmental context other than carbon abatement, even though phase-ins have



                                                 1
been included in many other environmental regulations.1

          This paper uses an analytical dynamic model to consider the phase-in question in a

general environmental regulation context, and then discusses implications of that model in the

specific context of climate policy. The paper shows that while adjustment costs provide a strong

efficiency argument for phasing in a quantity-based regulation (or allowing intertemporal

flexibility that creates the equivalent of a phase-in), this argument does not apply for price-based

regulation. Indeed, in many cases, it will be more efficient to do just the opposite, setting an

initially very high emissions price that then gradually falls over time. This difference in results

comes not from any fundamental difference between price and quantity policies, but simply from

a difference in how one defines whether the policy is phased-in or not: under either policy, the

efficient quantity of abatement rises over time, while the efficient price stays constant or even

falls. However, other considerations, such as distributional concerns or monitoring and

enforcement issues, may still argue for a gradual phase-in even for a price-based policy.

          The next section of this paper presents a simple analytical dynamic model of

environmental regulation and uses that model to address the phase-in question. The following

section considers possible extensions to that model that might provide a further rationale for a

gradual phase-in of a new regulation. A final section concludes and discusses implications for

policy.


I. A Simple Model

          This section introduces a simple analytical dynamic model of environmental regulation,

and uses that model to address the question of under what circumstances an environmental policy

1
 Montero (2000) addresses a different issue: the optimal design of a trading program that allows otherwise
unregulated sources to opt-in to the program. Such opt-in provisions have been included in early phases of a
number of emissions trading programs (most notably the U.S. SO2 trading program).


                                                         2
should be phased in gradually rather than immediately implemented at full force. A key element

of this problem is that capital cannot instantly adjust in response to policy. This provides the

main argument for phasing in policy: a gradual phase-in avoids making existing capital

prematurely obsolete, and allows time to build up a stock of less-polluting capital.

       To incorporate this issue, production follows

(1)    Yt = F ( H t , Et ) ,

where Y is output of a pollution-intensive good, H is the stock of pollution-intensive capital, and

E is the pollution emissions rate. The production function is concave and twice-differentiable.

                                                          !2 F
In addition, pollution and capital are complements, so         >0.
                                                         !H !E

       For simplicity, this model explicitly considers only a single type of capital, and

production of only one good. This is probably best understood as a partial-equilibrium model,

with the single good representing an aggregate of output from all pollution-intensive industries.

A model with two distinct types of capital, one polluting and one non-polluting (or less-

polluting), or with production of both pollution-intensive and non-pollution intensive goods,

would be more complex but would yield fundamentally the same results.

       Capital depreciates at the rate ! , and thus the rate of change of the capital stock is given

by

(2)     H! t = I t ! " H t ,

where I is the rate of investment (or disinvestment, if negative). The cost of investment is given

by

(3)     C ( It ) ,

which is strictly convex and twice-differentiable. This function includes the cost of the capital



                                                 3
itself (which will be negative if I is negative), plus any adjustment cost. The profit-maximization

problem of a representative firm is then given by

                 '

(4)     max ( #$ pt F ( H t , Et ) ! C ( I t ) ! " t Et %&e! rt dt ,
         E, I
                 0


subject to the capital transition equation (2), where p is the price of output, ! is the emissions tax

rate or emissions permit price, and r is the discount rate. The first-order condition for the

emissions rate is then

                !F
(5)      pt         = "t ,
                !Et

which equates the marginal value product of emissions with the emissions tax rate. The first-

order condition for investment is

        !C
(6)          = "t ,
        !I t

which sets the marginal cost of capital equal to its current-value shadow price, ! . The costate

equation gives the rate of change of ! as

(7)     !!t = ( r + " ) !t # p $F $H t .

The intuition for this equation is that the return on capital (its marginal value product plus the

change in its shadow price) must equal the cost of holding capital (the discount rate plus the

depreciation rate, times the shadow price).

       The next sub-section considers regulation of a flow pollutant (one for which pollution

damage is caused entirely by the current flow of emissions). The following sub-section then

considers regulation of a stock pollutant (one for which damage is caused by the accumulated

stock of emissions, as is the case for greenhouse gases).




                                                                  4
A. Regulation of a Flow Pollutant

       In the flow pollutant case, pollution damage will be given by the function D ( Et ) , which

is increasing, convex, and twice differentiable. The regulator’s problem is given by

               '

(8)     max ( #$ pt F ( H t , Et ) " C ( I t ) " D ( Et ) %&e" rt dt ,
          !
               0


which is very similar to the firm’s problem (4), except that in the regulator’s objective the cost of

pollution is the pollution damage done, whereas the analogous term in the firm’s objective is the

emissions tax paid. The regulator’s first-order condition for the emissions tax rate is

              !F
(9)      pt       = !D !Et ,
              !Et

which sets the marginal value product of emissions equal to the marginal damage. The regulator

can achieve this by setting the emissions tax rate equal to marginal damage,

(10)    ! t = "D "Et ,

which causes the firm’s first-order condition (5) to be equivalent to the regulator’s first-order

condition (9). If the pollution tax is set equal to marginal damage at all points in time, then the

firm’s first-order condition for investment (6) and costate equation (7) will also be equivalent to

the analogous equations for the regulator. Just as in a simple static model, the optimal emissions

tax simply equals the marginal damage from emissions.

       What does this imply for phase-ins? First, consider the case in which the marginal

damage from pollution is constant (i.e., damage is linear in emissions). The optimal emissions

tax, equal to marginal damage, will then also be constant. Thus, in this case, it is not optimal to

phase in the emissions price: the optimal path has the emissions price go immediately to its fully-

phased-in level and stay constant at that level.

       However, the optimal time path for emissions in this case does involve a phase-in.

                                                                 5
Imposing a constant emissions price causes an immediate drop in emissions. Because capital

and emissions are complements, that drop in emissions causes a corresponding drop in the

marginal product of capital, which in turn causes the shadow price of capital to fall, leading to a

reduction in investment. That drop in investment means that the quantity of capital will

gradually fall, with a corresponding gradual fall in the emissions rate (again, because capital and

emissions are complements), eventually converging to a new steady state with lower levels of

capital and emissions.2

         Thus, the optimal policy doesn’t phase in the emissions price, but does phase in the

emissions quantity. Regardless of how quickly or slowly capital can adjust, setting the emissions

price equal to marginal damage internalizes the externality and thus leads to the efficient level of

emissions. This might lead to earlier retirement of polluting capital and to higher costs than

would a gradual increase in the emissions price, but if so, then retiring that polluting capital

earlier and incurring higher costs is efficient. But because the capital stock takes time to adjust,

the level of emissions reductions implied by any given emissions price will rise over time, thus

gradually phasing in the emissions reductions. Another way of thinking about this is to view it

as a higher price elasticity of emissions in the long run than in the short run, so the same

emissions price will lead to a greater emissions reduction in the long run than in the short run.

         Now consider the case in which marginal damage is increasing in the level of emissions.

As just shown, a constant emissions price implies a gradually falling level of emissions over

time. But if marginal damage is increasing in emissions, a gradually falling level of emissions

implies that marginal damage will also be gradually falling. Therefore the optimal path must

2
  Note that if emissions and capital were substitutes, as would be the case for abatement capital, the optimal path
would still entail a gradual drop in emissions. The chain of reasoning is the same as for the complements case,
except that the signs of the changes in the shadow price of capital, investment rate, and quantity of capital are all
reversed. A similar logic would apply in a model with both polluting and non-polluting capital: along the optimal
path, the level of polluting capital would fall and the level of non-polluting capital would rise.


                                                           6
entail an emissions price that initially jumps to a level above its long-run level and then gradually

falls over time as the capital stock adjusts. In this case, not only does the optimal path not entail

a phase-in of the emissions price, but it actually implies the opposite.

       Going one step further, consider a case with threshold damages: marginal damage is very

low up to some threshold level of emissions and very high beyond that threshold. In this case,

the optimal policy will hold the level of emissions right at that threshold. This will require a

very high initial emissions price that then gradually falls over time. Thus, in this case, the

quantity of emissions jumps immediately to its long-run level, without any phase-in, while the

emissions price phases-in in reverse, starting high and then falling over time.


B. Regulation of a Stock Pollutant

       Now consider the case of a stock pollutant such as greenhouse gases. Let Pt represent the

stock of pollution, and D ( Pt ) the damage caused. In this case, the regulator’s problem is

                '

(11)    max ( #$ pt F ( H t , Et ) " C ( I t ) " D ( Pt ) %&e" rt dt ,
          !
                0


subject to the same capital transition equation (2) and to a transition equation for the pollution

stock, given by

(12)    P!t = Et ! "Pt ,

where ! is the natural rate of decay of the pollution stock. The regulator’s first-order condition

for the emissions price is now

              !F
(13)    pt        = µt ,
              !Et

where µt is the shadow price of emissions at time t. The costate equation for µt is

(14)    µ! t = ( r + ! ) µt " #D #Pt ,


                                                                  7
which can be solved to give

                $
                    !D
(15)     µt =   % !P        e" ( r + # )i di .
                0    t +i


Just as in the flow pollutant case, the first-order condition equates the marginal benefit from

emissions with the marginal damage from emissions, which in this case is the discounted value

of future pollution damage caused by a marginal unit of emissions at time t.

         As in the flow pollutant case, it is helpful first to consider the case in which marginal

pollution damage is constant. In this case, µt will also be constant (as can be seen by examining

(14) or (15)), which in turn implies a constant optimal emissions price. Just as in the flow

pollutant case, the optimal path has the emissions price jump immediately to its long-run level

and then stay constant, while emissions gradually fall over time – in other words, the emissions

price is not phased-in, but the emissions quantity is.

         For the case in which marginal pollution damage is increasing in the stock of pollution,

the results are again similar to the analogous results for a flow pollutant. A constant emissions

price would imply a gradual fall in emissions, which in this case implies a gradual fall in µt

(again, this can be seen by examining (14) or (15)). Thus, the optimal path must entail an

emissions price that initially jumps to a level above its long-run level and then gradually falls

over time.3 This effect will be much less pronounced than it would be for a flow pollutant

(because a gradual fall in !D !Pt implies a much slower fall in µt ), but it nonetheless

demonstrates the same pattern, which is the opposite of the usual phase-in.



3
  This argument assumes that the stock of pollution is at a steady state prior to the introduction of any regulation.
This is not the case for carbon dioxide, for which the stock of pollution is currently rising rapidly. In such a case,
the shadow price of emissions will follow a path similar to that of the pollution stock, initially rising, possibly
overshooting its long-run level, and then eventually converging to a steady state. This may resemble a phase-in,
because of the initially rising optimal emissions price, but arises for different reasons.


                                                            8
II. Possible Alternative Justifications for Phase-Ins

       The previous section’s results show that capital adjustment costs imply that phasing in

the quantity of emissions reductions is optimal, but that phasing in the emissions price is not: the

optimal emissions price jumps immediately to a level at or above its long-term level, without any

phase-in period. Nonetheless, many environmental regulations have gradually phased in both the

quantity and price of emissions. Phase 1 of the U.S. SO2 trading program covered only a small

fraction of the pollution sources that were covered in Phase 2, so for those not covered by Phase

1, the emissions price they faced was clearly higher in Phase 2. And even for those sources

covered during Phase 1, the emissions caps in Phase 2 were enough tighter to imply a higher

emissions price. Similarly, under the EU Emissions Trading System for carbon, the second-

phase caps were enough tighter than the caps during the first phase to imply a substantially

higher permit price. Moreover, environmental regulations are almost always announced well

before they are to take effect, which also represents a phase-in.

       Were the initial phases of those programs inefficiently designed, or do other factors

provide some justification for phasing in both the quantity and price of emissions? This section

discusses two such extensions to the model: distributional concerns and monitoring and

enforcement issues.


A. Distributional Considerations

       The model in Section I assumed that the regulator is setting policy to maximize

efficiency. In practice, however, distributional considerations are often at least as important as

efficiency, and policy decisions frequently represent a compromise between these two factors.

       Suppose that in addition to maximizing efficiency, the regulator would also like to limit

the cost imposed on firms (or more generally, on the owners of pollution-intensive capital).


                                                 9
Under some circumstances, this additional goal could imply a gradual phase-in of the emissions

price as well as the emissions quantity.4

         Consider an extreme case as an illustrative example: suppose that emissions and polluting

capital are perfect complements in production (i.e., the production function (1) is Leontief),

polluting capital cannot be liquidated once it is installed (i.e., C ( I t ) ! 0 for I t < 0 ), and the

efficiency-maximizing emissions price is not high enough to cause capital to be idled, but is

more than enough to stop new investment. Thus, on the optimal path, pollution-intensive

production continues, but the stock of polluting capital is allowed to depreciate over time,

eventually converging to zero.

         In this case, announcing that an emissions tax will be imposed at some future date but not

imposing any tax before that date can have the same effect on investment and emissions as

immediately imposing a tax. If the future date is not too distant (sufficiently near to cause the

shadow value of capital to drop below the marginal cost of investment), then in either case,

investment will stop immediately, and emissions will fall gradually as the capital stock

depreciates. Thus, the efficiency consequences of these two policies are identical, but waiting to

impose the tax reduces the cost to capital owners. If the regulator puts more weight on the cost

to capital owners than on government revenue, then waiting to impose the tax would be optimal.

         In less extreme cases, phasing in the emissions price will have some efficiency cost, but

that cost could still be outweighed by distributional considerations. However, in these cases, an

emissions price phase-in would still be a second-best policy: the regulator could achieve the


4
  This is similar to Feldstein’s (1976) argument for announcing a tax reform well in advance of the date it will take
effect, which is less efficient than having it take effect immediately but may still be worthwhile for distributional
reasons. Zodrow (1985) considered this argument in a dynamic model with capital adjustment costs, and found that
whether it justifies some form of phase-in depends on the magnitude of capital adjustment costs. The optimal
capital tax problem that Feldstein and Zodrow consider differs substantially from the optimal environmental tax
problem considered here, but nonetheless it seems likely that a similar result would hold here.


                                                         10
same distributional outcome at lower efficiency cost by immediately imposing an emissions

price equal to marginal damage and providing a compensating transfer (which could take the

form of emissions permit allocations or inframarginal exemptions from an emissions tax) to

owners of polluting capital. Only if such transfers aren’t possible would an emissions price

phase-in be optimal.


B. Monitoring and Enforcement

        The model in Section I also ignores issues of emissions monitoring and enforcement of

regulations. Incorporating such issues might provide another argument for phase-ins. Suppose

that the regulatory agency has a limited capacity for monitoring and enforcement, and that

increasing that capacity will take time (one could view this as accumulating “enforcement

capital”). In such a case, it could be optimal initially to regulate only a relatively small set of

polluters, those who would be expected to achieve relatively large reductions in emissions at

relatively low cost. Then the set of regulated firms could be expanded over time as the

regulatory agency’s enforcement capacity grows. The resulting phase-in policy would look

much like the phase-in of the U.S. SO2 trading program, which started by regulating a relatively

small number of large and particularly pollution-intensive plants in Phase 1, and then expanded

to include smaller and less-polluting plants in Phase 2.

        Again, though, it is not at all clear that such a policy is genuinely optimal. It might well

be more efficient for the regulation to cover all polluters immediately, but for limited

enforcement resources to be directed primarily (though not exclusively) toward the largest

polluters.




                                                  11
III. Conclusions

        This paper has shown that capital adjustment costs provide an efficiency justification for

a gradual phase-in of the quantity of emissions reductions under a new environmental regulation.

But this argument does not hold for phase-ins of the emissions price. Indeed, the optimal policy

is just the opposite – the emissions price immediately jumps to a point above its long-run level,

and then gradually declines to that long-run level over time – for any case in which marginal

pollution damage is increasing in the quantity of emissions.

        This result calls into question the approach taken with many environmental regulations,

which have gradual phase-ins of both the quantity of emissions reductions and the emissions

price. Given this paper’s simple and highly stylized model, it certainly cannot rule out the

possibility that there are other considerations that would justify such phase-ins, and further work

to explore such possible justifications would be valuable. But these results do suggest that a more

aggressive emissions price path in the initial implementation of a new regulation could be more

efficient.




                                                12
References

Feldstein, Martin, 1976. “On the Theory of Tax Reform.” Journal of Public Economics 6:77-
104.

Goulder, Lawrence, and Koshy Mathai, 2000, “Optimal CO2 Abatement in the Presence of
Induced Technological Change.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 39:1-
38.

Manne, Alan, and Richard Richels, 2004, “The Impact of Learning-by-Doing on the Timing and
Costs of CO2 Abatement.” Energy Economics 26:603-619.

Montero, Juan-Pablo, 2000, “Optimal Design of a Phase-In Emissions Trading Program.”
Journal of Public Economics 75:273-291.

Wigley, T., R. Richels, and J. Edmonds, 1996, “Economic and Environmental Choices in the
Stabilization of Atmospheric CO2 Concentrations.” Nature 379:240-243.

Zodrow, George, 1985. “Optimal Tax Reform in the Presence of Adjustment Costs.” Journal of
Public Economics 27:211-230.




                                             13
