                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ASSET PRICING MODEL SPECIFICATION AND
                   THE TERM STRUCTURE EVIDENCE




                          Terry A. Marsh



                      Working Paper No. 1612




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper 11612
                                              April 1985




                Asset Pricing Model Specification and
                      the Term Structure Evidence



                                  ABS TRACT




    In this paper, a set of' tests of models of relative capital asset prices

is developed. The tests are used to examine how well the models explain

maturity premiums on Government bonds, though they are perfectly general and

hence could be applied to stocks or other assets. Allowance is made in the

tests for the nonobservability of investors' optimal per capita consumption

(or expected marginal utility).

    It is found that the returns on Government bonds bear a systematic risk

which is better measured by their covariability with aggregate per capita

consumption than with the returns on the NYSE stock market index, the latter

being the surrogate—wealth portfolio typically used to measure risk in the

traditional Sharpe—Lintner—Mossin CAPM.




                                      Terry 1. Marsh
                                      Sloan School of Management
                                      Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                      50 Memorial Drive
                                      Cambridge, MA   02139

                                       (617) 253—6652
                                         —2—


1. Introduction

    Fisher (1930) presented a comprehensive analysis of the determinants of

interest rates under certainty, but stopped short of any real efforts to

extend his results to a world in which the return streams oenerated by capital

assets are uncertain. Such an extension requires a tractable model for

defining and pricing the differences across assets with respect to the

uncertainty of their returns. Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), Mossin (1966),

and Flack (1972) all showed that an equilibrium in which investors hold

mean—variance efficient portfolios, as they will do if asset returns are

normally distributed and/or if their utility functions are ouadratic [Tobin

(1958)], implies that a "capital asset pricing model" (CPPM) descr5hes the

risk and return characteristics of all assets.

    The CFM, which Merton (1971) showed could be derived for aeneral utility

functions if asset returns follow geometric Erownian motion processes in

continuous time, is straightforward: assets are priced so that the cross—

sectional differences in average rates of return which they generate are a

linearly increasing function of differences in their "systematic" risk,

defined to be the incremental risk that they contribute to an investor's

efficient portfolio. If all assets are traded and investors have homogeneous

beliefs, it is well known that the efficient portfolio will be the

value—weighted portfolio of all assets. Ross (1976) (1977) showed that if

asset returns are generated by a linear factor model, then the essence of the

CPM remains intact when it is applied to observed market portfolios which are

well diversified, but not necessarily mean—variance efficient.
                                           -z
                                         —---j —




    Most recent research on asset pricing models has focused on what happens

if the probability distribution of asset returns shifts around over time.

Merton (1973) showed that when such shifts occur, assets can still be priced,

in the spirit of the CPPM, in terms of a set of mutual funds whose composition

does not depend upon investor preferences. Unfortunately, identification of

the mutual funds has proved to be a major sturrblino block for empirical tests

of this interten'poral extension of the CIPM. Cox, Ingersoll, Ross (1977) and

Brock (1982) showed how an explicit link between asset prices and the

production sector might provide such identification. Plternatively, in a

model that is consistent with those of Merton, Cox—Inoersoll--Ross, and Erock,

Breeden (1979) and Grossman and Shiller (1982) derived a "consumption CPPM"

(CCAPM) in which each asset's risk premium is proportional to the covariance

of its return with per capita aggregate consumption. This CCPPM could

potentially retain the real sector—asset price linkage and yet remain

empirically tractable.

    The objective of this paper is to test how well the CCPPM explains the

returns on a cross—section of long—term, default—free, Government bonds——that

is, the term structure——and to assess how well this model compares with the

earlier stock—market—portfolio—oriented CAPM. The market value of U.S.

Government bonds outstanding at the end of 1983 was about a trillion

dollars,1 and this fact alone might justify the focus here on default-free

bond returns. However, the study of bond returns should also be particularly

helpful in evaluating models for pricing assets in general. Inflation

uncertainty aside, the only reason that payoffs on default—free bonds are

risky is because investors' overall levels of wealth and/or opportunities for

reinvestment of payoffs covary with the payoffs. By definition, wealth and
                                           —4—



opportunity set changes are not diversifiabie, unlike many of the real sector

shocks that cause variation in stock returns. Thus real sector shocks should

"show up" in bond returns and consumption changes if at all. The returns on

bonds over the maturity spectrum analyzed here also span 8 wide class of

security return behavior, including that at the long end which closely

resembles stock return behavior. Ps a result, not much aenerality is likely

to be sacrificed in studying bond returns.

    The tests implemented here most closely resemble the time series—cross

section tests of the CAFM in Gibbons (1982). However, I test the incremental

explanatory power of the CCPFM over the CPPM as well as the fit of both, end

to do this I nest the C/FM within the CCAPM. Observation errors in

consumption are allowed in the tests. The tests are applied to the asset

pricing   models stated in real terms, since the inflation component of nominal
bond returns is in-portent, whereas it   can   generally be ignored for stocks.
The tests are also applied to rates of return whose expectation is conditional

on the one period nominal risk—free rate of interest, though real risk

premiums are otherwise assumed to be constant. Ps Grossman and Shiller (1982)

and others have pointed out, it may be perfectly leaitirrate to assume that

unconditional expectations and risk premiums are constant, though doino so

neglects any additional structure which would exist in the time series of

changes in expected returns and risk premiums if those changes could be

predicted   by variables other than the risk—free rate. Such information would
be captured in the tests of Hansen and Singleton (1982) (1983) and Gibbons and
Ferson (1985), though at the additional expense of specification of a

conditional returns model which here would tax the relatively short available

history of bond return observations.2
                                         —5—



    The results here suggest that the CCPM can significantly improve upon the

CPPM in explainino risk premiums (term premiums) on bonds. Further, the

restrictions imposed by the CCPPM across the risk premiums on bonds with

different terms to maturity cannot be rejected for all but the shortest

maturity bonds. This is interesting because the time series behavior of bond

returns at the longer maturities, where the restrictions hold, most closely

resembles the time series behavior of common stocks for which these types of

asset pricing restrictions have been rejected in the past. In Section 4, I

discuss some possible reasons for the difference in results.

    In the following section, I define the CC/PM and the CIFM, and state the

hypotheses about them which are to be tested. The testable restrictions

implied by the hypotheses are formulated in Section 2.2, and the structure

which accounts for errors in measuring consumption is introduced in Section

2.3. The tests are briefly discussed in Section 2.4. Results are presented

in Section 3.
                                                                 -.6—




2. Tests for asset Pricing Model Specification

    2.1 Definition of the Models

    The CCb\PM is:                                                                   -




                             -                                                      -
                    E(Rt)        RFt
                                       -
                                                 E(Rtt)           =
                                                                            {E(R)        Ft -    E(RMt,t)J
                                                                                                    (1)

where:
    RFt is the nominal risk—free rate of interest over period t
         which is predetermined at the beginning of period t;
    0            4-k-                     -.'1LU.LI I UI
                 LI I I IUIILLI 10J .L dL uj                                  rL_
                                                           J UV! pti IUU I. •
                                                                         .L.
    I                                                    L                                               I

       '-'
              rate of return on asset j over period t equals the sum of the
             change in its price over the period and any cash income, such as
             dividends on stocks or coupons on bonds, which is received over the
             period, as a ratio of its beginning of period price;

   n         is the period t inflation rate;

             is the nominal rate of return on a market portfolio of'                            stocks       over
             period t;


                  cov(Pt -       t,                  )   -              -
                                                                            t' c
                                                                               AC*



                                 ,
                                       c*
                                           t—l               cov(RFt           tl                    (2'I
                                                                                                        /
                                                 t
                   cov(RMt
                             -                           ) -
                                                               cov(R
                                                                         -
                                                                              'c
                   is the percentage chanae in optimal per capita consumption
                     flow from that over period t—l to that over period t,
             where "optimal" means that it satisfies the envelope condition of
             the representative consumer—investor's dynamic optimization problem
             which is discussed in Merton (1971). Initially, consumption
             changes are assumed to be observable without error.

    The CCAPM in (1) states that the period—t risk premium on any asset j

is proportional to that on any other asset M, where the factor of

proportionality is the "consumption risk" coefficient i3 defined in

(2). Although the risk premiums on assets j and M are defined in terms of
                                                  —7—




nominal rates of return in (1), they can be interpreted as "real" premiums.
For example, the risk premium on the left—hand side of (1) can be re—expressed
as the expectation of the difference between the real rate of return on asset

j   and the (uncertain) real rate of return on the nominally risk—free asset:
                                            -
     E(Rt - RFt -    E(Rtnt)
                               =
                                   E[(Rt        i) - (RFt -
where the nominal risk—free rate RFt is predetermined at the beginning of

period t. Since the risk premiums on assets j              and   t"   in (1) are real, it

should not be surprising that the consumption risk coefficient                 in

(2) involves the covariation of the real risk premium on assets j and

with real consumption.

     Ps Ereeden (1979) discusses in detail, the consumption risk measure

I3 is sufficient to explain equilibrium risk premiums on assets because

per capita consumption changes reflect changes in investors' marginal

utilities occasioned by movements in wealth and investment opportunities. The

cross—product E(R1Tt) in (1) accounts for asset j's "systematic

nominal risk," i.e., inflation uncertainty3——if, on average, asset j's

dollar return is high in periods in which inflation is high, then that asset

must provide a higher expected nominal rate of return to yield a given real

risk premium because the dollar returns will buy fewer consumption goods when

prices have risen.

     The Sharpe—Lintner—Mossin CPFM can be obtained by replacino the per capita
                                                  C
consumption change variable in the expression for I3 by the rate of

return on a surrogate for the market portfolio of assets, typically a stock

market index. The real CPF "market beta" which replaces 13 is:


          M    cov[(Rt
                                   -
                                       Ft   -
                                                    Mt -                        (4)
               cov[(RMt -              Ft   -
                                                    (R
                                            —e —




    The hypotheses to be tested here are:

H0(1): Does the CCFM, as given in (1), hold for the pricing of default-
        free bonc?
        Does the CCPM add any explanatory power beyond the CPPM where the
        latter is given by (I) with the consumption beta           replaced by
        the market beta (3 ?
                           3
H0(3): Do per capita consumption changes reflect changes in investors'
        marginal utilities better than the returns on observed market
        portfolios such as stock indices if the pricing of bonds is not
        constrained to conform to the CCPM?

        Does the CPM hold?


    To test these hypotheses, I formulate them as restrictions on the

distribution of asset returns and consumption changes. That is, I show that

there is a "market model." [statistical model] of returns and consumption

changes on which the CCPPM imposes a testable structure, just as the

traditional CAPM imposes restrictions on multivariate asset return

distributions [e.g., Black, Jensen and Scholes (1972), Farra and Macbeth

(1973), and Gibbons (1982)].



    2.2 Test Procedure

    The basic market model on which the CCPM imposes restrictions is the

simple two—eQuation system:




     (Rtt)    -   C
                  G12j
                         Mtt -   l3jFtt
                                  C
                                                                    =      (5)


                                                           A   C
                      (RMt_t)   - 23   (RFt_t) -   24   25 C*1 = u2
                                                                           (6)
where the disturbance                =
                                          [utu2t]       is independently end identically

distributed through time with E u = 0                    and E        U    U' =       , where        is a

positive definite symmetric matrix; E(utIC*t/C*ti) = 0; and

12j •• '25 are         constant coefficients.



    If the coefficient restrictions 03j =                        (I       —
                                                                              l2j      and 023 1
are applied in (5) and (6), we obtain:

                                     -                      -
    [(Rtt) -        (RFtt)]               02jE(RMt_nt)          (RFt_t)]                                          (7)

                                                                                                0*
                                               [(RMt1Tt) -                        -                              (8)
                                                                (RF1Tt)]              024 025
                                                                                                C1          2t


The reduced form of (7) and (8) is:

                                                                 1    C
        [(Rt           - Ft                               112                         v1

                —      — (REt                                                                        (10)
        [(RMt                                        113 —114                         V2t



where the structural coefficient                         is just identified:

                                               C
                                           =
                                               012j 23
                                                                                                     (11)
                                     IT
                                               '23

                            II             cov[(Rt_Trt) —         Ftt'
                    l2j l                                                             AC
                                           cov[(RMt_'rrt)
                                                            — (RFt_t),                      ]




                        =
                                 3
                                                  -10-


Also, from (5):


    E[(Rtt) - (RFt_t)]                                     (RFtt)]            +
                                e12 E[(RMt_t) -                                   E[UjtI Ft        (13)



     Since REt is predetermined, E[utI Rpt] = 0                      ,   and it is straightforward

to verify that, with        =            (13) is equivalent to (1). Thus H0(l) can
be expressed as:

                       -        =             ;           = 1        for all assets i
        H0(l):

with the composite alternative:

                    (1 —            I3    .   ;    13 t     1
                                     l3j


    The test of H0(2) follows immediately from the two—eouation system (5)

and (6). Since         is predetermined, that two—eouation system is recursive

if cov(utu2t)       0. If it is recursive, 0l2j will he determined by

equation (5) alone. In that case, it will ecual the CAPM beta as given

in (4) .   hence, a test of whether the CCAPM reduces to the CPPM can be
expressed as:
                                                    C                     C
                                         0                      (1                     023 =   1
           H0(2):   cov(utu2t)                     0l3j                  012j

                                                          = (1 -
           HA(2):   cov(utu2t)                                           0l2j          023 =   1




    The counterpart of H0(2) is the third hypothesis H0(3) that the

two—equation system (5) and (6) reduces to the single eouation "system" (5),

although the restrictions imposed on the structural coefficients of (5) and

(6) by the CCAPM and CAPM might not hold:
                                                       —11—



                                               U                                unrestricted
           H0(3):    cov(utu2t)                         2j 13
                                                                                unrestricted
           H(3):     cov(utu2t)
                                                   '
                                                        0l2j   '
                                                                            3

   The final hypothesis considered here——that the CPPM holds——can be

expressed as:


                             =   (1   -
                                          l2j      '
                                                        cov(utu2t)
                                                                         = 0


           H-(5
            14'
                '     I.5J
                                 ' -
                                 (1                -              ti )
                                                              'jt'Lt'    = U-




    2.3   Unobserved Marginal Utility or Per Capita Consumption

    So far, it has been assumed that optimal per capita consumption changes

which, in the CCAPM, are a measure of changes in the representative investor's

marginal utility, are observable. Put if per capita consumption is itself

measured with error in the available data, measured consumption might more

appropriately be regarded as an indicator, along with other variables, of a

latent variable directly quantifying the representative investor's marginal

utility.4 Defining            to be this latent variable, the model used to

take such measurement errors into account in the tests here is:

                    Xit      Xlt + 6lt
                                                                                       (14)


                    Xkt Xkt +             kt
where       AC*t/C*tl in all of the previous discussion. Pny

one of the k indicator variable X's might be observed per capita
                                                             —12-



consumption; the properties of '                       = [cl,...,ek]    will be discussed

below.

      Note that simply plugging any of the X's in (14) into (5) and (6) as an

instrument           for          would not induce an errors-in-variables inconsistency

      1312j' since the unobservable variable does not appear in (5). The

measurement error would cause inconsistent estimates of I324, 25

Given the measurement error model (14), the estimates of &2j would

also be inefficient, as would the tests which are based on the covariance

matrix of disturbances in (5) and (6).

      Adding specification (14) to (5) and (6) and generalizing the latter to

include a cross-section of assets j =                       l,...,N,    gives:



Rt -            2at           -
                                   3Ft                                               ut     (15
 2          —       2             —    2
                                                                                 =
                                                                                       2
R8t             t3l2Mat               1313 RFt



                N                                                                      N
 at      - Gl2RMat                 13N
                                      13 RFt                                     - ult

                                                  - 2l - 25
                                                                l
                                                                            =               (15b)
                        RMt           1323RFt                                    u2t
                                                            -
                                                                    t            =
                                                                                     lt     (15c)

                                                 Xkt        _xkc                 kt
where:                                                                                         and
                                                       Mt           12 1312j' 13E
the C superscripts are
                                          dropped from 23' 24 25
      The    linear        structure (14) is a special version of the general multiple

indicator, multiple cause (MIMIC) model, discussed by Zellner (1970),
                                           —13—


Goldberger (1972a, 1972b) and Aigner (l978). If the elements of

were mutually independent, (14) would be, in essence, a confirmatory factor

analysis model, with [Xl,...,Xk] interpretable as factor loadings.

Elements of c     may be correlated here however, e.g., in the multivariate

                                                            +                 which
marginal distribution of (X1,X2), cov(X1,X2) =
                                                    Y2Y3a       cov(c1,c2),
is more general than if (14)were specified as a factor model. It may also be

verified that (15) will not be identified without a normalization on the X

coefficients or on the variance of an element of c. Here, we set

  1.

       Five indicator variables X, j   = l,...,5,   are used in the tests here.

They are: (i) percentage changes in seasonally adjusted retail sales of'

nondurable consumer goods; (ii) percentage changes in industrial production

of nondurable consumer goods; (iii) the average realized real rate of

interest on one—month T—bills over the past twelve months; (iv) the growth

rate in the monetary base over the past twelve months; and (v) percentage

changes in an interpolated monthly series of changes in quarterly per capita

consumption estimates reported in the Survey of Current Business. The retail

sales and industrial production variables seem intuitively reasonable as

potential measures of growth rates in per capita consumption expenditures and,

with standard caveats, per capita consumption sevices and investor marginal

utility. Also, their use can be rigorously justified in stylized production

economies such as those considered by Cox—Ingersoll—Ross (1977) and Brock

(1982). Historical real interest rates are used as an indicator of marginal

utility changes because movements in real interest rates potentially reflect

(ergodic) movements in marginal product [see, for example, Merton's (1973)

discussion]. Twelve month moving averages of realized real rates are crude

estimates of the ex ante real rate which don't require seasonal adjustment.
                                            -14-


The growth rate in the monetary base is used in an ettempt to capture any

nonneutral impact of money shocks. Finally, inclusion of the consumption

series is directly consistent with the spirit of the CCI\PM. In the absence of

a comprehensive theoretical equilibrium model, the choice of these variables

is admittedly ad hoc (though I can report that these were the only variables

considered:).

      In the MIMIC model frarrework, these five variables are treated as

indicators of' the true well—offness variable rather than as causes of "well

offness." While the variables, as either indicators or causes,6 could be

regarded as instruments for        or AC*ti/C*t, their

interpretation here as indicators seems more in line with the notion that

 t or A C*tl/C*t is inherently unobservable than with the notion

that it is directly observable, albeit with error. This interpretation is

also consistent with the specification that these X, j =     l,...,5   are, at

most, jointly stochastic and channeled through a common unobserved variable

 t.

      In the tests below, the vector u' =
                                            1u,. .. ,u,u2]   is

assumed to be orthogonal to c. This assumption, which is an identifying

one and hence nontestable, states that any unanticipated returns on the chosen

proxy market portfolio which cannot be attributed to changes in the

representative investor's marginal utility must be orthogonal to errors in

using the indicator variables just discussed to measure those marginal utility

changes. As for the choice of' the indicator variables themselves, there is no

guarantee that this orthogonality assumption is immutable truth. However, the

a priori arguments which can be cited in its defense are just as plausible as

those which can be cited against it, and I adopt it in the same spirit in

which most
                                                     — 15—




reasonable specifications are adopted——as provisionally true, subject to

diagnostic checks.

      As pointed out by Hausman (1977), if (,RF,X2,X3,X4,X5) follow

a mu].tivariate distribution for which the followirg regression function holds:

                                                                                               (16)

where Z [l,X2,X3,X4,X5,] and vi Z, then (16) can be

substituted into (15) to obtain:


 1           1               1                                        1
                                                                      J.
 at          12at -          l3 Ft
                                                                —
                                                                -
                                                                    U1



 N       -       N       -    N                                 -     N
                                                                                               (17)
Rat          G12RMt          G13RFt                                 u2t

                     RMt -   e23RF
                                      -
                                            2l   -
                                                     t       25 a =
                                                                           u2       +
                                                                                        25 V
                                      xlt    -z                 = Vt            +
                                                                                    Ct

      The restriction that cov(u,) = 0                 for bonds of each maturity

j, which is implied by the null hypothesis                   H0(2) that the CCAFM does not

significantly improve upon the traditional CPPM, can be tested by usina the

procedure in Hausman (1978). He proposes a test of exogeneity of 1at in

(17) in which the 0LS estimator of t3'2 ,            which is consistent and

efficient under the null hypothesis cov(u,u2)= 0 but inconsistent

under the alternative cov(r,u2). 0, is corrpared with an IV estimator

which is consistent under both the null and the alternative but efficient only

under the former. The formulation of the Hausman test used here involves OLS

applied to the following transformation of the security return equations in

(17):
                                             —16—



         Rt =   2RMat    +
                             3RFt       +       +


where:                           and   Mat is the instrumental variable
         vtE RMat    RMSt    ,




estimator obtained from the remainder of (17) with          =   1.   The

standard F test for     4) = U   is asymptotically equivalent to the

conventional likelihood ratio, LM and Wald procedures for testino whether
     i           7
cov(t,u2) = 0.

    Given the assumptions on u and c, (17) contains restrictions on the

disturbance matrix and on the slope coefficients. Thus, although a full

instrumental variable method (e.g., 3SLS) will be consistent, it will not be

fully efficient [Rothenberg and Leenders (1964)]. Fully efficient FIML

estimates and tests are obtained for (15) with the program MOMENTS.8 In

the FIML case, a likelihood ratio test of the asset pricing hypotheses is

performed.



    2.4 Discussion of the Tests

    The tests just described pertain to the CCPPM (1) which states that the

ratio of risk premiums on any two assets [j and M in (1)] is proportional

to the ratio of the covariabilities of their respective returns with

consumption changes. Breeden (1979) originally motivated this model with

the argument that since investors make consumption decisions simultaneously

with portfolio decisions, the former potentially reflect the interten'poral

tradeoffs which determine investorst asset demands and, given exogenous

asset supplies, asset prices. Eecause (1) is a cross—sectional model of

relative risk premiums on assets, it contains no explicit utility parameters.
                                         —17—



    Hansen and Singleton (1982)(1983) have suggested that attention need not

be restricted to relative asset prices. Instead of "substituting out" the

utility specification, they retain and use it to study the relation between

the risk premium on any single asset and expected niovernents in consumption.

In their analysis, asset risk premiums and the expectation of consumption

movements are conditioned on any available information which is assumed

relevant to investors. Here, by contrast, only the predetermined risk—free

rate and historical inflation rates are used to condition expectations.

    t the risk of belaboring the obvious, neither the focus here on

relative risk premiums, nor the Hansen and Singleton analysis, is strictly

dominant. If the utility specification is correct in the Hansen and

Singleton approach, if their model of conditional expectations is correct,

and if there are no observation errors in consumption (or at least only

particular kinds), then their approach potentially provides information

about primitive utility parameters and about the linkage between changes in

the absolute level of expected asset returns and expected changes in "real

sector" variables. On the other hand, these conditions may fail and yet the

CCAFM may still perform acceptably well as a model of relative asset prices

in which risk premiums that are unconditional on particular information sets

are constant.

    It seems unlikely that armchair reasoning will shed much light on the

relative merits of the approaches. Limited experience in estimating

variations in ex ante risk premiums on surrogate wealth portfolios [e.g.,

Merton (1980)], suggests that formulating and estimating a model of

variations in conditionally expected consumption changes——a model which is

not required in (1)—-is a nontrivial exercise. This is particularly true
                                                       -48—


relative to the likely      extent of variation in real premiums on bonds. Plso,

as was shown by 8hattacharya (1979) using analysis similar to Rubinstein

(1976), in continuous time the CCPFM can be obtained for any well—behaved

utility function. It is easy to draw the conclusion from this that, if the

time interval is "short," asset price movements themselves reveal little

about risk aversion parameters.9

    On the other hand, period—by—period movements in risk premiums which

cannot be predicted by movements in the predetermined risk—free rate but can

        UJLLU   iUIH ULI ti. Jj UIWd LIUP I W.L1J. _.i_
                                                   1    L_. .L...L......
                                                    IUL U LKtI IA          LU LLUUI IL Il LI I
tests   here. This does not, of course, invalidate them so long as the

unconditional expectation of these partly predictable movements and their

covariability with consumption changes remain constant over the test period.
3. Data and Results

      The time series—cross section of bond returns used to fit (15) and (17)

is taken from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) Government

Bond Returns File. Since a time series of monthly returns across the

maturity spectrum cannot be constructed from the returns on single bonds, a

cross—section of portfolios composed of' bonds with maturities which fall

within given ranges has been constructed.10 Six portfolios with the

following ranges are used in the tests reported here:



       Portfolio                                        Average Maturity
         Nunter                      Maturity            1958/2 — 1978/12

            1              0           —    6 months      2.70 months

            2               6 months —      1 year         8.74 months

            3              1 year      —    2 years       1.47 years

            4               2 years     —   3 years        2.48 years

            5              3 years     —    5 years       3.41 years

            6                               5 years        8.74 years



      As mentioned earlier, five indicator variables——referred to as -t ——

are   used in fitting (15). The variables are: percentage changes in

seasonally adjusted real retail sales of nondurable consumer goods,

percentage changes in industrial production of nondurable consumer goods,

the average realized real rate of return on one—month T—Eills over the past

twelve months, the growth rate in the monetary base over the past twelve

months, and percentage changes in the interpolated monthly series of

quarterly per capita consumption obtained from the MPS Quarterly Econometric
                                            -20-.




Model data file. The stock market returns are those for the value—weighted

NYSE index, but it has been verified that the results here hold a fortiori

if the equally weighted index is used.

      longstanding question in the term structure literature is whether, in

equilibrium, investors can expect to earn "term premiums" for holding lono

term bonds. If, instead of being defined in terms of bond yields—to—

maturity across maturities, the term structure is defined as the

cross—section of the excess in expected monthly rates of return on long term

bonds over the risk—free rate of return on a bond maturing at the end of the

month, the CCAPM   posits   that term premiums——here risk premiums——will be

positive only if bond returns covary systematically with changes in per

capita consumption. The point estimates for the systematic risk

coefficient l2 in (15), presented in Tables 1 and 2 and computed using

instrumental variables and FIML respectively, suggest that long term bonds

are risky, but that their risk does not increase monotonicelly with

maturity. The point estimates increase with maturity up to three years, but

decrease with maturity thereafter. This term structure (in holding period

returns) would be consistent with the longest term bonds possessing

"depression insurance," but given the standard errors of the point estimates

[which are not independent across maturities], the hypothesis that premiums

are equal beyond a one—year maturity could not be rejected using a Ponferoni

test. The point estimates of the risk coefficients are small relative to

those usually found in the stock market [e.g., Breeden (1980) reports

consumption betas in excess of 2.0 for portfolios of stocks].
                                              —21—



    Test statistics for the four hypotheses concernino asset pricing model
specification are presented in Table 3. The null hypotheses are:

The CCAPM    holds    for pricing default—free bonds; H0(2)——The CC/:\PM does not

add incremental explanatory power to the CAPM; H0(3)—--Per capita

consumption changes do not reflect changes in investors' marginal utilities

any better than do the returns on the NYSE value—weighted index even though

the pricing of bonds isn't constrained to conform with the CCAPM; H0(4)——

The Sharpe—Lintner—Mossin CPPM holds.

    1s can be seen from Table 3, the CCPFM and CIFM pricing restrictions are

rejected only for the portfolio of bonds with maturities less than six

months.     Of'   course, the tests applied to the different maturities are not
independent, but when the test is performed simultaneously across maturities

using FIML, the restrictions cannot be rejected at conventional significance

levels. On the other hand, hypotheses two and three—-that consumption—based

models    of' asset pricing do not better reflect investor marginal utility than
the NYSE value—weighted market index——are rejected. For the Hausrran tests,
where a Wald statistic is used for       testing the equality of   the l2 and
l2 coefficients which are given in Tables 1 and 2, H0(2) and
H0(3)     are rejected at the 99.5% significance     level. The FIML test
statistic,        which is —2 £n X where X is the usual likelihood ratio

value, is beyond the 99.9% chi-square confidence level." As might be

suspected    from the failure to reject F-lo(1) and I-1(4), the conclusion
that consumption changes (within the MIMIC irodel framework here) outperform
the NYSE index as a measure of investor marginal utility is insensitive to
whether or not the CCAFM restrictions are imposed.
                                          —22-



4.   Summary and Conclusions

     In this paper, tests have been developed for a set of hypotheses

concernino specification of the CCPM and its explanatory power vis—a—vis

the traditional C1\FM. When the tests were implemented on Government bonds,

it was found that for all but those with maturities less than six months,

the restrictions on the distribution of asset returns and consumption

changes implied by the CCI\PM could not be rejected when due allowance was

made for the effects of inflation and measurement errors in consumption.

ThL rrrlPIA lc-
     '_I_rI            l-.-
                       LL) IJL4I fn
                             1.-LLJ uI             k4-4-'
                                         LIIiJJIIk IJLL.L LI 4-k-
                                                              CI I   4-km    rRA
                                                                     LI I L,rII I'



     The result concerning the validity of the CCIPM restrictions contrasts

somewhat with Gibbons's (1982) finding that similar restrictions imposed by

the Black form of the traditional Sharpe—Lintner—Mossin CPPM could be

rejected for common stock returns. The difference may occur for a couple of

reasons. First, in the Gibbons tests, the expected rate of return on the

zero—beta asset which, in the Elack model, replaces the risk—free asset, was

assumed to be constant over time. The risk—free rate in the Sharpe—Lintner—

Mossin model which is incorporated in the tests here is allowed to vary

through time. Only the bond expected rates of return conditional on the

one—month T—Bill rate must be assumed to be constant. Of course, a

potential cost of including the variable risk—free rate is that, in the

tests here, it is more likely that the CAPM will be rejected in favor of the

CCAFM because the risk—free rate is not consistent with the NYSE stock

index's being a good surrogate for "true wealth" [Roll (1976)]. Second, the

power of the test here may be low; yet one might have expected that the

power would be most lacking at the short end of the maturity spectrum where
                                          - 2—

the   restriction is rejected. Third, there could be other misspecifi-

cations that have a more severe impact on the statistical model for

longer—term bonds. For example, the variance—covariance matrix of the

deviations of returns from their conditional expectations might not be

constant, and the misspecification might be more severe at longer maturities.

      Clearly, there are many considerations which have necessarily been

ignored here, but impinge on the results nonetheless. First, all the tests

are asymptotic. Second, tax effects have been ignored in the tests. On

this second point, it can be proved [Marsh (1980), appendix F] that fairly

general taxation policies have no effect on the prices of discount bonds

within the CCAPM when bond prices are continuously marked—to—market for tax

purposes. In the case of coupon bonds, however, tax effects will be absent

only if the marginal investor's effective tax rate is zero [as, for example,

in Miller and Scholes (1978)]. lso, Government bonds are not treated as

net wealth here. One consequence is that they are not aggregated with the

NYSE index to provide a wealth—surrogate for the CPPM. Some

inter—generational models attribute non—neutral equilibrium effects to the

issuance of bonds, though the existence of these effects often requires

restrictions on alternative modes of inter—generational transfer [see

Samuelson (1958), Barro (1974), and Drazen (1978)].

      Finally, the estimation and test procedures implemented here take

cognizance of the issues raised by Roll (1979). Before explaining, however,

note that the methodology here is not that suggested by Roll (1979). Roll's

(1979) reply to Mayers and Rice emphasizes that "the only relevant question

is whether the C/PM is exactly linear (in beta)" (p.395) and that the
                                              -24-

alternative      is a model with "an unspecified but nonconstant" intercept

term. The tests here can be expressed in that form, but the methodolooy

phrases the alternative partly in terms of the CPM beta itself——the OjI

in Rolls' terminology.

    The central problem for CPM tests raised by Roll (1979, p. 395) can be

described as follows: In every sample, there will always exist portfolios

that could serve as market index proxies guaranteeing that:




              E(R) —      + 'l°jI

where E(R) is the expected rate of return on individual asset j and

        is   its "risk" coefficient for a given index, I . In    the same

sample,      there will always be proxies which guarantee that



              E(R)        + ljI + jI
where
         o1 is       an unspecified but nonconstant vector [which is, inci-

dentally, different for different choices of the index I].

    Empirical tests of the CFM thus face a dilemma. If             = 0   and

the CPPM is accepted, it may be that although the true market index is not

efficient, the proxy is. In fact, the existence of mean-variance efficient

proxies is guaranteed. On the other hand, if              0 and the O\PM

is rejected, the opposite may have occurred, i.e., the proxy used in the

test may be ex post inefficient, so that the test says nothing about the

validity of the CAPM if the "true" market index is properly used.
                                          —25—



   The preceding test of'   whether the CCPPM can be reduced to the Sharpe—

Lintner—Mossin CPM is, in essence, just one test of'   the   adeauacy of chanaes

in the NYSE index as surrogates for changes in investors' marginal

utilities. Explicit allowance is made for deviations of measured wealth

from the true descriptor of marginal utility. Various proxies are treated

as indicators of the marginal utility change variable; none are required to

be individually the true marginal utility change.

    The approach in no way contradicts Roll's central theme. The errors—

in—the—variables model used here, complete with identification assumptions,

is simply a sophisticated way of describing the difference between true

marginal utility changes and their measured counterparts. The hypotheses

tested are joint hypotheses of the validity of the errors—in—variables model

and the asset pricing model (1). In fact, one of the most interesting ways

to extend the test procedure here would be to deduce and impose further

general restrictions on the measurement model specification——for example, it

is economically sensible to restrict the percentage changes in investors'

unobservable marginal utilities to be greater than minus one hundred

percent. Such elaborations would permit a relaxation of some of the

[nontestable] identifying assumptions in the measurement model.
                                         —26.-




                                   FOOTNOTE S



*This paper is adapted from a section of my dissertation at the University
of Chicago. I am grateful to Craig Ansley, Sudipto Ehattacharya, Oouglas
Preeden, William Brock, Michael Gibbons, John P. Gould, Jerry Hausman, Jon
Ingersoll, allan Kleidon, Myron Scholes, Irnold Zellner; I am especially
indebted to Merton Miller for his support and encouracement. Part of this
paper was rewritten while I was a Batteryrrarch Fellow.



1   By way of comparison, the market value of NYSE listed stocks was about 1.3
    trillion dollars.

2   I do not believe that the conditional expected return models are
    necessarily uninteresting, just that it must be realized that any extra
    information which they provide does not "come for free" (an obvious point
    which sometimes seems to get lost in discussion). Given what I believe
    are the priors of most researchers as to the extent of variation in real
    risk premiums on Government bonds, quite a strong prior would be needed
    for the conditional expected return—risk premium model before results
    could be considered as tests of anything other than the specification
    itself, especially when only about twenty years of data are available. If
    the conditional expected return—risk premium model were "rolled back" to a
    primitive expected utility maximization model, questions regarding its
    specification are likely to be an order of magnitude more important than
    variations in the real risk premiums.

3   If meaningful aggregation is not possible, uncertainty would be inherent
    in the distribution of wealth changes and price level chances, but an
    accounting for these is beyond the scope of this paper. In fact, the
    single price level index used here really makes sense only for homothetic
    preferences: "the fundamental and well—known theorem for the existence of
    a price index that is invariant under change in level of livino..., is that
    each dollar of income be spent in the same way by rich and poor, with
    income elasticities exactly unity (the homothetic case)." ISamuelson and
    Swamy (1974), p. 568].

4   /s long as investors can hold diversified portfolios and maximize expected
    utility, there will always be a measure of systematic risk for a security
    which is defined in terms of the covariation of its returns with maroinal
    utilities [see Merton (1982, Section III) for discussion].

5   In the sociology/psychometric literature, (15)   is   called a path model.
                                            -27--



6    Robinson (1974) formulates the MIMIC model more oenerally, so that (14)
     might become:


                     lt      'l t +aj 4

                      Xkt    kt +<Zt
                            —e'
                            —— z
                               —t       t


     where      is a vector of causes of      and X. In this
     extended model, the interdependence between indicators and causes is even
     more complex, as are any propositions needed to justify labels on X1
     as indicators or causes.

7    It can be shown [Holly (1982)] that, against "local alternatives" [i.e.,
     those for which the true covariance 012 converges to the null 0 at
     the rate /T as the sample size T increases], Hausman's test has the
     same asymptotic power as the conventional likelihood, LM and Wald
     procedures for testing whether 012 0. Note that since there are
     more nuisance parameters than the parameter of interest here (a 12'
     his result requires only correlation between 012 and those nuisance
     parameters.

8    MOMENTS was written by Bronwyn H. Hall (1979) and uses the Eerndt, Hall,
     Hall, and Hausman (1977) scoring procedure.

9    This conclusion, like Bhattacharya's result and indeed the CCPPM (1)
     itself, is only rigorously true in the limit of continuous time. Some
     results in Gennotte and Marsh (1985) indirectly suggest that the extent of
     discrete—time approximation errors is trivial over monthly intervals, end
     Grauer's (1978) results imply that at least monthly stock returns are
     "sufficiently compact" that researchers are unable to apply models of
     relative asset prices to them and differentiate emono power linear risk
     tolerance utility functions.

10 The portfolios are similar in concept to those constructed end descrThed
    by Bildersee (1975, 1978). Since bonds are "rolled across" portfolios as
    they approach maturity, the returns are not adjusted for taxes, and flower
    bonds are excluded. The average maturity of the bond portfolios and the
    total number of bonds in each are reasonably stable through time (more
    specific details are available upon request).

11   The likelihood ratio test, which will be a uniformly most powerful test if
     one exists, is asymptotically equivalent to the Lagrange Multiplier and
     Wald tests. The "Wald test" of coefficient equality in the Hausman
     exogeneity test uses the unrestricted regression coefficient estimates
     rather than the restricted and unrestricted likelihood estimates.
                                                    —28—




                                        REFERENCES


Aigner, 0.3., 1978, "Recent developments in econometric modelling with
    latent variables," IJnpublished manuscript, University of Southern
    California.

Barro, R.J., 1974, "Are government bonds net wealth?" Journal of Political
    Economy 82, 1095—1117.

Berndt, E.R., and N.E. Savin, 1977, "Conflict among criteria for testing
    hypotheses in the multivariate linear regression model," Econometrica
    45, 1263—77.
            D     D U L.J.11 0
                  L).Ii.            L U,11          j.rl.
                                                    1
                                                            IQtJHQI!, O7/,
LJL.LIILJ, L.!\.,        IQ.L.J, I\.L..      QHLJ                     L'1'+, LLJ.WQLLUII WLJ
     inference in nonlinear structural models," Annals of Economic end Social
     Measurement 3, 653—665.

Ehattacharya, S., 1979, "A note on multi—period valuation and the pricing of
    options," Unpublished Draft, Graduate School of Business, University of
    Chicago.

Bildersee, J.S., 1975, "Some new bond indexes," Journal of Business 48,
    506—25.

_______________ 1978, "U.S. government and agency securities: An analysis
    of yield spreads and performance," Journal of Business 51, 499—520.

Black, F., 1972, "Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing,"
    Journal of Business 45, 444—454.

_________ M.C. Jensen, and M. Scholes, 1972, "The capital asset pricing
    model: Some empirical findings," in: M.C. Jensen, ed., Studies in the
    theory of capital markets (Fraeger, New York), 79—121.

Breeden, D.T., 1979, "An interterrporal asset pricing model with stochastic
    consumption and investment opportunities," Journal of Financial
    Economics 7, 265—296.

_____________   1980, "Consurrption risk in futures markets," Journal of
     Finance 35, 503—520.

_____________ 1984, "Consumption, production, and interest rates: P
    synthesis," Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.

Brock, W.A., 1982, "Asset prices in a production economy," in: J.J. McCall,
    ed., The Economics of Information and Uncertainty (University of Chicago
    Press, Chicago).
                                                        -29—


Ccx, J.C., J.E. Ingersoll, Jr., and S.A. Ross, 1977, "A theory of the term
    structure of interest rates and the valuation of interest—dependent
    claims," Unpublished manuscript, forthcoming: Econometrica.

Drazen, A., 1978, "Government debt, human capital, and bequests in a
    life—cycle model," Journal of Political Economy 86, 505—16.

Farna, E.F., 1975, "Short—term interest rates and inflation," American
    Economic Review 65, 269—282.

Fama, E.F., 1976, "Inflation uncertainty and expected returns on treasury
    bills," Journal of Political Economy 84, 427—48.

__________ 1977, "Interest rates and inflation: The message in the
    entrails," American Economic Review 67, 487—96.
                      1 r -$-(- 1r7z
                  lu 'J • V • dUU LI I, L7 I_/s I,r1:L.     -..,.—.
                                                  1\JI, .L LULl   I, l,_.__,
                                                                       JU
                                                             UJJ..LUI LUll.
     Empirical    tests," Journal of Political Economy 81, 607—636.

Farebrother, R.W., 1980, "The Durbin—Watson test for serial correlation
    where there is no intercept in the regression," Econometrica 48,
    1553—1563.

Fisher, F.M., 1966, The identification problem in econometrics
    (McGraw— Hill Book Co., New York).

Fisher, I., 1930, The theory of interest (Reprinted by A.M. Kelly
    Publishers, New York, 1965).

Gennotte, C., and T.A. Marsh, 1985, "Variations in ex—ante risk premiums on
    capital assets," Working Paper, Sloan School of Management, MIT/E52—447,
    50 Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA 02139.

Gibbons, M.R., 1982, "Multivariate tests of financial models: A new
    approach," Journal of Financial Economics 10, 3—27.

_____________ and W. Ferson, 1984, "Testing asset pricing models with
     changing expectations and an unobservable market portfolio,"
     Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
Goldberger, P.S., 1972a, "Structural               equation methods in the social
    sciences,"       Econometrica 40, 979—1001.

________________ l972b, "Maxirrum likelihood estimation of regressions
     containing unobservable variables," in: D.J. Aigner  and P.S.
     Gcldberger, eds., Latent variables in socio—economic models
     (North—Holland, Amsterdam).

Grauer, R.R., 1978, "Generalized two parameter asset pricing models: Some
     empirical evidence," Journal of Financial Economics 6, 11—32.
                                         —30—


Grossman, S.J., and R.J. Shiller, 1982, "Consumption correlatedness and risk
    measurement in economies with nontraded assets and heterooeneous
    information," Journal of Financial Economics 10, 195-210.

Hall, B.H., 1979, Moments: The moment matrix processor user's manual,
    Version 1.1.

Hansen, L.P., and K.J. Singleton, 1982, "Generalized instrumental variables
    estimation of nonlinear rational expectations models," Econometrica 50,
    1269—1286.

                                   1983, "Stochastic consumption, risk
    aversion, and the temporal behavior of asset returns," Journal of
    Political Economy 91, 249-265.

Hausman, 3.A., 1977, "Errors in variables in simultaneous eQuation models,"
    Journal of Econometrics 5, 389—401.

____________   1978, "Specification tests in econometrics," Econometrica
    46, 1251—71.

Hausman, J.A., and W.E. Taylor, 1981, "Identification in linear simultaneous
    equations models with covariance restrictions: An instrumental
    variables interpretation," Working Paper 280, Department of Economics,
    MIT, 50 Memorial Drive, Cambridoe, MA 02139 (April 1981).

Holly, A., 1982, "P remark on Hausman's specification test," Econometrica
    50, 749—759.

Holly, A., and 3.0. Sargan, 1981, "Testing for exoqeneity within a limited
    information framework," Unpublished manuscript, The London School of
    Economics.

Holly, A., and A. Monfort, 1982, "Some useful eouivalance properties of
    Hausman's yest," Unpublished manuscript, Universite de Lausanne, Ecole
    des HEC, 1015 Lausanne—Dorigny, Switzerland.

Joreskog, K.G., and P.S. Goldberger, 1975, "Estimation of models with
    multiple indicators and multiple causes of a single latent variable,"
    Journal of the American Statistical Association 70 (351) Part I, 631—39.

Lintner, 3., 1965, "The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky
    investments in stock portfolios and capital budgets," Review of
    Economics and Statistics 47, 13—37.

Lucas, R.E., Jr., 1975, "An equilibrium model of the business cycle,"
    Journal of Political Economy 83, 1113-44.

Mankiw, N.G., and M.D. Shapiro, 1984, "Risk and return: Consumption versus
    market beta," National Bureau of' Economic Research Working Paper #1399,
    NR, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridoe, MA 02138, (July).
                                        —31—



Marsh, T.A., 1980, "Intertemporal capital asset pricing and the term
    structure of interest rates," Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Graduate
    School of Business, University of Chicago.

____________ 1984, "On Euler—equation restrictions on the temporal behavior
    of asset returns," Working paper #1619—84, Sloan School of Management,
    MIT/E52—447, 50 Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA 02139.

Merton, R.C., 1971, "Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a
    continuous—tirre model," Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373—413.

___________ 1973, "An intertemporal capital asset pricing model,"
    Econornetrica 41, 867—87.

___________   1980, "On estimating the expected return on the market,"
    Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323—361.

____________ 1982, "On the mathematics and economic assumptions of
    continuous time models," in: W.F. Sharpe, ed., Financial economics:
    Essays in honor of Paul Cootner (North—Holland, Amsterdam).

Miller, M.H., and M.S. Scholes, 1978, "Dividends and taxes," Journal of
    Financial Economics 6, 333—64.

Mossin, J., 1966, "Equilibrium in a capital asset market," Econometrica 35,
    768—783.

Nakamura, A. and M. Nakamura, 1981, "On the relation among several
    specification error tests presented by Durbin, Wu, and Hausman,"
    Econometrica 49, 1583—1587.

Robinson, P.M., 1974, "Identification, estimation and large—sample theory
    for regressions containing unobservable variables," International
    Economic Review 15, 680—692. Reprinted in Latent variables in
    socioeconoic models, ed. by D.J. Aigner and A.S. Coldberger,
    (North—Holland Publishing Co, Amsterdam).

Roll, R., 1976, "A critique of the asset pricing theory's tests. Part 1:
    On past and potential testability of the theory," Journal of Financial
    Economics 4, 129-76.

_______ 1979, "A reply to Meyers end Rice," Journal of Financial
    Economics 7, 391—400.

Ross, S.A., 1976, "The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing," Journal
    of Economic Theory 13, 341—360.

__________ 1977, "Return, risk, and arbitrage," in: I. Friend and J.L.
    Bicksler, eds., Risk and return in finance, I (Eallinger, Cambridge,
    MA), 198—218.
                                        -32-


Rothenbera, 1.3., and C.1. Leenders, 1964, "Efficient estimation of
    simultaneous equation systems," Econometrica 32, 57—75.

Rubinstein, M., 1976, "The valuation of uncertain income streams and the
    pricing of options," Bell Journal of Economics 7, 407—425.

Samuelson, P.A., 1958, "An exact consumption loan model of interest with or
    without the social contrivance of money," Journal of Political Economy,
    66, 467—482.

Samuelson, P.A., and S. Swamy, 1974, "Invariant economic index numbers and
    canonical duality: Survey and synthesis," The American Economic Review,
    64, 566—593.

Savin, N.E. and K.J. White, 1977, "The Durbin—Watson test for serial
    correlation with extreme sample sizes or many regressions,"
    Econometrica, 45, 1989—1996.

Sharpe, W.F., 1964, "Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium
    under conditions of risk," Journal of Finance 19, 425—42.

Tobin, 3., 1958, "Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk," Review of
    Economic Studies 25, 65—85.

Zeliner, A., 1970, "Estimation of regression relationships containing
    unobservable independent variables," International Economic Review 11,
    441—54. Reprinted in: 0.3. Aigner and A.S. Coldberger, eds., Latent
    variables in socioeconomic models (North—Holland, Amsterdam).
                                                     —33—


                                         Table 1



         Estimates of the coef1icents of the "market model" equations
         for bond rates of return.Y' over the period March 1959 to
         December 1980, conputed using Hausman's instrumental variable
         procedure.

               MODEL:        =
                                 012   8Mt       +
                                                     0138Ft
                                                                 +
                                                                     l2 vt   +
                                                                                  u.t
                                                          , — 2/
                                          8Mat
                                                      =   gZt

                                           =                —
                                   Vt          8Mat              RMt

P00
  Bond               'l2
                 (Std. Error)
                                         013
                                   (Std. Error)
                                                                     12
                                                            (Std. Error)


0-6 mos.            0.023               1.103                    0.002           1.827   0.95
                   (0.011)             (0.016)                  (0.001)

6 mos-1 yr          0.065              1.121                     0.015           1.800   0.75
                   (0.029)             (0.043)                  (0.004)

1 yr—2 yrs          0.112               1.074                    0.030           1.804   0.50
                   (0.049)             (0,073)                  (0.007)

2 yrs—3 yrs         0.123               1.045                    0.045           1.881   0.33
                   (0.072)             (0.107)                  (0.011)

3 yrs—5 yrs         0.079              0.960                     0.060           1.887   0.21
                   (0.095)             (0.143)                  (0.014)

>Syrs               0.049              0.963                     0.079           2.017   0.14
                   (0.132)             (0.199)                  (0.020)



                         Fiat, and
1/ In the model,                         are respectively the real
    rates of return on security j, the market, and the risk—free asset in
    period t
2/ The indicator variables——percentage changes in seasonally adjusted retail
    sales of nondurable consumer goods, percentage changes in industrial
    production of nondurable consumer goods, the average realized real rate of
    return on one—month 1—bills over the past twelve months, the growth rate
    of the monetary base over the past twelve months, and percentage changes
    in an interpolated monthly series of quarterly per capital consumption——
    are used, along with the predetermined nominal one month 1—bill return and
    prior inflation rates, to form the vector 7 in these regressions.


3/ with three regressors, the 0.05 signIficance level lower and upper limits
    for the Durbin—Watson statistics with 238 ohservations are 1.61 and 1.74;
    they are 1.738 and 1.799 in the extended tables of Savin and White (1977),
    ard the lower limit is 1.728 in the Farebrother (1980) tabulations when
    there is no intercept in the regression as here. The corresponding values
    for the 0.01 significance level are (1.48, 1.60), (1.63, 1.704), and 1.634.
                                                34—

                                           able   2

           FIML estimates of the coefficients qf the "market model"
           equations for bond rates of return 2/ over the ieriod March
           1959 to December 1980, computed using the MOMENTS program.

     MODEL:


      Diat        17 Mat     - 11 Ft                             -    j
                                                                     ult

                    8Mat     - 223 2Ft - 024      025 t
                                           2/
                                          Xk      _Xkt        Ekt

                                    012                                        013

                                (Std.   Eiror)                              (Std. Error)
               No restrictions on           Restriction:    No restrictions on        Restriction:
                the covariation                              the covariation
                                           cov(u,u2)=0,                              cov(u,u2)=O


                                                            t
               between u2 and                               between u2t and           j =


                                                                 ,j=1,...,6
  Rond
Portfolio
 Maturity

0—6 rnos            0.045                      0.024              1.154                1.081
                   (0.037)                  (0.013)             (13.226)              (0.049)

6 mos—l yr          0.053                      0.050              1.085                1.075
                   (0.078)                  (0.018)              (2.799)              (0.065)

1 yr.—2 yrs         0.084                      0.080              1.016                0.9996
                   (0.144)                  (0.033)              (5.172)              (0.122)
2 yrs—3 yrs         0.094                    0.089                0.921                0.9625
                   (0.226)                  (0.052)              (8.492)              (0.195)

3 yrs—5 yrs         0.022                      0.085              0.648                0.8745
                   (0.346)                  (0.086)             (12.459)              (0.316)
>5 yrs             —0.016                      0.070              0.579                0.8899
                   (0.451)                  (0.113)             (16.247)              (0.419)




 1/ In the model,
 — of                    lat' and Rp are respectively the real rates
        return on security j, the market, and the risk—free asset in period t

 2/ The indicator variables——percentage changes in seasonally adjusted in retail
     sales of nondurable consumer noods, percentage changes in industrial production
     of nondurable consumer goods, the average realized real rate of return on
     one—month T—bills over the past twelve months, the growth rate of the monetary
     base over the past twelve months, and percentage changes in an interpolated
     monthly series of quarterly per capital consuoption——are used, along with the
     predetermined nominal one month T—bill return and prior inflation rates, to
     form the vector Z in these regressions.
                                                -35—


                                              Table 3

             Tests of asset pricing model specificatio4/ applied to rates of
             return on long—term Government bonds over the period March 1959 to
             December 1978.

                                                              Hausman                  FIML
                     Bond Maturity                           Procedure               MOMENTS

Hypothesis         (where applicable)-/                 or F stat.   p-value     or F stat.    p-value

                          0-6 mos                      18.224
                          6 mos—l yr                    3.400
    1                     1 yr—2 yrs                    0.051                    0.000           1.000
                          2 yrs—3 yrs                   0.042
                           -yi        '   I             nob,)
                                                         . L' .
                          >5    yrs                     0.047

    2                                                  14.31             0.025   341.44         <0.005

    3                                               14.46                0.025   1074.15

                           0—6 rros                    17.890
                           6   mos—l yr                 3.385
    4                      1   yr-2 yrs                 0.047            0.000   1.000
                           2   yrs—3 yrs                0.038
                           3   yrs—5 yrs                0.044
                          >5 yrs                        0.049


—1/The   hypotheses tested are:

                 The CCAPM holds for pricing default—free bonds;

                 The CG4PM does not add incremental explanatory power to
                 the C1FM;
         H0(3): Per capita consumption changes do not reflect changes in
                 investors marginal utilities any better than do returns on
                 the NYSE value—weighted index when the pricing of bonds isn't
                 constrained to conform with the CCPPM;
                 The Sharpe-Lintner—Mossin CPM holds.



H0(l) and H0(4) are each tested for each bond maturity separately
  using instrumental variables, and for all bond maturities jointly
  using FIML. H0(2) and H0(3) are tested for all bond maturities jointly
  using Hausrnan's exogeneity test and FIML.
