NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUBURBANIZATION, DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGE AND THE CONSEQUENCES
FOR SCHOOL FINANCE
David N. Figlio
Deborah Fletcher
Working Paper 16137
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16137

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

We are grateful to the National Institutes for Health for financial support, to Randy Reback and Amy
Harris, William Evans, and Robert Schwab for their matched Census and school finance data, to Julie
Cullen, Roger Gordon, Rob McMillan and Randy Reback, as well as participants of the NBER Conference
on Fiscal Federalism, for thoughtful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by David N. Figlio and Deborah Fletcher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Suburbanization, Demographic Change and the Consequences for School Finance
David N. Figlio and Deborah Fletcher
NBER Working Paper No. 16137
June 2010
JEL No. H41,H75,H77,I20,I22,J1,J14
ABSTRACT
The existing literature on the relationship between the share of elderly in a community and the support
for local public education has led to mixed results to date. One potential reason behind this is that
the share of elderly in a community is endogenous, and it is very difficult to disentangle the effects
of individuals aging in place from that of dynamic Tiebout sorting. The point of this paper is to carefully
document the degree to which aging in place has occurred in the American suburbs, and to estimate
the degree to which it has influenced school finance once the initial settlers of these suburbs were no
longer the parents of school-aged children. We hand-match data from the 1950 and 1960 Censuses
of Population and Housing to more recent data to link postwar suburban development to later school
finance. Using a novel method for identifying the causal effects of aging in place, we find that the
share of elderly adults who age in place is negatively related to the level of support for public schooling,
and that this is particularly true for school districts in metropolitan areas where the school-aged population
is more heavily nonwhite relative to the elderly population.

David N. Figlio
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu
Deborah Fletcher
Miami University
fletchd@muohio.edu

1. Introduction
During the 1930s and early 1940s, most industry was focused on supporting the war
effort and little housing stock was being built. After World War II ended, a number of
factors caused the demand for new housing to rise dramatically. Many marriages were
postponed until servicemen returned home after the war, and following the war the
number of young married couples increased dramatically, and with them the demand for
housing. These new families were able to afford to purchase homes largely because the
Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, usually known as the GI Bill of Rights, allowed
veterans to procure low-interest mortgages with no down payments. Indeed, from 1944
to 1952, the Veteran’s Administration backed nearly 2.4 million home loans (U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs, 2009). The influx of black workers from the rural South
also resulted in white families fleeing the central cities, where blacks generally settled, to
newly built, race-restricted areas. The developing interstate highway system allowed
these new families, who would become the parents of the Baby Boomer generation, to
move away from the central cities but still be able to commute in for work. This
movement to previously undeveloped areas allowed for easy mass production of
affordable housing, and by 1955, suburban homes comprised more than 75 percent of all
new housing stock in metropolitan areas (Jackson, 1987). In fact, more houses were
built in the United States in the ten years following World War II than in the first 45
years of the 20th century (U.S. Department of Labor, 1960). The modern American
suburb was born.

After moving to the suburbs, a substantial number of the Baby Boomers’ parents aged in
place, and, their children grown, may have begun to prefer a different mix of publicly
2

provided goods. This would have put pressure on the mix of goods provided by local
governments to change, causing conflict between the wishes of these aging adults and
those of younger families moving into the suburbs. As the much larger Baby Boomer
generation itself moves into grandparenthood, the potential consequences of this
intergenerational conflict for the provision of locally provided public goods are even
larger than in the postwar era. Exploring how the mix of goods and services provided by
local governments changed as the parents of the Baby Boomers aged may give us some
insights to what may happen as the Baby Boomers themselves age in place. Aging in
place is particularly salient in an environment in which younger Americans are more
racially and ethnically heterogeneous than are the older Americans. Indeed,
demographers estimate that around 2012 non-Hispanic whites will account for less than
50 percent of births in the United States (Johnson and Lichter, 2010).

The point of this paper is to carefully document the degree to which this aging in place
has occurred, and to estimate the degree to which it has influenced school finance in the
American suburbs once the initial settlers of these suburbs were no longer the parents of
school-aged children. Using a novel method for identifying the causal effects of aging in
place, we find that the share of elderly adults who age in place is negatively related to the
level of support for public schooling, and that this is particularly true for school districts
in metropolitan areas where the school-aged population is more heavily nonwhite relative
to the elderly population.

2. Contributions to existing literature

3

There is a substantial literature exploring how intergenerational conflict has affected the
provision of public education. Most of these papers have focused on how an increase in
the elderly population in an area affects school revenues, but the results of these studies
have been inconclusive, and seem to vary with the level of aggregation and the empirical
specifications used. In a panel of Texas counties, Miller (1996) finds that the fraction
elderly have a significant negative impact on education spending, but the effect is
statistically insignificant in a panel of 48 states. Poterba (1997) finds in a state-level
panel that per-child education spending falls as the state’s fraction elderly rises.
However, the effect is not statistically significant if a measure of urbanicity is included.
Poterba does find that the states where the elderly are “whiter” than school-aged children
have significantly lower education spending. Ladd and Murray (2001) conduct an
analysis similar to Poterba’s, but at the county level with county and time fixed effects to
capture within-state differences in education finance. They find the elderly to have no
significant effect on school spending, but like Poterba, find that racial heterogeneity
between the elderly and school-aged children negatively affects spending. Harris, Evans
and Schwab (2001) conduct a school-district level analysis and find that a larger share of
elderly in the district significantly lowers education spending, but that the magnitude of
the effect is small. Fletcher and Kenny (2008) examine how an increase in a county’s
fraction elderly affects the identity of the median voter, and, like Harris, Evans and
Schwab, find that more elderly are associated with a small but statistically significant
decrease in education spending.

4

A few authors have directly examined how the elderly affect votes on school bond
initiatives. Button (1992) performs a precinct-level analysis of the determinants of the
fraction voting for education bond initiatives in six Florida counties with large elderly
populations. He finds that precincts with a larger share of voters aged 55 or older had
fewer voters choosing to approve the initiative. Brunner and Balsdon (2004) use survey
data of individual voters on school bond initiatives in California to get direct evidence on
how a voter’s characteristics might be related to his choice at the ballot box, and find that
the elderly were less likely than younger voters to support the initiatives.

A number of authors have noted that while the elderly prefer less education spending than
younger families because of intergenerational conflict, there are some factors that might
still cause them support education. One such factor is the capitalization of better school
quality into housing prices. In a school district-level analysis, Hilber and Mayer (2009)
find evidence that there is greater capitalization of school quality into house prices, and
thus more support for education spending by the elderly, when little land is available for
development. As suburbs are developing, they are surrounded by easily developed land,
and as the suburbs fill in this land becomes more scarce and expensive. This would
suggest that as the suburbs age along with the people living in them, those people should
become more supportive of education as time passes. The results supporting the
capitalization of school quality into housing prices, and the role this may play in elderly
support for school spending, mirrors the findings of Black (1999) and Figlio and Lucas
(2004) that indicate that measured school quality is highly valued in the housing market.
Reback (2009) demonstrates the importance of the tax price in determining the degree to

5

which elderly residents support school spending, and suggests that state-financed targeted
tax price subsidies to elderly homeowners may be an effective mechanism to reduce the
likelihood of intergenerational conflict.

Other authors, including Fletcher (2004) and Berkman and Plutzer (2004) have looked at
county-level migration patterns of the elderly to explain differences in school spending.
These authors argue that those elderly aging in place will be more invested in the
community and its youth, and this will be manifested by higher education spending in
locations with more long-term elderly. The results of both of these studies suggest that
more elderly aging in place are associated with increased school spending, while a higher
fraction of elderly migrants is associated with decreased school spending. There is also
some evidence that the relative age of the elderly inmigrants affects support for education
spending, however. Tosun, Williamson and Yakovlev (2005) find that counties with a
larger number of elderly between the ages of 55 and 74 moving into the county will
increase education spending, while more elderly aged 75 or older moving in will depress
it. If this effect is similar for those residents aging in place, we might expect to see
support for education erode as time passes.

This paper takes on a related but somewhat different question from the literature on
intergenerational conflict. The results from the existing literature regarding the
relationship between age distributions and school revenues and spending could be due to
the aging in place of the community, but age distributions could also be endogenous with
respect to school revenues and spending due to Tiebout (1956) sorting. We seek to map

6

out the broad sweep of postwar suburbanization, identifying the areas where young
families have settled, and documenting the degree to which they have aged in place rather
than sorted on variables salient to education spending. We use data from the suburbs of
20 Northeastern and Midwestern cities during the period of postwar suburbanization to
explore how support for education changed as the Baby Boomers’ parents aged in place,
changing the age distribution of the suburbs. Of course, the difficult question is whether
changes in the demographics of a community are due to aging in place versus dynamic
Tiebout sorting.

We are able to make substantial progress toward disentangling the effects of aging in
place from the confounding effects of dynamic Tiebout sorting by making two major new
contributions to this literature. First, we make use of statistical life tables published by
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2006) to forecast when individual
adults of given age at a certain time were most likely to die. We can therefore identify
the component of a school district's changing demographics due to aging in place, as
opposed to Tiebout sorting, by assuming that every adult at a certain point in time would
remain in the same house until they die and then would be randomly replaced by a
newcomer. When we do this exercise, we find that aging in place is much more
important than is Tiebout sorting in explaining over-time changes in a school district's
age distribution.

Our second major contribution is to try to determine the degree to which the early age
distribution (circa 1960) of the population in a given suburb is itself related to initial

7

Tiebout sorting. We find that, as of 1960, there is little relationship between the age of a
school district's residents and the population's income or education level. As nobody has
previously matched Census data to school districts prior to 1970, we hand-match 1960
Census tracts to school districts so that we can link the initial attributes of suburban
communities to their later demographic changes and school finance. The result of these
two innovations is that we can make a considerably more credible claim regarding the
causal effects of aging in place per se on school district finances. When doing so, we
find that an increase in the fraction of adults aged 65 and older is negatively related to
school revenues per pupil. These results have substantial consequences for the future of
school finance in the United States, as the much larger Baby Boomer generation is now
apparently aging in place.

3. The relationship between school district age distribution and school finance
Our identification strategy requires using historical data to forecast the age distributions
that will occur as suburban school districts age over time. Because Census data at the
school district level have never been collected for years prior to 1970, it was necessary to
hand-match school district boundaries to Census tracts in the pre-1970 years. This is
only possible, however, in a subset of metropolitan areas in which the Census collected
tract information in the years prior to 1970. As some of our models require data as far
back as the 1950 Census, we therefore limit our analysis to metropolitan areas with
Census tract data in 1950. We concentrate on the American cities that were already
beginning to suburbanize in postwar America, so that we can maximize the possibility of

8

following the parents of the Baby Boom generation from young parenthood through
retirement.

The great majority of these cities were in the Northeast and Midwest; indeed, 21 of the 27
cities whose suburbs were partially tracted by the Census in 1950 were in these regions.
We view suburban Census tracting as a proxy for suburbanization because the Census
Bureau aimed to divide into tracts all urbanized areas with significant population
surrounding a central city. We choose not to focus on Southern cities for several reasons.
First, the prevalence of county-level school systems in the South are not ideal for the
discussion of this topic. Second, Southern central cities made more use of suburban
annexation relative to cities in the Midwest and Northeast that were more likely ringed by
incorporated areas by 1950. Finally, the widespread de jure racial segregation of schools
in the South covers much of our study period. Among Western cities, only Los
Angeles's, Oakland's, San Diego's and Seattle's suburbs were significantly tracted in
1950, and mapping Census tracts in 1950 and 1960 to school districts in Los Angeles is
much more challenging than in the Northeast and Midwest because of major changes in
school district boundaries over time.1 In our analysis, we also exclude New York City,
because only a portion of New York's surrounding developed areas were included in the
1950 Census tracting. Therefore, our analysis focuses on the suburbs of 20 cities.

1

The tracted areas adjacent to Oakland, San Diego and Seattle in 1950 are in relatively large cities
themselves, as opposed to the smallish suburbs on which we are concentrating, for the most part, in this
analysis.

9

In order to know the degree to which our results may be representative of a larger set of
school districts than those in the 20 metropolitan areas for which we have hand-matched
school district boundaries to Census tracts, we begin our analysis by estimating as best
we can the same model specifications as those reported by Harris, Evans and Schwab
(2001). Harris, Evans and Schwab carefully matched Census of Governments data from
1972, 1982 and 1992, which contains school district financial information, to the three
closest decennial Censuses of Population (1970, 1980 and 1990), at the school district
level. We are grateful to Harris, Evans and Schwab for sharing their data with us. They
estimated their model for the balanced panel of school districts with valid data in all three
rounds of data2, and excluded school districts with implausibly large or implausibly small
values of the fiscal variables that they considered.

To benchmark our analysis against the school district-level analyses in the literature, we
begin by estimating the closest equivalent that we can to Harris, Evans and Schwab's
most-preferred specification, model 2 in Table 4 (p.464). They estimate a balanced panel
of school district log total revenues per pupil, over the three rounds of data, with school
district fixed effects and state-by-year fixed effects as well as controls for the percentage
of housing units that are owner-occupied, the percentage of population that is nonwhite,
the percentage of population below the poverty line, the log of median household income,
the log of federal revenues per capita, the percentage of the over-25 population that is a
high school dropout, high school graduate, or has some college, the log of district

The 1970 Census data were much less comprehensive at the school district level than were the 1980 and
1990 data. Harris, Evans and Schwab (2001) provide a careful delineation of exactly where they lose
observations, and we followed their description of their inclusion criteria as well as we could.

2

10

population, and interactions between whether the state's school finance system had been
overturned by the courts as of the date in question and dummies for the quintile of
median family income in 1970. The variables of primary interest are the share of the
population aged 65 or older and the share of the population aged 0 to 19. Harris, Evans
and Schwab weight the school districts by district enrollment, and we do the same for
consistency. Table 1 presents summary statistics for our dependent variables of interest,
our key explanatory variables and covariates from the 1970 - 1990 Censuses.

All of our analyses in this paper have the log of total per pupil revenues as the dependent
variable; our results are very comparable if we use the log of per pupil local revenues
instead. We report the results using only one dependent variable to save space. Our
replication of Harris, Evans and Schwab's (2001) findings is reported in the first column
of Table 2. We obtain very similar findings to those reported in their paper: our
coefficient on the fraction of the population aged 65 or older is slightly lower than theirs
(-0.852 as compared with -0.886) and our coefficient on the fraction of the population
aged 0 to 19 is slightly higher than their estimate (-0.985 as compared with -0.907), but
the results are fundamentally extremely similar. Because we employ the more
conservative robust standard errors, our standard errors are nearly three times as large as
theirs, but both point estimates remain very strongly statistically significant.

In addition to having a smaller sample size due to using data from just the suburbs of 20
metropolitan areas, our preferred model makes several additional refinements to the
Harris, Evans and Schwab approach. For one, we are concerned about the endogeneity of

11

the time-varying district variables. Much of the energy in the paper is spent addressing
the endogeneity of the key variables -- those representing the age distribution -- but in
addition, we worry about the inclusion of covariates reflecting owner-occupancy, racial
composition, education levels, household income, etc., that are likely to be endogenous
with school district revenues and spending. In addition, we prefer a political economy
model in which we look more at the decision-making units in a school district, so we
reformulate the two age variables as the fraction of adults aged 65 or older (as opposed to
fraction of population aged 65 or older) and the fraction of households with children (as
opposed to the fraction of the population aged 0 to 19). The remaining columns of Table
2 consider what happens as we change the model specification and study sample along
these lines.

As we move from the first column (Harris, Evans and Schwab's model specification) to
the second column (the specification excluding the covariates most likely to be
endogenous), we observe that the point estimates of the age variables of interest remain
very similar -- the coefficient on the fraction of the population aged 65 or older decreases
slightly and the coefficient on the fraction of the population aged 0 to 19 increases
slightly. We therefore believe that the inclusion of the potentially endogenous covariates
does not influence the key findings of interest, and all subsequent model specifications
exclude these covariates. Moving from the second column to the third column (the
alternative measure of the age variables) yields substantively similar findings; the
coefficient estimates are smaller but the units have changed. A one standard deviation
increase in either variable is related to a similarly-sized change in the dependent variable.

12

As a consequence, we conclude that our choices of definitions of the key age variables do
not influence the estimated relationships of interest in a meaningful way.

Having moved from Harris, Evans and Schwab's preferred specification to our preferred
specification (different definitions of age variables and fewer potentially endogenous
covariates), we can now see what happens when we restrict the sample size to school
districts in the suburbs of our 20 metropolitan areas -- only about one-tenth of the total
number of school districts in the balanced panel. We hand-matched school district
boundaries using the earliest maps we could find in each case to Census tract maps from
1950 and 1960, following the rule that if a Census tract was split between multiple school
districts, we assigned the tract to the school district that occupied the majority of the tract.
We were able to match school districts to one or more Census tracts in 100 percent of the
cases in which the geographical areas were covered by Census tracts in the relevant
years. In a fraction of cases (18.5 percent of all school districts), historical Census tracts
were large enough that they subsumed multiple school districts in their entirety (or at
least the vast majority of the districts). In these cases, we assigned the Census tract
populations to all of the relevant school districts, and in results available upon request, we
find that our results do not substantively vary whether or not we include or exclude the
school districts where Census tracts are too large to uniquely identify the school districts.
All told, of the 1396 suburban school districts in the 20 metropolitan areas in our study,
1252 were in the metropolitan areas in the 1970 area definitions. Among these school
districts, 1004 were in tracted suburban areas during the 1960 Census, and 818 of these
districts could be uniquely matched to 1960 Census tracts. Of these school districts, 600

13

were in suburban areas tracted in the 1950 Census, and 510 districts can be uniquely
matched to Census tracts in 1950.

The fourth column of Table 2 presents the analog to the model in the third column of
Table 2, except that only the school districts in tracted suburban areas in the 1960 Census
in our metropolitan areas are included. This sample provides the foundation for our
analysis. We include only 964 of the 1004 school districts in tracted suburban areas in
our analysis because 40 of the 1004 school districts did not meet the criteria for inclusion
in Harris, Evans and Schwab's balanced panel. As can be seen in the fourth column, the
coefficients and standard errors are both proportionately larger in the more limited
sample as compared with the full sample of school districts. Therefore, there is reason to
believe that the relationship between age and school finance may be somewhat more
extreme in the sample for which we can construct our instrumental variables analysis -though the results are still qualitatively similar across columns. Finally, because some of
our analysis involves only data from 1980 and 1990, we repeat the same specification but
limit the sample to just those observations for school districts in our data in the years
1980 and 1990. Those results, reported in the fifth column of Table 2, present similar
estimates to those seen in the fourth column.

We consider two other refinements to our model, both involving finer degrees of
geography-time-specific fixed effects. It may be that our covariates are not picking up
enough of the localized amenities that might influence both the age distribution of a
school district and the demand for school spending in that district. One possible way of

14

controlling for these differences is to segment the suburbs of a given city into geographic
areas based on different compass points. There is no inherently obvious way to do this,
but given Baum-Snow's (2007) finding that the interstate highway system led to
suburbanization, we coded all school districts in a metropolitan area into a set of
segments based on the number of radiating interstate highways spread outward from the
central city, and repeat the specification from column 4 (that is, the specification using
suburban data from 1970, 1980 and 1990), but controlling for metropolitan area times
compass direction times year fixed effects. These results, reported in column 6, are very
similar to those reported in column 4.

As an alternative specification, we stratify all school districts by the percentage of adults
in 1970 with at least a high school degree -- the median level of education among adults
in 1970. When we divide each metropolitan area into quartiles based on the level of
education of the adults in the school district, and control for education-specificmetropolitan area by year fixed effects (so that we are comparing school districts in a
metropolitan area to others in the metropolitan area with the same education levels in the
same year, and also still controlling for other observables.) These results, reported in
column 7 of Table 2, remain quite similar to those reported in column 4.

In summary, across a wide range of fixed effects model specifications, including
restricting our analysis to the school districts in the metropolitan areas with early Census
tracting, we find broadly consistent evidence that school district revenues per pupil are
inversely related to both the fraction of adults (or fraction of the total population) over

15

age 65 as well as the fraction of households with children (or the fraction of the
population aged 0 to 19.) These results are consistent both with a political economy story
regarding the elderly having lower levels of support for public schooling, as well as a
congestion story in which the more children for any given tax base, the more broadly the
revenues and expenditures are spread across pupils. The key question, however, is
whether these results suffer from endogeneity bias. The fixed effects regression results
reported in Table 2 (and in the prior literature) could actually be due to reverse causation
-- perhaps older people have been Tiebout sorting into lower-spending school districts.
The elderly population of a suburb could be present because those individuals moved into
the suburbs as young adults and aged in place. Alternatively, the characteristics of a
particular suburb could lead to dynamic sorting, where households with similar
characteristics --- such as age --- would tend to move to the same areas. It will be very
important to disentangle the effects of aging in place from the confounding effects of
dynamic Tiebout sorting. The principal purpose of this paper is to propose several novel
attempts to separate the two confounding phenomena.

4. Aging in place versus dynamic Tiebout sorting
An aging in place story would indicate that young families tend to have children, settle
down in the suburbs, and stay in their homes. Therefore, the first place to start in an
investigation of the degree to which aging in place explains over-time changes in a school
district's age distribution is to present information describing the extent to which these
potential relationships are true. We begin by investigating the probability that a
household with a head of any given age would have children. To do this, we use data

16

from the Integrated Public-Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) to identify the fraction of
suburban households with children, by age of the head of household, in the 1970, 1980
and 1990 Census years. As can be seen in Figure 1, the overwhelming majority of
younger families -- those with household heads younger than 45 -- who live in the
suburbs have children. This was even more the case in 1970, but even in 1990, when
fewer suburban households had children at nearly all age groups, the pattern is that young
suburban families have children at home. And in fact, the fraction of suburban families
with children at home remains robust even into the older age brackets: For example,
about 25 percent of those aged 55 to 59 (20 percent in 1990) and over 10 percent of those
aged 60 to 64 had children at home in these years.

But are the suburbs largely populated by families with children, who then settle down?
Figure 2 reports the fraction of suburban heads of households who are relative
newcomers (those who lived in their current home for five or fewer years) by age of
household head, in the 1990 Census.3 As can be seen, most young families have moved
into their current residence relatively recently, but by age 45 or so, the fraction who are
newcomers begins to plateau, and by the time the household is elderly, fewer than 20
percent of households were new to their home within the five previous years.
Importantly, however, in the younger age groups, it is apparent that suburban families
without children are more transient than are those with children at home: For age groups
younger than 50, suburban families without children are about ten percentage points more
likely to be newcomers in their homes than are suburban families with children. By age

3

Similar patterns are observed in the 1970 and 1980 Censuses.

17

50, however, the two relationships begin to converge. These results present additional
suggestive evidence that suburban residents were more likely to settle down once they
had children at home, and then after the children left home they were unlikely to leave.

This last point is particularly clear when one observes Figure 3, which presents the
distributions of length of tenure at the current residence, by age, in the suburbs of the 20
metropolitan areas in this study, as reported in the 1990 Census. Young households have
lived in the suburbs for a much shorter period of time than their older counterparts: more
than three quarters of households aged less than 30 have lived in their current home 5 or
fewer years, compared to the one third of households aged 65 and older living in their
current suburban home for more than 30 years.

In order to think about the comparison between dynamic Tiebout sorting and aging in
place in the suburbs, it is first important to understand the development of the suburb in
postwar America. We therefore begin by describing the development of the suburbs
surrounding these 20 cities during the period from 1950 through 1990. The first five
columns of Table 3 present the percentage of the total population in these metropolitan
areas who reside in the central city (or cities, in a few cases, such as Minneapolis-St.
Paul) in each of the first five postwar Census rounds. By design, all of these areas had at
least some significant suburbanization in process by the time of the 1950 Census, but in
all cases but one (Boston), the majority of the metropolitan population in areas tracted by
the Census resided in the central city as of 1950. Excluding the Boston area, where twothirds of the urbanized population resided outside of the central city in 1950, the fraction

18

residing in tracted suburbs ranged from 11 percent outside of Minneapolis-St. Paul to 47
percent outside of Cincinnati.

Within just ten years, the fraction of the urbanized population in suburban areas rose
considerably in most of these cities, and held steady only in the case of Kalamazoo. By
1960, the fraction of the urbanized area's population residing in tracted suburbs ranged
from 24 percent in the areas surrounding Columbus to 74 percent in the areas surrounding
Boston. Minneapolis-St. Paul's tracted suburbs, which accounted for just 11 percent of
the urbanized population of the area in 1950, had 37 percent of the area residents in 1960.
Cincinnati, the city with the most relatively populous suburbs other than Boston in 1950,
experienced suburban population growth from 47 percent of metropolitan population in
1950 to 60 percent of metropolitan population in 1960. The pattern of suburbanization
continued in 1970, with suburban population ranging from 52 percent of Milwaukee's
metropolitan area to 84 percent of Hartford's metropolitan area.

After 1970, the growth of suburbanization continued, but at a slower pace, in these cities.
By 1990, suburban population ranged from 59 percent of Milwaukee's metropolitan area
to 87 percent of Hartford's metropolitan area. While the fraction of the metropolitan
population continued to grow in all 20 areas, in only three cases (Flint, Indianapolis, and
Minneapolis-St. Paul) did the proportion within the suburbs increase by more than ten
percentage points between 1970 and 1990, as compared with the period from 1950 to
1970, when the smallest change (Boston) was 14 percentage points and 15 of the 20 cities
experienced suburban population share increases of more than 25 percentage points.

19

The final three columns of Table 3 describe an area-by-area breakdown of the percentage
of 1990-era metropolitan area school districts in tracted areas in the 1950, 1960 and 1970
Censuses. We look here at 1990-era school districts because our analysis follows school
district spending from the time around the 1970 Census to the time around the 1990
Census. This table echoes the previous discussion that a large fraction of postwar
suburbanization in these metropolitan areas had taken place by 1970. The final column
reflects the fact that in many of these areas, by 1970 the metropolitan area had expanded
spatially about as much as it would (though, of course, since metropolitan areas are
defined at the county level, except in New England, rural portions of counties included in
metropolitan areas continue to urbanize to this day.) In ten of the 20 metropolitan areas,
100 percent of the school districts in 1990 were included in the metropolitan area's
boundaries by 1970.4 The preceding two columns of Table 3 present the percentages of
1990 school districts that were in tracted areas in 1950 and 1960. In 1950, some presentday metropolitan areas were already heavily tracted; 54 percent of Boston's 1990-era
school districts are in areas tracted in 1950, while 60 percent of Cleveland's 1990-era
school districts are in areas tracted in 1950. And the entire Philadelphia-Camden
metropolitan area as of 1990 was tracted in 1950. By 1960, Chicago had joined
Philadelphia-Camden as being entirely tracted, and St. Louis, Buffalo-Niagara Falls and
Pittsburgh were close behind.

4

Kalamazoo, Columbus and Minneapolis-St. Paul have experienced the largest proportionate growth in
metropolitan area boundaries since 1970.

20

It is apparent from Table 3 that the suburbs in any given metropolitan area developed at
different times, and one would therefore expect that by 1970, the first year for which we
have both financial and population data, there would be considerable heterogeneity in the
age distributions across the suburbs of a metropolitan area. And, indeed, this is what
appears to be the case. Table 4 presents, by metropolitan area, both the percentage of
school districts with a median adult age 45 or older in 1970, as well as the minimum,
mean and maximum percentage of adults in the school district aged 65 or older in 1970.
The table reports these statistics for two different groups of school districts: all districts
within the 1990 metropolitan area boundaries and all districts within the 1970
metropolitan area boundaries.

One observes that there existed vast differences across metropolitan areas in the typical
age of suburban residents in 1970. Following the 1990 definition of metropolitan areas, it
is evident that while some areas had relatively old suburban residents -- 71 percent of
Pittsburgh suburbs had a median adult aged 45 or older, as did 58 percent of Bridgeport's
suburbs and 51 percent of St. Louis's suburbs -- some areas had very young suburban
residents as of 1970 -- not a single suburb of Flint had a median adult aged 45 or older,
and only 20 or 21 percent of Akron's, Dayton's and Indianapolis's suburbs had a median
adult aged 45 or above. The contrast is even stronger if one restricts the analysis to the
set of suburban school districts in the 1970 definition of metropolitan areas, where
Bridgeport, Pittsburgh and St. Louis have the same percentage of school districts with a
median adult aged 45 and over, while Flint, Kalamazoo and Minneapolis-St. Paul all had

21

three or fewer percent of the suburban school districts with a median adult resident aged
45 or older.

Furthermore, within each of the 20 metropolitan areas, there existed dramatic variation in
the age distributions of suburban school districts as of 1970. No school districts had
more than 30 percent of adults aged 65 and older, and in only one metropolitan area
(Philadelphia) was there at least one school district where the median adult was 55 or
older. However, in 7 metropolitan areas there was at least one school district where at
least 25 percent of the adult population was aged 65 or older, and in 11 metropolitan
areas there was at least one school district where at least 40 percent of the adult
population was aged 55 or older.5 In every one of these 11 metropolitan areas, there
was another school district where fewer than 18 percent of the adult population was aged
55 or older. While not reported in the table, the within-metropolitan area standard
deviation in the percentage aged 65 and over ranges from 2.4 percentage points
(Bridgeport) to 6.2 percentage points (Minneapolis/St. Paul), with most metropolitan
areas having standard deviations in around 4 percentage points. In summary, by 1970,
when the majority of the Baby Boom generation was still in elementary or secondary
school, there existed considerable variation within every metropolitan area in the relative
age of the population of the school districts. If adults tend to age in place, this would
indicate that some school districts in each metropolitan area would have their median
adult be without children in school considerably sooner than would other school districts.

5

For ease of explication, the remainder of this discussion will be based on the 1970 definition of the
metropolitan areas.

22

One question, of course, is whether individuals actually age in place. It is apparent from
Table 5 that individual suburbs that were relatively old in 1970 remained relatively old in
later years as well, a pattern consistent with aging in place of suburban residents. The
suburbs of each MSA in our sample are rank-sorted by the 1970 decile of average age.
As the 1970 deciles increase, the percentile rankings in the later years are almost
monotonically increasing as time passes. The suburbs that were relatively young in 1970
remained relatively young in 1980 and 1990, and the suburbs that were relatively old in
1970 remained relatively old in 1980 and 1990. While there has been some convergence
over time -- the youngest decile in 1970 averaged being at the 13.8th percentile in 1980
and the 20.4th percentile in 1990, while the oldest decile in 1970 averaged being at the
85th percentile in 1980 and the 76.5th percentile in 1990 -- the rank-ordering over time
remains strongly consistent. These results are consistent with a story of aging in place.
However, they are also consistent with a story of dynamic Tiebout sorting, in which
suburbs with a particular age distribution may be more likely to attract similar-aged
newcomers.

Therefore, it is necessary to forecast what the age distribution would have been were
everyone to solely age in place over time. In a world with no dynamic Tiebout sorting
based on age, each household living in a school district would remain in their home until
they die, and at that point would be replaced by a newcomer household of the average
age of all newcomers in the metropolitan area. We computed the average age of
newcomer households -- which we define as those who moved to their current house
within the past two years -- in each metropolitan area in 1980 and 1990 using IPUMS

23

data; the average newcomer age ranged from 31.9 to 36.1 in 1980 and from 34.4 to 37.2
in 1990.6 We use the life tables for adults of various ages in 1970 reported by the Social
Security Administration (2005) to predict when the adults would die; for example, the life
tables indicate that 8.7 percent of adults in youngest-decile school districts in 1970 would
die by 1980, while 20.0 percent of adults in oldest-decile school districts would die by
1980. By 1990, 19.1 percent of adults in the youngest-decile school districts would have
died, according to the 1970 life tables, while 36.8 percent of adults in the oldest-decile
school districts would have died. We assume that if the last person in a household died in
1974, he or she would be replaced by a new averaged-aged newcomer household in 1974
-- we use the next Census year to ascribe the age -- at which point that household would
begin to age in place.

Table 6 presents the predicted degree to which the hierarchy of age distributions in
suburban school districts would have changed if only aging in place and replacement
with average-aged newcomers taken place (which we'll call "random replacement.")7
One observes that with aging in place there would have been some compression in the
distribution of ages across school districts in a metropolitan area. (This would happen
because older school districts are more likely to have higher death rates with replacement
by average-aged newcomers.) For instance, the typical top-decile school district in 1970
would rank at the 84th percentile in 1980 and the 75th percentile in 1990 were there to be

In practice, the calculations change only trivially if we instead ascribe the same newcomer age to all
metropolitan areas.

6

Average-aged newcomers have some probability of death prior to 1980 and 1990 as well, and those
predicted to have died are then replaced in our calculations with new average-age newcomers in the year of
death.

7

24

only aging in place with random replacement. The ninth decile school district in 1970
would rank at the 76.6th percentile in 1980 and the 70th percentile in 1990. As can be
seen, the typical gap between the aging-in-place predictions and the realized predictions
is very small -- only 3.5 percentiles in 1980 and 3.7 percentiles in 1990. Excluding the
two youngest deciles, where there has been even more compression than what would
have been predicted by aging in place alone and are older than what would have been
predicted (perhaps because very young adults are less settled than older adults), the
typical gap is smaller still -- only 2.7 percentiles in both 1980 and 1990. It is clear that
the realized age distributions comport very closely with the age distributions that would
have been predicted were the residents in 1970 simply aging in place over time. The
correlation between the average realized age in 1980 and the average predicted age in
1980 based on aging in place is 0.78, and the correlation between the average realized
age in 1990 and the average predicted age in 1990 based on aging in place is 0.70. This
is a very high degree of correlation, and the reality of the correlation is likely higher still
since our calculations are based on predicted deaths rather than actual deaths.
Regardless, these calculations provide strong evidence that, while dynamic sorting might
affect the over-time stability in suburban age distributions, aging in place is the major
driver.

Table 7 provides more evidence that dynamic sorting is not a major determinant of
suburban age distributions. In the first panel, Census tracts as of 1990 are rank-sorted by
the fraction of the households in residence for more than one year that are aged less than

25

30.8 For each of these quartiles, the fraction of the newest households --- those moving in
one year previously or less --- in each age group are shown. If dynamic sorting is
important, then new residents should be sorting into locations where the current residents
are of the same age, so in the first panel we would expect to see much larger fractions of
those aged less than 30 as we move down the table. In fact, the increase is quite small,
rising only five percentage points from the suburbs with the fewest to the most young
residents. A similar pattern can be seen in panel B, where the fraction of newcomers
aged 65 and older rises by less than three percentage points from the first to the last row.9
Note that the fraction of the youngest newcomers also rises somewhat as we move to the
last row of the table.

5. Instrumental variables results
Given that we can strongly predict the age distribution of a school district over time using
forecasts assuming that adults age in place and are randomly replaced when they die, and
that aging in place appears to be the most important determinant of over-time changes in
the age distribution in a school district, we propose that predicted age distributions based
on the 1970 age distribution and aging in place with random replacement can be used as
instruments for the actual age distributions in 1980 and 1990. This instrumental variables
approach would rule out the changes in school district ages over time that are due to
dynamic Tiebout sorting and concentrate only on the changes over time predicted based

These data are not observed at the school district level of aggregation, so the best that we can do is the
Census tract.

8

Similar patterns can be seen in tables where tracts are rank-sorted by percentage of current residents in
different age groups. These tables are available on request from the authors.

9

26

on "natural" patterns. We therefore repeat the regressions from Table 2, but using the
1970 or 1960 age distributions to predict the fraction elderly and fraction of children in
the district in later years. The results of these instrumental variables regressions are
shown in Table 8. Here, we can only look at the 1980 and 1990 Census years because the
1970 Census year is used to generate the instruments for later years. For presentation
convenience, we report only the key parameter estimates in this table, but we control for
all of the same covariates as in column 5 of Table 2.

As can be seen in the first two columns of Table 8, the instruments -- predicted fraction
of adults aged 65 and up and predicted fraction of the households with children -predicted using the 1970 age distributions10 have very strong first-stage explanatory
power. The partial R-squared is 0.47 for share of adults aged 65 and older and 0.41 for
share of households with children, and the F-statistic is 847 and 668, respectively. The
second stage results have signs consistent with those in Table 2, although the magnitudes
and standard errors are both considerably larger than before. Therefore, there is still
strong evidence that as a community ages in place, the level of school revenues per pupil
declines.

Of course, if the age distributions in 1980 and 1990 are endogenous with respect to
education revenues, the age distributions in previous years may be endogenous as well.
We suspect that while the postwar boom in suburbs was occurring during the 1950s and

We use the share of householders in each age group with children generated from the 1980 and 1990
IPUMS data for the suburbs of the 20 metropolitan areas, and predict the number of householders in each
age group using the same methods used to predict the percentage of adults aged 65 and older.

10

27

early 1960s, sorting was more exogenous, and we therefore repeat the same analysis
using age distributions predicted based on the 1960 Census data that we hand-matched to
school districts. (This has the added advantage of being able to use predicted age
distributions in 1970, 1980 and 1990, as opposed to just 1980 and 1990.) Table 9
presents these instrumental variables results. As can be seen, the first stage results
remain extremely strong, and the pattern of coefficients and statistical significance in the
second stage remains consistent.

6. Tiebout sorting by age prior to 1960?
It may still be the case that the age distribution as of 1960 might reflect Tiebout sorting,
and older families that sorted into certain suburbs at the beginning of postwar
suburbanization may, for some reason, have been on a different trajectory of demands for
public schooling as they aged in place than would have younger families. Predicting age
distributions throughout the following several decades would thus be more satisfying if
the suburbs with older residents and the suburbs with younger residents in 1960 were
otherwise similar demographically. We therefore stratify school districts by their
position in the within-metropolitan area age distribution, and see whether the average
income or education levels of the adults in the school district are related to their ages.

Table 10 displays the educational attainment (percent with less than a high school degree)
and log of average family income in these suburbs, by age decile of the residents. As we
move from the youngest to the oldest suburbs, there is some variation in the values of
these variables, but they show no discernable pattern. The top two age deciles have the

28

highest levels of family income, but this may be due to the natural pattern of increasing
income with age, rather than Tiebout sorting; indeed, when we regression-adjust log of
average family income for household age and metropolitan area fixed effects, we see that
there is no residual relationship between school district age and residual income. These
results suggest that school districts with older residents do not have systematically
different types of residents -- at least along the lines of income and education.

What, then, could explain why some school districts have older residents than others, as
of 1960? Our proposition is that young families settled the new housing in the postwar
suburbs, suggesting that suburbs with younger adults would also have newer housing
stock, in general. To investigate this possibility, we include in Table 10 the percentage of
homes (as of 1960) built in the 1950s and the percentage of homes (as of 1960) built
postwar. We observe that the suburbs with the youngest adults are the suburbs with the
newest housing stock. As we move from the suburbs with the youngest adults to the
oldest, the fraction of homes built in the previous decade falls dramatically: 62 percent of
homes were built in the previous decade for suburbs with the youngest residents, while
less than 22 percent were built in the previous decade in the suburbs with the oldest
residents. Similarly, the fraction of homes built postwar falls from 76 percent to 34
percent as we move from the suburbs with the youngest to the oldest residents.
Therefore, within a metropolitan area, the youngest suburban developments also tended
to be the newest. While we do not have information about why exactly one suburb
developed five or ten years before another suburb in a metropolitan area, there is
therefore strong evidence that (1) the earlier-developing suburbs had older residents as of

29

1960, but (2) these suburbs with older residents do not appear to have residents with
different levels of income and education. This presents at least some evidence that the
1960 age distribution, and the nature of the housing stock as of 1960, may be exogenous
to future school district finances.

As an additional approach, we can go one step further and assume that someone of
average age purchased a house when it was built, aged in place until they died, when
another average-aged person (at the time) purchased the house and aged in place until
they died, and so on. In order to have some elapsed time between housing building and
the fiscal variables (because the fiscal variables could contemporaneously affect the
timing of new construction) we capture the age distribution of the school district's
housing stock as of the 1960 Census. This requires merging together the 1950 and 1960
Censuses, because the 1960 Census only identifies structure age as built in the 1950s,
built in the 1940s, or built before 1940, while the 1950 Census identifies housing
structures as built in the 1940s, built in the 1930s, built in the 1920s, or built before 1920.
So long as we assume that no housing present in 1950 was torn down between 1950 and
196011 we can combine these two years of Census data for the school districts tracted as
of the 1950 Census and have a full set of housing age by decade from pre-1920 through
the 1950s.12 Using these data, we can predict the age distributions in 1970, 1980 and
1990 based solely on the distribution of housing ages as of 1960.

Our best calculations indicate that only about two percent of the 1950 housing stock in the suburbs was
torn down between 1950 and 1960, making this a reasonable assumption.

11

About five percent of the suburban housing stock in our metropolitan areas present in 1960 was built
before 1920. Data from the U.S. Department of Labor (1960) on housing starts by year suggests that the
average house in this category was built in 1904, so we use that as our date for the pre-1920 housing stock

12

30

Having demonstrated the strong evidence that suburban dwellers tend to age in place
once settling the suburbs, we make use of this fact by instrumenting for age distributions
in 1970 - 1990 with the age of the housing stock in 1960 in our regressions. The
instrumental variables regressions shown in Table 11 are identical to those shown in
Table 8 and 9, except that here we use the age of the housing stock in 1960 to predict the
fraction of adults aged over 65 and the fraction of households with children in 1970, 1980
and 1990. As before, the first-stage F statistics on the excluded instruments are very
large with a p value of 0.000 in all cases. The signs of the coefficients in the second
stage equation are the same as before, although they are much smaller in magnitude,
more similar to the point estimates shown in Table 2. Because the standard errors are
large, the estimated effects of the fraction over age 65 and the fraction of households with
children are not statistically significant in this instrumental variables specification
(though the estimated effect of the fraction of households with children is close to
statistical significance) but we view these results as roughly consistent in theme with
those found above.

7. Community heterogeneity and the consequences of aging in place
Much of the theory on the potential consequences of aging in place for the provision of
local public schooling indicates that homophily could influence the degree to which
childless elderly citizens might continue to support schooling. We therefore continue our
in a suburb. We use housing start data to choose the most likely housing build date for the subsequent
decades as well; typically this is the midpoint of the decade, except in the 1930s, when the Depression
meant that few houses were built in the early part of the decade (so the typical house was built in 1937) and
the 1940s, when most houses were built postwar (so the typical house was built in 1947).

31

analysis by investigating whether our instrumental variables estimates of the effects of
the age distribution on the level of per pupil local revenues are influenced by the potential
racial distribution of the school district.

Because racial composition of a school district is endogenous, we measure the potential
for racial mismatch at the metropolitan area level. For each of the three years, we create
a mismatch variable measured as the share of the school-aged population that is nonwhite
divided by the share of the elderly population that is nonwhite. The mean of this variable
is 2.33 and the standard deviation is 1.02; a higher value of this variable would indicate
that the children in a metropolitan area are relatively more likely to be minorities than are
the elderly people in the metropolitan area. We repeat our instrumental variables
regression specification reported in Table 9, but this time we also interact the two
variables of interest, as well as the two instruments, with this metropolitan area-level
racial mismatch variable.

The results of this specification are reported in Table 12. As can be seen from the table,
the estimated effects of more elderly adults is strongly related to the level of racial
mismatch in the metropolitan area. At the mean level of racial mismatch, the estimated
coefficient on the share of adults aged 65 and above is -0.246. At one standard deviation
of racial mismatch above the mean, however, the corresponding estimated effect would
be -1.175. The coefficient on the interaction between the share of households with
children and the racial mismatch variable is also negative, though is only statistically
significant at the 11 percent level. Therefore, our estimates indicate that school districts

32

with increasing shares of elderly adults are more likely to cut their revenues and spending
when the children are relatively nonwhite than they are when the school-aged children
are relatively white. Given the changing demographics of the United States, this finding
underscores the potential role that the increasingly large share of elderly adults in some
school districts may play.

8. Conclusion
While there exists considerable evidence regarding the degree to which the age
distribution of a community is associated with its support for public schooling, it is
notoriously difficult to ascribe causality to this relationship. The fundamental challenge
is that a negative relationship between the fraction elderly in a community and support
for public schooling may be due either to aging in place -- which is what has been
implied but untested by the prior literature -- or to dynamic Tiebout sorting in which
elderly residents who do not wish to fund schools move to communities with other
elderly residents. While both stories are consistent with this relationship, they have very
different implications for the effects of demographic change on the provision of local
public schooling.

This paper introduces a novel approach to causally linking school spending to changing
demographics of a community. We begin by forecasting how the age distribution in a
school district would change if the only factor at work were aging in place, and
demonstrate that aging in place is the leading explanation for over-time changes in school
district demographics. We further seek to predict age distributions in the future using

33

data from a time when the American suburbs were, for the most part, brand new. We
show that as of 1960, suburbs populated by older residents were no different from those
populated by younger residents, in terms of income and education levels, and that the
principal determinant of the age of residents in 1960 was the age of the housing stock.
This paper presents the first evidence to our knowledge that documents the role that the
development of the suburbs in postwar America played in determining the age
distribution of school districts in 1970 and beyond. We find strong evidence that the
development dates of the suburbs and the resulting modern age distributions influence the
level of school spending in these school districts. School districts encompassing suburbs
that developed earlier and with consequently older populations tended to cut back on
school spending sooner, all else equal, once the Baby Boomer generation was out of
school, than did those with later-developing suburbs. These estimated effects are
particularly strong in the metropolitan areas where minorities comprise a relatively large
share of the school-aged population. These results have clear implications for what may
happen as the much larger Baby Boom generation ages, and suggest that the types of
state-financed targeted tax price subsidies for elderly homeowners that Reback (2009)
recommends may help to reduce inefficiencies in education provision in a graying
America. While our results are not definitive -- there could still be some remaining
endogenous sorting into the early postwar suburbs -- our analyses go a long way toward
cementing the conclusion that as a suburb ages, its support for schooling falls.

The heterogeneity in age distributions may also help to explain state interventions in
school finance at the state level. In an aging America, an increasing fraction of citizens

34

of a state may seek to influence the degree to which localities can tax residents without
school-aged children. These policies may lead to further inefficiencies. While it is
beyond the scope of the present paper to explain the presence and timing of these
interventions in the context of demographic shifts, it is a question of ongoing research
concern.

35

References
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. Did Highways Cause Suburbanization? Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122 (2007): 775-805.
Berkman, Michael B.; and Plutzer, Eric. Gray Peril or Loyal Support? The Effects of the
Elderly on Education Expenditures. Social Science Quarterly 85 (December
2004): 1178-92.
Black, Sandra. Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education.
Quarterly Journal of Economics (1999): 577-600.
Brunner, Eric; and Balsdon, Ed. Intergenerational Conflict and the Political Economy of
School Spending. Journal of Urban Economics 56 (September 2004): 369-88.
Button, James. A Sign of Generational Conflict: the Impact of Florida’s Aging Voters on
Local School and Tax Referenda. Social Science Quarterly 73 (December 1992):
786-97.
Downes, Thomas; and Figlio, David. Economic Inequality and the Provision of
Schooling. Economic Policy Review (September 1999): 99-110.
Figlio, David. Did the Tax Revolt Reduce School Performance? Journal of Public
Economics (September 1997): 245-269.
Figlio, David; and Maurice Lucas. What's in a Grade? School Report Cards and the
Housing Market. American Economic Review 94 (2004): 591-603.
Fletcher, Deborah. It Takes a Village? Intergenerational Conflict and Cooperation in
Education Expenditures. Miami University, 2004.

36

Fletcher, Deborah; and Kenny, Lawrence W. The Influence of the Elderly on School
Spending in a Median Voter Framework. Education Finance and Policy 3
(Summer 2008): 283-315
Harris, Amy Rehder; Evans, William N.; and Schwab, Robert M. Education Spending in
an Aging America. Journal of Public Economics 81(September 2001): 449 - 472.
Hilber, Christian A.L; and Mayer, Christopher J. Why Do Households Without Children
Support Local Public Schools? Linking House Price Capitalization to School
Spending. Journal of Urban Economics 65 (January 2009): 74-90
Jackson, Kenneth T. Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States.
New York: Oxford University Press (1987)
Johnson, Kenneth; and Lichter, Daniel. Growing Diversity among America's Children
and Youth: Spatial and Temporal Dimensions. Population and Development
Review 36 (March 2010): 151-175.
Ladd, Helen F.; and Murray, Sheila E. Intergenerational Conflict Reconsidered: County
Demographic Structure and the Demand for Public Education. Economics of
Education Review 20 (August 2001): 343 – 357
Miller, Cynthia. Demographics and Spending for Public Education: a Test of Interest
Group Influence. Economics of Education Review 15 (April 1996): 175-85.
Minnesota Population Center. National Historical Geographic Information System: Prerelease Version 0.1. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota (2004).
http://www.nhgis.org

37

Murray, Sheila; Evans, William; and Schwab, Robert. Education Finance Reform and the
Distribution of Education Resources. American Economic Review 88 (September
1998): 789-912.
Poterba, James M. Demographic Structure and the Political Economy of Public
Education. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 16 (Winter 1997): 48 66.
Reback, Randall. Local Tax Price Discrimination in an Aging Society. Barnard College,
2009.
Tiebout, Charles. A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. Journal of Political Economy
64 (October 1956): 416-424.
Tosun, Mehmet Serkan ; Williamson; Claudia R.; and Yakovlev, Pavel. Population
Aging, Elderly Migration and Education Spending: Intergenerational Conflict
Revisited. Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Working Paper (2009)
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics.
National Vital Statistics Report, vol. 54, no. 19, June 28, 2006.
U.S. Department of Labor. Nonfarm Housing Starts, 1889-1958. Bulletin #1260. (1960)
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. G.I. Bill History.
http://www.gibill.va.gov/gi_bill_info/history.htm (2009)

38

Table 1: Summary statistics of dependent and independent variables included in balanced panel analysis
Variable
Log per pupil total revenues
Log per pupil local revenues
Fraction over 65
Fraction aged 0-19
Natural log of median household income
Fraction owner occupied
Fraction nonwhite
Fraction in poverty
Fraction of adults who were high school
dropouts
Fraction of adults with 12 years of
education
Fraction of adults with 13 - 15 years of
education
School finance system overturned by this date
Log of per pupil federal revenues
Log of population

Means (Standard deviations)
1970
1980
8.02 (0.29)
8.23 (0.27)
7.30 (0.60)
7.40 (0.63)
0.11 (0.04)
0.13 (0.05)
0.39 (0.05)
0.33 (0.04)
10.34 (0.30)
10.30 (0.28)
0.74 (0.10)
0.75 (0.09)
0.09 (0.15)
0.10 (0.16)
0.16 (0.11)
0.13 (0.07)
0.52 (0.13)
0.37 (0.12)

1990
8.53 (0.29)
7.64 (0.67)
0.15 (0.05)
0.30 (0.04)
10.29 (0.33)
0.74 (0.10)
0.12 (0.17)
0.13 (0.08)
0.27 (0.11)

0.31 (0.08)

0.37 (0.08)

0.36 (0.08)

0.09 (0.04)

0.13 (0.05)

0.22 (0.06)

0.02 (0.15)
0.97 (1.46)
8.95 (1.15)

0.08 (0.28)
0.49 (1.02)
9.08 (1.16)

0.21 (0.41)
0.46 (1.03)
9.12 (1.21)

9113

9113

9113

Total number of school districts

Sources: Authors' calculations based on data provided by Harris, Evans and Schwab (2001).

39

Table 2: Fixed effect regression results for the relation between fraction of adults aged 65+, fraction children and log per pupil total revenues
(1)
Harris, Evans
and Schwab
specification

Fraction of population aged
65 and older

-0.852***
(0.276)

(2)
Eliminating
potentially
endogenous
covariates

-0.985***
(0.154)

(4)
Same as (3)
but only in
suburbs of 20
MSAs

(5)
Same as (4)
but 1980,
1990 only

(6)
Same as (4),
but with
MSA x
direction
FEs

(7)
Same as (4),
but with MSA
x education
FEs

-0.774***
(0.240)

Fraction of adults aged 65
and older
Fraction of population aged
less than 20

(3)
Same as (2)
but with
alternative
measures

-0.374**
(0.186)

-0.504**
(0.242)

-0.586**
(0.259)

-0.525**
(0.243)

-0.443*
(0.251)

-0.249***
(0.065)

-0.491***
(0.125)

-0.433***
(0.146)

-0.483***
(0.136)

-0.457***
(0.138)

-1.088***
(0.288)

Fraction of households with
kids
Fixed effects

School district,
state x year

School
district,
state x year

School
district,
state x year

School
district,
state x year

School
district,
state x year

School
district,
MSA x
direction x
year

School
district, MSA
x equation
quartile x year

Observations
Adjusted R squared

27339
0.886

27339
0.880

27339
0.879

2892
0.870

1928
0.911

2892
0.882

2892
0.883

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses beneath parameter estimates. Models also include all covariates described in the text.

40

Table 3: The development of the suburbs in postwar America

Metro area

% of MSA population in central city in:
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990

% school districts:
tracted
tracted
in 1950 in 1960

in MSA
in 1970

Akron

76

55

40

34

32

10

48

93

Boston

33

26

19

17

17

54

64

90

Bridgeport

71

47

35

32

31

17

50

100

Buffalo

72

46

41

35

33

35

89

100

Chicago

71

47

47

42

38

40

100

100

Cincinnati

53

40

36

27

28

38

38

100

Cleveland

67

52

40

33

31

60

74

100

Columbus

83

76

46

41

36

31

31

48

Dayton

69

52

37

30

27

21

33

100

Detroit

68

43

34

28

24

36

71

71

Flint

64

52

36

28

25

37

57

74

Hartford

61

25

16

14

13

12

47

84

Indianapolis

81

60

42

32

28

23

23

100

Kalamazoo

57

58

37

33

32

18

29

32

Milwaukee

77

62

48

42

41

31

53

89

Minneapolis-St. Paul

89

63

43

35

31

15

55

61

Philadelphia

67

63

43

38

35

100

100

100

Pittsburgh

58

35

21

19

18

48

98

100

St. Louis

56

32

24

20

17

34

82

97

Syracuse

65

46

31

26

25

43

76

100

Notes: These are authors' calculations based on Census tract data from the 1950 and 1960 Censuses and
school district-level Census data from the 1970, 1980 and 1990 Censuses. School district-Census tract
matches from 1950 and 1960 were conducted by the authors. School district counts are based on the 1990
Common Core of Data, and metropolitan area definitions reported by the U.S. Census Bureau. In the case
of the Buffalo, Dayton, and Philadelphia metropolitan areas, a second city (Niagara Falls, Springfield, and
Camden, respectively) was also considered a central city for the purposes of this analysis.

41

Table 4: Variation in age distribution among suburbs within a metropolitan area

Metro area

All districts in MSA in 1990:
% with median
% over 65 in 1970:
age ≥ 45 in 1970
min
mean max

All districts in MSA in 1970:
% with median
% over 65 in 1970:
age ≥ 45 in 1970
min
mean
max

Akron

21

5

11

19

15

5

11

15

Boston

41

3

14

26

41

6

14

26

Bridgeport

58

7

13

17

58

7

13

17

Buffalo

42

8

14

20

42

8

14

20

Chicago

29

2

11

24

29

2

11

24

Cincinnati

39

5

14

23

39

5

14

23

Cleveland

44

7

13

22

44

7

13

22

Columbus

25

6

14

20

17

6

12

20

Dayton

20

4

12

26

20

4

12

26

Detroit

28

4

12

22

23

4

11

22

Flint

0

7

11

16

0

7

11

16

Hartford

35

6

13

23

32

6

12

22

Indianapolis

21

6

14

21

21

6

14

21

Kalamazoo

43

7

16

27

0

7

11

15

Milwaukee

28

6

14

26

24

6

13

25

Minneapolis

24

3

14

26

3

3

9

17

Philadelphia

40

3

14

30

40

3

14

30

Pittsburgh

71

7

15

24

71

7

15

24

St. Louis

51

6

15

25

51

6

15

25

Syracuse

28

8

15

21

28

8

15

21

Notes: These are authors' calculations based on Census age distributions in 1970. Metropolitan area
definitions in 1990 and 1970 come from the U.S. Census Bureau.

42

Table 5: Persistence of age patterns over time within a suburban school district

WithinMSA age
decile in
1970

Average
age in
1970

Average age in
1980
[likelihood of
average aged
household having
kids]

Youngest
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Oldest

40.5
42.4
43.5
44.3
45.0
45.5
46.2
47.0
47.8
49.2

41.2 [82%]
43.0 [80]
43.4 [79]
44.3 [77]
44.3 [77]
44.8 [76]
45.5 [74]
46.3 [73]
47.0 [70]
48.0 [66]

Average
realized withinMSA percentile
in 1980

Average age in
1990
[likelihood of
average aged
household having
kids]

Average
realized withinMSA percentile
in 1990

13.8
27.3
32.6
43.6
43.1
50.0
58.9
69.7
77.5
85.0

43.1 [71%]
44.4 [67]
44.7 [65]
45.5 [63]
45.2 [64]
45.8 [61]
46.2 [59]
47.0 [57]
47.4 [55]
48.0 [52]

20.4
32.2
37.0
47.3
43.1
51.2
57.1
67.2
70.7
76.5

Note: Figures calculated by authors. School districts were rank-ordered within
metropolitan areas using data from the 1970 Census.

43

Table 6: Actual and predicted age distributions over time for school districts ranked by within-MSA decile of age distribution in 1970
WithinMSA age
decile in
1970

Average realized
within-MSA
percentile in
1980

Average predicted
within-MSA
percentile in 1980, if
no dynamic sorting

Predicted rate of
household head
deaths, 1970 to
1980

Average realized
within-MSA
percentile in 1990

Average predicted
within-MSA
percentile in 1990, if
no dynamic sorting

Predicted rate of
household head
deaths, 1970 to
1990

Youngest
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Oldest

13.8
27.3
32.6
43.6
43.1
50.0
58.9
69.7
77.5
85.0

7.4
20.1
30.3
45.0
50.7
55.1
61.3
70.4
76.6
84.0

8.7%
10.7
11.9
12.8
13.8
14.6
15.5
16.6
17.7
20.0

20.4
32.2
37.0
47.3
43.1
51.2
57.1
67.2
70.7
76.5

10.8
26.8
37.9
49.6
52.6
55.1
58.6
65.7
70.0
75.0

19.1%
22.4
24.4
26.1
27.5
28.7
30.2
31.8
33.6
36.8

Note: Figures calculated by authors. School districts were rank-ordered within metropolitan areas using data from the 1970 Census.
Predictions without dynamic sorting assume that all householders will remain in their homes until they die, and then are replaced by
the average-aged new suburban householder in the given metropolitan area in the 1980 or 1990 Census. We predicted death rates in
each school district using life expectancies by age in 1970 calculated from "Life Tables for the United States Social Security Area,
1900-2100," Social Security Administration, 2005. We measured the average age of new suburban householders in each of twenty
metropolitan areas by calculating the average age in the metropolitan area of householders new to their homes in the suburban portions
of the metropolitan areas within the last two years, using data from the 1980 and 1990 five percent Census microdata sample from the
IPUMS. The correlation between average realized age in 1980 and average predicted age (based on 1970 age distribution, with
random replacement) in 1980 is 0.78. The correlation between average realized age in 1990 and average predicted age in 1990 (based
on 1970 age distribution, with random replacement) is 0.70.

44

Table 7a: Age distributions of newest households by quartile of the Census tract’s
fraction of long-term residents aged less than 30, 1990 Census
Quartile of fraction
aged less than 30

Mean (std. dev.) fraction of newest residents aged:
less than 30
30 - 44
45 - 64
65 and older

1

0.446
(0.221)

0.322
(0.189)

0.186
(0.150)

0.045
(0.083)

2

0.462
(0.162)

0.317
(0.138)

0.181
(0.102)

0.041
(0.053)

3

0.493
(0.163)

0.299
(0.137)

0.171
(0.106)

0.038
(0.054)

4

0.498
(0.173)

0.295
(0.148)

0.168
(0.126)

0.039
(0.069)

Table 7b: Age distributions of newest households by quartile of the Census tract’s
fraction of long-term residents aged 65 and older, 1990 Census
Quartile of fraction
aged 65 and older

Mean (std. dev.) fraction of newest residents aged:
less than 30
30 - 44
45 - 64
65 and older

1

0.456
(0.192)

0.340
(0.164)

0.175
(0.134)

0.029
(0.063)

2

0.473
(0.181)

0.316
(0.158)

0.174
(0.113)

0.037
(0.055)

3

0.487
(0.178)

0.296
(0.152)

0.175
(0.116)

0.042
(0.063)

4

0.479
(0.193)

0.282
(0.154)

0.182
(0.138)

0.057
(0.085)

45

Table 8: Instrumental variables regression results, predicting 1980 and 1990 age
variables using 1970 Census data
First stage results

Second stage results

Fraction of
adults aged 65+

Fraction of
households
with kids

Predicted fraction of adults
aged 65+

0.639***
(0.018)

-0.807***
(0.039)

Predicted fraction of
population aged 0 - 19

0.088***
(0.018)

0.398***
(0.039)

Fraction of adults aged 65+

-2.489***
(0.764)

Fraction of households with
kids

-1.484***
(0.409)

F for excluded instruments
Partial R squared
Observations

847.02
0.470
1928

668.12
0.412
1928

1928

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions also include controls described
in text. The simulated age distributions are based on 1970 Census data using the
procedure described in the text.

46

Table 9: Instrumental variables regression results, predicting 1970, 1980 and 1990 age
variables using 1960 Census data
First stage results

Second stage results

Fraction of
adults aged 65+

Fraction of
households
with kids

Predicted fraction of adults
aged 65+

0.4058***
(0.0167)

-0.5890***
(0.0357)

Predicted fraction of
population aged 0 - 19

0.0006***
(0.0002)

0.0032***
(0.0004)

Fraction of adults aged 65+

-1.413**
(0.700)

Fraction of households with
kids

-0.737**
(0.353)

F for excluded instruments
Partial R squared
Observations

350.47
0.273
1893

317.46
0.254
1893

1893

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions also include controls described
in text. The simulated age distributions are based on 1960 Census data using the
procedure described in the text.

47

Table 10: Relations between age of suburban households, age of housing stock, income
and educational attainment in 1960
WithinMSA age
decile in
1960
Youngest
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Oldest

Average
age in
1960

Percent
with
education
<=11 years

Log of
average
family
income

Log income
adjusted for
age and
metro area

Percent of
homes
built in
1950s

Percent of
homes
built after
1940

39.8
41.6
42.5
43.4
44.1
44.7
45.5
46.1
47.0
48.4

47.9%
52.0
52.4
52.0
51.2
53.2
54.4
52.8
49.1
48.2

8.98
9.00
8.99
9.01
9.03
8.99
8.98
9.01
9.08
9.08

0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.03
0.03
0.01

62.2%
57.5
53.6
48.5
41.1
38.0
33.4
29.3
27.2
21.7

75.6%
72.9
68.4
63.2
55.8
52.8
47.7
43.5
38.7
33.6

Note: Figures calculated by authors. School districts were rank-ordered within
metropolitan areas using data from the 1960 Census, following the authors' handmatching of Census tracts to school districts. Log income adjusted for age and
metropolitan area is the residual of a regression of log of average family income on
average adult age and metropolitan area fixed effects.

48

Table 11: Instrumental variables regression results, predicting 1970, 1980 and 1990 age
variables using 1960 Census housing construction age distributions
First stage results
Fraction of
Fraction of
adults aged
households
65+
with kids
Predicted fraction of adults
aged 65+

0.593***
(0.063)

-0.199
(0.126)

Predicted fraction of
population aged 0 - 19

-0.166***
(0.027)

0.933***
(0.053)

Second stage results

Fraction of adults aged 65+

-0.525
(1.106)

Fraction of households with
kids

-0.665
(0.440)

F for excluded instruments
Partial R squared
Observations

303.19
0.241
1944

485.75
0.337
1944

1944

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions also include controls described
in text. The simulated age distributions are based on 1960 Census data using the
procedure described in the text.

49

Table 12: Instrumental variables regression results, predicting 1970, 1980 and 1990 age
variables using 1960 Census data, accounting for racial mismatch
Second stage
results

First stage results
Fraction
Fraction of Fraction
of adults
households 65+ x
aged 65+ with kids
mismatch

Fraction
with kids x
mismatch

Predicted fraction of
adults aged 65+

0.319*** -0.646***
(0.048)
(0.102)

-1.042***
(0.149)

1.082***
(0.259)

Predicted fraction of
adults 65+ x mismatch

0.034**
(0.017)

0.018
(0.036)

0.765***
(0.053)

-0.902***
(0.093)

Predicted fraction of
Households with kids

-0.000
(0.000)

0.004***
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.005**
(0.002)

Predicted fraction kids
x mismatch

0.0002*
(0.0001)

-0.000
(0.000)

0.002***
(0.000)

-0.000
(0.001)

Fraction of adults aged
65+

1.874
(1.983)

Fraction of adults aged
65+ x mismatch

-0.910**
(0.460)

Fraction of households
with kids

0.926
(0.956)

Fraction of households
with kids x mismatch

-0.401
(0.247)

F for excluded
instruments
Partial R squared
Observations

177.10

160.19

162.50

101.69

0.276
1893

0.256
1893

0.259
1893

0.179
1893

1893

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions also include controls described
in text. The simulated age distributions are based on 1960 Census data using the
procedure described in the text.

50

Figure 1: Fraction of households with children, by age, 1970/1980/1990 Censuses

51

Figure 2: Fraction of households that are newcomers, by age

52

Figure 3: Duration of residence by age, 1990 Census

53

