                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          BINGE DRINKING & SEX IN HIGH SCHOOL

                                          Jeffrey S. DeSimone

                                         Working Paper 16132
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16132


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2010




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jeffrey S. DeSimone. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Binge Drinking & Sex in High School
Jeffrey S. DeSimone
NBER Working Paper No. 16132
June 2010
JEL No. I1

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the impact of binge drinking on sexual activity among a nationally representative
set of high school students during the 1990s and 2000s. The main innovations are explicitly controlling
for time-invariant preferences regarding sexual behavior and alcohol use, and eliminating non-drinkers
from the comparison group. I find that binge drinking significantly increases participation in sex, promiscuity,
and the failure to use birth control, albeit by amounts considerably smaller than implied by merely
conditioning on exogenous factors. For all outcomes, impacts rise substantially with binge drinking
frequency. Results are similar using alternative comparison groups defined by excluding those who
do not exhibit other risky behaviors, and by gender and race/ethnicity, but vary by grade level and
over time in different ways for engaging in sex than protective behavior. Effects are much larger for
the small fraction of students that has not been taught about AIDS/HIV infection in school.


Jeffrey S. DeSimone
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Arlington
701 S. West St.
Arlington, TX 76019
and NBER
jdesimone@uta.edu
1. Introduction

       Does the strong relationship between alcohol consumption and sexual activity reflect a

causal impact of drinking? More precisely, does inebriation, by impairing judgment and limiting

inhibition, induce sexual risk-taking that would not otherwise occur? Many economic studies

have addressed this question over the last decade, but the answer is still unclear. The difficulty,

not surprisingly, is identifying a component of alcohol use that is not associated with unobserved

factors also related to sexual behavior. Various empirical approaches have been pursued, but as

DeSimone (2010) reviews, each has weaknesses offsetting its particular advantages.

       Chesson et al. (2000), Dee (2001), Sen (2003) and Carpenter (2005) each estimated

reduced form relationships between sexually transmitted disease (STD) or birth rates and either

alcohol taxes, minimum legal drinking ages, or zero tolerance drunk driving laws in U.S. state

panel data. Results generally show a negative impact of restrictive alcohol policies, but vary

somewhat across different studies as well as age and racial groups within studies. Moreover,

while inclusion of state fixed effects and time trends yields credibly exogenous variation, neither

drinking nor sexual behavior is observed.

       In contrast, analyses of individual-level behavioral data by Rees et al. (2001), Sen (2002),

Averett et al. (2004) and Grossman et al. (2005) have encountered difficulty in identifying

exogenous changes in alcohol use. Their instrumental variables (IV) estimates are often

unexpected, including larger effects for any than intense alcohol use and effects that are

unfeasibly large yet statistically insignificant. Rashad & Kaestner (2004) criticized the

instruments used in the initial two of these studies for being both weakly related to drinking and

separately correlated with sexual behavior, showing that an analogous strategy for cigarette use

produces nonsensical large impacts of smoking. The instrument sets employed in the latter



                                                 1
articles have similarly low first-stage F-statistics. Grossman et al. (2004) circumvented the need

for instruments by using bivariate probit models, but these rely on the strict assumption of joint

normality for identification and construction of the estimator. Using individual fixed effects in

longitudinal data, Grossman et al. (2005) estimated coefficients that are significant and

reasonably sized in one data set, but insignificant in another, while acknowledging that this

strategy does not eliminate time-varying endogeneity.

       DeSimone (2010) departs from the earlier literature by using cross-sectional data on

individual behavior, specifically among college students, but neither utilizing IV (as a primary

strategy) nor imposing functional form assumptions. Instead, my approach was to introduce

strict controls for previous sexual and drinking activity as proxies for previously-formed

preferences, while simultaneously holding constant other behaviors likely to be affected by the

same unobservable factors that influence decisions regarding sex and alcohol use. Results

showed that binge drinking, a standard measure of intoxication-producing alcohol use in the

literature defined as having at least five drinks over a short contiguous period, is unrelated to

recent participation in sex but strongly raises the likelihood of having two or more recent sex

partners. In both cases, the conclusions hold when the given type of sex is interacted with not

having used a condom during the last episode. Thus, the study finds that binge drinking

increases the riskiest form of sex, i.e. promiscuity without protection against STD transmission.

       Although the results seem sensible, with coefficients which are meaningful yet

considerably smaller than without the additional preference and heterogeneity controls, this

earlier study still has several limitations. The data set is small, precluding the analysis of

protective behavior separately from whether sex occurred at all or with multiple partners while

restricting viable identification strategies. Also, the policy relevance of the relationship between



                                                  2
drinking and sexual activity clearly extends beyond college students.

       This paper studies high school students, for whom the relationship in question is arguably

even more important: most individuals initiate both drinking and sex before finish high school,

and very few people fail to at least reach 9th grade whereas many never attend college. Reyna &

Farley (2006) note that U.S. adolescents experience three million new sexually transmitted

infections annually and two new HIV infections hourly, the latter among the highest rates for any

age group. They argue that delaying sexual activity decreases subsequent risky sexual behavior

by allowing the maturation of neurological structures that improve judgment and behavioral

inhibition. Although most of the earlier cited research likewise focused on teenagers, only

Grossman et al. (2005) similarly restricted attention to high school students.

       I use data from the national Youth Risk Behavior Surveys (YRBS) administered to U.S.

high school students during the 1990s and 2000s (www.cdc.gov/HealthyYouth/yrbs/). In the

analysis sample, 53% of students have previously had sex and 38% have done so in the past three

months. Among the latter, 28% had at least two sex partners during that time, while 44% did not

use a condom and 16% used no birth control during their last sexual encounter. Meanwhile, 78%

of respondents have consumed at least one alcoholic beverage in their lives and 49% have done

so in the past month. During that time 30% of YRBS participants binge drank, 13% on at least

three occasions, and 21% used alcohol or drugs before the most recent episode of intercourse.

       The YRBS data convey several advantages. They cover two decades while extending

through 2009. More importantly, even using strict inclusion criteria, the initial analysis sample

contains over 100,000 observations, providing statistical power to identify small effects and

pursue identification strategies not feasible in DeSimone (2010).

       In parallel to the earlier study, I begin by accounting for previously-formed preferences



                                                 3
regarding sexual activity and alcohol use, as well as consumption of cigarettes and marijuana,

while also holding constant several other covariates likely to reflect factors spuriously correlating

the behaviors of interest. As with college students, this severely reduces the estimated impacts

of binge drinking on sex outcomes, though all but protection use remain significant and sizable.

        The main contribution is moving beyond the above strategy by isolating more restricted

non-binge drinking control groups. Specifically, I eliminate non-drinkers, defined in several

different ways, from the comparison group. 1 Separately controlling for non-binge alcohol use

reveals a strong positive relationship with sexual activity that was not apparent for college

students. Under the strong assumption that a causal effect of drinking requires intoxication

which can occur only with binge drinking, this association with non-binge alcohol use suggests

additional time-varying heterogeneity not eliminated by the controls for lifetime engagement in

the behaviors of interest. Consequently, I estimate models that successively remove from the

sample students who have never drank, did not do recently, and did not frequently do so recently.

        Although binge drinking coefficients continue to shrink, they also maintain statistical

significance and remain large enough to be policy-relevant. This typically holds even when

samples are further restricted to students who have previously been or are currently sexually

active, or based on alternative criteria designed to limit the presence of respondents likely to be

unobservably different from binge drinkers. As expected, more frequent binge drinking is more

strongly linked to sexual activity.

        For these coefficients to reflect causal effects, binge drinkers cannot differ from non-

binge alcohol users in ways that influence sexual behavior. Like any identification assumption,

there is no way to conclusively prove that this is true. However, three important considerations


1
 This approach contradicts the argument in Sen (2002) that a causal impact can occur only for non-binge alcohol
use, because individuals who have consumed five or more drinks are too intoxicated to engage in sex.

                                                        4
point to this conjecture being reasonable. First, it need merely hold conditional on observed

determinants, meaning for those who have initiated sex and alcohol at about the same age, had a

similar number of previous sex partners and lifetime drinking occasions, analogously comparable

previous experience with cigarettes and marijuana, and engaged in an identical set of recent

behaviors strongly correlated with drinking and sexual activity. As such, if nothing else, the

analysis isolates a highly idiosyncratic form of unobserved heterogeneity. Second, because the

“previous” period encompasses the current timeframe under examination, lifetime sex partners

and occasions of alcohol (and marijuana) use might respond to current alcohol use while also

affecting current sexual behavior, so that holding constant these lifetime measures biases the

estimator away from finding an impact of drinking. Third, this strategy treats the entire

association between non-binge alcohol use and sexual activity as non-causal, even though many

individuals, particularly adolescents who in some cases have had little previous drinking

experience with which to build up tolerance, might require less than five drinks for alcohol to

affect their decision-making capacities. 2

        Under the interpretation that the evidence implies a direct impact of binge drinking on

promiscuous and unprotected sex, an implication is that public policy has a potential role in

reducing disease transmission and unintended pregnancies resulting from binge drinking.

Indeed, a final set of regressions finds that the impact of binge drinking on risky (though not

overall) sexual activity is significantly larger among a small minority of students who have not

learned about AIDS/HIV infection in school.




2
  For instance, the U.S. Department of Transportation reports that most drivers, including experienced drinkers, are
significantly impaired at a blood alcohol concentration of .08, which a 135-pound female could reach by consuming
three drinks in the span on one hour (www.nhtsa.gov/people/outreach/safesobr/13qp/facts/perselaws.html).

                                                         5
2. Data

        Data for this study come from all 10 existing waves of the YRBS (Brener et al., 2004),

administered between February and May in every odd-numbered year since 1991. The sampling

scheme is designed to yield a nationally representative group of 9th–12th grade students. Schools

were selected, with probability proportional to enrollment, from primary sampling units (PSUs,

comprising sub-areas of very large counties, single large counties or groups of small, adjacent

counties) which themselves were selected from strata that allowed for oversampling of schools

with large concentrations of black and Hispanic students. From each school, one or two classes

of a required subject were chosen randomly from every grade level.3

        Sample frequencies for the six binary sexual behavior outcomes and binge drinking are

reported in the regression tables, since these vary over the numerous different samples that are

analyzed. Students are asked with how many people they have had sexual intercourse during the

past three months, with choices ranging from zero to six or more. From these responses, I

construct indicators for having sex at all and with at least two partners during that time. Simply

having sex might convey little risk, if it involves a long-term partner and appropriate protection.

However, some sex is risky and, obviously, having sex is a requirement for sexual risk-taking.

Having multiple recent partners captures promiscuity, one measure of potentially risky sex.

Although this variable might partially pick up transitions from one regular partner to another, it

seems probable that at least some sexual activity among students with two or more partners in a

three month span occurs outside the context of stable relationships.

        Two additional questions ask whether respondents or their partners used a condom and to

select “what one method” was used to prevent pregnancy among several choices including “no

3
  All students in these classes were eligible to participate, with student response rates of 83–90% depending on the
year. Local parental permission procedures were followed, and students completed self-administered questionnaires
in their classrooms during a regular class period.

                                                         6
method.” From these responses, I create four additional indicators reflecting interactions

between one of the two sexual activity indicators and one of two indicators for not using birth

control, one for condoms and the other for any birth control, all of which serve as response

variables capturing unprotected sex.

       Because the birth control questions pertain to the last episode of intercourse, the timing

between these and sexual activity is mismatched. Since having sex is a prerequisite for being

labeled as not using birth control, the interaction responses underestimate the incidence of

unprotected sex: categorization errors occur only among the sexually active who used protection

the last time they had sex but failed to do so on a previous occasion during the last three months.

The direction of any resulting bias depends on the relationship between binge drinking and birth

control nonuse frequency. If binge drinkers regularly forego protection during sex but non-

bingers do so only sporadically, miscategorized respondents are mostly non-bingers, which

biases the estimated effect of binging on unprotected sex positively, i.e. towards finding an

impact in the expected direction. However, if a prevailing negative association between binge

drinking and not utilizing birth control implies that binge drinkers are more likely to be

mislabeled, a negative bias, i.e. away from finding the predicted effect, could result. In any case,

it is clear that one layer of mismeasurement exists for the four unprotected sex responses that

does not for two other sexual activity dependent variables.

       Binge drinking is defined as having “5 or more drinks of alcohol in a row, that is, within

a couple of hours.” Most specifications analyze an indicator of having done so on at least one

day in the past month, but I later estimate models that instead include indicators for past month

days categories that serve as the actual survey responses.

       This, unfortunately, presents another timing mismatch, this time between drinking and



                                                 7
sexual behavior. Any ensuing bias could again go in either direction: some past month binge

drinkers might have had sex 1–3 months ago but not more recently, while others who did not

drink in the past month might have had sex that was induced by binge drinking 1–3 months ago.

We do know, at least, that if these two types of misclassification offset, measurement error is

primarily random and any bias will be towards zero, and that minimal bias will occur if binge

drinking 1–3 months ago is similar to that in the past month.

       Table 1 lists the full set of control variables, all of which are also binary indicators, along

with their sample means. Exogenous factors are gender, age, grade, race/ethnicity, and PSU-by-

year combinations. Participating in the 10 surveys were 1,479 schools, ranging from 110–159

per year, from a total of 529 PSUs, varying by wave from 42–76. Thus, although not as precise

as school fixed effects, each PSU-by-year indicator represents an average of fewer than three

schools. Moreover, schools from the same PSU and year are also part of the same sampling

stratum, meaning they are homogeneous in terms of racial/ethnic concentration and MSA status.

       As a way of controlling for time-invariant preferences regarding the two behaviors under

scrutiny, included among the covariate set are indicators for age at which respondents first had

intercourse and first drank alcohol “other than a few sips.” Similarly incorporated are indicators

for the number of sex partners and categories representing the number of days on which students

had at least one drink of alcohol, both of which encompass the entire lifetime. To avoid

deterministic relationships with recent binge drinking and sexual activity, I make adjustments to

all of these variables. Ages of first intercourse and drink are recoded to current age for those

who have not engaged in the corresponding activity, as if the variables were specified in terms of

years since initiation. Regressions also exclude indicators for 0–2 lifetime sex partners, which

thereby becomes a reference group into which students reporting multiple recent partners could



                                                  8
still fall. Similarly, models omit several of the lowest lifetime drinking days categories so that

the reference group becomes having ever consumed alcohol on nine or fewer days.

         I also control for previous use of marijuana and cigarettes, again as measures of earlier-

formed preferences. Each could provide a pharmacological effect that either complements or

substitutes for that from consuming alcohol. Or, similar unmeasured characteristics might

predict the use of all three substances, along with that of sexual behavior. 4 Marijuana use might

also compromise judgment sufficiently to induce sex that would not otherwise take place. Age

of first use is included for both marijuana and cigarettes, with a separate category for never

having used each. Indicators for times previously used are also specified for marijuana. No such

information is recorded for cigarettes, so I alternatively incorporate indicators for having ever

tried smoking and smoked at least one cigarette every day for at least a month.

         To account for more broad and recent characteristics that are prospectively correlated

with drinking and sex but not directly observed, such as risk or time preferences, aggression and

impulsiveness, I make use of information on frequency of seatbelt use as a passenger, past year

physical fighting, and past month weapon carrying and riding with a driver who has been

drinking. 5 The latter could also mark socializing with alcohol-consuming peers. In addition,

learning about AIDS/HIV infection in school could directly affect both sexual and drinking

proclivities, particularly if such classes cover potentially unhealthy behaviors more generally.

         Finally, bodyweight and exercise-related behavior might be relevant if driven by the

same unmeasured factors that contribute to alcohol use and sexual activity. These could include

traits associated with unhappiness, such as low self-esteem, or that are productive, such as


4
 For instance, Farrell & Fuchs (1982) argued that cigarette smoking reflects higher rates of future discounting.
5
 As an example, Anderson & Mellor (2008) showed that risk aversion predicts both more seatbelt use and less
heavy drinking.


                                                          9
sociability. Variables integrated into the analysis include self-described weight relative to ideal,

what students are trying to do about their bodyweight, past week days of aerobic exercise and

past year sports teams. Particularly in the absence of information on actual bodyweight (and

height), each of these could also directly impact sexual activity through attractiveness.

       Of the 144,266 participants in the 10 surveys, 21,000 are missing information on recent

sexual or alcohol behavior or having learned about AIDS/HIV in school, which I later examine

as a policy exercise. I also drop 1,602 students who do not report values for at least one

exogenous factor, 160 who are age 12–13, 7,678 for whom previous sexual or drinking behavior

is unobserved, 5,927 without information on previous cigarette or marijuana use, 3,114 who are

missing values for an additional heterogeneity control and 1,783 with an unobserved bodyweight

or exercise measure. This yields an initial analysis sample of 103,002 respondents, though as

described below further restrictions are imposed in many specifications.



3. Results

       The empirical analysis consists of OLS models in which one of the six sexual behavior

indicators is regressed on binge drinking, usually the indicator for whether or not it occurred, and

other covariates. Standard errors adjusted for heteroskedasticity and PSU-by-year clustering.



Controlling for time-invariant sex & drinking preferences

       Table 2 shows results for the full sample of 103,002 observations, before any restrictions

are placed on control group inclusion. Each cell gives the binge drinking coefficient and t-

statistic from a different regression of the dependent variable listed in the row heading.

Successive columns represent specifications in which a new set of regressors is added. The aim



                                                 10
is to examine how holding constant previously established preferences for sex and drinking,

along with the other unobserved heterogeneity proxies described earlier, alter the estimates.

       Column 1 is a baseline model that conditions on only gender, age, grade, race/ethnicity

and PSU-by-year fixed effects. Relative to the dependent variable means listed in the row

headings, binge drinking is associated with increases in sexual activity of around 75% for any

sex and not using protection, and over 100% for the other three outcomes. These effects, and the

corresponding t-statistics, are much too large to possibly reflect causation from drinking to sex.

       To begin purging endogeneity, column 2 controls for the two measures of previous sexual

activity. Simply eliminating differences in sexual behavior linked to initiation age and number

of previous sex partners reduces the estimates by 56–67%. Moving to column 3, doing the same

for drinking initiation age and lifetime drinking days categories lowers effect sizes by

comparable proportions for the two protection outcomes, but less so for having sex and hardly at

all for the three promiscuity-related outcomes.

       The logic behind the column 2 and 3 specifications is that components of the binge

drinking coefficients that are attributable to previous sex- and alcohol-related behavior cannot

reflect impacts of current drinking. Already, at least five-eighths of the baseline effects, and up

to about five-sixths of those on condom and birth control use, have been eliminated. On the flip

side, any sexual and drinking activity that took place during the recent periods encompassed by

the dependent and binge drinking variables also, by definition, constitutes overall lifetime

experience, implying that controlling for total sex partners and drinking days negatively biases

the estimates. This problem is mitigated somewhat by broadening the lower-bound omitted

ranges, but could still be relevant given the narrow intervals other than the top-codes and next-

highest drinking days category.



                                                  11
Controlling for marijuana & cigarette use, and other heterogeneity proxies

       The distinguishing characteristics of the controls added to the regressions in columns 4–7

of table 2 are that they are not manifestations of either binge drinking or sexual activity, and

except for possibly marijuana use they are unlikely to occupy the causal pathway from one to the

other. Some regressors might directly influence both variables, but cannot stem directly from

binge drinking. Many others likely reflect spurious correlates such as time or risk preference.

       For all six outcomes, the net impact of adding all the additional heterogeneity proxies,

moving from column 3 to 7, is substantially smaller than that of simply conditioning on previous

sexual activity in column 2, and is comparable to that of controlling for previous drinking in

column 3 in all but one case (having multiple partners, for which the estimates in columns 2 and

3 are essentially the same). Coefficient changes result almost exclusively from adding previous

marijuana use and the “other heterogeneity proxies” to the explanatory variable set, with

previous cigarette use and the bodyweight/exercise measures making little difference.

       Column 7 represents the full sample model that controls for all observables. Binge

drinking no longer impacts the overall use of condoms or birth control. However, coefficients in

the other four equations remain highly significant, though appreciably smaller than in column 1.

Binge drinking is accompanied by increases of 12% in having sex and 40–50% in promiscuity-

related outcomes.



Restricted comparison groups: sex participation

       Although it is encouraging that most of the binge drinking coefficient changes in table 2

occur when accounting for previous sexual and drinking activity, it is still the case that the

preferences reflected by such behavior might change over time, and that the other additional



                                                 12
controls are not explicitly related with drinking or sex. I address both of these issues by next

restricting the comparison groups to those who have consumed alcohol but are not past month

binge drinkers. The identification assumption thereby becomes that binge drinkers are not

unobservably different, in terms of omitted sexual behavior determinants, from non-binge

alcohol users when previous sexual activity and alcohol use are held constant along with the

other heterogeneity proxies. This strategy attributes all alcohol-related causation to binge

drinking, which implicitly presumes that any relationship with non-binge alcohol use entirely

reflects unobserved differences between drinkers and nondrinkers in the propensity to have sex.

Although some individuals might require fewer than five drinks in a short time span for

decisions about engaging in sex to be affected, I choose to impose this restriction and thus err on

the side of biasing the estimator away from finding a drinking effect.

       Table 3 shows results for participation in sex, with each column alluding to a separate

regression. It is useful to begin with this most general measure of sexual activity because even

protected sex with a regular partner can carry a small risk of pregnancy if not STD transmission,

having sex at all is the most basic behavioral margin without which risky sex cannot occur, and

whether the respondent has had sex is apt to be the best-measured response variable.

       Columns 1–4 illustrate the four ways in which I make the aforementioned comparison

group restrictions. In column 1, I simply insert an indicator for any past month alcohol use as an

additional regressor. The estimates imply that drinking in less than binge quantities is associated

with a 4.4 percentage point increase in the likelihood of having sex, while binge drinking further

raises this likelihood by another 2.5 percentage points. This reflects a nearly 50% reduction in

the binge drinking coefficient compared to column 7 of table 2. However, binge drinking still

increases the probability of sex by a highly significant 6.5%. Also of note is the R-squared of



                                                 13
nearly 0.42 which, though implying that well over half of the variation in whether students are

sexually active remains unexplained, is quite high for a regression in a micro data set of this size.

       Going a step further, column 2 removes from the sample the 22% of students who have

never tried alcohol, raising the binge drinking rate from 30% (as reported in introduction) to

38%. Non-binge alcohol use is not as strongly, though still significantly, correlated with sex

when compared to non-drinking just among students who have ever consumed alcohol. More

relevantly, the significance and proportionate impact of binge drinking rise slightly.

       In column 3, students who did not drink in the past month, comprising another three-

eighths of remaining observations, are excluded. This explicitly uses a control group of current

non-binge alcohol consumers to identify the effect of binge drinking, rendering binge drinkers

and the sexually active as majorities in the sample. Still, results are essentially unchanged, with

the binge drinking coefficient signifying a 6.2% increase in the incidence of sex.

       The most constrained specification is in column 4, where I eliminate the nearly half of

respondents still left who drank on only 1–2 days in the past month. This should make the

control group, which now consists of students who drank on at least three days but did not binge,

even more homogeneous with binge drinkers. A disadvantage is that only one-sixth of those still

in the sample did not binge drink, making it even less representative of the high school

population. Yet, other than a slight decrease in proportionate size, the coefficient is unchanged.

       Columns 5–8 re-estimate the models in columns 1–4, respectively, with the additional

inclusion requirement of having previously engaged in sex. Binge drinking effects are somewhat

smaller, especially standardized by the larger fraction of sample respondents who had sex in the

past three months. But this should be expected, as all exclusions relative to the corresponding

preceding specification (four columns to the left) are, by definition, students who are currently



                                                 14
sexually inactive. Coefficients maintain significance at 1% except in column 8, but even in this

most restrictive model, with a comparison group of non-virgins who drank on at least three past

month days, binge drinking raises the incidence of sex by 2% at the 5% significance level.

       In sum, the impact of binge drinking remains significant and nontrivial even when

compared to relatively frequent current drinkers and/or those with sexual experience. The

column 3 estimate, which is stringent in eliminating current non-drinkers but preserves both non-

binge alcohol users and the sexually inactive as a substantial minority of observations, implies

that binge drinking raises the likelihood of having sex by just over 6%.



Restricted comparison groups: promiscuity

       Table 4 displays estimates for having sex with at least two partners in the past 3 months.

Having sex with an additional partner clearly raises the risk of disease transmission, for a given

level of protective effort. The format and specifications mimic table 3, except that columns 5–8

now limit the sample to students who have had sex in the past three months. Thus, the column

1–4 estimates show the net effect on promiscuity, whereas columns 5–8 isolate the impact on

moving beyond having a single sex partner into the category of promiscuous sex.

       A couple differences emerge compared with table 3. Coefficients for any alcohol use,

though significant, are smaller than those for binge drinking, suggesting that selection plays less

of a role for promiscuous than overall sexual activity. In contrast, as a percentage, the impact of

binge drinking falls as comparison groups become more restricted in columns 1–4 and again in

columns 5–8. Still, effects remain highly significant with much larger semi-elasticities than

those for simply having sex. The net effect of binge drinking in column 3 is to make promiscuity

more likely by one-sixth. Even among the sexually active, binge drinking increases the



                                                15
probability of having sex with a second partner by one-in-seven. Thus, binge drinking raises the

incidence of promiscuity at least in part by inducing students who have already had one recent

sex partner to have an encounter with a different person.



Restricted comparison groups: protection

       Table 5 repeats the exercises of the previous two tables, this time for sex without

condoms or any birth control during the last episode within the past three months. Each column

of each panel presents a distinct regression, with identical specifications across panels in a given

column other than the different dependent variables.

       Panel A shows that binge drinking has little bearing on condom use. In columns 1–4,

neither type of alcohol use is significantly related to whether respondents had sex without a

condom. Coupled with the strong positive effects on the overall incidence of sex, this implies an

unexpected negative impact of drinking on condom use among the sexually active, which is

statistically significant in the column 5–6 specifications that include past month nondrinkers.

For binge drinking, this seems unlikely to reflect a direct impact, but the implied semi-elasticity

is small and becomes insignificant when binge drinkers are compared strictly with current non-

binge alcohol users in columns 7–8.

       In panel B, the negative alcohol use coefficients are noticeably larger, taking into account

the considerably smaller proportion of students who fail to use any birth control than simply do

not use a condom. However, the effects of binge drinking are positive and become significant, at

1% overall and 10% conditional on having sex, once current non-drinkers are removed from the

sample. Columns 3 and 7 imply, respectively, that binge drinking elevates birth control nonuse




                                                 16
by 10% on net and 6% among the sexually active. 6

        Combined with the results from tables 3–4, the negative coefficients on any alcohol use

in both panels of columns 5–6 (and associated change in binge drinking coefficients moving to

columns 7–8) suggest selection into sexual activity among alcohol users, apart from any causal

impact of binge drinking. If drinkers are more likely to have sexual relationships in part because

they are simply more socially interactive, they would presumably be aware of this (regardless of

whether drinking is motivated by a desire to engage in sex) and thus prepared to protect against

infection and pregnancy. This evidence provides further justification for purging current

nondrinkers from the control group.

        In examining protective behavior in conjunction with promiscuity rather than simply any

sexual activity, table 6 follows the same pattern as table 5, with columns 9–12 added to provide

estimates in samples further restricted to include only respondents who had sex with at least two

partners in the past three months. The positive association between alcohol use and having sex

observed in tables 3–4 seems to dominate the negative association with birth control non-use

viewed in table 5, as coefficients are significantly positive (but relatively small) in the condom

use regressions not restricted to those with multiple partners, and insignificant otherwise. In

panel A, columns 1–8, binge drinking increases the incidence of promiscuous sex without a

condom, by 18% overall (column 3) and 16% among the sexually active (column 7).

Presumably this occurs via strong effects on promiscuity, which inevitably involves some

absence of condom use, given that binge drinking does not influence condom use in table 5 or

among those with multiple partners in columns 9–12. The analogous birth control nonuse semi-

elasticities in panel B, 27% among all drinkers and 26% among those who had sex in the recent


6
 These results are likely to be conservative in the sense that students who chose withdrawal, “some other method”
(besides a condom, the pill and injection) and “not sure” are coded as having used birth control.

                                                        17
period, are even larger. And binge drinking reduces the use of protection even among those with

multiple partners, by 15% in column 11. Thus, binge drinking raises the incidence of the riskiest

type of sex that can be studied in these data, particularly with regard to the transmission of STDs.



Binge drinking frequency

         It would seem that a necessary (though not sufficient) condition for binge drinking to

causally influence sexual activity is that their association becomes stronger as binge drinking

frequency increases. As such, table 7 shows estimates for models in which binge drinking is

specified using separate indicators for five categories of days on which it took place during that

time. 7 In this and remaining tables, each column corresponds to a different sexual behavior, with

specifications matching those in column 3 of tables 3–6, i.e. the only sample inclusion criterion

is past month alcohol use. This highlights the net impact of binge drinking, incorporating but not

directly examining effects at the margin for those who are sexually active.

         Results are as expected. There are only four cases in which coefficients are not

monotonically non-decreasing in days, all in columns 2–4, and in each of these the difference in

adjacent coefficients is small and highly insignificant. Effects of binge drinking on only one day

are substantially smaller than the corresponding average effects in tables 3–6, yet are significant

for the four outcomes besides overall condom and birth control use. In contrast, binge drinking

on at least 10 days has impacts that are considerably larger than those of binge drinking on

average and are significant even for the two protective behavior responses. Implied semi-

elasticities for this highest binge drinking frequency category are 10–15% for any sex and

condom nonuse, 35–40% for birth control nonuse and multiple partners, and 80–100% for

7
  These categories are the ones reported in the survey, except that 10–19 and 20 or more days are combined because
relatively few students binge drink on 10 or more days. Regressions also control for identically constructed overall
alcohol use frequency indicators, with an omitted category of 1–2 days because these are not reported separately.

                                                         18
promiscuity without a condom and any protection, respectively.



Alternative comparison groups

       As a way of homogenizing the control group with binge drinkers while not systematically

ignoring non-drinkers, table 8 shows results using alternative comparison groups. All cells

represent the binge drinking coefficient from separate regressions using the sample described in

the row heading, with the dependent variable mean also listed. In each of the eight rows, the

inclusion criterion is engaging in a behavior that is highly correlated with binge drinking.

       Although sample sizes and rates of binge drinking and sexual activity vary in accordance

with the behaviors used to construct the samples, results are remarkably stable across the

different comparison groups. For the four outcomes with the strongest results in tables 3–6, i.e.

those other than use of condoms and any birth control, binge drinking is significant at 1% in all

cases except with regard to any sex among those who have smoked cigarettes daily for at least a

month, in which case it still significant at 5%. The smallest proportionate effects are 3% for any

sex and 15% for multiple partners, both in the sample of regular smokers, and 17% and 23% for

promiscuity without a condom or any protection, respectively, both in the sample of students

who rode with a drinking driver in the past month. Not coincidentally, binge drinking is most

prevalent in these two samples. Coefficients are significant for sex without birth control in five

of eight samples, with semi-elasticities as large as 17%, and remain insignificant for sex without

a condom, as with the original comparison groups, in all but one case. Thus, the earlier binge

drinking findings are not idiosyncratic to the particular way in which the control group is made

more comparable to the set of binge drinking students.




                                                19
Stratified samples

         Table 9 investigates whether the relationship of interest differs by gender, grade,

race/ethnicity, or time period. 8 Perhaps surprisingly, considering differences in rates of risky

behavior, birth control options and risky sex consequences, results are strikingly similar by

gender in panel A. Estimates are also comparable for white non-Hispanics and other

racial/ethnic groups in panel B., although are proportionately larger among the former with

regard to any sex and especially not using birth control.

         Two distinct patterns emerge across grade levels in panel C. For the three outcomes not

involving multiple partners (columns 1, 3 and 4), coefficients are monotonically decreasing with

advancing grade level. Binge drinking significantly increases sex participation in all grades, but

reduces use of any birth control only for 9th–10th graders and condoms just for 9th graders. This

trend is consistent with the conclusion in DeSimone (2010) that binge drinking does not impact

these outcomes for college students, including the negative (but insignificant) relationships with

condom use for both 12th graders and undergraduates. Meanwhile, coefficients are uniformly

significant in the promiscuity equations other than for condom use among 10th graders, but are

somewhat smaller for 10th than 9th graders before rising when moving to 11th and again to 12th

grade. Effects on promiscuous sex that are strong for 12th graders, and increasing starting in 10th

grade, are again consistent with large impacts on college students estimated in the earlier study.

         In panel D, binge drinking has a stronger effect on having sex, with at least one and

multiple partners, in the 2000s than 1990s. However, the opposite is true for remaining

outcomes except promiscuity without birth control, for which coefficients are about the same.


8
  Results by age are similar to those by grade. I show the latter disaggregation because this does not require
dropping any of the indicators for age of first experience, it seems logical that behavior would be shaped at least as
much by school cohort as chronological age, the grouping is more natural given associated sample sizes, and the
results are more directly comparable with those for college students in DeSimone (2010).

                                                          20
Impact of AIDS/HIV education

       A direct impact of binge drinking on unprotected and promiscuous sex increases any

existing justification for policy intervention to reduce adolescent binge drinking and risky sex,

the latter because it is more likely to occur without intention than if it was not increased by binge

drinking. One common approach is to raise awareness of the issue by providing information to

students as part of classes during school. As listed in table 1, my covariate set includes a

measure of whether students learned about AIDS/HIV infection in school, or are unsure whether

they did, versus not having done so. I use this to examine whether an educational program can

mitigate the deleterious sexual behavior consequences of binge drinking.

       Table 10 reports estimates for models in which interactions between binge drinking and

the two AIDS/HIV variables are added to the right-hand side. In the top row, binge drinking

effects are slightly smaller than before, as expected because the effects now reflect behavior of

the vast majority of students who have learned about AIDS/HIV in school. More importantly,

the interaction terms in the second and third rows are uniformly positive, and at least one is

significant in all regressions other than that for simply having sex, the least-risky outcome.

Column 2 reveals that binge drinking raises the incidence of promiscuous sex by 15% for

students who have learned about AIDS/HIV, but by 26% for students who have not. In column

3, binge drinking boosts the likelihood of sex without a condom by one-sixth among those

unsure about AIDS/HIV education, but negligibly otherwise. Analogously, the binge drinking

effects in columns 4–6 are 3–4 times greater for those who have not (and in column 5, are unsure

about having) received AIDS/HIV information. Moreover, the two interactions are jointly

significant in columns 2–6, even though both are individually significant in only one case. Thus,

AIDS/HIV education substantially reduces the adverse impact of binge drinking on risky sex.



                                                 21
        Definitive policy inferences cannot be drawn from these results. The amount and quality

of other relevant information simultaneously transmitted to students is unclear and likely varies

widely across schools, and as my grouping of the AIDS/HIV variable with “other heterogeneity

controls” implies, the receipt of such education is not necessarily exogenous. However, 7 in 8

students report such learning (and over one-third of others might simply not recall experiencing

it), and PSU-by-year indicators identify effects within small sets of schools of similar racial

composition and metropolitan area status. 9 Also, it is suggestive that AIDS/HIV education

mitigates the impact of binge drinking on all sexual behaviors except the incidence of sex, which

conveys minimal risk if accompanied by the appropriate protective behavior.



4. Conclusion

        This study has estimated positive impacts of binge drinking on sexual activities with

varying inherent risks, using comparison groups of non-binge alcohol users and holding constant

previous sexual and drinking experience as well as many other related behaviors. Assuming that

remaining unobserved differences between binge drinkers and non-binge alcohol users are

unrelated to sexual proclivities, these impacts reflect sex that would not occur in the absence of

binge drinking. If so, binge drinking elevates the incidence of risky sex by both prompting

students who would otherwise be sexually inactive to engage in sex, and the sexually active to

take on an additional partner and forego the use of birth control, with the latter occurring even

conditional on having more than one recent sex partner.

        Binge drinking raises the likelihood of having sex by 6%, at least two recent partners by

5%, sex without birth control by 10%, multiple recent partners without a condom by 18%, and


9
 Interestingly, the percentage responding affirmatively was nearly 82% even in 1991, and has remained between
88–90% in every survey starting with 1995.

                                                      22
multiple recent partners without any protection by 27%. Furthermore, binge drinking increases

the probability of current sex participation by 2% among those who have previously had sex,

promiscuity by 14% and failure to employ birth control by 6% among those who are currently

sexually active, and nonuse of birth control by 15% among those who have had at least two

recent sex partners. Greater binge frequencies have larger effects, with all sex outcomes

occurring significantly more often among students who binge drank on at least six days in the

past month. Results are similar using alternatively constructed control groups.

       A broad implication is that reduced risky sex is a prospective benefit of policies that are

able to diminish binge drinking among high school students. The analysis illustrated that one

potentially effective policy is school-based AIDS/HIV instruction, which appears to lower the

impact of binge drinking on risky sex outcomes. There appears limited scope for extending such

education to new recipients, since only a small fraction of students is not already exposed to it.

Increasing the amount provided in schools that already offer it, or targeting programs towards

alcohol offenders and abusers, is a possibility, but whether doing so would convey additional

benefits that are worth the opportunity costs is unclear.

       Most existing research on drinking and sex has focused on adolescents and young adults,

suggesting that investigation of the relationship for older adults might be a fruitful avenue for

future research. The divergence in results for high school and college students implies that the

relationship might also vary for, say, the population of working-age adults or married couples

with children at home. This is particularly true because the baseline situation (a stable long-term

partner) and intrinsic cost of risky sex (including family dissolution) is likely to differ for these

groups compared with those in their teens and early 20s.




                                                  23
References

Anderson, Lisa R. & Jennifer M. Mellor, “Predicting Health Behaviors with an Experimental
Measure of Risk Preference,” Journal of Health Economics, September 2008, 27(5), 1260–1274.

Averett, Susan L., Daniel I. Rees, Brian Duncan & Laura Argys, “Race, Ethnicity, and Gender
Differences in the Relationship between Substance Use and Adolescent Sexual Behavior,”
Topics in Economic Analysis & Policy, 2004, 4(1), Article 22.

Brener, Nancy D., Laura Kann, Steven A. Kinchen, Jo Anne Grunbaum, Laura Whalen, Danice
Eaton, Joseph Hawkins & James G. Ross, “Methodology of the Youth Risk Behavior
Surveillance System,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 24 September 2004, 53(RR-12),
1–13.

Carpenter, Christopher, “Youth Alcohol Use and Risky Sexual Behavior: Evidence from
Underage Drunk Driving Laws,” Journal of Health Economics, May 2005, 24(3), 613–628.

Chesson, Harrell, Paul Harrison & William J. Kassler, “Sex under the Influence: The Effect of
Alcohol Policy on Sexually Transmitted Disease Rates in the United States,” Journal of Law and
Economics, April 2000, 43(1), 215–238.

Dee, Thomas S., “The Effects of Minimum Legal Drinking Ages on Teen Childbearing,” Journal
of Human Resources, Fall 2001, 36(4), 823–838.

DeSimone, Jeff, “Binge Drinking and Risky Sex among College Students,” NBER WP 15953,
April 2000.

Farrell, Phillip & Victor R. Fuchs, “Schooling and Health: The Cigarette Connection,” Journal of
Health Economics, December 1982, 1(3), 217–230.

Grossman, Michael, Robert Kaestner & Sara Markowitz, “Get High and Get Stupid: The Effect
of Alcohol and Marijuana Use on Teen Sexual Behavior,” Review of Economics of the
Household, December 2004, 2(4), 413–441.

Grossman, Michael & Sara Markowitz, “I did What Last Night?! Adolescent Risky Sexual
Behaviors and Substance Use,” Eastern Economic Journal, Summer 2005, 31(3), 383–405.

Rashad, Inas & Robert Kaestner, “Teenage Sex, Drugs and Alcohol Use: Problems Identifying
the Cause of Risky Behaviors,” Journal of Health Economics, May 2004, 23(3), 493–503.

Rees, Daniel I., Laura M. Argys & Susan L. Averett, “New Evidence on the Relationship
between Substance Use and Adolescent Sexual Behavior,” Journal of Health Economics,
September 2001, 20(5), 835–845.




                                              24
Reyna, Valerie F. & Frank Farley, “Risk and Rationality in Adolescent Decision Making:
Implications for Theory, Practice and Public Policy,” Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, September 2006, 7(1), 1–44.

Sen, Bisakha, “Does Alcohol Use Increase the Risk of Sexual Intercourse among Adolescents?
Evidence from the NLSY97,” Journal of Health Economics, November 2002, 21(6), 1085–1093.

Sen, Bisakha, “Can Beer Taxes Affect Teen Pregnancy? Evidence Based on Teen
Abortion Rates and Birth Rates,” Southern Economic Journal, October 2003, 70(2): 328–343.




                                               25
                                                  Table 1: Control variable definitions and means
Exogenous factors
Female (.525)
Age: 14 (.090), 15 (.218), 16 (.257), 17 (.268), ≥ 18 (.168)
Grade: 9th (.230), 10th (.245), 11th (.256), 12th (.269)
Race/ethnicity: white (.457), black (.205), Hispanic (.260), all others (.078)
Previous sexual activity
Age first had sex: ≤ 11 (.044), 12 (.041), 13 (.071), 14 (.173), 15 (.255), 16 (.218), ≥ 17 (.199)
Lifetime sex partners: 0–2 (.748), 3 (.071), 4 (.045), 5 (.031), ≥ 6 (.105)
Previous alcohol use
Age first drank: ≤ 8 (.089), 9–10 (.065), 11–12 (.125), 13–14 (.291), 15–16 (.320), ≥ 17 (.111)
Lifetime days drank: 0–9 (.538), 10–19 (.119), 20–39 (.117), 40–99 (.104), ≥ 100 (.122)
Previous marijuana use
Age first used: never (.588), ≤ 8 (.012), 9–10 (.017), 11–12 (.056), 13–14 (.156), 15–16 (.142), ≥ 17 (.029)
Lifetime times used: 0 (.588), 1–2 (.097), 3–9 (.086), 10–19 (.049), 20–39 (.048), 40–99 (.044), ≥ 100 (.088)
Previous cigarette use
Age first smoked whole cigarette: never (.496), ≤ 8 (.035), 9–10 (.050), 11–12 (.108), 13–14 (.168), 15–16 (.115), ≥ 17 (.028)
Ever tried (.633)
Ever smoked daily for at least month (.168)
Other heterogeneity proxies
Learned about AIDS/HIV in school: yes (.876), no (.078), not sure (.045)
Rode with drinking driver past month (.351)
Seatbelt use as passenger: never (.050), rarely (.114), sometimes (.172), most of time (.287), always (.378)
Carried weapon past month (.186)
Physical fights past year: 0 (.661), 1 (.185), ≥ 2 (.155)
Bodyweight/exercise measures
Describe weight as: very under (.019), slightly under (.136), about right (.538), slightly over (.266), very over (.041)
Trying to do about weight: lose (.438), gain (.189), maintain (.187), nothing (.186)
Days aerobic exercise past week: 0 (.182), 1 (.092), 2 (.106), 3 (.121), 4 (.091), 5 (.138), 6 (.070), 7 (.201)
Sports teams played on past year: 0 (.457), 1 (.229), 2 (.155), ≥ 3 (.159)
All variables are binary indicators. Parentheses contain sample frequencies. Age first had sex and drank are recoded to current age for those who have never
engaged in the activity. Regressions exclude one indicator for each categorical variable (and never used marijuana, which is redundant with zero lifetime uses),
and include a constant and indicators for all PSU-by-year combinations except one.

                                                                               26
 Table 2: Effects of binge drinking on sexual behavior with expanding control variable sets
Dependent variable                          (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
Any sex past 3 months                      .280       .120       .080       .062       .058       .047       .046
µ = .384                                  (72.6)     (36.3)     (20.9)     (15.8)     (14.7)     (12.0)     (11.6)

2+ partners past 3 months                  .155       .054       .053       .050       .051       .043       .042
µ = .107                                  (49.0)     (25.1)     (20.4)     (19.3)     (19.3)     (16.4)     (16.0)

No condom last time                        .129       .050       .022       .009       .007      –.001       .002
µ = .168                                  (41.4)     (17.0)     (6.22)     (2.51)     (1.91)     (0.17)     (0.52)

No birth control last time                 .045       .015       .007       .002       .001      –.003      –.001
µ = .061                                  (23.1)     (7.82)     (3.03)     (0.89)     (0.41)     (1.28)     (0.60)

2+ partners & no condom                    .074       .031       .027       .025       .025       .020       .021
µ = .045                                  (36.4)     (18.7)     (14.6)     (13.5)     (13.3)     (10.6)     (10.7)

2+ partners & no birth control             .032       .014       .012       .011       .011       .009       .009
µ = .018                                  (24.6)     (13.0)     (10.9)     (9.69)     (9.63)     (7.59)     (7.84)

Controls for:
Exogenous factors                            X          X          X          X          X          X          X
Previous sexual activity                                X          X          X          X          X          X
Previous alcohol use                                               X          X          X          X          X
Previous marijuana use                                                        X          X          X          X
Previous cigarette use                                                                   X          X          X
Other heterogeneity proxies                                                                         X          X
Bodyweight/exercise measures                                                                                   X
The sample contains 103,002 respondents, among whom binge drinking frequency was .298. Each cell reports the
coefficient of the past month binge drinking indicator in the OLS regression of the sexual behavior outcome in the
row heading, which occurs with frequency µ, with absolute t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and PSU-by-
year clustering in parentheses. Variables included in each category, as listed in table 1, are: exogenous factors
(gender, age, grade, race, PSU-by-year indicators), previous sexual activity (age at first intercourse, lifetime
partners), previous alcohol use (age at first drink, lifetime days drank), previous marijuana use (age at first use,
lifetime times used), previous cigarette use (ever tried, ever smoked regularly, age at first whole cigarette), other
heterogeneity proxies (ever taught about AIDS/HIV in school, rode with drunk driver past month, seatbelt use,
carried weapon past month, physical fights past year), and bodyweight/exercise measures (self-described weight
category, trying to lose or gain or maintain weight, aerobic exercise days past week, sports teams past year).




                                                          27
                        Table 3: Effects of binge drinking on sex participation using various comparison groups
Drinking variable                                  (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)
Binge drank past month                            .025          .031           .032          .032           .016          .017           .019          .016
                                                 (5.77)        (7.01)         (6.80)        (4.50)         (2.80)        (3.01)         (3.19)        (1.96)

Any alcohol use past month                        .044          .027                                        .035          .034
                                                 (11.6)        (7.02)                                      (6.25)        (5.94)

Proportion had sex                                .384          .450           .518          .596           .729          .738           .763          .785

Proportion binge drank                            .298          .381           .603          .822           .420          .464           .658          .845

R-squared                                         .417          .380           .367          .355           .147          .147           .147          .161

Sample size                                     103,002        80,539        50,942         27,540        54,252         49,081        34,603         20,888
Sample restrictions:
Drank in lifetime                                                 X                                                         X
Drank in past month                                                             X                                                         X
Drank 3+ days in past month                                                                    X                                                         X
Had sex in lifetime                                                                                          X              X             X              X
Each column reports results from an OLS regression of having sex in the past three months on the drinking indicators in the row headings, the full set of
explanatory variables listed in table 1, and PSU-by-year indicators. Parentheses contain absolute t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and PSU-by-year
clustering.




                                                                                28
                                               Table 4: Effects of binge drinking on promiscuous sex
Drinking variable                                   (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
Binge drank past month                             .034          .034           .028           .028          .051           .051           .046           .041
                                                  (11.9)        (11.8)         (9.33)         (5.30)        (9.16)         (9.08)         (7.74)         (4.29)

Any alcohol use past month                         .017          .018                                        .033           .036
                                                  (8.00)        (8.02)                                      (6.48)         (6.79)

Proportion 2+ partners                             .107          .128           .169           .229           .279          .285           .326           .385

Proportion binge drank                             .298          .381           .603           .822           .448          .489           .670           .851

R-squared                                          .420          .410           .426           .446           .374          .370           .375           .392

Sample size                                     103,002         80,539         50,942        27,540         39,558         36,235        26,403         16,403
Sample restrictions:
Drank in lifetime                                                  X                                                          X
Drank in past month                                                               X                                                          X
Drank 3+ days in past month                                                                     X                                                          X
Had sex in past 3 months                                                                                       X              X             X              X
Each column reports results from an OLS regression of having sex with 2+ partners in the past three months on the drinking indicators in the row headings, the
full set of explanatory variables listed in table 1, and PSU-by-year indicators. Parentheses contain absolute t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and PSU-
by-year clustering.




                                                                                 29
                                  Table 5: Effects of binge drinking on sex without condoms or birth control
Drinking variable                                   (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)                   (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
                                                                  A. Did not use condom
Binge drank past month                             .001          .002        .005      .010                  –.015         –.014          –.009          –.000
                                                  (0.25)        (0.59)     (1.10)     (1.42)                 (1.98)        (1.91)         (1.24)         (0.04)
Any alcohol use past month                         .002         –.005                                        –.025         –.029
                                                  (0.58)        (1.47)                                       (3.71)        (4.04)
Proportion did not use condom                      .168          .201        .231      .270                   .438          .447           .445           .454

R-squared                                          .199          .186           .176           .172           .102          .102           .104           .115

                                                                B. Did not use birth control
Binge drank past month                             .002          .003        .008        .014                 .002          .003           .010           .018
                                                  (0.73)        (1.26)      (2.93)      (2.70)               (0.41)        (0.54)         (1.85)         (1.93)
Any alcohol use past month                        –.007         –.012                                        –.033         –.037
                                                  (3.21)        (5.03)                                       (6.23)        (6.64)
Proportion did not use birth control               .061          .072        .080        .096                 .160          .161           .156           .161

R-squared                                          .082          .080           .080           .090           .070          .073           .076           .092

Proportion binge drank                           .298            .381           .603          .822           .448           .489          .670           .851
Sample size                                     103,002         80,539         50,942        27,540         39,558         36,235        26,403         16,403
Sample restrictions:
Drank in lifetime                                                  X                                                          X
Drank in past month                                                               X                                                          X
Drank 3+ days in past month                                                                     X                                                          X
Had sex in past 3 months                                                                                       X              X              X             X
Each column in each panel reports results from an OLS regression of not using a condom (panel A) or any birth control (panel B) during the last episode of sex
on the drinking indicators in the row headings, the full set of explanatory variables listed in table 1, and PSU-by-year indicators. Parentheses contain absolute t-
statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and PSU-by-year clustering.




                                                                                 30
                         Table 6: Effects of binge drinking on promiscuous sex without condoms or birth control
Drinking variable                 (1)         (2)        (3)     (4)      (5)     (6)    (7)                    (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)
                                                             A. 2+ partners & no condom
Binge drank                      .018        .017       .013    .017     .028    .028   .023                   .030       .015        .014       .017       .034
                                (8.64)      (8.15)     (5.78) (4.26) (6.61) (6.44) (5.15)                     (3.86)     (1.07)      (0.98)     (1.12)     (1.61)
Any alcohol use                  .005        .006                        .015    .015                                     .004       –.001
                                (3.38)      (3.47)                      (3.98) (3.92)                                    (0.25)      (0.09)
Proportion 2+ partners           .045        .055       .074    .103     .116    .122   .143                   .173       .416        .427       .437       .451
& no condom
R-squared                        .179        .179       .192       .212       .154       .157       .166       .186       .142        .141       .149       .166

                                                            B. 2+ partners & no birth control
Binge drank                      .009        .009       .008     .012     .015     .015     .015               .020       .023        .023       .027       .038
                                (6.75)      (6.64)     (5.50) (4.16) (5.51) (5.52) (5.01)                     (3.83)     (2.30)      (2.25)     (2.56)     (2.38)
Any alcohol use                  .001        .000                         .002     .002                                  –.013       –.016
                                (0.86)      (0.44)                       (0.92) (0.73)                                   (1.07)      (1.23)
Proportion 2+ partners           .018        .022       .030     .042     .048     .049     .058               .071       .170        .173       .177       .185
& no birth control
R-squared                        .089        .091       .102       .121       .088       .092       .103       .125       .104        .109       .123       .149

Proportion binge drank  .298    .381   .603   .822   .448   .489   .670   .851   .579   .619                                                    .742       .872
Sample size            103,002 80,539 50,942 27,540 39,558 36,235 26,403 16,403 11,046 10,332                                                   8,616      6,308
Sample restrictions:
Drank in lifetime                 X                           X                           X
Drank in past month                      X                           X                                                                            X
Drank 3+ days                                   X                           X                                                                                X
Sex past 3 months                                      X      X      X      X
2+ partners 3 months                                                              X      X                                                        X          X
Each column in each panel reports results from an OLS regression of having 2+ partners in the past three months interacted with not using a condom (panel A) or
any birth control (panel B) during the last episode of sex on the past month drinking indicators in the row heading, the full set of explanatory variables listed in
table 1, and PSU-by-year indicators. Parentheses contain absolute t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and PSU-by-year clustering.



                                                                                31
                   Table 7: Effects of binge drinking frequency on sexual activity
Days binge drank past month                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
1 day                                       .017         .009        –.001         .004         .004         .004
µ = .197                                   (3.21)       (2.65)       (0.29)       (1.23)       (1.78)       (2.66)

2 days                                      .031         .019         .010         .008         .007         .004
µ = .137                                   (4.49)       (4.10)       (1.47)       (1.68)       (1.91)       (1.90)

3–5 days                                    .035         .024         .008         .006         .012         .006
µ = .136                                   (4.84)       (4.36)       (1.08)       (1.10)       (3.00)       (2.03)

6–9 days                                    .045         .020         .042         .014         .021         .009
µ = .076                                   (4.83)       (2.47)       (4.15)       (1.95)       (3.11)       (1.91)

10+ days                                    .054         .065         .035         .029         .059         .030
µ = .057                                   (5.02)       (6.72)       (2.75)       (3.14)       (6.83)       (4.48)

Dependent variable mean                     .518         .169         .231         .080         .074         .030

R-squared                                   .368         .430         .177         .081         .195         .105

Dependent variable:
Had sex past 3 months                         X
2+ partners past 3 months                                  X
No condom last time                                                     X
No birth control last time                                                          X
2+ partners & no condom                                                                          X
2+ partners & no birth control                                                                                X
The sample contains 50,942 respondents who drank on at least one day in the past month. Each column reports
results from an OLS regression of the dependent variable specified in the last six rows on the binge drinking days
indicators in the row headings, which occur with frequency µ, and the full set of explanatory variables listed in table
1 along with indicators for PSU-by-year and whether respondents drank any alcohol on 1–2 days (µ = .459), 3–5
days (µ = .239), or 6–9 days (µ = .153) in the past month, with an excluded category of 10 or more days (µ = .149).
Parentheses contain absolute t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and PSU-by-year clustering.




                                                          32
  Table 8: Effects of binge drinking on sexual activity with alternative comparison groups
       Sample                            Binge       (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)
                                         mean
A.     Drank on 10+ days in life         .564       .036       .037       .005      .008       .018       .010
       (n = 47,555)                                (6.92)     (10.9)     (0.93)    (2.44)     (6.94)     (5.98)
                                                   µ=.53      µ=.17      µ=.24     µ=.08      µ=.07      µ=.03

B.     Used marijuana in life             .539      .027       .036      –.001      .007       .018       .011
       (n = 41,276)                                (4.56)     (8.55)     (0.11)    (1.70)     (5.87)     (5.52)
                                                   µ=.59      µ=.20      µ=.28     µ=.10      µ=.09      µ=.04

C.     Tried cigarettes in life           .448      .032       .033       .004      .006       .017       .010
       (n = 60,447)                                (6.48)     (10.3)     (0.82)    (1.83)     (6.94)     (6.41)
                                                   µ=.50      µ=.15      µ=.23     µ=.08      µ=.07      µ=.03

D.     Smoked regularly in life           .644      .021       .033       .004      .019       .020       .016
       (n = 16,965)                                (2.27)     (4.55)     (0.38)    (3.01)     (3.74)     (4.78)
                                                   µ=.62      µ=.22      µ=.32     µ=.11      µ=.11      µ=.04

E.     Rode with drinking driver          .589      .032       .036      –.003      .006       .015       .009
       (n = 33,818)                                (4.86)     (7.75)     (0.51)    (1.42)     (4.34)     (4.16)
                                                   µ=.54      µ=.19      µ=.25     µ=.09      µ=.09      µ=.04

F.     Use seatbelt sometimes or          .467      .023       .035       .003      .004       .023       .011
       less (n = 29,301)                           (3.27)     (6.10)     (0.44)    (0.74)     (5.10)     (4.01)
                                                   µ=.55      µ=.19      µ=.26     µ=.10      µ=.09      µ=.04

G.     Had physical fight                 .471      .042       .037       .010      .006       .019       .012
       (n = 30,133)                                (6.06)     (7.29)     (1.55)    (1.23)     (5.22)     (4.81)
                                                   µ=.53      µ=.19      µ=.23     µ=.09      µ=.08      µ=.03

H.     Carried weapon                     .546      .046       .044       .016      .014       .025       .016
       (n = 17,473)                                (4.95)     (6.20)     (1.85)    (2.56)     (4.24)     (4.34)
                                                   µ=.57      µ=.25      µ=.24     µ=.10      µ=.11      µ=.05
       Dependent variable:
       Had sex                                        X
       2+ partners                                               X
       No condom                                                           X
       No birth control                                                               X
       2+ & no condom                                                                           X
       2+ & no birth control                                                                               X
Samples are restricted to respondents who have previously consumed alcohol in their lifetimes and as described in
the row heading. Each cell reports results, including the dependent variable frequency µ, from an OLS regression of
the dependent variable specified in the last six rows on indicators for past month binge drinking and use of any
alcohol, the full set of explanatory variables listed in table 1, and PSU-by-year indicators. Parentheses contain
absolute t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and PSU-by-year clustering.

                                                        33
            Table 9: Effects of binge drinking on sexual activity in stratified samples
       Sample                             Binge        (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                                          mean
A.     Females                            .544        .030       .025       .007       .009       .013       .007
       (n = 25,823)                                  (4.94)     (6.51)     (1.27)     (2.24)     (4.37)     (3.63)
                                                     µ= .51     µ=.12      µ=.26      µ=.09      µ=.06      µ=.02
       Males                               .663       .034       .029       .007       .009       .014       .009
       (n = 25,119)                                  (5.33)     (6.59)     (1.15)     (2.37)     (3.87)     (4.01)
                                                     µ=.53      µ=.22      µ=.20      µ=.07      µ=.09      µ=.04
B.     White non-Hispanics                 .673       .037       .024       .005       .008       .009       .005
       (n = 24,948)                                  (5.57)     (6.93)     (0.95)     (2.72)     (3.24)     (3.67)
                                                     µ=.48      µ=.13      µ=.21      µ=.05      µ=.06      µ=.02
       All others                          .536       .026       .031       .004       .008       .016       .009
       (n = 25,994)                                  (4.22)     (6.41)     (0.64)     (1.81)     (4.42)     (3.71)
                                                     µ=.56      µ=.21      µ=.25      µ=.11      µ=.09      µ=.04
C.     9th graders                         .532       .040       .027       .016       .012       .016       .009
       (n = 9,951)                                   (4.25)     (4.49)     (1.95)     (2.12)     (3.47)     (2.31)
                                                     µ=.38      µ=.14      µ=.15      µ=.07      µ=.06      µ=.03
       10th graders                        .583       .031       .020       .008       .010       .007       .004
       (n = 11,908)                                  (3.58)     (3.44)     (0.91)     (1.98)     (1.56)     (1.66)
                                                     µ=.47      µ=.16      µ=.19      µ=.07      µ=.06      µ=.03
       11th graders                        .629       .019       .028       .006       .008       .013       .006
       (n = 13,507)                                  (2.15)     (4.53)     (0.78)     (1.54)     (2.63)     (2.02)
                                                     µ=.55      µ=.17      µ=.24      µ=.08      µ=.08      µ=.03
       12th graders                        .640       .018       .033      –.008       .002       .017       .010
       (n = 15,576)                                  (2.19)     (5.88)     (0.94)     (0.29)     (3.53)     (3.47)
                                                     µ=.62      µ=.19      µ=.30      µ=.09      µ=.09      µ=.03
D.     1991–1999                           .596       .025       .022       .008       .011       .016       .008
       (n = 27,261)                                  (3.72)     (5.02)     (1.29)     (2.80)     (4.63)     (4.15)
                                                     µ=.51      µ=.17      µ=.25      µ=.09      µ=.08      µ=.03
       2001–2009                           .611       .039       .034       .001       .004       .010       .007
       (n = 23,681)                                  (5.99)     (8.85)     (0.22)     (1.16)     (3.61)     (3.76)
                                                     µ=.52      µ=.16      µ=.21      µ=.07      µ=.07      µ=.03
       Dependent variable:
       Had sex                                          X
       2+ partners                                                 X
       No condom                                                              X
       No birth control                                                                  X
       2+ & no condom                                                                               X
       2+ & no birth control                                                                                   X
Samples are restricted to respondents who drank on at least one day in the past month and as described in the row
heading. Each cell reports results, including the dependent variable frequency µ, from an OLS regression of the
dependent variable specified in the last six rows on the past month binge drinking indicator, the full set of
explanatory variables listed in table 1, and PSU-by-year indicators. Parentheses contain absolute t-statistics adjusted
for heteroskedasticity and PSU-by-year clustering.


                                                          34
  Table 10: Impact of AIDS/HIV education on relationship between binge drinking & sex
Explanatory variable                         (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
Binge drank past month                      .030         .025        .003         .006         .009         .006
µ = .603                                   (6.29)       (8.20)      (0.58)       (2.07)       (3.99)       (4.22)

Binged × no AIDS/HIV classes                .008         .019        .007         .025         .031         .017
µ = .051                                   (0.54)       (1.89)      (0.49)       (2.63)       (3.60)       (2.71)

Binged × unsure if had                      .017         .017        .039         .005         .029         .001
AIDS/HIV classes [µ = .027]                (0.99)       (1.41)      (2.31)       (0.42)       (2.77)       (0.22)

No AIDS/HIV classes                         .019        –.001        .028         .003         .001         .002
µ = .079                                   (1.65)       (0.12)      (2.51)       (0.48)       (0.16)       (0.52)

Unsure if AIDS/HIV classes                 –.024        –.003       –.015        –.007        –.007        –.002
µ = .043                                   (1.72)       (0.31)      (1.18)       (0.76)       (1.13)       (0.40)

F-statistic for joint significance          0.61         2.70        2.83         3.55         9.39         3.67
of 2 interaction terms                     [.546]       [.069]      [.060]       [.029]       [.000]       [.026]

Dependent variable mean                     .518         .169        .231         .080         .074         .030

Dependent variable:
Had sex past 3 months                        X
2+ partners past 3 months                                 X
No condom last time                                                    X
No birth control last time                                                          X
2+ partners & no condom                                                                          X
2+ partners & no birth control                                                                               X
The sample contains 50,942 respondents who drank on at least one day in the past month. Each column reports
results from an OLS regression of the dependent variable specified in the last six rows on the indicators in the row
headings, which occur with frequency µ, and the full set of explanatory variables listed in table 1 along with
indicators for PSU-by-year. Parentheses contain absolute t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and PSU-by-
year clustering, while brackets contain F-statistic p-values.




                                                         35
