                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HAS ICT POLARIZED SKILL DEMAND? EVIDENCE FROM ELEVEN COUNTRIES
                             OVER 25 YEARS

                                             Guy Michaels
                                            Ashwini Natraj
                                           John Van Reenen

                                         Working Paper 16138
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16138


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2010




We thank David Autor, Tim Brenahan, David Dorn, Liran Einav, Maarten Goos, Larry Katz, Paul
Krugman, Alan Manning, Denis Nekipelov, Stephen Redding, Anna Salomons, and seminar participants
at various universities for extremely helpful comments. David Autor kindly provided the data on routine
tasks. Finance was provided by the ESRC through the Centre for Economic Performance. This paper
is part of the SCIFI-GLOW Collaborative Project supported by the European Commission's Seventh
Research Framework Programme, Contract number SSH7-CT-2008-217436. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Guy Michaels, Ashwini Natraj, and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Has ICT Polarized Skill Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries over 25 years
Guy Michaels, Ashwini Natraj, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 16138
June 2010
JEL No. J23,J24,O33

                                             ABSTRACT

OECD labor markets have become more "polarized" with employment in the middle of the skill distribution
falling relative to the top and (in recent years) also the bottom of the skill distribution. We test the
hypothesis of Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) that this is partly due to information and communication
technologies (ICT) complementing the analytical tasks primarily performed by highly educated workers
and substituting for routine tasks generally performed by middle educated workers (with little effect
on low educated workers performing manual non-routine tasks). Using industry level data on the US,
Japan, and nine European countries 1980-2004 we find evidence consistent with ICT-based polarization.
Industries with faster growth of ICT had greater increases in relative demand for high educated workers
and bigger falls in relative demand for middle educated workers. Trade openness is also associated
with polarization, but this is not robust to controls for technology (like R&D). Technologies can account
for up to a quarter of the growth in demand for the college educated in the quarter century since 1980.


Guy Michaels                                        John Van Reenen
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
London School of Economics                          London School of Economics
Houghton Street                                     Centre for Economic Performance
London WC2A 2AE                                     Houghton Street
United Kingdom                                      London WC2A 2AE
g.michaels@lse.ac.uk                                UNITED KINGDOM
                                                    and NBER
Ashwini Natraj                                      j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk
Houghton Street
London
WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
a.natraj@lse.ac.uk
1. Introduction


The demand for more highly educated workers appears to have risen for many
decades across OECD countries. Despite a large increase in the supply of such
workers, the return to college education has not fallen. Instead, it has risen
significantly since the early 1980s in the US, UK, and many other nations (see
Machin and Van Reenen, 2008). The consensus view is that this increase in skill
demand is linked to technological progress (e.g. Goldin and Katz, 2008) rather
than increased trade with low wage countries (although see Krugman, 2008, for a
more revisionist view).
      Recent analyses of data through the 2000s, however, suggest a more nuanced
view of the change in demand for skills. Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2007, 2008)
use US data to show that although “upper tail” inequality (between the 90th and
50th percentiles of the wage distribution) has continued to rise in an almost secular
way over the last thirty years, “lower tail” inequality (between the 50th and 10th
percentiles of the distribution) increased during the 1980s but has stayed relatively
flat from around 1990. They also show a related pattern for diﬀerent education
groups, with the hourly wages of college graduates’ rising relative to high school
graduates since 1980, and high school graduates gaining relative to high school
dropouts during the 1980s but not since then. When considering occupations,
rather than education groups, Goos and Manning (2007) describe a polarization
of the workforce. In the UK middle skilled occupations have declined relative to
both the highly skilled and low skilled occupations. Spietz-Oener (2006) finds
related results for Germany and Goos, Manning and Salomons (2009) find similar
results for several OECD countries1 .
      What could account for these trends? One explanation is that new technolo-
  1
      See also Dustmann, Ludsteck and Schonberg (2009) and Smith (2008).




                                           2
gies, such as information and communication technologies (ICT), are complemen-
tary with human capital and rapid falls in quality-adjusted ICT prices have there-
fore increased skill demand. There is a large body of literature broadly consistent
with this notion2 . A more sophisticated view has been oﬀered by Autor, Levy
and Murnane (2003) who emphasize that ICT substitutes for routine tasks but
complements non-routine analytical tasks. Many routine tasks were traditionally
performed by less educated workers, such as assembly workers in a car factory, and
many of the analytical non-routine tasks are performed by more educated workers
such as consultants, advertising executives and physicians. However, many rou-
tine tasks are also performed in occupations employing middle educated workers,
such as bank clerks, and these groups may find demand for their services falling as
a result of computerization. Similarly many less educated workers are employed in
non-routine manual tasks such as janitors or cab drivers, and these tasks are much
less aﬀected by ICT. Since the numbers of routine jobs in the traditional manufac-
turing sectors (like car assembly) declined substantially in the 1970s, subsequent
ICT growth may have primarily increased demand for highly educated workers
at the expense of those in the middle of the educational distribution and left the
least educated (mainly working in non-routine manual jobs) largely unaﬀected.
      Although this theory is attractive there is currently little direct international
evidence that ICT causes a substitution from middle-skilled workers to high-skilled
workers. Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) show some consistent trends for the
US and Autor and Dorn (2009) exploit spatial variation across the US to show
that the growth in low skilled services has been faster in areas where initially there
were high proportions of routine jobs.3
  2
     See Bond and Van Reenen (2007) for a survey. Industry level data are used by Berman,
Bound and Griliches (1994), Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998) and Machin and Van Reenen
(1998). Krueger (1993), DiNardo and Pischke (1997) and Lang (2002) use individual data.
   3
     The closest antecedent of our paper is perhaps Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998, Table V)
who found that in the US the industry level growth of demand for US high school graduates




                                          3
    In this paper we test the hypothesis that ICT may be behind the polarization
of the labor market by implementing a simple test using 25 years of international
cross-industry data. If the ICT-based explanation for polarization is correct, then
we would expect that industries and countries that had a faster growth in ICT
also experienced an increase in demand for college educated workers, relative to
workers with intermediate levels of education. In this paper we show that this is
indeed a robust feature of the international data.
    We exploit the new EUKLEMS database, which provides data on college grad-
uates and disaggregates non-college workers into two groups: those with low ed-
ucation and those with “middle level” education. For example, in the US the
middle education group includes those with some college and high school gradu-
ates, but excludes high school drop-outs and GEDs (see Timmer et al, 2007, Table
5.3 for the country specific breakdown). The EUKLEMS database covers eleven
developed economies (US, Japan, and nine countries in Western Europe) from
1980-2004 and also contains data on ICT capital. In analyzing the data we con-
sider not only the potential role of ICT, but also several alternative explanations.
In particular, we examine whether the role of trade in changing skill demand could
have become more important in recent years (most of the early studies pre-dated
the growth of China and India as major players).
    The idea behind our empirical strategy is that the rapid fall in quality-adjusted
ICT prices will have a greater eﬀect in some country-industry pairs that are more
reliant on ICT. This is because some industries are for technological reasons inher-
ently more reliant on ICT than others. We have no compelling natural experiment,
however, so our results should be seen as conditional correlations. We do, how-
between 1993 and 1979 was negatively correlated with the growth of computer use between 1993
and 1984. We find this is a robust feature of 11 OECD countries over a much longer time period.
For other related work see Black and Spitz-Oener (2010), Firpo, Fortin and Lemieux (2009),
and work surveyed by Acemoglu and Autor (2010).




                                            4
ever, implement some instrumental variable strategies using the industry-specific
base year levels of US ICT intensity and/or routine tasks as an instrument for
subsequent ICT increases in other countries. These support the OLS results.
   We conclude that technology - both ICT and Research and Development
(R&D) - has raised relative demand for college educated workers and, consistent
with the ICT-based polarization hypothesis, this increase has come mainly from
reducing the relative demand for middle skilled workers rather than low skilled
workers.
   The paper is laid out as follows. Section II describes the empirical model,
Section III the data and Section IV the empirical results. Section V oﬀers some
concluding comments.

2. Empirical Model

Consider the short-run variable cost function, CV (.):


                           CV (W H , W M , W L ; C, K, Q)                      (2.1)

   where W indicates hourly wages and superscripts denote education/skill group
S (H = highly educated workers, M = middle educated workers and L = low
educated workers), K = non-ICT capital services, C = ICT capital services and
Q = value added. If we assume that the capital stocks are quasi-fixed, factor prices
are exogenous and that the cost function can be approximated by a second order
flexible functional form such as translog then cost minimization (using Shephard’s
Lemma) implies the following three skill share equations:



SHARE H = φHH ln(W H /W L )+φMH ln(W M /W L )+αCH ln(C/Q)+αKH ln(K/Q)+αQH ln Q
                                                                               (2.2)




                                       5
SHARE M = φHM ln(W H /W L )+φMM ln(W M /W L )+αCM ln(C/Q)+αKM ln(K/Q)+αQM ln Q
                                                                                        (2.3)


SHARE L = φHL ln(W H /W L )+φML ln(W M /W L )+αCL ln(C/Q)+αCL ln(K/Q)+αCM ln Q,
                                                                                        (2.4)
                                  W SNS
       where SHARE S = W H N H +W S N M +W L N L is the wage bill share of skill group S =
{H, M, L} and N S is the number of hours worked by skill group S. Our hypothesis
of the ICT-based polarization theory is that αH > 0 and αM < 0 4 .
       Our empirical specifications are based on these equations. We assume that
labor markets are national in scope and include country by time eﬀects to cap-
ture relative wages (φjt ). We also assume that there is unobserved heterogeneity
between industry by country pairs (η ij ) and include fixed eﬀects to account for
these, giving the following three equations:


   SHARE S = φjt + η ij + αCS ln(C/Q)ijt + αKS ln(K/Q)ijt + αQS ln Qijt ,               (2.5)

       where i = industry, j =country and t = year. We estimate in long (25 year)
diﬀerences, ∆,to look at the historical trends and smooth out measurement error.
We substitute levels rather than logarithms (i.e. ∆(C/Q) instead of ∆ ln(C/Q))
because of the very large changes in ICT intensity over this time period. Some
industry by country pairs had close to zero IT intensity in 1980 so their change
is astronomical in logarithmic terms5 . Consequently our three key estimating
equations are:
   4
     The exact correspondence between the coeﬃcients on the capital inputs and the Hicks-Allen
elasticity of complementarity is more complex (see Brown and Christensen, 1981).
   5
     The range of ∆ ln(C/Q) lies between -1 and 23.5. We report some robustness checks using
∆(C/Q)
  C/Q    as an approximation.




                                            6
        S
  ∆SHAREijt = cSj + β S1 ∆(C/Q)ijt + β S2 ∆(K/Q)ijt + β S3 ∆ ln Qijt + uSijt .   (2.6)

   In the robustness tests we also consider augmenting equation (2.6) in various
ways. Since ICT is only one aspect of technical change we also consider using Re-
search and Development expenditures. Additionally, we consider trade variables
(such as imports plus exports over value added) to test whether industries that
were exposed to more trade upgraded the skills of their workforce at a more rapid
rate than those who did not. This is a pragmatic empirical approach to examining
trade eﬀects. Under a strict Heckscher-Ohlin approach trade is a general equilib-
rium eﬀect increasing wage inequality throughout the economy so looking at the
variation by industry would be uninformative. However, since trade costs have
declined more rapidly in some sectors than others (e.g. due to trade liberalization)
we would expect the actual flows of trade to proxy this change and there to be
a larger eﬀect on workers in these sectors than in others who were less aﬀected
(Krugman, 2008, makes this argument).
   Appendix A considers a theoretical model with parameter restrictions over
equation (2.1) that implies that ICT is a substitute for middle skilled labor and a
complement with highly skilled labor. Comparative static results from the model
suggest that as ICT increases (caused by a fall in the quality-adjusted price of
ICT) the wage bill share of skilled workers rises and the share of middle skilled
workers falls. It also shows that all else equal an exogenous increase in the supply
of middle skilled workers will cause their wage bill share to rise. Thus, although
ICT could reduce the demand for the middle skilled group their share could still
rise because of the long-run increase in supply.




                                        7
3. Data
3.1. Data Construction

The main source of data for this paper is the EUKLEMS dataset, which con-
tains data on value added, labor, capital, skills and ICT for various industries in
many developed countries (see Timmer et al, 2007). The EUKLEMS data are
constructed using data from each country’s National Statistical Oﬃce (e.g. the
US Census Bureau) and harmonized with each country’s national accounts. EU-
KLEMS contains some data on most OECD countries. But since we require data
on skill composition, investment and value added between 1980 and 2004, our
sample of countries is restricted to eleven: Austria, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, the UK and the USA6 .
       Another choice we had to make regards the set of industries we analyze. Since
our baseline year (1980) was close to the peak of the oil boom, we have dropped
energy-related sectors - mining and quarrying, coke manufactures and the sup-
ply of natural gas - from the sample (we report results that are very robust to
the inclusion of these sectors). The remaining sample includes 27 industries in
each country (see Appendix Table A1). But wage data by skill category are only
reported separately by industry in some countries. We therefore aggregate in-
dustries to the lowest possible level of aggregation for which all the variables we
use could be constructed — the precise level of disaggregation varied by country
(see Appendix Table A2)7 . Our final sample has 208 observations on country-
industry cells for each of the years between 1980 and 2004. We also have data for
   6
     In order to increase the number of countries we would need to considerably shorten the
period we analyze. For example, limiting our analysis to 1992-2004 (12 years instead of 25) only
adds Belgium. To further add Czech Republic, Slovenia and Sweden we would need to restrict
the sample to 1995-2004. In order to preserve the longer time series we focused on the 11 core
OECD countries.
   7
     Results are robust to throwing away information and harmonizing all countries at the same
level of industry aggregation.




                                             8
intervening years, which we use in some of the robustness checks.
    For each country-industry-year cell in our dataset we construct a number of
variables. Our main outcome is the wage bill share of workers of diﬀerent edu-
cational groups, which is a standard indicator for skill demand. In 9 of the 11
countries, the high skilled group indicates whether an employee has attained a
college degree8 . A novel feature of our analysis is that we also consider the wage
bill of middle skill workers. The precise composition of this group varies across
countries, since educational systems diﬀer considerably. But typically, this group
consists of high school graduates, people with some college education, and people
with non-academic professional degrees.
    Our main measure for use of new technology is Information and Communi-
cation Technology (ICT) capital divided by value added. Similarly, we also use
the measure of non-ICT capital divided by value added. EUKLEMS builds these
variables using the perpetual inventory method from the underlying investment
flow data for several types of capital (see Data Appendix). For the tradable in-
dustries (Agriculture and Manufacturing) we construct measures of trade flows
using UN COMTRADE data (21st March 2008 updates)9 . Details are contained
in the Data Appendix.

3.2. Descriptive statistics
3.2.1. Cross Country Trends

Panel A of Table 1 shows summary statistics for the levels of the key variables in
1980 across each country and Panel B presents the same for the changes through
   8
     In two countries the classification of high skilled workers is diﬀerent: in Denmark it includes
people in “long cycle” higher education and in Finland it includes people with tertiary education
or higher.
   9
     Using a crosswalk (available from the authors upon request) we calculate the value of total
trade, imports and exports with the rest of the world and separately with OECD and non-OECD
countries. We identify all 30 countries that were OECD members in 2007 as part of the OECD.




                                               9
2004. The levels have to be interpreted with care as exact comparison of qual-
ifications between countries is diﬃcult, which is why wage bill shares are useful
summary measures as each qualification is weighted by its price (the wage)10 .
The ranking of countries looks sensible with the US having the highest share of
high-skilled (29 percent), followed by Finland (27 percent). All countries have ex-
perienced significant skill upgrading as indicated by the growth in the high skilled
wage bill share in column (1) of Panel B, on average the share increased form 14.3
percent in 1980 to 24.3 in 2004.
       The UK had the fastest absolute increase in the high-skilled wage bill share
(16.5 percentage points) and is also the country with the largest increase in ICT
intensity. The US had the second largest growth of ICT and the third largest
increase in the high-skilled wage bill share (13.9 percentage points), but all coun-
tries have experienced rapid increases in ICT intensity, which doubled its 1980
share of value added.
       The change of the middle education share in column (2) is more uneven. Al-
though the mean growth is positive, it is relatively small compared to the highly
educated (8.7 percentage points on a base of 51.1 percent), with several countries
experiencing no growth or a decrease (the US and the Netherlands). The model
in Appendix A shows how the wage bill share of the middle skilled could rise as
the supply of this type of skill increases, so this supply increase can oﬀset the fall
in relative demand caused by technical change. Moreover, as Figure 2A shows,
although the wage bill share of the middle group rose more rapidly (in percentage
point terms) between 1980 and 1986, it subsequently decelerated. Indeed, in the
last six year sub-period, 1998-2004, the wage bill share of middle skilled workers
actually fell. At the same time, the wage bill share of low skilled workers continued
  10
    Estimating in diﬀerences also reduces the suspected bias from international diﬀerences as
the definitions are stable within country over time.




                                           10
to decline throughout the period 1980-2004, but at an increasingly slower rate.
Figure 2B shows the US, the technology leader that is often a future indicator
for other nations. From 1998-2004 the wage bill share of the middle educated
declined more rapidly than that of the low skilled workers. Figure 2B is in line
with the finding that while college educated US workers continued to gain rela-
tive to high-school graduates, high-school graduates gained relatively to college
dropouts in the 1980s but not in the 1990s (see Autor, Katz and Kearney, 2008,
Figure 5).

3.2.2. Cross Industry Trends

Table 2 breaks down the data by industry. In levels (column (1)) the highly ed-
ucated were disproportionately clustered into services both in the public sector
(especially education) and private sector (e.g. real estate and business services).
The industries that upgraded rapidly (column (8)) were also mainly services (e.g.
finance, telecoms and business services), but also in manufacturing (e.g. chem-
icals and electrical equipment). At the other end of the skill distribution, the
textile industry, which initially had the lowest wage bill share of skilled workers,
upgraded somewhat more than other low skill industries (transport and storage,
construction, hotels and restaurants, and agriculture). This raises the issue of
mean reversion, so we are careful to later show robustness tests to conditioning
on the initial levels of the skill shares in our regressions. In fact, the ranking of
industries in terms of skill intensity in 1980 and their skill upgrading over the next
25 years was quite similar across countries. This is striking, because the countries
we analyze had diﬀerent labor market institutions and diﬀerent institutional ex-
periences over the period we analyze. This suggests something fundamental is at
play that cuts across diﬀerent sets of institutions.
   ICT grew dramatically from 1980-2004, accounting for more than 42 percent




                                       11
of the average increase in capital services. The increased ICT diﬀusion was also
quite uneven: financial intermediation and telecoms experienced rapid increases
in ICT intensity, while in other industries, such as agriculture, there was almost
no increase.
   Figures 3, 4, and 5 plot changes by industry in the wage bill shares of high,
medium, and low skilled workers respectively against changes in ICT intensity.
The top panel of each figure includes all industries with fitted regression lines
(solid line for all industry and dashed line for non-traded sectors only). The
bottom panel (Figure 3B) restricts attention to the traded sectors. Figure 3A
shows that the industries with the fastest ICT upgrading had the largest increase
in the high skilled wage bill share. One might be worried that two service sectors,
Post and Telecoms and Finance, are driving this result, which is one reason Figure
3B drops all the non-traded sectors. In fact, the relationship between high skill
and ICT growth is actually stronger in these “well measured” sectors.
   Figure 4 repeats this analysis for the middle educated groups. We observe
the exact opposite relationship to Figure 3: the industries with the faster ICT
growth had the largest fall in the middle skilled share whether we look at the
whole economy (Figure 4A) or just the traded sectors (Figure 4B). Finally, Figure
5 shows that there is essentially no relationship (Figure 5A) or a mildly positive
one (Figure 5B) between the change of the share of the least educated and ICT
growth.
   These figures are highly suggestive of empirical support for the hypothesis that
ICT polarizes the skill structure: increasing demand at the top, reducing demand
in the middle and having little eﬀect at the bottom. To examine this link more
rigorously, we now turn to the econometric analysis.




                                      12
4. Econometric Results
4.1. Basic Results

Our first set of results for the skill share regressions at the industry by country pair
level is contained in Table 3. The dependent variable is the change of the wage bill
share of the college-educated in Panel A, the share of the middle educated group
in Panel B and the share of the least educated group in Panel C. All equations are
estimated in 24 year long diﬀerences. The first four columns look across the entire
economy and the last four columns condition on the sub-sample of “tradable”
sectors where we have information on imports and exports.
   Column (1) of Panel A simply reports the coeﬃcient on the constant that in-
dicates that, on average there was a ten percentage point increase in the college
wage bill share. This is a very large increase, considering the average skill share
in 1980 (across our sample of countries) was only 14%. Column (2) includes the
growth in ICT capital intensity. The technology variable has a large, positive and
significant coeﬃcient and reduces the regression constant to 8.7. The importance
of technology for skill upgrading is consistent with other work, which has found
technology-skill complementarity. Column (3) includes the growth of non-ICT
capital intensity and value added. The coeﬃcient on non-ICT capital is negative
and insignificant, suggesting that there is no sign of capital-skill complementar-
ity. Some studies have found capital-skill complementarity (e.g. Griliches, 1969)
but few of these studies have disaggregated capital into its ICT and non-ICT
components, so the evidence for capital-skill complementarity may be due to ag-
gregating over high-tech capital that is complementary with skills and lower tech
capital that is not. Similarly few studies have looked over such a long time span as
we do in this paper. The coeﬃcient on value added growth is positive and signifi-
cant suggesting that skill upgrading has been occurring more rapidly in the fastest




                                        13
growing sectors (this is consistent with Berman, Rohini and Tan, 2005). Column
(4) includes country fixed eﬀects. This is a demanding specification because the
specification is already in diﬀerences so this specification essentially allows for
country specific trends. The coeﬃcient on ICT falls (from 65 to 47) but remains
significant at conventional levels11 .
       We repeat these specifications for the tradeable industries in the next four
columns. Column (5) shows that the overall increase in the college wage-bill share
from 1980-2004 was 9 percentage points - similar to that in the whole sample.
Columns (6) - (8) add in our measure of ICT and other controls. The coeﬃcient
on ICT in the tradeable sector is positive, highly significant and larger than in
the overall sample (e.g. 129 in column (8)).
       Panel B of Table 3 repeats these specifications for middle-skilled workers. Col-
umn (1) shows that overall, the growth of the wage bill share of middle skilled
workers has been 8.7 percentage points over this time period. But as the rest
of the panel shows, the association between the change in middle-skilled workers
and ICT is strongly negative. In column (4), for example, a one percentage point
increase in ICT intensity is associated with a 0.8 percentage point fall in the pro-
portion of middle skilled workers. The absolute magnitudes of the coeﬃcients for
the sample that includes all industries is quite similar to those for college educated
workers.
       Panel C holds the low-skilled worker results - the coeﬃcients can all be deduced
from the rest of Table 3, but the standard errors are useful to see. Importantly,
the technology measures appear to be insignificant for this group of workers illus-
trating the point that the main role of ICT appears to be in changing demand
  11
     Including the mineral extraction sectors caused the ICT coeﬃcient to fall from 47 to 45.
We also tried including a set of industry dummies in column (4). All the variables became
insignificant in this specification. This suggests that it is the same industries that are upgrading
across countries.




                                              14
between the top and the middle skill groups12 . Since the adding up requirement
means that the coeﬃcients for the least skilled group can be deduced from the
other two skill groups we save space by omitting Panel C in the rest of the Tables.

4.2. Robustness and Extensions
4.2.1. Initial conditions

Table 4 examines some robustness checks using the results in our preferred speci-
fication of column (4) of Table 3 (reproduced in the first column). Since there may
be mean reversion we include the level of initial share of skills in 1980 in column
(2). This does not qualitatively alter the results, although coeﬃcient on ICT for
the middle skilled does fall somewhat.

4.2.2. Heterogeneity in the coeﬃcients across countries

Wage inequality rose less in Continental Europe than elsewhere, so it is interesting
to explore whether technological change induced polarization even there. Columns
(3) and (4) restrict the sample to the eight Continental European countries (i.e.
Austria, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands and Spain) and
show qualitatively similar results to the pooled sample. Unfortunately, the sample
size for most individual countries is rather small preventing a full country by
country analysis13 . For example, column (5) shows that the correlation between
ICT and polarization is larger for the US than for the full sample, though column
(5) shows that the estimates become imprecise when we control for baseline levels
of skill composition.
  12
     The diﬀerence in the importance of ICT for the middle and lowest skill groups implies that
high school graduates are not perfect substitutes for college graduates as Card (2009) argues
in the US context. The majority of our data is from outside the US, however, where there are
relatively fewer high school graduates.
  13
     Due to the above-mentioned restriction that wage bill data is aggregated for some industries
in most countries.




                                             15
4.2.3. Instrumental variables

One concern is that measurement error in the right hand side variables, especially
ICT, causes attenuation bias14 . To mitigate this concern, we use the industry-level
measures of ICT in the US in 1980 as an instrument for ICT upgrading over the
whole sample. The intuition behind this instrument is that the dramatic global
fall in quality-adjusted ICT prices since 1980 (some 15-30% per annum) will dis-
proportionately benefit those industries that (for exogenous technological reasons)
have a greater potential for using ICT inputs. An indicator of this potential is the
initial ICT intensity in the technological leader, the US. In the 2SLS estimates of
column (7) the coeﬃcient on ICT is roughly twice as large as the OLS coeﬃcients
for the college educated group (and significant at the 5 percent level), and a little
bigger for the middle skill group. Column (8) report estimates the same specifica-
tion but this time excluding the US itself, and the results are very similar. We also
considered using the proportion of routine manual tasks in the industry (in the US
in the base year) as an instrument for future ICT growth as these industries were
most likely to be aﬀected by falling ICT prices (see Autor and Dorn, 2009). The
results of using this instrument are shown in columns (9) and (10). Although the
first stages are weaker with this instrument15 , these columns again suggest that
we may be under-estimating the importance of ICT by just using OLS - there is
certainly no evidence of downward bias.
  14
     Estimates of the ICT coeﬃcient for the two 12-year sub-periods of our data are typically
about half of the absolute magnitude of those for the full period. In general, our estimates for
shorter time periods are smaller and less precise, consistent with the importance of measurement
error in the ICT data. For example, in the specification of column (4) of Panel A in Table 3, the
coeﬃcient (standard error) on ICT was 18.30 (10.30) in a pooled 12 year regression. We could
not reject the hypothesis that the ICT coeﬃcient was stable over time (p-value=0.35).
  15
     The signs of the instruments in the first stage are correct. The F-tests is 6.5 in column (7)
compared to 10.5 in column (10).




                                             16
4.2.4. Disaggregating the wage bill into wages and hours

The wage bill share of each skill group reflects its hourly wage and hours worked,
and those of the other skill groups. We now discuss estimates of specifications
that are identical to those in Table 3, except that they allow for a disaggregation
of the dependent variable into the growth of relative skill prices and quantities.
In the first two columns of Appendix Table A3 we reproduce the baseline specifi-
cations using the log relative wage bill (which can be exactly decomposed) as the
dependent variable16 . Columns (1) - (4) confirm what we have already seem using
a slightly diﬀerent functional form: ICT growth is associated with a significant
increase in the demand for high skilled workers relative to middle skilled workers
(first two columns) and with a significant (but smaller) increase for low skilled
workers relative to middle skilled workers (third and fourth column).
       For the high vs. middle skill group, ICT growth is significantly associated with
increases in relative wages and relative hours (columns (5), (6), (9) and (10)). In
comparing the middle vs. low groups, the coeﬃcients are also all correctly signed,
but not significant at conventional levels. Overall this suggests that our results
are robust to functional form and the shifting pattern of demand operates both
through wages and hours worked17 .

4.3. Trade, R&D and skill upgrading

Having found that technology upgrading is associated with substitution of college-
educated workers for middle-skilled workers, we now examine whether changes in
  16
     Another functional form check was using the growth rate of ICT intensity. For the specifi-
cation in column (3) of Panel A in Table 3 we replaced ∆(C/Q) with ∆(C/Q)  C/Q . The coeﬃcient
(standard error) on ICT growth was 2.586 (1.020). The marginal eﬀect of a one standard devi-
ation increase (0.581) is 1.50 (=0.581*2.586), compared with 1.55 (=0.024*64.6) in Table 3.
  17
     In examining these results across countries there was some evidence that the adjustment in
wages was stronger in the US and the adjustment in hours was stronger in Continental Europe.
This is consistent with the idea of great wage flexibility in the US than in Europe.




                                            17
trade exhibit similar patterns. The first two columns of Table 5 suggest that more
trade openness (measured as the ratio of imports plus exports to value added) is
associated with increases in the wage bill share of college educated workers, at
least once we control for country time trends in column (2). Adding our measures
of ICT, value added and non-ICT capital weakens this result in column (3), but
the trade measure remains significant. However, the last two columns of Table 5
suggests that when we control for initial R&D intensity the association between
trade and skill upgrading becomes much smaller and ceases to be statistically
significant. Column (4) repeats the specification of column (3) for the sub-sample
where we have R&D data and shows that the trade coeﬃcient is robust. Column
(5) includes R&D intensity in a simple specification and shows that the coeﬃcient
on trade halves (from 0.5 to 0.24) and is insignificant, whereas the coeﬃcient on
R&D is positive and significant at the 10 percent level. In column (6) we include
the ICT and non-ICT capital stocks and the coeﬃcient on trade is now 0.11 with
a standard error of 0.25. The final column drops the insignificant trade variable
and shows that ICT and R&D and individually (and jointly) significant.
       These findings are consistent with most of the literature that finds that tech-
nology variables have more explanatory power than trade in these kinds of skill
demand equations18 . Of course, trade could be influencing skill demand through
aﬀecting the incentives to innovate and adopt new technologies, which is why trade
ceases to be important after we condition on technology (e.g. Draca, Bloom and
Van Reenen, 2009, argue in favor of this trade-induced technical change hypothe-
sis)19 . Furthermore, there could be many general equilibrium eﬀects of trade that
  18
      These are simple industry-level correlations and not general equilibrium calculations, so we
may be missing out the role of trade through other routes.
   19
      We further test whether the association between trade and skill upgrading remains similar
when we examine diﬀerent components of trade separately. Appendix Table A4 suggests that
when we examine imports and exports separately, the picture is quite similar. Greater trade
is associated with an increase in the college wage bill share until we control for initial R&D




                                             18
we have not accounted for (these are controlled for by the country time eﬀects).

4.4. Magnitudes

We perform some “back of the envelope” calculations in Table 6 to gauge the
magnitude of the eﬀect of technology on the demand for highly skilled workers.
Column (1) estimates that ICT accounts for 13.2 percent of the increase in the
college share in the whole sample without controls and column (2) reduces this to
8.5 percent with controls. Many authors (e.g. Jorgenson, Ho and Stiroh, 2008)
have argued that value added growth has been strongly aﬀected by ICT growth,
especially in the later period, so column (2) probably underestimates the eﬀect of
ICT. Column (3) reports equivalent calculations for the tradeable sectors. Here,
ICT accounts for 16.5 percent of the change and R&D a further 16.1 percent,
suggesting that observable technology measures by account for almost a third of
the increase in demand for highly skilled workers. If we include controls in column
(4) this falls to 23.1 percent. Finally, columns (5) and (6) reports results for the
IV specification for the whole sample, showing an ICT contribution of ICT of
between 22.1 percent and 27.7 percent20 .
    We have no general equilibrium model, so these are only “back of the enve-
lope” calculations to give an idea of magnitudes. Furthermore, measurement error
probably means that we are probably underestimating the importance of the vari-
ables. Nevertheless, it seems that our measures of technology are important in
intensity, in which case the coeﬃcient on trade falls and becomes insignificant. Results are
similar when we analyze separately imports to (or exports from) OECD countries. For non-
OECD countries the results are again the same, except for exports to non-OECD countries,
which remains positively associated with changes in the college wage-bill share even after we
add all the controls, including R&D. However, it should be noted that the change in exports to
developing countries is on average very small.
   20
      The IV specifications for tradeables show an even larger magnitude. For example in a
specification with full controls, R&D and ICT combined account for over half of all the change
in the college wage bill share. The first stage for the IV is weak, however, with an F-statistic of
6, these cannot be relied on.




                                              19
explaining a significant proportion of the increase in demand for college educated
workers at the expense of the middle skilled.

5. Conclusions

Recent investigations into the changing demand for skills in OECD countries have
found some evidence for “polarization” in the labour market in the sense that
workers in the middle of the wage and skills distribution appear to have fared
more poorly than those at the bottom and the top. One explanation that has
been advanced for this is that ICT has complemented non-routine analytic tasks
but substituted for routine tasks whilst not aﬀecting non-routine manual tasks
(like cleaning, gardening, childcare, etc.). This implies that many middle-skilled
groups like bank clerks and para-legals performing routine tasks have suﬀered a
fall in demand. To test this we have estimated industry-level skill share equations
distinguishing three education groups and related this to ICT (and R&D) invest-
ments in eleven countries over 25 years using newly available data. Our findings
are supportive of the ICT-based polarization hypothesis as industries that experi-
enced the fastest growth in ICT also experienced the fastest growth in the demand
for the most educated workers and the fastest falls in demand for workers with
intermediate levels of education. The eﬀects are nontrivial: technical change (as
proxied by ICT and R&D) can account for up to a quarter of the growth of the
college wage bill share in the economy as a whole (and more in the tradeable
sectors).
   Although our method is simple and transparent, there are many extensions
that need to be made. First, alternative instrumental variables for ICT would
help identify the causal impact of ICT. As with the existing literature, we do
not have strong instruments for ICT. Second, although we find no direct role
for trade variables, there may be other ways in which globalization influences the




                                      20
labour market, for example by causing firms to “defensively innovate” (Acemoglu,
2003). Third, there are alternative explanations for the improved performance of
the least skilled group through for example, greater demand from richer skilled
workers for the services they provide as market production substitutes for house-
hold production (e.g. childcare, eating out in restaurants, domestic work, etc.)21 .
These explanations may complement the mechanism we address here. Finally, we
have not used richer occupational data that would focus on the skill content of
tasks due to the need to have international comparability across countries. The
work of Autor and Dorn (2009) is an important contribution here.




 21
      See Ngai and Pissarides (2007) and Mazzolari and Ragusa (2008).




                                            21
   References
Acemoglu, Daron (2003) “Patterns of Skill Premia” Review of Economic Stud-
ies, 70(2): 199—230.
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor (2010) “Skills, Tasks and Technologies:
Implications for Employment and Earnings” MIT mimeo
Autor, David, Katz, Lawrence and Krueger, Alan (1998) “Computing
Inequality: Have Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 113 (4), 1169-1214
Autor, David H., Katz, Lawrence F. and Kearney, Melissa S. (2006)
“The Polarization Of The U.S. Labor Market” American Economic Review vol.
96(2), 189-194,
Autor, David H., Katz, Lawrence F. and Kearney, Melissa S. (2008)
“Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists” Review of Economics
and Statistics 90(2), 300-323
Autor, David H., Levy, Frank and Murnane, Richard J. (2003) “The Skill
Content Of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1279-1333
Autor, David and Dorn, David (2009) “Inequality and Specialization: The
Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs in the United States” NBER Working Paper
15150
Berman, Eli, Bound John and Griliches, Zvi (1994) “Changes in the de-
mand for skilled labor within US manufacturing industries: Evidence from the
Annual Survey of Manufacturing”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 367-98.
Berman, Eli, Rohini Somanathan and Hong Tan. (2005). “Is skill-biased
technological change here yet? Evidence from Indian manufacturing in the 1990”
Policy Research Working Paper Series 3761, The World Bank.
Black, Sandra E. and Alexandra Spitz-Oener (2010). “Explaining Women’s
Success: Technological Change and the Skill Content of Women’s Work” Review
of Economics and Statistics 92(1), 187-194.
Bloom, Nick, Draca, Mirko and Van Reenen, John (2009) “Trade Induced
Technical Change? The impact of Chinese imports on technology, jobs and plant
survival”, CEP/LSE mimeo
Bond, Stephen and Van Reenen, John (2007) “Micro-econometric models of
investment and employment” Chapter 65 in Heckman, J. and Leamer. E. (eds)
Handbook of Econometrics Volume 6A, 4417-4498
Brown, R. and L. Christensen (1981), “Estimating elasticities of substitution




                                    22
in a model of partial static equilibrium: an application to US agriculture 1947-
74”, in: C. Field and E. Berndt, eds., Modelling and Measuring Natural Resource
Substitution ( MIT Press, Cambridge).
Card, David (2009) “Immigration and Inequality”, NBER Working Paper No.
14683
Desjonqueres, Thibaut, Machin, Stephen and Van Reenen, John (1999)
“Another Nail in the Coﬃn? Or Can the Trade Based Explanation of Changing
Skill Structures Be Resurrected?” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol.
101, No. 4, pp. 533-554.
DiNardo, John, Fortin, Nicole and Lemieux, Thomas (1996) “Labor
Market Institutions and the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric
Approach” Econometrica 64(5), 1001-1044.
DiNardo, John and Pischke, Jorn-Steﬀen (1997) “The Returns to Com-
puter Use Revisited: Have Pencils Changed the Wage Structure Too?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112(1), 291-303
Dustmann, Christian, Ludsteck, Johannes and Schonberg, Uta (2009)
“Revisiting the German Wage Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2),
843-881.
Feenstra, Robert and Gordon Hanson. (1996) “Foreign Investment, Out-
sourcing and Relative Wages” in Robert Feenstra and Gene Grossman, eds., Polit-
ical Economy of Trade Policy: Essays in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati, Cambridge
MA: MIT Press.
Firpo, Sergio, Nicole Fortin and Thomas Lemieux (2009) “Occupational
Tasks and Changes in the Wage Structure” UBC Mimeo.
Goldin, Claudia and Katz, Lawrence F. (2008) The Race between Education
and Technology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Goos, Maarten, Manning, Alan and Salomons, Anna (2009) The Polar-
ization of the European Labor Market, American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, forthcoming
Goos, Maarten and Manning, Alan (2007) “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The
Rising Polarization of Work in Britain” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1),
118-133
Griliches, Zvi (1969) “Capital-Skill complementarity” Review of Economics and
Statistics 51:465-468.
Jorgenson, Dale, Mun Ho, and Kevin Stiroh (2008) “A Retrospective Look
at the US Productivity Growth Resurgence”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
22(1), 3-24.




                                      23
Krueger, Alan. (1993) “How computers have changed the wage structure”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics., 108, 33-60.
Krugman, Paul. (2008) “Trade and Wages reconsidered”, mimeo prepared for
Brookings Panel of Economic Activity, http://www.princeton.edu/~pkrugman/pk-
bpea-draft.pdf
Lang, Kevin (2002) “Of Pencils and Computers”, Boston University mimeo
Machin, Stephen and Van Reenen, John (1998) “Technology and Changes
in Skill Structure: Evidence from Seven OECD Countries” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113, 1215-44.
Matsuyama, Kiminori. (2007) “Beyond Icebergs: Towards a Theory of Biased
Globalization” Review of Economic Studies 74, 237—253
Mazzolari, Francesca and Giuseppe Ragusa (2008) “Spillovers from High-
Skill Consumption to Low-Skill Labor Markets.” Mimeograph, University of Cal-
ifornia at Irvine
Ngai, L. Rachel and Pissarides, Christopher (2007) “Structural Change in
a Multisector Model of Growth.” American Economic Review, 97(1), 429-443.
Spitz-Oener, Alexandra (2006) “Technical Change, Job Tasks, and Rising Ed-
ucational Demands: Looking Outside the Wage Structure,” Journal of Labor Eco-
nomics 24(2) 235—270.
Smith, Christopher L. (2008) “Implications of Adult Labor Market Polariza-
tion for Youth Employment Opportunities.” MIT working paper
Timmer, Marcel, Ton van Moergastel, Edwin Stuivenwold , Gerad
Ypma, Mary O’Mahony and Mari Kangasniemi (2007) “EU KLEMS Growth
and Productivity Accounts Version 1.0”, University of Gronigen mimeo
Wood, Adrian. (1994) North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality, Chang-
ing Fortunes in a Skill-Driven World, Clarendon, Oxford.



A. Theory Appendix: A simple model of the eﬀect of ICT
   on demand for three skill groups.
We present a simple model that illustrates how we could derive the relationships
we observe in the data. The exogenous variable is an increase in ICT capital
generated by a large fall in ICT prices. The prediction is that we can observe an
increase in the share of the high skilled and a decline in the share of the middle




                                      24
skilled. Note that an increase in the supply of the middle skilled will also generate
an increase in their wage bill share.
    The model below considers an aggregate (sectoral) production function using
three labor inputs: low skilled (L), middle skilled (M), and high skilled (H)
workers and ICT capital (C). The model also assumes a constant elasticity of
                     1
substitution σ = 1−ρ    > 1 between the three types of (ICT-augmented) labor
inputs, so ρ ∈ (0, 1). We assume that output, Q, is produced using the following
production function:
                 h                                          i ρ1
              Q = αL Lρ + (αM M + βC)ρ + (αH H μ + γC μ )ρ/μ ,
where αj denotes the eﬀectiveness of each type of labor, j ∈ {L, M, H}. β mea-
sures the eﬀectiveness of ICT in substituting middle skilled labor and γ measures
ICT eﬀectiveness in complementing high skilled labor. The model assumes that
ICT capital (C) is a substitute for middle skilled workers, and a complement to
                                1
high skilled labor, where η = 1−μ  ∈ (0, 1), so μ < 0. Note that the model only
treats the relationship between C and H in exactly the opposite way from the
relationship between C and M if η −→ 0 (or equivalently μ −→ −∞).
    Assuming perfect competition, the wage of the three types of labor and the
cost of ICT are:

         h                                           i 1 −1
                             ρ                 μ ρ/μ ρ
wH =          ρ                        μ
          αL L + (αM M + βC) + (αH H + γC )                  (αH H μ + γC μ )(ρ/μ)−1 αH H μ−1
         h                                           i ρ1 −1
wM =      αL Lρ + (αM M + βC)ρ + (αH H μ + γC μ )ρ/μ         (αM M + βC)ρ−1 αM
         h                                           i ρ1 −1
wL =      αL Lρ + (αM M + βC)ρ + (αH H μ + γC μ )ρ/μ         αL Lρ−1
         h                                           i 1 −1
              ρ              ρ         μ       μ ρ/μ ρ
  p =     αL L + (αM M + βC) + (αH H + γC )
           h                                                    i
         ∗ (αM M + βC)ρ−1 β + (αH H μ + γC μ )(ρ/μ)−1 γC μ−1
          β       γC μ−1
     =      wM +          wH
         αM      αH H μ−1
   In this model an increase in ICT raises the wage of high skilled and low skilled
workers, but has an ambiguous eﬀect on the wage of middle skilled workers:
                                ∂wH      ∂wL
                                    > 0,     > 0.
                                 ∂C      ∂C




                                       25
   The wage bill shares of the three types of labor are:
                wH H
 θH =                       =
        wL L + wM M + wH H
                          (αH H μ + γC μ )(ρ/μ)−1 αH H μ
      =            ³     −ρ          −1
                                        ´ρ−1
        αL Lρ + αM αM M 1−ρ + βCM 1−ρ         + (αH H μ + γC μ )(ρ/μ)−1 αH H μ
               wM M
 θM =                       =
        wL L + wM M + wH H
                            ³     −ρ          −1
                                                 ´ρ−1
                         αM αM M 1−ρ + βCM 1−ρ
      =           ³      −ρ        −1
                                      ´ρ−1
        αL Lρ + αM αM M 1−ρ + βCM 1−ρ      + (αH H μ + γC μ )(ρ/μ)−1 αH H μ
                  wL L
  θL =                       =
          wL L + wM M + wH H
                                      αL Lρ
      =             ³      −ρ        −1
                                        ´ρ−1
          αL Lρ + αM αM M 1−ρ + βCM 1−ρ      + (αH H μ + γC μ )(ρ/μ)−1 αH H μ

   One can verify that in this specification:
                                ∂θH        ∂θM
                                      > 0,      < 0,
                                 ∂C         ∂C
so increased supply of ICT raises the college wage bill share and reduces the middle
skilled wage bill share. The ratio of the wage bill of high (middle) skilled workers
to low skilled workers increases (decreases) with ICT:
               µ       ¶           "                                #
                                           μ      μ (ρ/μ)−1       μ
             ∂    wH H         ∂ (αH H + γC )               αH H
                          =                          ρ
                                                                      >0
           ∂C wL L            ∂C                αL L
                                   ⎡     ³                       ´ρ−1 ⎤
               µ       ¶                        −ρ            −1

                               ∂ ⎢ αM αM M
                                                1−ρ + βCM 1−ρ
            ∂    wM M                                                 ⎥
                          =        ⎣                                  ⎦<0
          ∂C wL L             ∂C                  αL Lρ

    Note that an increase in the supply of middle skilled workers raises their wage
bill relative to low skilled workers:
                                   ⎡   ³                       ´ρ−1 ⎤
                 µ        ¶                   −ρ            −1

                                ∂ ⎢ αM αM M       + βCM
                                              1−ρ          1−ρ
              ∂    wM M                                             ⎥
                            =      ⎣                ρ               ⎦>0
            ∂M      wL L      ∂M                αL L




                                       26
B. Data Appendix
Our main dataset is EUKLEMS (http://www.euklems.net/), which is an industry-
level panel dataset created by economic researchers funded by the European Com-
mission. It covers the European Union, the US, Japan, and other countries, and
contains a wealth of information on productivity-related variables. These were
constructed through joint work with census bureaus in each country and are
designed to be internationally comparable. Details of the methodology are in
Timmer et al (2007).
    In the construction of our sample we faced a number of technical issues. First,
although college wage bill shares are reported for 30 industries in each country,
these reported wage bill shares are not unique within each country. For example, in
a certain country the reported college wage bill share for industry A and industry
B may be (college wage bill in A + college wage bill in B)/(total wage bill in A +
total wage bill in B). The identity and number of industries pooled together vary
across countries. In order to use as much of variation as possible, we aggregate
industries within each country up to the lowest level of aggregation that ensures
that the college wage bill share is unique across the aggregated observations. This
is also suﬃcient to ensure that other variables we use, such as our ICT and value
added measures, have unique values across observations.
    Second, as a measure of ICT intensity we use ICT capital compensation divided
by value added directly from EUKLEMs. ICT capital is built using the Perpetual
Inventory method based on real ICT investment flows (using a quality-adjusted
price deflator). ICT capital compensation is the stock of ICT capital multiplied
by its user cost. Non-ICT capital compensation is built in the same way22 .
    Third, matching trade variables into our main dataset required data required
currency conversions, since EUKLEMS reports data in historical local currency
and COMTRADE reports data in historical dollars. To overcome this diﬀerence,
we convert nominal values to current US Dollars using exchange rates from the
IMF IFS website. To convert national currency to the Euro (for Eurozone coun-
tries), we use exchange rates from the website:
    http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/euro/transition/conversion_rates.htm
  22
    Because EUKLEMS calculates capital compensation as a residual in a few cases observations
can have negative capital compensation. Of the 208 country-industry cells we use, negative
capital compensation occurs in 12 cases in 1980 and in 3 cases in 2004. These are typically
agriculture (which is heavily subsidized and becomes smaller over time) and industries where
public services play an important role (e.g. education and health). To overcome this problem,
we bottom-coded negative values of ICT and non-ICT capital compensation to zero. Our results
are robust to dropping these observations from the sample.




                                           27
    We use trade figures from the UN’s COMTRADE dataset. Data is downloaded
in the four digit Standard International Trade Classification format (revision 2),
and converted to the European NACE Rev 1 classification used in the EUKLEMS
dataset (concordance available on request). Our trade regressions contain the
updated data from 21st March 2008.
    To decompose trade into OECD versus non-OECD, we use the 2007 defin-
ition of OECD countries (Austria, Australia, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Re-
public, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nor-
way, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
the UK and the USA). This means that Czechoslovakia and Belgium-Luxembourg
were treated as OECD countries in 1980.
    Finally, we account for the fact that the (aggregated) industries we use diﬀer
substantially in their employment shares within each country’s population. We
therefore use the employment shares of each industry in 1980 (our base year)
in total employment as analytical weights in the regressions using both tradable
and non-tradable industries. For trade regressions, which use only the traded
industries, each industry’s weight is its employment share in the traded industries
for that country, so that the sum of weights for each country is still equal to one.




                                       28
                                                           Table 1: Summary Statistics by Country
                                                          Panel A: 1980 levels averaged by country
                          (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)                  (6)                    (7)

    Country         (High-skilled      (Medium-skilled     (Low-skilled wage-     log(Value        ((ICT capital) /   ((Non ICT capital) /   ((Imports+Exports) /
                   wage-bill share)    wage-bill share)        bill share)         Added)         (Value Added))        (Value Added))          (Value Added))
     Austria             8.8                51.6                   39.6              8.0                0.012                0.227                   1.43
    Denmark              5.3                50.5                   44.2              7.8                0.029                0.174                   2.24
     Finland            26.9                28.5                   44.6              7.6                0.015                0.195                   1.36
     France             11.2                49.6                   39.2              10.1               0.011                0.158                   1.23
    Germany              9.4                66.0                   24.7              10.3               0.020                0.168                   1.31
       Italy             5.8                86.9                    7.3              9.7                0.021                0.174                   0.91
     Japan              17.7                49.0                   33.2              10.8               0.016                0.230                   0.55
   Netherlands          21.6                62.1                   16.3              8.8                0.012                0.155                   3.39
      Spain             12.7                 9.6                   77.7              9.1                0.021                0.265                   0.53
        UK               9.2                52.7                   38.1              9.8                0.019                0.180                   1.54
      USA               28.7                56.0                   15.3              11.6               0.016                0.224                   0.54

      Mean               14.3                51.1                 34.6                9.4              0.018                 0.195                   0.67

                                                    Panel B: Changes from 1980-2004, averaged by country

    Country       Δ (College wage-    Δ (Medium-skilled      Δ (Low-skilled      Δ log(Value     Δ ((ICT capital) / Δ ((Non ICT capital) Δ((Imports+Exports) /
                      bill share)      wage-bill share)     wage-bill share)       Added)        (Value Added))      / (Value Added))        (Value Added))
     Austria               5.4              15.5                  -20.9              1.2               0.014               0.010                  0.87
    Denmark                4.1              17.8                  -21.9              1.3               0.013               -0.011                 1.26
     Finland              15.2              12.0                  -27.2              1.2               0.022               -0.001                 0.36
     France                7.7              14.1                  -21.8              1.1               0.021               0.066                  0.99
    Germany                6.3               0.1                   -6.4              1.1               0.007               0.023                  1.03
       Italy               5.3               1.6                   -6.9              1.2               0.020               0.051                  0.55
     Japan                10.8              11.5                  -22.3              1.1               0.013               0.035                  0.33
   Netherlands            13.1              -2.9                  -10.1              1.3               0.023               0.041                  3.01
      Spain               11.9              19.0                  -30.9              1.5               0.006               0.056                  1.13
        UK                16.5              12.6                  -29.1              1.3               0.032               -0.031                 1.26
      USA                 13.9              -5.1                   -8.8              1.4               0.028               0.032                  0.62

      Mean               10.0                 8.7                 -18.8               1.2              0.018                 0.025                   0.67


Notes: The table reports means weighted by 1980 share of each country's employment. All variables are measured for the full sample, except for trade variables,
measured only for traded goods.



                                                                                       29
                                                                               Table 2: Summary Statistics by Industry
                                                                                                                                                                                    Mean weight
                                                         1980 levels averaged by industry                            Changes from 1980-2004 averaged by industry                   (share of 1980
                                                                                                                                                                                    employment)
                                         (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)        (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)       (11)     (12)    (13)             (14)     (15)     (16)
                                                                                       ((Non             Δ (High-     Δ                                 Δ ((Non             Δ
                                        High- Medium-       Low-             ((ICT            ((Imports                     Δ (Low-             Δ ((ICT
                                                                                         ICT              skilled (Medium-                Δ                ICT         ((Imports        Traded
                                       skilled   skilled   skilled ln(Value capital)          +Exports                       skilled           capital)                           Full
Code Description                                                                     capital)             wage-    skilled            ln(Value          capital) /     +Exports)        goods
                                      wage-bill wage-bill wage-bill Added) / (Value           ) / (Value                    wage-bill          / (Value                          sample
                                                                                     / (Value               bill  wage-bill            Added)            (Value         / (Value         only
                                       share     share     share            Added))            Added))                       share)            Added))
                                                                                     Added))              share)   share)                               Added))         Added))
Agriculture, hunting, forestry and
                                        5.9       39.7        54.4      0.10    0.002       0.246   0.73    5.1       21.8           -26.9   0.56    0.003     0.009      0.25      0.10     0.28
fishing
Food products, beverages and
                                        6.4       47.7        45.9      0.03    0.012       0.341   1.09    8.0       15.8           -23.9   1.00    0.014     0.010      0.29      0.03     0.09
tobacco
Textiles, textile products, leather
                                        5.0       45.8        49.2      0.03    0.006       0.168   2.13    8.2       17.3           -25.4   0.16    0.014     0.027      3.79      0.03     0.09
and footwear
Wood and products of wood and
                                        7.8       46.8        45.4      0.01    0.010       0.232   2.30    9.2       16.4           -25.5   0.93    0.010     0.020      0.02      0.01     0.03
cork
Pulp, paper, paper products,
                                        10.8      51.4        37.8      0.02    0.021       0.242   0.84    11.0      10.9           -21.8   1.17    0.030     0.047      0.02      0.02     0.07
printing and publishing
Chemicals and chemical products         13.3      49.2        37.4      0.01    0.016       0.370   2.51    13.1         9.2         -22.2   1.22    0.028     0.070      1.18      0.01     0.04
Rubber and plastics products            9.0       49.1        41.9      0.01    0.010       0.255   0.42    9.8       14.0           -23.8   1.28    0.017     0.022      0.04      0.01     0.02
Other non-metallic mineral
                                        8.6       47.4        44.0      0.01    0.014       0.270   0.57    9.5       15.3           -24.9   0.90    0.011     0.052      0.13      0.01     0.03
products
Basic metals and fabricated metal
                                        8.7       50.1        41.2      0.03    0.010       0.267   1.01    9.1       14.3           -23.4   0.97    0.013     0.009      0.18      0.03     0.10
products
Machinery, not elsewhere
                                        9.8       55.7        34.5      0.03    0.017       0.209   1.59    12.0         8.5         -20.5   1.05    0.023    -0.003      0.98      0.03     0.08
classified
Electrical and optical equipment        12.6      54.7        32.7      0.03    0.024       0.176   3.78    14.6         6.2         -20.8   1.23    0.038     0.052      5.42      0.03     0.08
Transport equipment                     10.5      54.9        34.5      0.02    0.010       0.167   1.35    12.3         8.3         -20.6   1.11    0.020     0.080      0.94      0.02     0.06
Manufacturing not elsewhere
                                        7.0       47.7        45.3      0.01    0.013       0.213   3.21    8.2       15.6           -23.8   1.05    0.010     0.004      0.41      0.01     0.04
classified; recycling
Sale, maintenance and repair of
motor vehicles and motorcycles;         6.5       59.6        33.9      0.02    0.016       0.195           8.5          9.7         -18.1   1.3      0.0       0.0                 0.02
retail sale of fuel
Wholesale trade and commission
trade, except of motor vehicles         10.2      57.1        32.6      0.05    0.032       0.247           10.2         7.7         -17.8   1.42    0.030     0.055                0.05
and motorcycles
Retail trade, except of motor
vehicles and motorcycles; repair        8.3       58.1        33.6      0.09    0.011       0.084           8.7          9.1         -17.8   1.29    0.016     0.079                0.09
of household goods
Transport and storage                    6.1      53.7        40.2      0.04    0.020       0.200            7.0      13.5           -20.5   1.36    0.030     0.072                0.04
Post and telecommunications              8.1      60.5        31.4      0.02    0.143       0.238           17.2       1.9           -19.2   1.60    0.088     0.119                0.02
Real estate activities                  26.8      52.4        20.8      0.01    0.014       0.891           12.7      -1.1           -11.6   1.81    0.014    -0.008                0.01
Renting of machinery and
equipment and other business            29.3      51.2        19.5      0.05    0.051       0.180           18.1         -7.1        -11.0   2.16    0.020    -0.027                0.05
activities
Construction                             7.3      52.1        40.6      0.08    0.005       0.180            4.0      16.2           -20.2   1.19    0.009     0.013                0.08
Hotels and restaurants                   6.2      54.4        39.4      0.04    0.013       0.136            7.8      12.5           -20.3   1.59    0.000     0.041                0.04
Financial intermediation                18.3      65.0        16.6      0.03    0.051       0.297           19.6      -8.2           -11.3   1.57    0.112     0.009                0.03
Public admin and defence;
                                        20.8      58.4        20.7      0.07    0.017       0.171           13.1         0.7         -13.7   1.30    0.019    -0.022                0.07
compulsory social security
Education                               51.7      38.2        10.1      0.06    0.013       0.078           11.6         -5.4         -6.1   1.47    0.004    -0.010                0.06
Health and social work                  27.0      53.1        19.8      0.07    0.011       0.119           11.5         0.8         -12.2   1.70    0.003    -0.008                0.07
Other community, social and
                                        18.4      50.1        31.5      0.04    0.038       0.215           11.2         7.1         -18.3   1.65    0.003     0.029                0.04
personal services
Notes: Industry values are simple unweighted averages across all countries. Regressions in subsequent tables use the maximum level of disaggregation available in each country (method described in
Data Appendix).




                                                                                                                                30
                                 Table 3: Changes in Wage Bill Shares: 1980-2004
                             Panel A:Dependent variable: High-Skilled Wage Bill Share
                                            (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)     (5)     (6)            (7)       (8)
Δ ((ICT capital) / (Value Added))                   72.29      64.56   46.92             163.94     139.6    128.71
                                                   (18.28)    (17.31) (14.94)            (45.48)   (42.74)   (32.19)
Δ log(Value Added)                                               5.42   4.76                         3.26       3.41
                                                               (1.24) (0.95)                        (2.25)    (1.07)
Δ ((Non ICT capital) / (Value Added))                           -7.64  -6.45                         0.31      -0.47
                                                               (4.92) (3.51)                        (5.59)    (2.45)
Intercept                                 10.02     8.69         2.22            9.12     6.42       4.04
                                          (0.57)   (0.63)      (1.67)           (0.86)   (1.02)     (2.19)
Country fixed effects                                                    X                                     X
Sample: All industries                      X        X            X      X
Sample: Traded industries                                                    X          X            X         X
Obs.                                       208      208       208    208     84         84           84        84
R-squared                                           0.09      0.19   0.45              0.19         0.22      0.81
                            Panel B:Dependent variable: Medium-skilled Wage Bill Share
Δ ((ICT capital) / (Value Added))                 -100.78 -77.76 -64.52              -163.98        -41.59   -288.01
                                                  (30.21) (25.44) (20.24)           (115.77)       (84.73)   (83.94)
Δ log(Value Added)                                           -13.8 -15.33                           -15.64    -7.96
                                                            (2.69) (2.23)                           (4.27)    (3.14)
Δ ((Non ICT capital) / (Value Added))                         9.76  18.01                           -10.79     1.57
                                                           (11.88) (10.25)                         (14.08)   (10.98)
Intercept                                  8.73    10.59    27.24           15.5      18.20          29.75
                                          (1.29)   (1.49)   (3.73)         (1.90)     (2.95)        (4.67)
Country fixed effects                                                 X                                        X
Sample: All industries                      X        X         X      X
Sample: Traded industries                                                    X          X            X         X
Obs.                                       208      208       208    208     84         84           84        84
R-squared                                           0.05      0.23   0.58              0.05         0.25      0.74

                              Panel C:Dependent variable: Low-skilled Wage Bill Share
Δ ((ICT capital) / (Value Added))                   28.55   13.21    17.71             0.50    -97.91        159.65
                                                  (27.34) (25.66) (16.41)            (113.51) (100.71)       (79.30)
Δ log(Value Added)                                            8.43   10.62                       12.45          4.61
                                                            (2.40) (1.95)                       (4.24)        (3.30)
Δ ((Non ICT capital) / (Value Added))                        -2.21 -11.68                        10.32         -1.28
                                                            (9.63) (9.07)                      (11.91)       (11.73)
Intercept                                 -18.74   -19.26    -29.5          -24.61    -24.62    -33.84
                                          (1.12)   (1.31)   (3.27)          (1.68)    (2.55)    (3.95)
Country fixed effects                                                  X                                       X
Sample: All industries                      X         X        X       X
Sample: Traded industries                                                       X       X          X           X
Obs.                                       208       208      208     208      84       84        84           84
R-squared                                           0.00      0.10    0.65             0.00      0.16         0.70


Notes: Coefficients estimated by OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions in columns (1)-(4)
weighted by each industry's 1980 share of each country's employment, and regressions in columns (5)-(8) weighted by
each industry's 1980 share of each country's employment in traded industries.




                                                         31
                              Table 4: Changes in Wage Bill Shares: 1980-2004 - Robustness checks
                                     Panel A: Dependent variable: High-Skilled Wage Bill Share
                                             (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)       (5)    (6)      (7)        (8)      (9)     (10)
                                            OLS     OLS     OLS     OLS       OLS    OLS     2SLS       2SLS     2SLS     2SLS
Δ ((ICT capital) / (Value Added))          46.92   42.09 50.98 48.79 132.84          66.1 121.63       103.16 137.99      65.31
                                          (14.94) (14.66) (16.64) (16.20) (52.59) (58.15) (53.43)      (48.82) (119.44) (104.60)
Δ log(Value Added)                          4.76    2.93    5.79     4.4      0.26   -1.97    4.24       4.85     4.12     5.09
                                           (0.95)  (1.39) (1.31) (1.93)      (2.94) (3.79) (1.07)       (1.10)  (1.30)   (1.20)
Δ ((Non ICT capital) / (Value Added))       -6.45   -5.06  -9.25    -8.19    15.41   2.56    -8.47       -9.85   -8.91    -8.54
                                           (3.51)  (3.99) (4.56) (5.13) (12.99) (12.94) (4.02)          (4.33)  (5.01)   (5.16)
1980 High-skilled wage bill share                   0.06            0.04             0.34
                                                   (0.06)          (0.07)           (0.19)
1980 Medium-skilled wage bill share                 0.12            0.08              0.6
                                                   (0.05)          (0.07)           (0.27)
Country fixed effects                         X       X       X       X                         X        X         X         X
Sample: Continental Europe                                    X       X
Sample: US                                                                      X      X
Sample: All countries                         X       X                                         X                  X
Sample: All countries except USA                                                                         X                  X
Obs.                                         208     208    143      143       27     27       208      181      208       181
R-squared                                  0.450    0.47    0.44    0.45      0.21   0.43     0.36      0.38     0.32      0.46
F-stat for excluded instrument in the
first stage                                                                                   10.5       9.6      6.5       8.3

                                   Panel B:Dependent variable: Medium-Skilled Wage Bill Share
                                           OLS     OLS    OLS      OLS     OLS     OLS      2SLS   2SLS    2SLS     2SLS
Δ ((ICT capital) / (Value Added))         -64.52 -41.72 -62.13 -51.41 -160.15 -80.06 -73.81 -46.74         -42.8    22.21
                                         (20.24) (13.35) (18.79) (14.28) (44.52) (60.97) (56.75) (49.04) (235.73) (224.74)
Δ log(Value Added)                        -15.33   -2.73 -16.33 -4.36      -7.57   0.45    -15.26 -16.24 -15.48    -16.67
                                          (2.23)  (1.99) (3.13) (2.83)    (3.32)  (3.64) (2.30) (2.47)    (2.27)   (2.34)
Δ ((Non ICT capital) / (Value Added))     18.01    3.89   21.33    7.82   -16.58    -7.9   18.26  20.02    17.42    17.62
                                         (10.25) (6.61) (13.38) (9.27) (17.77) (13.85) (10.59) (11.41) (11.34) (12.81)
1980 High-skilled wage bill share                  -0.55           -0.48           -0.72
                                                  (0.08)          (0.08)          (0.19)
1980 Medium-skilled wage bill share                -0.64           -0.57           -0.95
                                                  (0.07)          (0.09)          (0.28)
Country fixed effects                       X        X      X        X                        X      X        X        X
Sample: Continental Europe                                  X        X
Sample: US                                                                   X       X
Sample: All countries                       X        X                                        X               X
Sample: All countries except USA                                                                     X                 X
Obs.                                       208      208    143      143     27       27      208    181     208      181
R-squared                                 0.580    0.79    0.59    0.77    0.36    0.68     0.58   0.78     0.58     0.52
F-stat for excluded instrument in the
first stage                                                                                 10.5    9.6      6.5      8.3


Notes: Coefficients estimated by OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions weighted by the industry's 1980 share
of each country's employment. In columns (7) and (8) we instrument the 25-year difference in ICT Capital/Value Added by the 1980
levels of ICT capital/Value Added in the USA. In columns (9) and (10) we instrument the 25-year difference in ICT Capital/Value
Added by the 1980 levels of routine task input using the 1991 Directory of Occupational Titles (constructed as in Autor, Levy and
Murnane (2003)).




                                                                32
                                                         Table 5: Trade and Technology
                                             Dependent variable: High-Skilled Wage Bill Share
                                                                     (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)
Δ ((Imports+ Exports) / (Value Added))                              0.59       0.71        0.59            0.50       0.24        0.11
                                                                   (0.46)     (0.25)     (0.15)           (0.19)     (0.30)      (0.25)
Δ ((ICT capital) / (Value Added))                                                       107.61            94.25                  73.59      75.49
                                                                                        (31.70)          (34.07)                (31.41)    (31.10)
Δ log(Value Added)                                                                         4.09            3.84       4.03        2.57       2.36
                                                                                         (1.09)           (1.26)     (1.38)      (1.52)     (1.35)
Δ ((Non ICT capital) / (Value Added))                                                     -0.63            0.16                   0.97       1.03
                                                                                         (2.41)           (3.41)                 (3.12)     (3.02)
1980 (Research and Development Expenditure/ Value Added)                                                             34.18       28.04      30.08
                                                                                                                    (18.23)     (17.59)    (14.91)
Intercept                                                                8.60
                                                                        (0.80)
Country fixed effects                                                                  X         X          X          X           X          X
Sample: Traded goods (all countries)                                      X            X         X
Sample: Traded goods (except Austria and Spain)                                                            X           X          X           X
Obs.                                                                     84            84       84         65          65         65          65
R-squared                                                               0.02          0.67     0.82       0.80        0.80       0.82        0.82



Notes: Coefficients estimated by OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions weighted by the industry's 1980 share of each country's
employment, for traded goods. The OECD ANBERD dataset does not have R&D data for Austria and Spain, which are dropped from the sample
(columns (4)-(7)).




                                                                                 33
                                   Table 6: Contribution of Changes in ICT and R&D to Changes in the High-Skilled Wage Bill Share

                                                         (1)                    (2)                 (3)                    (4)                (5)                  (6)
Sectors                                                  All                   All                Traded                 Traded               All                  All
Method                                             No Controls, OLS     Full Controls, OLS    No Controls, OLS     Full Controls, OLS    No controls, IV    Full controls, IV
Δ (High-skilled wage-bill share)                        10.02                 10.02                9.37                   9.37               10.02                10.02

Δ ((ICT capital) / (Value Added))                        0.018              0.018                   0.017                0.017                0.018              0.018
Coefficient on ICT                                        72.3               46.9                    83.1                 75.5                152.3              121.6
Mean*Coefficient of ICT                                   1.32               0.86                    1.45                 1.31                 2.78               2.22
Mean contribution % of ICT                               13.16               8.50                   15.43                14.03                27.72              22.14
Table and columns used                             Table 3 column (2) Table 3 column (4)                          Table 5 column (7)                       Table 4 column (7)
Research and Development/Value Added                                                                0.028                 0.028
Coefficient on R&D                                                                                  52.79                 30.08
Mean*Coefficient on R&D                                                                              1.49                 0.85
Mean contribution of R&D                                                                            15.90                 9.06


Notes: This table contains a "back of the envelope" calculation of the contribution of technology to accounting for the changes in the high-skilled wage bill share




                                                                                      34
               Appendix Table A1: List of all EUKLEMS Industries
          Manufacturing                               Services
Code        Code Description        Code              Code Description
        Agriculture, hunting,              Sale, maintenance and repair of motor
AtB                                  50    vehicles and motorcycles; retail sale of
        forestry and fishing
                                           fuel
                                           Wholesale trade and commission
 C      Mining and quarrying         51    trade, except of motor vehicles and
                                           motorcycles
                                           Retail trade, except of motor vehicles
        Food products, beverages
15t16                                52    and motorcycles; repair of household
        and tobacco
                                           goods
        Textiles, textile products,
17t19                               60t63 Transport and storage
        leather and footwear
        Wood and products of
 20                                  64    Post and telecommunications
        wood and cork
        Pulp, paper, paper
21t22   products, printing and       70    Real estate activities
        publishing
        Coke, refined petroleum                 Renting of machinery and equipment
 23                                 71t74
        products and nuclear fuel               and other business activities
        Chemicals and chemical
 24                                    E        Electricity, gas and water supply
        products
        Rubber and plastics
 25                                    F        Construction
        products
        Other non-metallic
 26                                   H         Hotels and restaurants
        mineral products
        Basic metals and
27t28                                  J        Financial intermediation
        fabricated metal products
      Machinery, not elsewhere                  Public administration, defence, and
 29                                    L
      classified                                compulsory social security
      Electrical and optical
30t33                                 M         Education
      equipment
34t35 Transport equipment             N         Health and social work
      Manufacturing not
                                                Other community, social and personal
36t37 elsewhere classified;           O
                                                services
      recycling




                                           35
                                Appendix Table A2: List of Industries Pooled by Country

               NACE codes

               15t16 plus 17t19 plus 36t37; 20 plus 21t22 plus 24 plus 25 plus 26 plus 27t28; 29 plus 30t33 plus 34t35; 50
Austria
               plus 51 plus 52 plus H; 60t63; 64; 70 plus 71t74; AtB; F; J; L; M; N; O
               15t16; 17t19; 36t37; 20; 21t22; 24; 25; 26; 27t28; 29; 30t33; 34t35; 50; 51; 52; H; 60t63; 64; 70; 71t74; AtB;
Denmark
               F; J; L; M; N; O
              15t16 plus 17t19 plus 36t37; 20 plus 21t22 plus 24 plus 25 plus 26 plus 27t28; 29 plus 30t33 plus 34t35; 50
Finland
              plus 51 plus 52 plus H; 60t63; 64; 70 plus 71t74; AtB; F; J; L; M; N; O
              15t16 plus 17t19 plus 36t37; 20 plus 21t22 plus 24 plus 25 plus 26 plus 27t28; 29 plus 30t33 plus 34t35; 50
France
              plus 51 plus 52 plus H; 60t63; 64; 70 plus 71t74; AtB; F; J; L; M; N; O
              15t16 plus 17t19; 20 plus 21t22 plus 24 plus 25 plus 26 plus 27t28 plus 29; 30t33 plus 34t35; 36t37; 50 plus
Germany
              51 plus 52 plus H; 60t63 plus 64; 70 plus 71t74; AtB; F; J; L; M; N; O
              15t16; 17t19; 20; 21t22;24; 25; 26; 27t28; 29; 30t33; 34t35; 36t37; 50; 51; 52; H; 60t63; 64; 70; 71t74; AtB;
Italy
              F; J; L; M; N; O
              AtB; 20; 60t63; 64; H; 17t19; 26; 27t28; 50; 25 plus 36t37; 34t35; 15t16; O; 29; 52; 30t33; F; 21t22; 24;
Japan
              71t74; 51; J; 70; L plus M plus N
              AtB; F; 50 plus 51 plus 52 plus H; 64; 15t16 plus 17t19; 60t63; 20 plus 21t22 plus 24 plus 25 plus 26 plus
Netherlands
              27t28 plus 36t37; J; 29 plus 30t33 plus 34t35; L; N; 70 plus 71t74; M; O
              15t16; 17t19; 20 plus 21t22 plus 24 plus 25 plus 26 plus 27t28; 29; 30t33; 34t35; 36t37; 50 plus 51 plus 52;
Spain
              60t63; 64; 70 plus 71t74; AtB; F; H; J; L; M; N; O
              64; F; 50 plus 51 plus 52 plus H; 15t16 plus 17t19 plus 36t37; AtB; 60t63; 20 plus 21t22 plus 24 plus 25 plus
UK
              26 plus 27t28; 29 plus 30t33 plus 34t35; O; L; J; N; 70 plus 71t74; M
              15t16; 17t19; 36t37; 20; 21t22; 24; 25; 26; 27t28; 29; 30t33; 34t35; 50; 51; 52; H; 60t63; 64; 70; 71t74; AtB;
USA
              F; J; L; M; N; O
Note: We aggregate to the lowest level of industries in each country where there is a unique value of the wage bill share for
each education group




                                                                     36
                  Appendix Table A3: Decomposing Changes in Relative Wage Bills into Wages and Hours
Dependent variable              Ln(Relative Wage Bill)           Ln(Relative Wages)         Ln(Relative Hours Worked)
                              (1)     (2)    (3)       (4)   (5)      (6)    (7)       (8)   (9)    (10)   (11)      (12)
                                (High-        (Medium-         (High-         (Medium-         (High-       (Medium-
                            skilled/Mediu skilled/Low- skilled/Mediu skilled/Low- skilled/Mediu skilled/Low-
                              m-skilled)       skilled )     m-skilled)        skilled )     m-skilled)      skilled )
Δ ((ICT capital) / (Value
Added))                      4.72    4.00   -2.47 -2.04     1.28     0.93   -0.62 -0.77     3.44    3.07  -1.85 -1.28
                            (1.36) (1.26) (1.07) (0.99) (0.48) (0.43) (0.60) (0.68) (1.33) (1.26) (1.14) (1.12)
Δ log(Value Added)                   0.18            -0.28           0.10             0.04          0.08            -0.32
                                    (0.09)           (0.08)         (0.06)           (0.07)        (0.09)          (0.10)
Δ ((Non ICT capital) /
(Value Added))                       0.98             0.14           0.41             0.18          0.57            -0.03
                                    (0.51)           (0.38)         (0.21)           (0.17)        (0.51)          (0.34)

Country fixed effects          X        X        X       X       X        X           X      X      X        X       X        X
Sample: All industries         X        X        X       X       X        X           X      X      X        X       X        X
Obs.                          208      208      208     208     208      208         208    208    208      208     208      208
R-squared                     0.32     0.38     0.72    0.75    0.28     0.33        0.43   0.44   0.32     0.33    0.52     0.56

Notes: Dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) is the 1980-2004 change in the Ln(relative wage bill), e.g. in column (1) this is
ln(wage bill of highly skilled workers) - ln(wage bill of medium skilled workers). The dependent variable in columns (5)-(8) is the
change in Ln(relative hourly wage), e.g. in column (5) it is the ln(hourly wage of highly skilled) - ln(hourly wage of medium
skilled). In columns (9)-(12) the dependent variable is the change in Ln(relative hours worked), e.g. in column (9) this is
ln(annual hours of highly skilled) - ln(annual hours of medium skilled) . Coefficients estimated by OLS with robust standard




                                                                                37
                                                                  Appendix Table A4: Trade, ICT, and Research and Development
                                               (1)       (2)       (3)    (4)     (5)    (6)      (7)    (8)     (9)    (10)  (11)                          (12)      (13)      (14)      (15)      (16)      (17)      (18)
Dependent variable: High-Skilled Wage Bill
Share


Δ ((Imports+ Exports) / (Value Added))         0.59     0.11
                                              (0.15)   (0.25)
Δ ((Imports) / (Value Added))                                     1.07      0.21
                                                                 (0.30)    (0.45)
Δ ((Exports) / (Value Added))                                                         1.16      0.21
                                                                                     (0.30)    (0.54)
Δ ((Imports OECD+ Exports OECD) / (Value
Added))                                                                                                   0.68     -0.05
                                                                                                         (0.18)    (0.37)
Δ ((Imports OECD) / (Value Added))                                                                                            1.44     -0.43
                                                                                                                             (0.52)    (0.91)
Δ ((Exports OECD) / (Value Added))                                                                                                                1.10      0.03
                                                                                                                                                 (0.30)    (0.61)
Δ ((Imports+Exports nonOECD) / (Value
Added))                                                                                                                                                               2.21      1.38
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.58)    (0.73)
Δ ((Imports nonOECD) / (Value Added))                                                                                                                                                     2.09      1.14
                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.63)    (0.83)
Δ ((Exports nonOECD) / (Value Added))                                                                                                                                                                         10.97      9.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (3.38)    (3.41)
Δ ((ICT capital) / (Value Added))            107.61     73.59    107.29     73.22    110.10     74.17    109.81     76.19    110.39     78.75    112.20     75.32    110.43     69.95    113.76     71.89    116.71     67.65
                                             (31.70)   (31.41)   (31.52)   (31.32)   (32.04)   (31.41)   (31.94)   (31.57)   (31.55)   (31.40)   (32.51)   (31.53)   (31.13)   (30.44)   (32.06)   (30.75)   (29.66)   (29.74)
Δ log(Value Added)                             4.09      2.57      4.30      2.62      3.80      2.50      3.94      2.28      4.09      2.01      3.74      2.38      4.27      3.07      4.16      2.86      3.76      3.04
                                              (1.09)    (1.52)    (1.13)    (1.52)    (1.06)    (1.49)    (1.09)    (1.50)    (1.11)    (1.41)    (1.07)    (1.48)    (1.12)    (1.46)    (1.16)    (1.50)    (0.97)    (1.18)
Δ ((Non ICT capital) / (Value Added))         -0.63      0.97     -0.50      0.99     -0.76      0.95     -0.46      1.04      0.00      0.90     -0.82      1.01     -1.10      0.61     -1.20      0.47      0.24      2.77
                                              (2.41)    (3.12)    (2.38)    (3.11)    (2.45)    (3.13)    (2.39)    (3.05)    (2.33)    (2.98)    (2.46)    (3.13)    (2.50)    (3.22)    (2.51)    (3.24)    (2.42)    (2.97)
1980 ( Research and Development
Expenditure/ Value Added)                               28.04               28.05               28.27               30.89               32.97               29.83               25.38               26.73               25.85
                                                       (17.59)             (16.88)             (18.06)             (18.27)             (17.36)             (18.33)             (15.53)             (15.88)             (13.84)
Country fixed effects                          X          X        X          X        X          X        X          X        X          X        X          X        X          X        X          X        X          X
Obs.                                           84         65       84         65       84         65       84         65       84         65       84         65       84         65       84         65       84         65
R-squared                                     0.82       0.82     0.82       0.82     0.82       0.82     0.82       0.82     0.82       0.82     0.82       0.82     0.82       0.83     0.82       0.82     0.83       0.83

Notes: Coefficients estimated by OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions weighted by the industry's 1980 share of each country's employment, for traded goods. The OECD
ANBERD dataset does not have R&D data for Austria and Spain, which are dropped from the sample




                                                                                                         38
      Figure 1: Cross Country Variation in Growth of High, Medium
      and Low-Skilled Wage Bill Shares and ICT Intensity, 1980-2004
                                                                                 Figure 1A:High-Skilled Wage Bill Share



                                                  20
                                                            are
                                                                                                                               UK
                             Change High-Skilled Wagebill Sha                                               Finland
                                                          15                                                          USA
                                                                                                              Netherlands
                                                                              Spain
                                                                                         Japan
                                                 10




                                                                                                      France
                                                                              Germany
                                                                                          Austria Italy
                                        5




                                                                                         Denmark
                                0                 -5




                                                                       .005       .01     .015        .02        .025    .03    .035
                                                                                                 Change ICT/VA



                                                                                Figure 1B:Medium-Skilled Wage Bill Share
                                                                  20




                                                                              Spain
                                                                                         Denmark
                                                             hare
                               ange Medium-Skilled Wagebill Sh




                                                                                          Austria
                                                          15




                                                                                                           France
                                                                                                            Finland            UK
                                                                                         Japan
                                         5        10




                                                                                                        Italy
                                                                              Germany
                                 0
                             Cha




                                                                                                                 Netherlands
                                                  -5




                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                       .005       .01     .015        .02        .025    .03    .035
                                                                                                 Change ICT/VA



                                                                                 Figure 1C:Low-Skilled Wage Bill Share
                                                  -5




                                                                              Germany                   Italy
                              hange Low-Skilled Wagebill Sharre




                                                                                                                         USA
                                                         -10




                                                                                                                 Netherlands
                                       -20      -15




                                                                                          Austria          France
                                                                                         Denmark
                                                                                         Japan
                                -25
                             Ch




                                                                                                            Fi l d
                                                                                                            Finland
                                                                                                                               UK
                                                  -30




                                                                              Spain
                                                                       .005       .01     .015        .02        .025    .03    .035
                                                                                                 Change ICT/VA


Note: Figure 1 plots the growth of high, medium and low-skilled college wage bill shares against the growth of ICT
intensity (ICT/VA) for 11 OECD countries (see Table 1). Lines show regressions of the growth of each wage bill share
against growth of ICT intensity.


                                                                                                   39
  Figure 2: Average Annual Percentage Point Changes in High, Medium
   and Low-Skilled Wage Bill Shares over Six-Year Intervals from 1980-
                 2004 (Eleven Country Average and US)


                                                                   Figure 2A: Eleven Country Average
                                    Six-Year Difference

                                                      1




                                                                                                           High
                                             .5
                            in Wagebill Share




                                                                                                         Medium
                 Average Annualised S

                                   0




                                                                                                            Low
                  -1      -.5




                                                            1986         1992                    1998        2004
                                                                         End Year of Six Year Interval

                                                                               High             Medium
                                                                               Low



                                                                        Figure 2B: US Average
                             ualised Six-Year Differencce

                                                        1




                                                                                                           High
                                            .5
                              Wagebill Share




                                                                                                           Low
                                    0
                           in W




                                                                                                         M di
                                                                                                         Medium
                 Average Annu

                 -1      -.5




                                                            1986         1992                    1998        2004
                                                                         End Year of Six Year Interval

                                                                               High             Medium
                                                                               Low




Note: Figure 2 shows annualised six-year average growth rates of high, medium and low-skilled wage bill shares from
1980-2004, weighted by employment share in the starting year of the six-year interval (e.g. The 1980-1986
annualised difference is weighted by each industry’s share in the 1980 employment of the country).


                                                                                   40
 Figure 3: Cross-Industry Variation in Growth of High-Skilled Wage-Bill
        Share and ICT Intensity, 1980-2004 (11 Country Means)


                                                                      Figure 3A:Growth of High
                                                                                          High-Skilled
                                                                                               Skilled Share
                                                                     Whole Economy and Nontraded Industries
                                                     35
                                       agebill Share
                                         25     30
                 Change High-Skilled Wa
                                    20




                                                                                                                                         Financial
                                                                      Renting
                                                                                                                             Post
                             15




                                                                                 Electrical
                                                                    Public
                                                              Real estateChemicals
                                                                   Transport
                       10




                                                        Edu
                                                       Health        Machinery
                                                     Community               Paper
                                                                 Rubber
                                                            Minerals      Wholesale
                                                             Wood
                                                               Metals
                                                                 Retail
                                                         Sale_motor
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                     Hotels    Textiles
                                                                Food
                                                                           Transport
                   5




                                                        Agri
                 C




                                                        Construction
                                     0




                                                          0                                     .05                                 .1
                                                                                              Change ICT/VA


                                                                      Figure 3B: Growth of High-Skilled Share
                                                                              Traded Industries Only
                                                    20
                                   d Wagebill Share
                                          15




                                                                                                                                     Electrical
                                                                                                                 Chemicals
                                                                                                 Transport
                                                                                                     Machinery
                 Change High-Skilled
                                10




                                                                                                                       Paper
                                                                            Minerals      Rubber
                                                                          Wood   Metals
                                                                         Manufacturing
                                                                                    Textiles
                                                                                     Food
                      5




                                                              Agri
                                     0




                                                          0                     .01                .02                 .03                  .04
                                                                                              Change ICT/VA

Note: Figure 3A plots the growth from 1980-2004 of high-skilled wage bill shares against the growth of ICT intensity
(ICT/VA), by industry, averaged across countries. Lines show fitted values from regressions weighted by the cross-
country average of each industry’s share in 1980 employment (solid line for entire economy, dashed line for non-
trade industries only). Figure 3B restricts the sample to traded industries.

                                                                                                41
Figure 4: Cross-Industry Variation in Growth of Medium-Skilled Wage-
     Bill Share and ICT Intensity, 1980-2004 (11 Country Means)


                                                                            Figure 4A:Growth of Medium-Skilled Share
                                                                            Whole Economy and Nontraded Industries
                                                      25
                                       Wagebill Share
                                                20




                                                              Agri

                                                                  Textiles
                                         15




                                                               Wood
                                                           Construction
                                                                   Food
                                                           Manufacturing
                                                               Minerals
                                                                 Metals
                                                                    Rubber Transport
                  hange Medium-Skilled W




                                                        Hotels
                                    10




                                                                               Paper
                                                            Sale_motor
                                                                    Retail Chemicals
                                                                        Machinery
                                                                     Transport
                                                        Community           Wholesale
                              5




                                                                                  Electrical

                                                                                                                               Post
                         0




                                                             Health          Public
                                                                       Real estate
                    -5
                 Ch




                                                                 Edu
                                                                             Renting
                                       -10




                                                                                                                                           Financial

                                                             0                                   .05                                  .1
                                                                                               Change ICT/VA



                                                                            Figure 4B:Growth of Medium-Skilled Share
                                                                                     Traded Industries Only
                                                        25
                  Change Medium-Skillled Wagebill Share




                                                                     Agri
                                            20




                                                                                           Textiles
                                                                                 Wood
                                 155




                                                                                            Food
                                                                                Manufacturing
                                                                                   Minerals
                                                                                        Metals Rubber
                         10




                                                                                                                         Paper
                                                                                                                   Chemicals
                                                                                                       Machinery
                                                                                                   Transport

                                                                                                                                       Electrical
                 5




                                                             0                         .01          .02                  .03                  .04
                                                                                               Change ICT/VA

Note: Figure 4A plots the growth from 1980-2004 of medium-skilled wage bill shares against the growth of ICT
intensity (ICT/VA), by industry, averaged across countries. Lines show fitted values from regressions weighted by the
cross-country average of each industry’s share in 1980 employment (solid line for entire economy, dashed line for
non-trade industries only). Figure 4B restricts the sample to traded industries.

                                                                                                  42
 Figure 5: Cross-Industry Variation in Growth of Low-Skilled Wage-Bill
        Share and ICT Intensity, 1980-2004 (11 Country Means)


                                                                      Figure 5A:Growth of Low-Skilled Share
                                                                     Whole Economy and Nontraded Industries
                                    0
                                    agebill Share
                                              -5




                                                            Edu
                 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10




                                                                    Rentingg                                             Financial
                                                           lthReal estate
                       Low-Skilled Wa




                                                        Health
                                                        H
                                                                    Public

                                                               Retail Wholesale
                                                       Sale_motor
                                                   Community
                                                                                                             Post
                                                      Construction
                                                   Hotels               Transport
                                                                   Machinery
                                                                Transport     Electrical
                                                                          Paper
                                                                      Chemicals
                                                            Metals
                                                      Manufacturing
                                                               Rubber
                                                              Food
                Change




                                                          Minerals
                                                             Textiles
                                                           Wood
                                                      Agri
                C
                                    -35




                                                        0                                    .05                    .1
                                                                                           Change ICT/VA



                                                                      Figure 5B: Growth of Low-Skilled Share
                                                                              Traded Industries Only
                                                  -10
                                 d Wagebill Share
                                       -15
                Change Low-Skilled
                              -200




                                                                                           Machinery
                                                                                       Transport                    Electrical
                                                                                                      Paper
                                                                                                  Chemicals
                                                                              Metals
                    -25




                                                                       Manufacturing
                                                                                FoodRubber
                                                                         Minerals
                                                                         Wood Textiles
                                                              Agri
                                     30
                                    -3




                                                        0                      .01              .02        .03             .04
                                                                                           Change ICT/VA

Note: Figure 5A plots the growth from 1980-2004 of low-skilled wage bill shares against the growth of ICT intensity
(ICT/VA), by industry, averaged across countries. Lines show fitted values from regressions weighted by the cross-
country average of each industry’s share in 1980 employment (solid line for entire economy, dashed line for non-
trade industries only). Figure 5B restricts the sample to traded industries.

                                                                                             43
