NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VALUATION AND OPTIMAL EXERCISE OF
THE WILD CARD OPTION IN
THE TREASURY BOND FUTURES MARKET

Alex Kane

Alan J. Marcus

Working Paper No. 161)4

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1985

The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #16 14
May 1985

Valuation

and Optimal Exercise of
the Wild Card Option in
the Treasury Bond Futures Market

ABSTRACT

The Chicago Board of Trade Treasury Bond Futures Contract allows the short
position several delivery options as to when and with which bond the contract

will be settled. The timing option allows the short position to choose any
business day in the delivery month to make delivery.

In addition, the

contract settlement price is locked in at 2:00 p.m. when the futures market
closes, despite the facts that the short position need not declare an intent
to settle the contract until 8:00 p.m. and that trading in Treasury bonds car,

occur all day in dealer markets. If bond prices change significantly between
2:00 and 8:00 p.m., the short has the option of settling the contract at a

favorable 2:00 p.m. price. This phenomenon, which recurs on every trading day
of the delivery month, creates a sequence of 6-hour put options for the short

position which has been dubbed the "wild card option." This paper presents a
valuation model for the wild card option and computes estimates of the value
of that option, as well as rules for its optimal exercisc.

Alex Kane
School of Management
Boston University
704 Commonwealth Avenue

Alan J. Marcus
School of Management
Boston University
704 Commonwealth Avenue

Boston, MA 02215

Boston, MA 02215

I.

Introduction

The Treasury bond futures contract on the Chicago Board of Trade gives

several delivery options to the short position. The quality option, which
allows the short to deliver any of several eligible delivery bonds, has

already been studied fairly extensively. Because many bonds are eligible to
be delivered against the futures contract, and the conversion factors used to
adjust for the bond actually delivered do not perfectly reflect relative price

differences, the short-side trader will choose to deliver the "cheapest

eligible bond. Kilcollin (1982) presents a discussion and analysis of
conversion factors and their effects on the optimal delivery bond. Gay and
Manaster (1984a) present a theoretical valuation model for the quality option
when two classes of commodities with uncertain

end-of-period spot prices may

be delivered. Garbade and Silber (1983) provide a similar analysis and
estimate parameters of the valuation formula for a variety of agricultural

commodity futures. Kane and Marcus (1984) have used Monte Carlo simulations
to value the quality option in the Treasury bond futures market.
In contrast, the various timing options embedded in the delivery process

have received comparatively little attention. One of the most important of
these is the so-called wild card option. The wild card option arises because
the futures market closes each trading day at 2 p.m. (Central Standard Time),
which locks in the futures settlement price for the rest of the day, while the
short trader has until 8 p.m. of each trading day in the delivery month to

declare an intent to deliver on the contract. Because government bonds trade
in a dealer market that is effectively open until the 8 p.m. delivery-notice

deadline, a 6-hour "put option" is created at 2:00 p.m., which allows the
short trader to deliver the bond at that day's settlement price.

The short-side trader 'exercises1 his option by choosing at 8:00 p.m. to

deliver at that afternoon's 2:00 p.m. settlement price. Otherwise, the

contract is continued into the next day. That day, the contract is marked to
market and by 8:00 p.m. the short position once again must decide whether to

deliver. This process continues until delivery, which is required to be made
by the end of the delivery month.

One recent paper that deals explicitly with the wild card option is by Gay

and Manaster (1984b). That paper considers a simple delivery rule for the
fiit-itr rnntra't -

to

and

iniii1

atc th ic nf th rul

93 nr

frr th 1 —
q77-1
—-—

ntl

derive an empirical assessment of the value of the wild card option. No

theoretical valuation formula for the option is offered, however. Moreover,
we will argue below that the Gay-Manaster trading rule is not value-maximizing
for the short position.
The

derivation of both the optimal exercise strategy and the valuation

formula for the
equilibrium,
Because
impounds

rules

wild card option are

complicated by the

the futures price must be bid down

the payoff to the

option

presumption that, in

by the value of the option.

depends upon the futures price, which in turn

the option value, the determination of the valuation and exercise

requires the solution of a fixed-point problem. This simultaneity is

often overlooked; for example, Gay and Manaster's (1984b, p. 9) exercise rule
implies that, in the absence of transaction costs, delivery should be made

whenever spot bond prices decrease after 2 p.m.1 In fact, we demonstrate
below that bond prices must decline by more than a critical value before

delivery is optimal. The excess profit offered by delivering at B p.m. over
that of marking to market on the next trading day must compensate the short

position for the fact that the wild card option expires upon exercise. This

-2-

feature makes the delivery decision an optimal stopping problem: once the
short trader chooses to deliver, potentially more profitable future exercise

of the option is no longer possible. Hence, the delivery profit must be large
enough to compensate for the loss of the right to carry the wild card option
into the next trading day.

This paper presents a valuation model for the wild card option. We show
that the option is in some ways similar to an American option with the unusual
feature that, at the start of each trading day, the exercise price is

readjusted to put the option out of the money. Section II contains a
discussion of the features of the delivery process in the T-bond market that
create the wild card option, and presents a valuation formula for the option.
This valuation rule gives the amount by which the equilibrium T-bond futures

prices should be bid down in equilibrium to compensate the long position for
the

delivery option conveyed to the short position. Section III is devoted to

numerical exercises that demonstrate the quantitative significance of the
option.

We find that the value of the option at the start of the delivery

month can be 20 cents (off the current futures price of 65 dollars). This
value is smaller than, but of the same order of magnitude, as the value of the

quality option (Kane and Marcus, 1984). Finally, Section IV contains a
summary and discussion of the implications of our results.

II. The Delivery Process and the Valuation of the Wild Card Option
The basic trading unit in the CBT 1-bond futures market is a 10O,OOO face
value U.S. Treasury bond. Any such T-bond with a maturity of at least 15
years which is not callable for at least 15 years from the first day of the

delivery month may be delivered to settle the contract. In order to adjust

-3-

for differences in the values of deliverable grade bonds, the CBT establishes
conversion factors (OF) to determine actual payments at the delivery of the

The long side of each contract pays the short side an amount equal

contract.

to the futures contract settlement price times the conversion factor. The CF

is chosen to adjust for the relative values of the admissible delivery grade
bonds. The CF equals the fraction of par value for which the delivery bond

would sell if it were priced to offer an 8 percent yield to maturity. Bonds
with coupon rates above 8 percent will have a CF greater than one, and

i

hu1 ri.i
J frv. hrnrJ.Sfl,IJT

I ' ¼-I! In

Al though the futures price is frozen for the day as of 2:00 p.m., the
short side trader has until 8:00 p.m. to announce his intent to deliver. If
he delivers, the conversion factor of the delivery bond is calculated and the

long—side trader is invoiced for an amount equal to q F2pm(t) where q is

the conversion factor and F2(t) is the closing futures (settlement) price
at date t. Letting B8pm(t) denote the market value of the delivered bond,
the short position's profit from delivery is2

F2p(t) - 88pm(t)

(1)

If the short chooses not to deliver, the contract is continued to the next

day. The expected (as of 8:00 p.m. on day t) profit or loss to the short
position from the next day's marking to market is

F
2pm

Ct) - E

[F

8pm,t 2pm

(t÷1)]

(2)

where the second term in (2) denotes the expected value of the next day's
closing futures price based on the information available as of 8:00 p.m.

-4-

If there are no transactions costs involved in establishing a position in
the futures market, then the short will choose to deliver if expression (1) is

greater than (2). With no transaction costs, any position in the futures
market may be re-established after the profits from either strategy (1) or (2)

are realized. To operationalize the delivery rule, an expression for

Eapmt[F2pm(t+1)] is required.
To derive such an expression, note that if the futures market were open
continuously, then at all times during the delivery month the futures price
and spot price of the currently-optimal delivery bond would have to satisfy
the no-arbitrage condition

rr(t)

= qF(t)

-

8(t)

=

0

or
F(t) =

3(t)/q

where ir(t) is the profit to the short side and the optimal delivery bond is
the one which minimizes the price to conversion factor ratio, B(t)/q.

In reality, the short position may choose to deliver at 8:00 p.m. at the
closing (2:00 p.m.) futures price, or if it is more profitable, may continue

the contract to the next day, and mark to market. To reflect this option, the
equili5rium futures price must he bid down by the option's value V(t), so that
the observed futures prices, F(t) must he

F(t) =

B(t)/q

—5--

-

V(t) .

(3)

otice that if a contract were settled while the futures market were open,
the profit from settlement would be

=
=

qF(t)

-

B(t)

-qV(t)

The short trader would suffer a loss equal to the wasted wild card option
scaled by the conversion factor.

In fact, one would expect that the contract

,4 ng' ls ++i AU ,'4
F' I IJrI 4r.
I#U A.flfl
• 'A '.1 p • rn
Ii •

.,,-.,.1
u I 'A II ' V ' I
flU

L/ s...

.2 I.. t I_

.2 I

+h 4rn 1rw1
,I h
*flJI 1 I
.2l * 'I IA
Li i.,r'.rl-h

'— —

'—

'J V I.. I 'J I I

IA '..

more alive than dead.4 Thus, the settle versus mark to market decision will
be made each day at 8:00 p.m., and the sequence of delivery decisions can be
treated as occurring once each day during the delivery month.

Using (3), we immediately deduce that

E8pmt[F2pm(t+l)] =

E8pffl[Bpffl(t+l)/

-

V2(t+1)]

(4)

With no trend growth in the bond price (or alternatively, noting that trend
growth over one day is of second-order importance compared with daily price

fluctuations), the expectation of B2p(t+l) is simply the current price,

B8pm(t)•5 Moreover, V2(t+l) is nonstochastic: as of 2:00 p.m. on
date t1, before any bond price movements occur while the futures market is
closed and the settlement price is locked in for the day, the option value is
a function only of time to maturity and the parameters of bond price

dynamics. Since the bond price and futures price have not yet become
misaligned, the option value is independent of
price.

the

actual level of the bond

In fact, its value for any day in the future at times during which the

futures market is open is nonstochastic. Hence, (4) becomes

-6-

= B8p(t)/q

-

(5)

V2pm(t+l)

and the expected profit from marking to market is

F2pm(t) —

[Bgp(t)/q

-

V2pm(t+l)]

or, using (3) for F2pm(t)

[B7p(t)/q -

=

where 3 =

V7pm(t)]

-tBIq

-

[B8p(t)/ V2pjt+l)]

-

-

-

[V?pm(t)

(6)

V2pm(t+l)]

-

Bgpm(t)

B2pm(tL

Finally, comparing the profits from marking to market [equation (6)] with

those from delivery [equation (i)] the condition at 8:00 pm. for continuing
the contract rather than delivering is

-B!q -

-

V2pm(t•ll)]

[V2pm(t)

>

iB_V2p(t)

(7)

and the incremental profit of marking to market over that of delivering is

X. =

B(1-1/q)

+

(q-l)V2(t)

+

V2pm(t+1)

(8)

Equations (7) and (8) highlight the difference between our formulation and

that of Gay and Manaster (1984b). They derive the optimal delivery strategy
without accounting for the impact of the wild card option on the futures

-7-

price. (See their equations (2) and (3).) Consequently, the last two terms
in (8) do not appear in their delivery rule, and they conclude that in the
absence of delivery costs, and with a conversion factor greater than one, the
short should deliver whenever bond prices decline between 2:00 p.m. and 8:00

p.m.7 In contrast, equation (8) demonstrates that the delivery decision

cannot be predicted by simple rules of thumb. On one hand, marking to market
continues the contract and keeps the wild card option alive into the next

day. This is reflected in the term qV2(t) in equation (8); this
consideration discourages delivery. On the other hand, (8) shows that one
must also consider the change in the value of the option as time passes.
Since the value of the wild card option must decrease as the delivery month

nears its end, V(t÷1) will be less than V(t), so that F(t1)-F(t) will be
larger than would be suggested by movements in the spot bond market alone.
Consequently, marking to market produces lower profits for the short position
than would be indicated by changes in the spot price alone; this pattern
encourages delivery.
Notice

also the crucial role played by the conversion factor in the

valuation of the wild card option. If the conversion factor equals 1.0, then
the only value for the option that is consistent

with (7)

or (8) is V(t) = 0

for all t. For q = 1, delivering and marking to market produce identical

profits,

As q diverges from 1, however,

the value of the option to choose

between delivering and marking to market can grow rapidly.
The role of the conversion factor in determining settlement behavior may

best be understood by considering the CF as a scale factor. The daily profit
to the short position from a mark to market strategy equals (-B/q -

the settlement strategy gives a profit of -B - qV.

-8-

V)

while

When bond prices fall,

the short position profits. Note however, that the profit accruing from the
bond price decline is divided by q in the mark to market strategy. Hence,
when q exceeds 1.0, settlement will tend to dominate marking to market for
bond price decreases, because marking to market scales down profits by 1/q.
Conversely, for increases in bond prices, the short position suffers a loss

that can be scaled down by the factor 1/q by marking to market. Hence,
ignoring the option value (and transaction costs), the optimal settlement rule
for q > 1 would be to settle whenever bond prices fall after 2:00 p.m. and

mark to market when prices rise. The delivery rule should be reversed for q <

1, since then the factor 1/q exceeds 1.0, and scales up profits or losses.
This rule was simulated.by Gay and Manester (1984b) using past contracts.
When the value of the option is also considered, the settle versus mark to
market decision is more complicated, since settlement forfeits the right to

carry the option into the next trading day. Hence settlement requires that
bond

prices fall by more than a finite critical value (for q > 1) before

settlement is optimal . However, the role of the conversion factor as a

scaling factor remains. In fact, one might view the wild card option as the

right

to scale up profits by a factor of q when bond prices fall (for q >

1)

or to scale down losses by that factor when prices rise (for q < 1) on the day

that the option is exercised.8 Hence, it is clear that the optimal strategy
is to wait for an afternoon with large price swings before settling the
contract.

Implementation of equation (8) as a means of determining when to deliver
requires that the value of the wild card option as a function of time left in

the delivery month be known. This is the standard optimal stopping problem
(DeGroot,

1970). Fortunately one can solve (8) recursively to determine that

-9-

valuation formula. Consider first the value of the option on the last day
that the contract is traded, which we will denote by T. At this date, the
short position's wild card option is valueless. The last change in the
futures price has been recorded, and there is no longer an option to mark to

market rather than to deliver.9 Hence, V2(T) =

0.

At 2:00 p.m. on date T-1, the short has one more six-hour period in which

the choice between delivering or marking to market may be made. The expected
profit is thus

E2pm,T_l[max (settlement profit, mark-to-market profit)]

(9)

The equilibrium condition in the futures market (assuming no risk premium to

either side of the contract) is that expression (9) equal zero. Rewriting
(9), we obtain

+

E2pm,T_l(settlement profit)

where

E2Pffl,T_l[max(XTlO)]

= 0

(10)

was defined in equation (8). But the expected settlement profit is

simply E2pm,T_l[(_B8pm(T_l) +

qF2p(T_l)].

Since the expected

end-of-day bond price equals the current price (see footnote 5), and with
F2pm(T_l) =

B2p(T_l)/

-

V2pm(T_l)

by equation (3), the expected 8:00

p.m. settlement profit is

2pm(Tl) +

[B2p(T_l)/

-

and equation (10) becomes

-

10-

V2pm(T_l)]

_V2p(T_l)

(11)

V2p(T_1) + E2PfflTI[max(XT1.

0)] = 0

or

V2(T-1) =

(l/)E2p,1_1

[rnax(X11,0)]

(12)

The realization of XT1 depends on Bgpm(T_I) which is a random variable as
of 2:00 p.m. on day T-1.

The solution to

V(t) = E9m 4[max(X4., O)]/q

(13)

requires the determination of a fixed point since V(t) is itself part of

and thus appears on the right-hand side of (13). However, given the
probability distribution for B8pm(t) conditional on information available at
2:00 p.m. on date t, the expectation of X. for a given V(t) is easily
calculated, and determination of the fixed point is a straightforward
numerical exercise.

Once V(T-1) is determined, equation (13) can be solved for V(T-2), and so

on back to the first day of the delivery month. The end result is a schedule,
V(t), for each date t

during

the delivery month. This schedule can then he

by the short position in conjunction with equation (7) to determine at

used

8:00 p.m. of each delivery day whether delivering or marking to market is the

appropriate strategy. The exercise strategy
market

is straightforward: mark to

if X. is greater than zero; otherwise settle the contract.

For example, using the assumption that next-day bond prices are

distributed lognormally with

mean drift equal to zero, the expectation in (13)

equals

—11—

(1/q) [xBH(d1) -

E1(d7)]

for q > 1
(14)

(1/q) [xBrl—N(d1)] — E[1—N(d2)]]

for q <

1

where
x = 1 -

current

=

B

1/q

E = xB +
=

bond price

(1-q)V(t)

(1/a)[ln(xB/E)

V(t1)

+
+

2/2]

d9 = d1 2

=

the

variance of the six-hour bond return

NL) = the cumulative standard normal distribution function.

Because the one-step--ahead value of the option is already established (as we

work backwards from time 1), an iterative technique can be used to solve (14)

for V(t). Notice that V(t) appears on the RHS of (14) in E. Hence, at each
step of the solution, the fixed point for V(t) in (14) must be calculated.

III. Numerical Results
In order to quantify the value of the wild card option, we present
solutions to equation (14) for several configurations of the delivery bond's

conversion factor and standard deviation of bond returns. The value V(t) that
results is the amount by which the futures price should be bid down in
equilibrium because of the option.

We considered conversion factors of 0.75, 1.25, 1.5, and 1.75. Conversion
factors of bonds currently eligible for delivery range from approximately 1.0

-12-

to 1.75. The standard deviation of annual bond returns was set to either .05,

.10, or

.20. These values correspond to the range of va'ues calculated by

Bodie, Kane, and McDonald (1984) for bond return variability during different

subperiods in the 1970s and 1980s. The six hour standard deviations of the
bond rate of return were calculated from the annual standard deviations on the
basis of 52 trading weeks per year with five trading days per week. We also
assumed that the spot bond market supports active trading for 12 hours a day.
The range that we consider for the annual standard deviation, 5-20 percent,
should account for the fact that the number of trading days per week and hours
per day need not be exactly as assumed.

Figure 1 is a graph of the value of the wild card option as a function of

trading days remaining in the delivery month. Because trading in the contract
is suspended seven business days prior to the end of the month, there are

typically no more than 16 days on which the wild card play can be made. Three
curves appear in Figure 1, corresponding to the three posited values for
standard

deviation in conjunction with a conversion factor of 1.5. As

expected, the value of the wild card option increases with the delivery bond's
standard deviation. The value

of the option rises quickly as days remaining

in the delivery month increase from zero, but the rate of increase falls

steadily with time to maturity. At the start of the delivery month, with 16
days remaining until the contract stops trading, the value for the option

reaches .083, Z.165, and .329 per contract on Z100 of T-bond par value, for
the three standard deviations respectively. These values are smaller than,
hut of the same order of magnitude as the value of the quality option
calculated in Kane and rlarcus (1984). The quality option (i.e., the value of
the short position's right to choose the optimal delivery bond) for contracts

-13-

three months prior to the delivery month was calculated to be in the range of

1.39 to 4.60. As the delivery month approaches and the delivery bond
becomes more easily predicted, the quality option diminishes in importance,
and the wild card option becomes more important for the short position.

Figure 2 is similar in design to Figure 1, but examines the impact of the

conversion factor on the option value. The calculations here use the
mid-point annual standard deviation value of 10 percent.

In this case the

values of the wild card option at the start of the delivery month equal Z.277,

.li4, .i65, and $.189 for the conversion factors .75, 1.25, 1.5, and 1.75
respectively. The value of the option is obviously quite sensitive to the

between the conversion factor and 1.0.

difference
factors

themselves increase with

Since the conversion

the difference between the coupon rate of the

delivery bond and the eight percent coupon rate of the benchmark bond on which
the contract is nominally written, the value of the wild card option will vary

with

the general level of market yields. Thus, if

permanently

to

market yields were

fall from current levels, so that all delivery bonds would have

coupon rates closer to eight percent, the wild card option would be devalued.
Figures 3 and 4 demonstrate the amount by which the delivery bond's price
must rise or fall on any afternoon in order to induce the short position to

initiate delivery. Equation (8) shows that when

is negative, settlement

of the contract will be optimal. For conversion factors greater than one,
this will require a bond price decrease. We have calculated the necessary
decrease

for bonds intitially selling at par value (Z100). Figures 3 and 4

show that with few days left in the
bond

delivery month, even slight declines in

price will set off delivery. Because there is little time left in which

to obtain a "favorable draw" from the distribution of bond-price changes, the

-14-

value of the wild card option is low, and even small decreases dictate

contract settlement. However, as time remaining in the delivery month
increases, the condition for settlement becomes more stringent. The analysis
is symmetric for conversion factors less than one. Figures 3 and 4 also
illustrate the bond price increase required to initiate delivery when q < 1.
Because of the sensitivity of bond prices to weekly money-supply
announcements, one might argue that the weekly variance rate of bond returns

ought to be 11concentrated on the announcement day. We examine the impact of
this potential nonstationarity in Figures 5 and 6, in which the annual
standard deviation of bond-price changes is kept equal to the midrange value
in Figures 1 and 3 (i.e., 10 percent), but in which the standard deviation of

every fifth day's return is made to be (1k) times as large as the previous
four days' standard deviation. Increases in k thus correspond to greater
concentration of price movements on the money-supply announcement day. Values
of k equal to 0.5 and 1.5 are considered, and the conversion factor 1.5 is

used. The values in Figure 5 and 6 thus may be compared to the midrange
curves in Figures 1 and 2, since all use identical conversion factors and

annual standard deviations. The option values in Figure 5 are all slightly
greater than the corresponding values in Figures 1 and 2,

reflecting

the fact

that valuation function is convex in the bond-return standard deviation.
The outstanding feature of Figure 5 is the dramatic dependence of the

option value on potential price movement during the announcement day. For the
extreme case, k =

1.5,

the option value is almost flat for days in-between

announcements. Virtually the entire value of the option accrues from the
bond-price variability associated with the three announcement days of each

delivery month. The decrease in bond price necessary to set off a settlement,

-15-

which is depicted in Figure 6, is correspondingly spiked at announcement

days. Figure 6 demonstrates that the critical price decrease required to
induce contract settlement increases dramatically for each announcement day
left in the delivery month, while it is almost unaffected by the remaining
number of non-announcement days.

IV. Conclusion
We have developed a valuation framework for the wild card option implicit
in

the Treasury-bond futures contract. Market equil ibrium requires that the

futures price be bid down by the value of this option. For the current set of
delivery bands, and with an annual standard deviation of 10 percent, our

results indicate that the value of the option at the start of the delivery
month is consistent with the futures price being bid down by approximately
one-fifth of a point (from a current base of roughly 68). As the month draws
to its end, however, the option value approaches zero.
Our valuation framework also gives rise to a value-maximizing contract-

settlement rule. We presented the critical bond-price decreases necessary to
induce contract settlement as a function of days left in the delivery month
and the bond's variance rate and coversion factor.
A natural question arises as to whether

traders

actual settlement behavior of

closely mimics that dictated by our model. Gay and Manester (1984b)

conclude that traders act suboptimally and that futures prices are consistent

with that suboptimal settlement behavior. If so, delivery behavior based on
the rules derived herein should provide the short position with superior

profits. We currently are simulating the use of these rules using past
contracts to examine their efficacy in increasing the short positions's
potential profit.
-15-

FOOThOTES

1. This rule is reversed when the delivery bond's conversion factor falls

below 1.0. However, the conversion factor exceeds one for virtually all
eligible (non-flower) bonds.

2. The invoice price also includes the accrued interest on the delivered

bond. For expositional simplicity, we will omit this term in the
following analysis. Since the actual profit at delivery is -B + (qF+A)
-(B-A) + qF, where A is the accrued interest, one can think of the short

position as delivering the bond stripped of its accrued interest in return

for qF. Hence B in our notation may be considered the
net-of-accrued-interest value of the bond. This is the price at which the
bond is quoted in the security market.

3. This formulation ignores the uncertainty involved in the mark-to-market
strategy.

If that risk is not diversifiabie, a discount factor could be

applied to (2).

1.. It is conceivable that for some specifications of interest rate dynamics,

settlement prior to 8:00 p.m. could be optimal. For example, with a
strongly mean-reverting interest rate process, a large interest rate
increase and associated bond-price decrease early in the afternoon would

tend to be followed by bond-price recovery. Settlement before the
anticipated recovery could then be value maximizing. Such a possibility
is rule out by the log-normal bond-price dynamics that we posit.

If we

were to use a stochastic process for which settlement prior to 8:00 p.m.
were an important possibility, then equation (13) below would
underestimate

the value of the wild card option.

5. Letting A denote accrued interest on the delivery bond, the short's profit
upon delivery actually equals [-(B-A)
-17-

+

qFi, and (3) becomes

(t) =

[B(t)

-

A(t)]/q

-

V(t)

Hence, one actually requires in (4) that B2pm(t+1) include the trend
growth in the value of the bond less its accruing interest, or' put

differently, the trend growth in the quoted price of the bond. This will

be quite close to zero for bonds selling near par. It is simple to add a

growth factor to B8(t) to account for the expected one-day growth in
the net-of-accrued-interest bond price. Our valuation estimates results
were virtually unaffected by such an addition, and we therefore ignore it

to avoid cluttering the notation. We also assume here that the optimal
delivery bond for the next day is known as of 8:00 p.m.

6. As noted, because the futures price continually adjusts along with the
bond price to new information during the trading day, it will never he
optimal to deliver prior to 2:00 p.m., and indeed delivery before 8:00

p.m. would be highly unlikely. Only when bond prices decline after 2:00
p.m. is it profitable to settle. After 2:00 p.m., the option value moves
in response to bond price fluctuations. Until then the value is fixed.
If, at 8:00 p.m., settlement is not chosen, the option takes on its

next-day's value which is, again, fixed until 2:00 p.m. This feature
distinguishes the wild card option from more conventional American

options. When the futures market reopens every morning, the futures price
immediately adjusts to reflect the information that arrived since 2:00

p.m. on the previous afternoon. Thus, the option goes immediately out of
the money at the start of each day.

7. When the conversion factor is less than 1.0, increases in the price of the

delivery bond will cause the short position to settle the contract. The
term multiplying 3 in equation (3) changes sign when q passes though

1.0. This issue is discussed further below.

-18-

S. This

insight suggests an easy way to

Rather

eliminate

the wild card option.

than use the CF to scale up the invoice price to reflect the

quality of the delivery bond, which results in profits qF-B, the CF
could be used to scale down the number of bonds required to satisfy the

contract. This procedure would result in settlement profits to the short
position of F-B/q. Marking to market would thus result in identical

profits

as settlement, and this complicating effect on contract strategy

would be eliminated.

9. This date is actually 7 business days prior to the end of the delivery

month. At that time, the futures market is closed and the settlement
price no longer changes. While the short has the right to decide when
during this last week to deliver, he is obligated to deliver by the end of
the week at the given settlement price, and with no special information
regarding the one-week movement in the bond price, the value of this
"waiting option" should be negligible.

-19-

REFERENCES

Bodie, Z.; Kane, A.; McDonald, R.L., 1984, 'Why Haven't Nominal Rates
Declined,' Financial Analysts Journal, 40, 16-27.

DeGroot, M.H., 1970, Optimal Statistical Decisions, New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Company.
Garbade, K. and W.L. Silber, 1983, "Futures Contracts on Commodities with
Multiple Varieties: An Analysis of Premiums and Discounts," Journal of
Business, 56, 249-271.
Gay, G.D. and S. Manaster, 1984a, "The Quality Option Implicit in Futures
Contracts," Journal of Financial Economics, 13, 353—370.
1984b, "Implicit Delivery Options and Optimal
Delivery Strategies for Financial Futures Constraints," Working Paper
CSFM-95, Center for the Study of Futures Markets, Columbia University.

Kane, A. and A.J. Marcus, 1984, "An Assessment of Delivery Risk in the
Treasury Bond Futures Market," Working Paper CSFM-96, Center for the Study
of Futures Markets, Columbia University.
Kilcollin, T.E., 1982, "Difference Systems in Financial Futures Markets,"
Journal of Finance, 37, 1183-1197.
Kolb, R.W., G.D. Gay, and J. Jordan, 1982, "Are There Arbitrage Opportunities
in the T-bond Futures Market," Journal of Futures Markets, 2, 217-229.

Phillips, S.M. and C.W. Smith, 1980, "Trading Costs for Listed Options: The
Implications for Market Efficiency," Journal of Financial Economics, 8,
179—201.

Resnick, B. and E. Hennigar, 1983, "The Relation Between Futures Prices and
Cash Prices for U.S. Treasury Bonds," Review of Research in Futures
Markets, 2, 282-299.

1.2

1-

0.4—

z
0 0.8
HIL
0
0 0.6
-J

>
0.2

0

/

I

I
I

<i-

-

-

Figure
1:

-------:
_
5

Option Value (sigma =

10

.10)

15

TRADING DAYS LEFT IN MONTH

20

2Ei10R:i!,

CONVERSION F
CONVERSION F ACTOR=,75
ION
_______
CONVERSION rActoRI.5

Legend

A
X

[1

1i

z
0
FU0
LL

0
LiJ

-J

>

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0

/

/

/

,

2:

7

Figure

//

5

-—

=
Option Value (conversion factor

10

1.5)

15

TRADING DAYS LEFT IN MONTH

20

Legend

SIGMA=.1O

A SKMA=.05

><

U SIGMA=.20

LU

-J
FF-—

LU
11)

0
F-

Li
ID
2>

0

2:
0
z
LU
Cl)
LU

U
LU
0

1

0.5

0

—0.5

—1

0

Figure

2

3:

6

8

-

-

10

12

-

-

14

16

--——.——- -: J—T ----

Critical Bond-Price Decrease to Initiate Contract Settlement

-

4

TRADING DAYS LEFT IN MONTH

CON VRSLON F A CT ORi.75

CONVERSION rACTORrt.5

CONVtRSIOMFCTORrI25

CONVERSION F ACTOR=50
CONVERSION F ACTOR=.75

Legend

/\

X

JEli

uJ

-J
F—

FLd
(I-)

0
F—

bJ
-J

>

za
0

z
U
Cl)

U
U

U
a

1.5

1

0.5-

0
0

Figure

/

2

4:

/
/

6

I

8

I

10

I

12

I

14

I

V

Critical Bond—Price Decrease to Initiate Contract Settlement

/,
//
4

TRADING DAYS LEFT IN MONTH

>'\

16

Legend

t SIGMA=0.05

X SIGMA=0.i

LI SIGMA=0.2

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
0

//

Figure

/

5

5:

15

1

Option Value With Weekly Announcements

10

TRADING DAYS LEFT IN MONTH

><

20

Legend

A K=0.5

X K=1.5

LtJ

-J
FFuJ
ff1

0
FLiJ

-J

>
D
2:
0
In
2:
U

V)

U
U

0bJ

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

Figure

2

6:

6

8

10

12

14

Critical Bond—Price Decrease (Weekly Announcements)

//
4

TRADING DAYS LEFT IN MONTH

y

2<

16

A

K=1.5

K=0.5

Legend

x

