                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE:
           THE IMPACT OF RELOCATED FIRMS ON INCUMBENT SURVIVAL

                                            Oliver Falck
                                         Christina Guenther
                                          Stephan Heblich
                                          William R. Kerr

                                        Working Paper 16141
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16141


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




We thank Gilles Duranton, Marcello Pagnini, William Strange, Matthew Turner, and seminar participants
at the European Regional Science Association, University of Munich, and University of Toronto for
insightful comments and suggestions. Parts of this paper were written while Falck was visiting Harvard
University and Heblich was visiting the University of Toronto. They acknowledge the hospitality of
these institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Oliver Falck, Christina Guenther, Stephan Heblich, and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
From Russia with Love: The Impact of Relocated Firms on Incumbent Survival
Oliver Falck, Christina Guenther, Stephan Heblich, and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 16141
June 2010
JEL No. J2,L1,O1,R1

                                             ABSTRACT

We identify the impact of local firm concentration on incumbent performance with a quasi natural
experiment. When Germany was divided after World War II, many firms in the machine tool industry
fled the Soviet occupied zone to prevent expropriation. We show that the regional location decisions
of these firms upon moving to western Germany were driven by non-economic factors and heuristics
rather than existing industrial conditions. Relocating firms increased the likelihood of incumbent failure
in destination regions, a pattern that differs sharply from new entrants. We further provide evidence
that these effects are due to increased competition for local resources.

                                                    
Oliver Falck                                        Stephan Heblich
Ifo Institute for Economic Research                 Max Planck Institute of Economics
University of Munich                                Kahlaische Straße 10
Poschingerstr. 5                                    07745 Jena, Germany
81679 MunichGermany                               heblich@econ.mpg.de
falck@ifo.de
                                                    William R. Kerr
Christina Guenther                                  Harvard Business School
Max Planck Institute of Economics                   Rock Center 212
Kahlaische Straße 10                                Soldiers Field
07745 Jena, Germany                                 Boston, MA 02163
guenther@econ.mpg.de                                and NBER
                                                    wkerr@hbs.edu
1. Introduction

    A common theme in economic geography is that increasing returns to scale at the

local level are essential for explaining the geographical distribution of economic activity.

Many industries have product markets that are national or international in scope, and one

typically finds the firms of those industries tightly clustered together in specialized

regions or clusters (e.g., automobiles in Detroit, finance in London). These geographic

agglomerations of similar firms offer benefits to each member firm by reducing the

transportation costs for material goods, specialized workers, and industry knowledge

among the firms. Increasing returns are further generated through shared local inputs,

indivisible facilities, better matching possibilities due to thicker markets, and so on.1


    Of course, tight geographic concentration comes with countervailing costs as firms

compete for local inputs. This competition is most frequently expressed in rental prices

and wage rates that differ both across local areas and across districts within a specific

region. With this pricing, it is not certain that the increased benefits to incumbents from

additional firm concentration will maintain pace with growing input costs, or vice versa.

The effect of increased local agglomeration on incumbent firm performance is thus

ambiguous. In the extreme, greater competition for scarce local inputs can force some

incumbent firms out of business even when product markets are very broad in scope.


    This paper is an empirical investigation of the impact of increased local concentration

on incumbent firms. Causal identification in this setting is quite challenging due to



1
  Marshall (1920) first outlined many of the rationales for industrial agglomerations. Duranton and Puga
(2004) and Glaeser (2008) document the microeconomic foundations of agglomeration economies, and


                                                   2
selection effects. Economic models typically begin with rational entrants that are forming

expectations about the relative costs and benefits of locations and choosing the best

candidate. This location choice process suggests that simple empirical correlations of

changes in local firm concentration and incumbent firm performance or survival are

likely to be biased from the true relationship. For example, high entry rates may reflect

short-term spatial disequilibria with favorable benefit/cost ratios. The latter conditions

can independently promote incumbent firm performance and survival, and the adverse

impact of new entrants on input conditions for local incumbents are likely to be

dampened in these opportunistic settings.


    This endogeneity problem can be overcome with random assignment of locations to

entrants. One situation in which location choice is quasi random arises when the entrant

has incomplete information about locations. The entrant will first use available

information to limit the choice set of potential locations. However, after removing weak

contenders, the entrant will be indifferent among observationally equivalent locations and

hence choose randomly among the finalists. This idea drives the identification strategy in

the pivotal work of Greenstone et al. (2010), who analyze the effect of opening a large

manufacturing plant on the productivity of incumbent firms in the local region. In their

setting, the location choice for a new plant by an expanding firm begins with a detailed

review of dozens of possible locations. This review process, however, yields several top

candidates that are often very difficult to choose among. This ambiguity makes the final

location decision effectively random among these top candidates.




Rosenthal and Strange (2004) survey the corresponding empirical evidence. Rosenthal and Strange (2001)
and Ellison et al. (2010) provide recent empirical analyses of the relative strengths of agglomeration forces.


                                                      3
   A second setting that overcomes the selection bias is where location choice is driven

by non-economic factors. If decisions are made exclusively according to factors that are

orthogonal to local industrial conditions, the assignment of entrants can be treated as

random for incumbents. Such experimental variation is rare in regional economics and

cannot be generated in controlled experiments (Holmes, 2010). This form of random

variation is very valuable, however, as randomized location choices are over all potential

sites. When relying on economic decisions based upon substantial but ultimately

incomplete information, as exemplified by Greenstone et al. (2010), tight comparisons

are made amongst the best sites for an entrant. In principal, decisions due to non-

economic factors and/or extremely limited information offer a wide spectrum of sites that

include (from a local business perspective) very good choices and very bad choices.


   This paper exploits one such quasi natural experiment—the division of Germany into

four occupational zones after World War II. By 1949, the three western zones occupied

by England, France, and the United States formed the Federal Republic of Germany. The

eastern part developed into a satellite state of the Soviet Union, and most believed in

1949 that this eastern zone would adopt the Soviet Union’s socialist system. The fear of

expropriation (or worse) prompted many firm owners to flee to western Germany where

they re-established their firms (Buenstorf and Guenther, 2007).


   We study this relocation in the context of the machine tool industry. Our data

catalogue the entire population of German firms in the machine tool industry from 1949

onwards, along with many pre-war conditions. This industry is a good setting to

investigate these localized agglomeration and input competition effects. The industry’s

product markets are international in scope, but its production processes benefit from


                                            4
agglomeration economies due to specialized knowledge and workers, exchanges of

material goods, and similar. The industry is characterized by strong manufacturer-user

relationships that are the main impetus of innovation in this industry, and it largely

consists of small and medium-size firms. While relatively small at 2% of German

industrial production, the machine tool industry serves as an important foundation for the

broader metalworking sector.2


    Moreover, the relocation of the machine tool industry from eastern to western

Germany was quite substantial. We identify 33 relocators that fled from the Soviet zone

to the American or British occupation zones. These 33 firms represent an 8% increase in

total industry size for the receiving zones. At a regional level, the localized increases

ranged from 0% and 200%, with an average of 11% for regions experiencing a relocation.

In total, a fifth of machine tool industry present in eastern Germany migrated during a

narrow window of 1949-1956. This was a one-time event, as no prior or subsequent

migrations occurred within the industry across German regions, eastern or western.


    Using conditional logit frameworks, we first show that these location choices were

made with very little regard to existing business conditions across regions in western

Germany. The general destruction of Germany during World War II and its subsequent

division resulted in very little information, much less accurate information, about the

current state or future plans for regions. Moreover, many migrations were made under

extreme duress. Consequently, relocating firms did not undertake sophisticated location

decisions, but instead based their destination choices on heuristics and non-economic


2
 See Sciberras and Payne (1985), Ashburn (1988), Carlsson (1989), Lee (1996), Hirsch-Kreinsen (2000),
and Arnold (2003).


                                                 5
factors. In particular, we show that greater cultural similarity and further geographic

distances dominate economic factors in these decisions.


   Yet, upon arrival, these relocating firms substantially impacted local industrial

conditions as the firms quickly regained much of their former production capacity

(Buenstorf and Guenther, 2007). We use hazard models to compare incumbent survival

by region based upon the magnitude of this influx. We find that relocations significantly

increased the likelihood of incumbent failure, which suggests that the costs of increased

competition for local inputs dominated the potential benefits from agglomeration

economies. By contrast, we find that new start-up entrants during the post war period—

whose location choices were more opportunistic—were not associated with increased

incumbent failure rates. These differences provide additional confidence in our

experimental design.


   Finally, we further validate the resource constraint hypothesis by examining local

workforce conditions after the war. In particular, western Germany experienced a

contemporaneous inflow of about 12 million expellees who were exogenously distributed

across local regions by the authorities of the occupation zones. These expellees were

critical for rebuilding a German workforce devastated by the war. These expellee

assignments were again orthogonal to the existing machine tool industry. As such, there

exists great heterogeneity in workforce conditions across locations where relocations of

machine tool firms occurred. We show that the increased failure rates of incumbents in

western Germany due to relocating firms was concentrated in regions where labor forces

were constrained due to low expellee inflows. In regions with a significant inflow of




                                           6
expellees and favorable input conditions, there was no effect of relocations on incumbent

firms’ risk of failure.


    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the quasi

natural experiment in greater detail, and Section 3 introduces our data on the German

machine tool industry. Section 4 analyzes the location choice problem for firms

relocating from East Germany. Section 5 examines the impacts of relocating firms for

incumbents. We conclude with some implications in Section 6.




2. Industrial relocation from the Russian zone as a natural experiment

    After World War II, Germany was initially separated into four occupational zones

that were independently administered by France, the United Kingdom, the United States,

and the Soviet Union. In the years following World War II, differences in ideology

between the three ―western‖ administrations and the Soviet Union led to a second, lasting

separation of Germany. The western part evolved into a federal parliamentary republic

with a market-oriented economy, and the socialist eastern part adopted the Soviet system

of a planned economy. The partition became quasi official in May 1949 when the three

western zones were merged into an independent state, the Federal Republic of Germany

(West Germany), and the Soviet zone became the German Democratic Republic (East

Germany) in October 1949. Even though the West German Constitution considered the

two-state solution as an artificial status quo, reunification was not expected in the short

term. To this end, West Germany began massive investment in developing the

infrastructure and housing supply for its new capital of Bonn.


                                            7
   As it became clear that the separation was semi-permanent and that East Germany

was adopting a Soviet system, many East Germans looked west in search of political

freedom and economic prosperity. More than 2.5 million people fled East Germany to

resettle in West Germany prior to the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961.


   Among the refugees from East Germany were thousands of business owners whose

firms were threatened with socialization. Recognizing the costs of these firm migrations,

East Germany continually strengthened border controls to prevent a large-scale outflow

of productive capital and knowledge, and thus most business relocations were secretly

planned and quickly executed. As a consequence, it was impossible for these owners to

collect or analyze detailed information about potential locations in West Germany.

Moreover, any available information had very little content for decision making due to

vast destruction during World War II and the subsequent dismantling of many

undestroyed production facilities (Laske, 1995; Mazzoleni, 1997). For most decisions,

existing industrial structures were simply not known.


   The expropriation and dismantling of machine tool producers in the Soviet zone was

largely based on a referendum held on 30 June 1946. The referendum approved the

expropriation of all Nazis and war criminals, a group that included firm owners who

engaged in or were related to the production of armaments. Given that the whole machine

tool industry was somehow involved in the production of armaments, most owners were

subsequently expropriated and their firms were socialized.


   Three case studies of firms originally located in the Chemnitz region of East Germany

illustrate the setting. In response to the expropriation threat, the owners and managers of




                                            8
the Wanderer Corporation called an extraordinary general meeting in Munich where they

decided to relocate the company to that city. This was done quickly, and the company

continued producing bicycles and mopeds at their new location from 1949 onwards. A

very similar story applies to the Auto Union Corporation. In this case, the firm relocated

to Ingolstadt where it ultimately developed into the very successful car producer Audi.

Finally, Pfauter Co. was a producer of machine tools used in gear production that was

established in Chemnitz in 1900. At the end of World War II, the firm was being run by

the founder’s four sons. Feeling threatened by the Soviet occupation, three of the Pfauter

brothers and some loyal employees moved the company to Stuttgart in 1949. The fourth

brother was detained by the Soviets (Buenstorf and Guenther, 2007).


   All together, the separation of Germany was a hard blow for the machine tool

industry. Prior to World War II, almost 30% of Germany’s machine tool manufacturers

were located in the eastern part of Germany that was to become the Soviet zone after the

war. This separation of the former centers of the industry, especially around Chemnitz,

Leipzig, and Dresden in Saxony, as well as East Berlin, resulted in a 41% reduction of

production capacity as compared to 1938 (Schwab, 1996).




3. The German machine tool industry

   Our data come from the buyer’s guide Who Makes Machinery (Wer baut Maschinen),

which has been issued annually since the 1930s by the Association of the German

Machine Tool Producers (Verein Deutscher Maschinen- und Anlagenbau). This source

allows identification of the entire firm population of 2,267 machine tool producers in


                                            9
West Germany from 1949-2002.3 Machine tool producers are defined as producers of

power-driven machines that are used to produce a given work piece by cutting, forming,

or shaping metal (Wieandt, 1994).


    Based on the 1936-1943 volumes of Who Makes Machinery, we identify 394

incumbent firms with pre-war experience in the British or American zones. We exclude

the French zone from our analysis because the dismantling of production facilities within

this zone eliminated almost all incumbent production facilities. The first three columns of

Table 1 provide statistics for these incumbents by region within each occupational zone.


    The listed regions are officially defined as ―planning regions‖. These regions are

functional economic units formed on the basis of commuter distances. Many

agglomeration forces find their strongest expression at this geographic level, making this

spatial unit ideal for our analysis.4 The average number of incumbents in the 40 regions

was ten, with a median of four incumbents. The three largest centers were Düsseldorf,

Stuttgart, and Bochum/Hagen.


    Product counts are our best estimate of firm size (Franco and Filson, 2006; Klepper

and Thompson, 2006). We are able to distinguish 36 products (e.g., turning, boring, or

grinding machines) from three major product classes: metal cutting, metal forming, or

special purpose machine tools. The average number of products for incumbent firms in




3
  Only one catalogue was issued for 1949/1950, and the 1952 catalogue was not archived. We approximate
1952 with conditions in 1951 for our empirical work.
4
  See Rosenthal and Strange (2001), Duranton and Overman (2005), Arzaghi and Henderson (2008), Fu and
Ross (2010), Ellison et al. (2010), and Kerr and Kominers (2010) for related work on spatial distances for
agglomeration forces. For recent work on labor markets and agglomeration, see Diamond and Simon
(1990), Rotemberg and Saloner (2000), Fallick et al. (2006), Menon (2009), and Overman and Puga (2010).
Delgado et al. (2010) and Glaeser et al. (2010) provide recent analyses of local cluster performance.


                                                   10
1949 was 1.7, and the average number of product variants was 3.4. The most important

product class varied across regions within each zone.


    We further identify from the earlier records 33 machine tool producers that were

originally located in eastern Germany (28 firms) or Silesia/Prussia (5 firms) but relocated

their business activities after the war to either the British or American zones of West

Germany. These 33 companies constituted about 6% of the overall firm population in

1938 at the beginning of World War II.


    Columns 4-6 of Table 1 describe relocators’ destination regions, their years of

relocation, and the number of products that they start with at their new location. The

number of products after relocation of 1.4 was a decline from the pre-war capacity of

these firms, but they quickly expanded upon relocation. Over the first ten years,

relocators achieved a mean of 2.18 products. The average of their max sizes is 3.15

products.5


    Columns 7 and 8 describe the level of start-up entrants in these regions. In total, 1,386

firms entered these regions in the post war period to 2002. Approximately 55% of these

entrants survived for five years or longer, and 40% survived for ten years.


    Visually, the table suggests that relocations and entries have moderate spatial overlap

at most. In absolute terms, Düsseldorf and Stuttgart are the top locations on both lists

reflecting their greater shares of the industry as a whole. But there exists extensive


5
  We identified 43 relocators in total. We require that relocators in our sample survive for five years after
relocating. This restriction excludes a few marginal cases where it is not certain that the relocator resumed
production. Two relocators from Silesia move to regions without incumbent firms (Oberland and
Regensburg). These firms are effectively excluded from our sample as well. Finally, we drop three
relocations within Berlin that are difficult to interpret.


                                                    11
variation otherwise. For example, Berlin had the third most entrants but only one

relocation from the surrounding eastern Germany regions. The start-up overlay was

closer to existing incumbent structures.6 One way to quantify the spatial overlap is to

normalize relocation and entrant counts by initial incumbent activity after the war. The

spatial correlation of these normalized measures for relocations and entrants is just 0.14.

This independence allows us to analyze these two phenomena jointly.




4. Location decisions of relocating firms from the Soviet zone

      We analyze the location choice problem of relocators from the Soviet zone to either

the American or British zones with conditional logit models. We have ten source regions

in the Soviet occupation zone and 63 potential destination regions (40 with incumbents

after World War II) in the American and British zones. For this analysis, we only

consider relocations from eastern Germany as we do not have pre-war traits on conditions

in Silesia/Prussia. The latter are, however, included in the survival analysis in Section 5.


      The conditional logit estimations include fixed effects for potential destination

regions. These effects capture traits of destination regions that are common to relocators

from all source regions. Examples would include general economic activity in the region,

the number of surviving incumbents, and so on. Beyond these traits that we could

potentially measure today (e.g., Düsseldorf’s size in 1949), these effects also capture

many unobserved characteristics or expectations of regions that existed in the uncertain

environment after World War II.


6
    Holmes and Stevens (2002) and Glaeser and Kerr (2009) discuss entrant spatial distributions and existing

                                                     12
    After controlling for these destination effects, we test attributes about destination

regions that are unique to origin regions. We characterize three factors that are specific to

origin-destination pairs. The first is naturally geographic distance, although distance

carries two potential effects in this context. First, greater distance raised the costs of

relocations. On the other hand, further distance might have been advantageous to the

extent that firms relocated further away from the uncertainties that surrounded the border.


    Our second measure is how similar the machine tool industries are in the origin and

potential destination region. This factor tests the extent to which industrial structures

factored into decisions. Our measure is a count measure of product similarity across 36

different products. We measure products that were being produced in the origin region in

eastern Germany before World War II in 1936. We do the same for potential destination

regions in West Germany in 1949.7 Our measure is the sum of product matches between

the two regions, which describes the similarity of conditions for entrants.


    This measure is calculated by region pairs. By contrast, we purposefully do not

compare the relocator’s product portfolio when starting at the new location to the

incumbent firms’ product portfolios in the potential destination regions. The relocator’s

product portfolio might be endogenous to the location decision itself.


    Our third metric tests the role of non-economic factors and heuristics in these

decisions. Following Falck et al. (2010b), we measure cultural similarity between two

regions as the similarity between the historical dialects spoken. Extensive research in

economics ties heightened social and economic interactions to ethnic, genetic, and



incumbents for the US.


                                             13
linguistic bonds.8 In this study’s context, dialect similarity partly represents familiarity

with norms and conventions of the potential destination region. It may also reflect distant

family ties. With such uncertainty about economic conditions in potential destinations,

these non-economic factors may have been especially important in decisions.


    Linguist Georg Wenker conducted a unique survey of dialects between 1879 and

1888 at 45,000 schools across the German Empire. The resulting data, which contains

almost 300 attributes of dialects by region, afford very fine grained comparisons of the

dialect connections between locations. Falck et al. (2010b) construct a dialect similarity

matrix. This work further demonstrates that these dialect connections persist even to

present in migration flows. We use their metrics for the cultural similarity of origin

locations in eastern Germany and potential destinations in West Germany.


    Figure 1 illustrates the location choice of the seven relocators from the region of

Chemnitz-Ore Mountains in eastern Germany. The shading of the left map reflects the

dialect similarity of the 63 regions in the American (solid outline) and British occupation

zones with the Chemnitz region. Darker shading indicates higher dialect similarity. The

shading of the right map reflects the product similarity between the Chemnitz region and

potential destinations. Darker shading again indicates greater similarity.


    The first observation is that distance is a factor in that the seven firms migrated

farther into West Germany than random. Second, the chosen destination regions tended to

have strong dialect similarity with Chemnitz—four of the seven cases fall into the highest




7
  We find similar results when using 1936 traits for potential destination regions, but we believe it is
conceptually better to use conditions after the war.


                                                  14
two levels, and none of the selected regions has below average dialect similarity. On the

other hand, there is not a consistent pattern for product similarity, with a wide mixture of

high and low similarities present.


    Table 2 extends this visual analysis to all relocations using conditional logit models

(McFadden, 1973). To aid in interpretation, we standardize our three similarity metrics to

have zero mean and unit standard deviation. The Chemnitz patterns hold more generally.

Geographic distance was a very strong factor, with relocators favoring more distant

regions. This suggests that short-term transportation costs were less important than

establishing new locations farther from the border. Dialect or cultural similarity was also

a strong factor, with a strength similar to geographic distance.


    On the other hand, product similarity did not play role in these decisions. It is

important to note that our product similarity measure is not insignificant due just to

imprecise estimates. Its standard errors are consistently larger than the standard errors for

distance or dialect similarity. But, the point estimates for the economic importance of

incumbent structures are also much lower. Both of these give us confidence that location

choices were primarily made due to factors orthogonal to incumbent industrial structures.


    Column 2 finds similar results when restricting the sample to relocators that survived

at least ten years in their new location in West Germany. In general, it does not appear

that relocation choices were motivated differently among relocators with short versus

long subsequent life spans.



8
  For example, Lazear (1999), Rauch and Trindade (2002), Kerr (2008), Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), and
Guiso et al. (2009). Falck et al. (2010b) provide more extended references. See also the experimental
results on status quo tendencies of Kahneman et al. (1991).


                                                  15
    Finally, Columns 3 and 4 conduct tests of the independence of irrelevant alternatives

assumption by restricting the set of alternative potential destinations. We first consider

the actual destination region along with ten counterfactual regions that are most similar to

the actual destination region in terms of population density. Beyond origin-destination

similarity for the machine tool industry itself, these urban conditions could have been

meaningful for relocation decisions due to infrastructure needs and similar factors. This

choice set restriction does not change the greater importance given to distance and

dialect/cultural similarity.


    Column 4 alternatively restricts counterfactual regions to just those that bordered the

actual destination region. This restriction removes the distance and dialect variation, but

it allows us to test very narrowly the product similarity index. Relocators continue to

select regions with very limited attention to incumbent industrial structures even among

regions that neighbor their true choice.


    To summarize, both the case studies and empirical models indicate that existing

incumbent structures across regions were not a major factor in the location choices of

firms fleeing East Germany. Instead, non-economic factors like greater distance and

dialect similarity dominated. This provides confidence that these relocations provided

quasi random exogenous shocks to the local machine tool industries. We next turn to the

impact of these shocks on the performance of incumbent firms.




                                            16
5. The effect of relocators on incumbent survival

5.1. Empirical strategy


    We estimate the effect of relocated firms from the Soviet zone on incumbent survival

in the affected West German regions. These firms were quite different from start-ups as

they brought with them (to varying degrees) industry experience and technical

knowledge, networks of domestic and foreign customers, portfolios of existing products,

and similar assets that could be built upon in their new locations. Indeed, these relocated

firms recovered quickly and developed to be as successful as local incumbents. This

group has been taken as evidence for persistent organizational capabilities of firms that

are independent of a single spatial location (Buenstorf and Guenther, 2007).


    The large magnitudes of these random shocks, along with the localized variations in

resource constraints for workers that are discussed below, provide a fruitful laboratory for

comparing beneficial agglomeration economies versus adverse competition for localized

inputs. Importantly, our empirical setting is also free of variations in local demand to a

first approximation. Domestic and international trade is central to the machine tool

industry and its wide product markets (Carlsson, 1989).9




9
  For example, a particularly simple representation of firm optimization with one input takes the form
p•g(n)•f(l)-w(n)•l-c, where f(l) is a concave production technology in the input l and c is a fixed cost of
operation that are specific to firm i. The size of the industry in the local area is n. The price of output p is
determined by national or international product markets and is exogenous to the local area. The function
g(n) is a reduced-form expression of agglomeration economies that is increasing in n. The function w(n)
similarly represents the impact of greater local industry size on input prices. Depending upon the
underlying model, local industry growth may raise productivity due to agglomeration economies, raise
input prices due to resource competition, or both. Shut-down conditions for incumbents (participation
constraints) and first order conditions for optimal firm size depend upon the relative strengths of these
effects. See Greenstone et al. (2010) for a more extended discussion of this theoretical backdrop.


                                                      17
     We begin our survival estimations with 1949. This is several years after the 1945

German surrender, but it took some time after World War II for the industry to

reorganize. War crime prosecutions lasted until 1949, and industrial production was

controlled by occupational forces during the interim. Heavy machine tool production was

entirely prohibited immediately after the war, and other fields were severely restricted.

Machine tool production in West Germany began to recover in 1949 with the signing of

the Petersburg Agreement, which set the framework for West German sovereignty and a

new market-based economy (Schwab, 1996). 1949 also marked a clear recognition that

the future paths of East and West Germany would differ substantially, which began the

rush to relocate.


     We analyze the effect of relocations on incumbent firm survival through a

proportional Cox hazard model (Cox, 1972),


     hi (t | )  h0 (t )  exp(  r   t   0 RZ rt  1 RE rt  X i   it ) ,


where hi (t | ) is the hazard rate or risk of failure of incumbent firm i located in region r at

time t conditional on a set of regressors. h0 (t ) is the unspecified baseline hazard function.

We take into consideration the fact that incumbent firms have been at risk of failure since

their founding, even though we do not analyze their survival before 1949.10 Some of the

incumbent firms are still active today. We relate these hazard functions to relocations and

start-up entry in the incumbents’ planning regions.




10
  We lack founding years for some incumbents. We therefore use the year of first appearance in the survey
(between 1936 and 1949) as the time at which a firm becomes at risk of failure. Our results are robust
across various modelling strategies with respect to this timing.


                                                         18
    RZ rt is a count variable of relocations to a region. In our first specification, we treat

each relocator with the same weight, such that RZ rt is the cumulative count of relocating

firms to region r by time t. In our second approach, we weight the importance of

relocators by their size at entry, which is proxied by initial product counts upon

relocation. The coefficient of interest is  0 or exp(  0 ) . The latter is the proportional

change in the incumbent firm’s hazard rate resulting from the relocation of a firm from

the Soviet zone to region r. RE rt is a symmetrical treatment for entering start-up firms.


   We include time fixed effects  t to capture aggregate changes in hazard rates

common to regions. These are due, for example, to German business cycles or industry

trends for machine tools. The region fixed effects  r control for regional variation in the

baseline hazard rate due to factors like fixed agglomeration externalities, natural

advantages, or local policies.


   Finally, we include two firm-specific covariates. The first of these is the number of

products an incumbent firm supplied in 1949, where we consider a firm’s product variety

as a good proxy for firm size (Franco and Filson, 2006; Klepper and Thompson, 2006).

Larger initial firm size and product variety reduced the likelihood of firm failure. The

second trait is the incumbent’s major product class in 1949, as technology areas and

industries differed in the expected longevity of businesses (Sciberras and Payne, 1985).




                                             19
5.2 Basic survival results


   Tables 3 and 4 report the basic hazard estimations. We report proportional changes

for the hazard ratio, exp( ) . Coefficients larger than one signify an increased risk of

failure, while values less than one signify decreased risk. We cluster standard errors by

region, and statistical significance is measured relative to exp( )  1 .


   Table 3 uses the firm count approach. Additional relocations to a region significantly

raised the hazard of failure for local incumbents. One additional relocation was associated

with a 25% higher likelihood of firm failure compared to the baseline. This effect

contrasts sharply with the coefficient for start-up entrants. Start-up entrants were

associated with a very small decline in incumbent hazard rates. The linear differences

between the relocation and entry effects are statistically significant.


   While proportional effects are most accurately estimated, Table 1 shows that there

were many more entrants than relocators. A crude calculation of applying the marginal

effects to the total numbers of each type during 1949-2002 suggests that these aggregate

effects of relocators and entrants are quite comparable in economic magnitude. This

comparability is remarkable given the very short window in which these relocations

occurred.


   Columns 2-4 refine this assessment by contrasting the relocation response with

different sets of start-up entrants. First, we restrict the start-up entrants to the period

before 1956. With this restriction, the window for new entrants matches the period in

which the relocations occurred. The results in Column 2 are very similar, suggesting that

the effective time periods across types are not driving our results. Second, many start-ups


                                              20
are short-lived, with 45% of entrants to the machine tool industry failing before five

years. Columns 3 and 4 restrict entrants to those that survived at least five or ten years,

respectively. These entrants were perhaps more comparable in quality to the relocated

firms, at least over a medium horizon, but the difference persists. Finally, unreported

regressions further show these differences hold when combining the various restrictions.


   Table 4 repeats this battery of specifications using initial product counts to weight the

importance of relocators and entrants. The pattern of results is very similar to Table 3,

with the more refined variation yielding more precisely estimated effects. The average

relocator had 1.42 products at entry. This mean entrant would yield a 22% increase in

incumbent failure, which is slightly less than the mean effect of 25% in Table 3. This

differential suggests that larger reallocations may have had disproportionate effects, but

that the non-linearities would be second order in importance. Along these lines,

unreported specifications find evidence that relocations of larger firms had additional

effects for incumbent failure, but these differences are not statistically significant. This

may in part descend from the fact that many relocators with small initial product counts

were able to restore production capacity quickly upon arrival.


   These results are robust to a variety of further specification variants. For example, we

find similar patterns when including pre-trends for regions or interactions of product class

and year fixed effects. Adjustments to the sample window also do not influence the

results. We find comparable outcomes when testing simpler indicator variables for pre-

post relocations to a region. Across multiple techniques, the higher incumbent failure rate

following relocations emerges with a generally consistent economic magnitude.




                                            21
   These survival estimations focus on the extensive margin of incumbent performance.

We also undertook unreported specifications of product counts of incumbents to model

the intensive margin for surviving incumbents. The historical nature of our data limit us

from calculating detailed productivity measures, but product counts and survival are often

closely linked to productivity (Griliches and Regev, 1995).


   Effects on the intensive margin were much smaller and generally sensitive to

specification choice. One exception was (not surprisingly) a strong, sharp decline in

products for failing incumbents immediately before exit. A second result pointed to

increased product variants for surviving incumbents following relocations. Nevertheless,

our general conclusions from this extended analysis are that extensive margin effects for

incumbent survival were much more important than intensive margin differences for

surviving incumbents.




5.3 Exploring the source of input competition in the local labor market


   As a final step, we investigate more closely the input competition mechanism. The

German labor force was devastated by the war, and a very important factor in rebuilding

this labor force was the distribution of expellees (Falck et al., 2009). Expellees were

German citizens or ethnic Germans who lived within the eastern German borders as they

existed between 1917–1937 or in Austria-Hungary before or during the war (§1, Federal

Expellee Law, 19 May 1953). Late in World War II, these individuals were forced by the

Soviet Red Army to leave their homelands and settle within the new borders of Germany

or Austria. This expulsion was furthered by the Potsdam Treaty. Almost 12 million ethnic



                                           22
Germans fled or were expelled from their homes in East Prussia, Pomerania, Silesia, East

Brandenburg, and the Sudetenland to find refuge in other German states.


   Expellees had little choice in where they were settled, being generally distributed

across regions based on the availability of food and housing by the authorities. These

often tended to be more rural locations. At first, it was difficult for the expellees to work.

For example, their formal qualifications were frequently not recognized as valid.

However, West Germany enacted the Federal Expellee Law (Bundesvertriebenengesetz)

in 1953 that regulated the expellees’ status and granted them full access to the local labor

market. This exogenous push provides important variation in local workforce conditions.


   Competition for employees was weaker in planning regions with a higher influx of

expellees. Moreover, the differences across regions were quite substantial. The last

column in Table 1 shows the variation in expellee shares. Data are available in eight bins

from the Bundesminster fuer Heimatvertriebene (1950). Eight of the 40 planning regions

in our incumbent sample had an expellee influx of less than 10%. On the other hand, five

zones had an influx greater than 30%.


   We group regions into three buckets based upon these expellee shares. Low shares are

[0,10%], medium shares are (10%, 20%], and high shares are those greater than 20%.

These three groups are of equal size with respect to the number of relocations. Moreover,

each of these buckets contains one of the three largest destinations for relocations.

Düsseldorf is among the lowest shares, Rhine-Main is in the middle bucket, and Stuttgart

is among the highest shares. This extensive variation is a fortunate byproduct of the

exogenous circumstances driving both the spatial distributions of machine tool




                                             23
relocations and of expellees. The spatial correlation of the expellee shares and the

machine tool relocations is -0.19.


   Table 5 shows that the impact of relocating firms on incumbent survival was

particular strong in regions with lower labor influx due to expellees. The first and third

columns demonstrate this pattern for the full sample. These regions with low labor influx

experienced the fiercest competition for labor, and the effect of relocations on incumbent

survival was twice the sample average. The increase in the incumbents’ risk of failure is

somewhat smaller in the intermediate group of regions. Most importantly, there was no

increase in failure among the regions with the largest expellee influx. The estimations in

Table 5 jointly measure these effects, and we find similar results when separately

considering each group of expellee shares.


   The second and fourth column also show these results hold when restricting the

sample to regions with moderate population density. We undertake this robustness check

due to the tilt towards rural areas in expellee distributions. There are insufficient

observations among regions with moderate population densities to estimate the low

expellee effect, but we are able to compare the middle and high expellee regions. This is

effectively a matching exercise among areas of comparable population density, and the

estimations show that the risk of failure was larger in the regions that experienced less of

an expellee labor inflow. These estimations suggest that resource constraints were

particularly important in how relocations impacted incumbents.




                                             24
6. Conclusions

   The relocation of the machine tool industry from the Soviet zone of post war

Germany to western regions is a unique laboratory for studying the impact of industrial

structures on incumbent survival. The quasi random nature of the location decisions by

migrating owners—driven mostly by non-economic factors and undertaken hastily due to

extreme duress—offers an exogenous shock to local industries that is rare in economic

geography. We find that relocations increased a local incumbent’s risk of failure by a

factor of 1.25. These effects were particularly acute in locations with constrained labor

resources; they also differ substantially from more opportunistic entrants.


   Though based on an historic natural experiment, these results are very relevant to

current academic and policy discussions on the long-term impacts of firm location

decisions, which often require substantial investments and create future path

dependencies. Many local leaders argue for incentives to attract large firms to their region

(Greenstone et al., 2010). This may no longer take the explicit form of ―smokestack

chasing‖ for manufacturing firms, but instead often targets healthcare firms, services

companies, or similar large employers in favored sectors (Falck et al., 2010a). Regional

planners frequently invoke agglomeration economies or cluster formation to promote

these efforts. They should be aware that incumbents can also be displaced if local

resources are tight.




                                            25
References

Arnold, H.M. 2003. Technology Shocks. Heidelberg: Physica.
Arzaghi, M. and V. Henderson. 2008. Networking off madison avenue. Review of
  Economic Studies, 75:1011-1038.
Ashburn, A. 1988. The machine tool industry: The crumbling foundation. In D.A. Hicks
  (ed.), Is New Technology Enough? Making and Remaking of U.S. Basic Industry.
  Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.
Buenstorf, G. and C. Guenther. 2007. No place like home? Location choice and firm
  survival after forced relocation in the German machine tool industry. Jena Economic
  Research Papers # 2007-53.
Bundesminuster für Heimatvertriebene. 1950.
Carlsson, B. 1989. Small-scale industry at a crossroad: U.S. machine tools in global
  perspective. Small Business Economics, 1:245-261.
Cox, D.R. 1972. Regression models and life tables (with discussion). Journal of the
  Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 34:187-220.
Delgado, M., M. Porter and S. Stern. 2010. Convergence, clusters and economic
  performance. Working paper.
Diamond, C. and C. Simon. 1990. Industrial specialization and the returns to labor.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 8:175-201.
Duranton, G. and H. Overman. 2005. Testing for localization using micro-geographic
  data. Review of Economic Studies, 72:1077-1106.
Duranton, G. and D. Puga. 2004. Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies.
  In V. Henderson and J.-F. Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
  Volume 4. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2063–2117.
Ellison, G., E. Glaeser and W. Kerr. 2010. What causes industry agglomeration?
   Evidence from coagglomeration patterns. American Economic Review, forthcoming
Falck, O., S. Heblich and H. Patzelt. 2009. Entrepreneurship policy and regional
   entrepreneurship: German expellees as a natural experiment. Working paper.
Falck, O., S. Heblich and S. Kipar. 2010a. Industrial innovation: Direct evidence from a
   cluster-oriented policy. Regional Science and Urban Economics, forthcoming.
Falck, O., S. Heblich, A. Lameli and J. Südekum. 2010b. Dialects, cultural identity, and
   economic exchange. IZA Working Paper.




                                          26
Fallick, B., C. Fleischman and J. Rebitzer. 2006. Job-hopping in Silicon Valley: Some
   evidence concerning the microfoundations of a high-technology cluster. Review of
   Economics and Statistics, 88:472-481.
Franco, A.M. and D. Filson. 2006. Knowledge diffusion through employee mobility.
   RAND Journal of Economics, 37:841-860.
Fu, S. and S. Ross. 2010. Wage premia in employment clusters: Does worker sorting bias
   estimates? Working paper.
Glaeser, E. 2008. Cities, Agglomeration and Spatial Equilibrium. Oxford, UK: Oxford
  University Press.
Glaeser, E. and W. Kerr. 2009. Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship: How
  much of the spatial distribution can we explain? Journal of Economics and
  Management Strategy, 18:623-663.
Glaeser, E., W. Kerr and G. Ponzetto. 2010. Clusters of entrepreneurship. Journal of
  Urban Economics, 67:150-168.
Greenstone M., R. Hornbeck, and E. Moretti. 2010. Identifying agglomeration spillovers:
  Evidence from winners and losers of large plant openings. Journal of Political
  Economy, 118:536-598.
Griliches, Z. and H. Regev. 1995. Firm productivity in Israeli industry 1979-1988.
  Journal of Econometrics, 65:175-203.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales. 2009. Cultural biases in economic exchange?
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124:1095-1131.
Hirsch-Kreinsen, H. 2000. The machine tool industry: New market challenges and the
   crisis of the traditional German pattern of innovation. In K. Jürgens (ed.) New Product
   Development and Production Networks. Berlin/Heidelberg, 55-65.
Holmes, T.J. 2010. Structuralist, experimentalist, and descriptive approaches to empirical
  work in regional economics. Journal of Regional Science, 50:5-22.
Holmes, T.J. and J. Stevens. 2002. Geographic concentration and establishment scale.
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84:682-690.
Kahneman, D., J.L. Knetsch and R.H. Thaler. 1991. Anomalies: The endowment effect,
  loss aversion, and status quo bias. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5:193-206.
Kerr, W. 2008. Ethnic scientific communities and international technology diffusion.
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 90:518-537.
Kerr, W. and S. Kominers. 2010. Tipping points and agglomeration bubbles. Working
  paper.
Klepper, S. and P. Thompson. 2006. Submarkets and the evolution of market
  structure. RAND Journal of Economics, 37:861-886.


                                           27
Laske, G. 1995. Eine Musterbranche stürzt ab, Bremen: Donat.
Lazear, E. P. 1999. Culture and language. Journal of Political Economy, 107:S95-S126.
Lee, K. 1996. The role of user innovation of machine tools: The Japanese case. Research
  Policy, 25:491-507.
Marshall, A. 1920. Principles of Economics. London, UK: MacMillan and Co.
Mazzoleni, R. 1997. Learning and path-dependence in the diffusion of innovations:
  Comparative evidence on numerically controlled machine tools. Research Policy,
  26:405-428.
Menon, C. 2009. The bright side of gerrymandering: An enquiry on the determinants of
  industrial agglomeration in the United States. Working paper.
McFadden, D., 1973. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. In P.
  Zarembka (ed.), Frontiers in Econometrics. New York: Academic Press.
Overman, H. and D. Puga. 2010. Labor pooling as a source of agglomeration: An
  empirical investigation. In E. Glaeser (ed.) Agglomeration Economics. Chicago, IL:
  University of Chicago Press.
Rauch, J. and V. Trindade. 2002. Ethnic chinese networks in international trade. Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 84:116-130.
Rosenthal, S.S. and W.C. Strange. 2001. The determinants of agglomeration. Journal of
  Urban Economics, 50:191-229.
Rosenthal, S.S. and W.C. Strange. 2004. Evidence on the nature and sources of
  agglomeration economies. In V. Henderson and J.-F. Thisse (eds.) Handbook of
  Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 4. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2119-2171.
Rotemberg, J. and G. Saloner. 2000. Competition and human capital accumulation: A
  theory of interregional specialization and trade. Regional Science and Urban
  Economics, 30:373-404.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg. 2009. The diffusion of development. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 124:469-529.
Schwab, G. 1996. Die Entwicklung der deutschen Werkzeugmaschinenindustrie von
  1945-1995. Master Thesis, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, revised version edited by
  VDW, Frankfurt.
Sciberras, E. and B.D. Payne. 1985. Machine Tool Industry. Technical Change and the
   International Competitiveness. Harlow, Essex: Longman.
Wieandt, A. 1994. Innovation and the creation, development and destruction of markets
  in the world machine tool industry. Small Business Economics, 6:421-437.




                                          28
            Figure 1: Relocation patterns to West Germany from Chemnitz region
Dialect-Cultural                                                                        Industrial
 Similarity to                                                                         Similarity to
   Chemnitz                                                                             Chemnitz




    Notes: Figure demonstrates the location choice of the seven relocators from the region of Chemnitz-Ore Mountains in eastern Germany. The shading of the
    left map reflects the dialect similarity of the 63 regions in the American (solid outline) and British occupation zones with the Chemnitz region. Darker
    shading indicates higher dialect similarity. The shading of the right map reflects the product similarity between the Chemnitz region and potential
    destinations. Darker shading again indicates greater similarity. Distance is a factor in that the seven firms migrated farther into West Germany than random.
    Second, the chosen destination regions tended to have strong dialect similarity with Chemnitz, while there is not a consistent pattern for product similarity.
               Table 1: Descriptive statistics for machine tool industry in West Germany and East German relocations
                                             Incumbents                             Relocators from East Germany                      New entrants                     Region
                                Total         Products /      Dominant           Total         Date       Products /              Total       Number          Population Expellee
                             incumbent      prod. variants     product         relocator     ranges of prod. variants            entrant     surviving          density     share of
                                firm           per firm         class             firm      relocations    per firm                firm      for 5 / 10          1949       post war
                               count            1949                             count                      1949                  count        years           (per km2) workforce
                                 (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)              (6)              (7)            (8)             (9)           (10)
                                                                                 A. Planning Regions in the US Occupied Zone
Bremen                            1              2/4           Cutting                                                             10            4/3             1371        0%-10%
Rhine-Main                       25            1.8 / 2.5       Cutting             6         1951-1955         1.7 / 6.3           71           46 / 31           353        10%-15%
Starkenburg                       4              1/2           Cutting                                                             18           10 / 7            239        10%-15%
Upper Neckar                      3              1/1           Cutting             2         1949-1951           1/4               22            7/5              292        15%-20%
Franconia                         5            1.8 / 2.6       Cutting                                                             23           15 / 11           123        15%-20%
Middle Upper Rhine                7            1.3 / 2.4       Cutting             1            1949             2/2               24           10 / 7            297        10%-15%
Northern Black Forest            11            1.5 / 2.5       Forming                                                             58           30 / 25           141        10%-15%
Stuttgart                        43            2.1 / 3.6       Cutting             5         1949-1955         1.2 / 1.6           136          86 / 57           407        20%-25%
Eastern Wuertemberg               2            1.5 / 1.5       Cutting                                                             15            8/6              142        20%-25%
Bavarian Lower Main               2              2/2           Forming                                                             15           10 / 7            173        10%-15%
Wurzburg                          1              1/1           Cutting                                                             11            7/3              131        15%-20%
Upper Franconia-W.                5            1.2 / 2.2       Forming                                                             11            7/6              147        20%-25%
Central Franconia                15            1.4 / 2.1       Cutting                                                             38           18 / 11           287        15%-20%
W. Central Franconia              1              1/1           Cutting                                                             31           16 / 11           150        20%-25%
Landshut                          2              2/2           Forming                                                              4            2/2              100        25%-30%
Munich                            5             2 / 3.6        Cutting             1            1951             3/5               47           24 / 18           278        20%-25%
Danube-Iller (BY)                 1              1/5           Cutting                                                             17            9/8              131        25%-30%
Allgaeu                           2              1/2           Forming                                                             11            7/6              103        20%-25%
Notes: Incumbent traits describe existing firms in the planning region before the relocations began. Dominate product classes refer to metal cutting and metal forming. Relocator traits
describe firms moving from East Germany. Entrant traits describe new start-up firms that are not relocating from East Germany.
                                                     Table 1: Descriptive statistics, continued
                                     Incumbents                      Relocators from East Germany               New entrants                 Region
                           Total      Products /     Dominant     Total         Date       Products /       Total       Number      Population Expellee
                        incumbent   prod. variants    product   relocator     ranges of prod. variants     entrant     surviving      density     share of
                           firm        per firm        class       firm      relocations    per firm         firm      for 5 / 10      1949       post war
                          count         1949                      count                      1949           count        years       (per km2) workforce
                           (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)            (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
                                                                B. Planning Regions in the British Occupied Zone
Schleswig-Holstein E.       2         1.5 / 1.5      Forming                                                 9            2/1          278      30%-35%
Schleswig-Holstein S.       1            3/6         Forming                                                14           11 / 7        150        >35%
Hamburg                     9         1.4 / 1.9      Forming       1          1955           1/1            40           25 / 18      2149      0%-10%
Hanover                     4          1.25 / 2      Cutting                                                16            8/6          261      30%-35%
Brunswick                   5            1/1         Forming       1          1953           1/1            16            8/7          205      30%-35%
Hildesheim                  2            1/1         Forming                                                 7            3/3          244        >35%
Gottingen                   2            1/1         Cutting                                                12            7/7          184      25%-30%
Berlin                     20         1.3 / 2.2      Cutting       1          1955           2/3            98           47 / 31      4464      0%-10%
Muenster                    1            1/2         Cutting       2        1949-1951       1 / 1.5         10            4/3          170      10%-15%
Bielefeld                   8         2.3 / 4.4      Cutting                                                42           26 / 21       304      15%-20%
Arnsberg                    2           2 / 3.5      Cutting                                                18            7/5          138      15%-20%
Dortmund                    7         4.4 / 12.6     Forming                                                15            8/5         1039      0%-10%
Duisburg / Essen            3         2.7 / 5.7      Forming       1          1956           1/1            36           13 / 8        687      0%-10%
Düsseldorf                102         1.7 / 3.8      Forming       6        1949-1953      1.5 / 3.2        237         112 / 77       956      0%-10%
Bochum / Hagen             37         2.1 / 3.7      Forming       1          1951           3/3            76           45 / 30       778      0%-10%
Cologne                    20         2.2 / 4.8      Forming                                                62           29 / 17       531      10%-15%
Aachen                     10           2.9 / 5      Forming       1          1949           1/1            18           11 / 9        237      0%-10%
Bonn                        1            1/1         Cutting       1          1951           1/2             9            7/7          272      10%-15%
Siegen                     15           2 / 3.8      Forming                                                38           29 / 27       175      10%-15%
Northern Hesse              2         1.5 / 1.5      Cutting       1          1949           1/4            22           12 / 7        140      15%-20%
Central Hesse               5           1.8 / 6      Forming                                                24           14 / 10       156      20%-25%
Eastern Hesse               1            1/1         Cutting                                                 5            4/2          125      20%-25%
Notes: See above.
                 Table 2: Location choice for relocators from East Germany
                                          Baseline           Sample restricted Region choice       Region choice
                                       location choice       to relocators that set restricted to set restricted to
                                         estimation          survive 10 years destinations with destinations that
                                                               in new region similar population      border the
                                                                                 to true choice     true choice
                                              (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)
Geographic distance to                    0.942***               0.921***                0.532***                   -
destination region                         (0.295)                (0.182)                 (0.224)
Dialect similarity of                     0.828***               0.972***               0.515***                    -
destination region                         (0.255)                (0.210)                (0.092)
Product similarity of                        -0.317                 -0.277                -0.271                 -0.431
destination region                          (0.471)                (0.593)               (0.281)                (0.317)
Destination fixed effects                     Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes
LR Chi Squared                            16.30***               39.41***                52.41***                1.850
Pseudo R Squared                            0.07                   0.07                    0.06                   0.03
Origin regions                                10                      9                     10                     10
Destination regions                           63                     63                     43                     44
Relocators                                    28                     24                     28                     27
Observations                                 1,759                  1,507                  308                    154
Notes: Table reports conditional logit models for the location choice of West German regions by relocating firms from
East Germany. Regressors measure the geographic distance, dialect similarity, and industrial product similarity of the
relocator's origin region in East Germany (pre-war) and the potential destination region in West Germany (post-war).
Greater geographic distance and greater dialect similarity were the dominant factors in relocation decisions. Existing
industrial structures in West Germany were not an important factor in decisions. The base location choice sample
includes 28 relocating firms after relocators from Silesia are excluded due to data constraints on pre-war industrial
conditions in Silesia. These excluded relocators are included in the hazard models of Tables 3-5. Column 2 restricts the
sample to the 24 relocators that survived at least 10 years at their new location. Column 3 restricts the set of potential
destination regions to the actual destination region plus ten counterfactuals most similar in population size. Column 4
restricts the set of potential destination regions to the actual destination region plus regions that border it. The relocation
to Berlin is excluded from this sample due to lack of neighboring regions outside of the Soviet zone. Regressions are
unweighted and cluster standard errors by relocating firm. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.
                       Table 3: Incumbent hazard models with firm counts
                                            Baseline             Restricting            Restricting        Restricting
                                          hazard model          entrant counts        entrant counts     entrant counts
                                          of incumbent           to pre-1956        to firms surviving to firms surviving
                                              failure              entrants             for 5 years       for 10 years
                                                (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)
Firm count of relocators                     1.248*                1.172*                 1.314*                1.352*
to incumbent's region                        (0.132)               (0.100)                (0.163)               (0.208)
Firm count of new entrants                   0.993**                0.993                0.982**               0.971***
in incumbent's region                        (0.003)               (0.007)               (0.007)                (0.011)
Incumbent's product                         0.824***              0.827***              0.824***               0.823***
count in 1949                                (0.065)               (0.064)               (0.065)                (0.065)
Region fixed effects                           Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Product class fixed effects                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Time period fixed effects                      Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Subjects                                      394                    394                   394                   394
Failures                                      316                    316                   316                   316
Observations                                 12,041                 12,041                12,041                12,041
Notes: Table reports Cox hazard models for incumbent failure/death in West German regions. Explanatory factors for
incumbent failure are relocating firms from East Germany and new start-up entrants. Relocating firms consistently increase
incumbent hazard of failure, while start-up entrants do not. Estimations control for incumbent product counts in 1949 (i.e.,
firm size) and fixed effects for region, product class, and time period. Reported coefficients are relative to a value of one,
with coefficients greater than one signifying increased hazard of firm failure. Estimations quantify the strengths of
relocations and entrants with simple firm counts. The first column considers all entrants. The second column considers
entry to 1956 only, which is the date of the last relocation from East Germany. The third and fourth columns restrict
entrants to high-quality firms that survive five and ten years, respectively. The sample includes incumbent firms from 40
West German regions. After World War II, 31 relocating firms moved from East Germany to 15 of these regions.
Estimations are unweighted and cluster standard errors by planning region. Wald tests for all estimations are significant at
the 1% level. ***, **, * denote statistical significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                Table 4: Incumbent hazard models with firm product counts
                                           Baseline            Restricting           Restricting        Restricting
                                         hazard model         entrant counts       entrant counts     entrant counts
                                         of incumbent          to pre-1956       to firms surviving to firms surviving
                                             failure             entrants            for 5 years       for 10 years
                                              (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)
Product count of relocators                1.155**               1.152**              1.189***              1.215***
to incumbent's region                      (0.066)               (0.070)               (0.068)               (0.074)
Product count of new entrants              0.993**                0.987*              0.984***               0.974*
in incumbent's region                      (0.003)                (0.008)              (0.005)               (0.016)
Incumbent's product                        0.824***             0.827***              0.823***              0.823***
count in 1949                               (0.065)              (0.064)               (0.066)               (0.066)
Region fixed effects                          Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Product class fixed effects                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Time period fixed effects                     Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Subjects                                     394                   394                  394                   394
Failures                                     316                   316                  316                   316
Observations                                12,041                12,041               12,041                12,041
Notes: See Table 3. Estimations quantify the strengths of relocations and entrants with the product counts of firms. These
product counts are the best available measure of firm size. Relocating firms consistently increase incumbent hazard of
failure, while start-up entrants do not.
              Table 5: Incumbent hazard models with labor force differentials as resource constraints
                                          Hazard models using raw firm counts to measure                  Hazard models using product capacity to measure
                                            strength of relocations and entry (Table 3)                      strength of relocations and entry (Table 4)
                                                  Full                    Moderate                                 Full                    Moderate
                                                sample                population density                         sample                population density
                                                    (1)                            (2)                               (3)                            (4)
Strength of relocators
to incumbent's region
           x weak expellee growth                 1.483*                             -                            1.170*                             -
              for region workforce                (0.269)                                                         (0.104)
      x moderate expellee growth                 1.059***                       1.076**                          1.062***                       1.079***
            for region workforce                  (0.022)                       (0.037)                           (0.015)                        (0.026)
            x high expellee growth                 0.917                          1.004                            0.961                          1.027
              for region workforce                (0.082)                        (0.121)                          (0.045)                        (0.072)
Strength of new entrants                         0.991**                         0.985*                           0.993**                        0.988**
in incumbent's region                            (0.004)                         (0.008)                          (0.003)                        (0.006)
Incumbent's product                              0.824***                       0.741***                         0.824***                       0.741***
count in 1949                                     (0.065)                        (0.075)                          (0.065)                        (0.075)
Region fixed effects                                Yes                            Yes                              Yes                            Yes
Product class fixed effects                         Yes                            Yes                              Yes                            Yes
Time period fixed effects                           Yes                            Yes                              Yes                            Yes
Subjects                                           394                             180                              394                            180
Failures                                           316                             134                              316                            134
Observations                                      12,041                          5,757                            12,041                         5,757
Notes: See Tables 3 and 4. Estimations quantify the importance of labor resource constraints on how the relocating firms impact incumbent survival. The
strength of relocations are interacted with indicator variables for low, medium, and high expellee growth of workforce after the war. These expellees
exogenously increased the size of the local workforce. Low shares are [0,10%], medium shares are (10%, 20%], and high shares are those greater than 20%.
Effects are estimated independently for each group (i.e., there is no excluded group). The first two columns measure the strength of relocations and entry using
firm counts similar to Table 3. The second two columns measure strength of relocations and entry using product counts of firms similar to Table 4. Within
each pair, the second column restricts the sample to regions with moderate population densities. Relocating firms consistently increase incumbent hazard of
failure in regions where labor supplies are constrained, but not in regions also experiencing a sharp increase in workforce growth. Estimations are unweighted
and cluster standard errors by planning region. Wald tests for all estimations are significant at the 1% level. ***, **, * denote statistical significant at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
