NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING THE EFFICIENCY AND EQUITY OF FEDERAL FISCAL EQUALIZATION
David Albouy
Working Paper 16144
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16144

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

I thank Robin Boadway, John Burbidge, Rob Gillezeau, Jim Hines, Keren Horn, Marcelin Joanis,
Fernando Leibovici, Peter Mieszkowski, Kevin Milligan, Gordon Myers, Christine Neill, Jim Poterba,
Joel Slemrod, Michael Smart,Wallace Oates, Dan Usher, Francois Vaillancourt,WilliamWatson, DaveWildasin,
and participants of seminars at George Mason, Georgia State, McGill, Michigan, NYU, Queen’s, Simon
Fraser, UBC, UQAM, Victoria, the Barcelona Institute of Economics Urban Economics Meetings,
the Urban Economics Association Meetings and the National Tax Association Annual Meetings, and
Tax Time (Cambridge, ON), for their help, input, and advice. Any mistakes are my own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by David Albouy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Evaluating the Efficiency and Equity of Federal Fiscal Equalization
David Albouy
NBER Working Paper No. 16144
July 2010
JEL No. H73,H77,J61,R13
ABSTRACT
In theory, federal transfers that make household location decisions efficient should ignore local cost
differences, subsidize positive externalities, and offset differences in federal-tax payments and local
taxes levied on non-residents, but not local tax revenues from residents. Transfers that redistribute
resources equitably across regions will likely target areas with individuals of low earnings potential
or low real incomes. Applying these criteria empirically, Canadian equalization policy appears neither
efficient nor equitable, but exacerbates pre-existing inefficiencies and underfunds minorities. Locational
inefficiencies cost Canada 0.41 percent of income annually and cause over-funded provinces to have
populations 31 percent beyond their efficient long-run levels.

David Albouy
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
351C Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
albouy@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Many federal governments – including those of Canada, Germany, Australia, and Japan – make
fiscal equalization payments to local governments, with the stated goal of equalizing the fiscal
capacity of local governments to provide public services. Most equalization systems provide unconditional grants that are negatively related to an estimate of local fiscal capacity. Often, this
measure of fiscal capacity is a weighted average of local tax bases, where the weight of each base
is determined by its representative share of revenue across all localities. These weights are generally independent of whether the tax has a source or residence base – i.e., levied on incomes
earned locally or received locally. For example, corporate income taxes, which may be paid by
non-residents, are treated the same as personal income taxes, paid only by residents.
The merits of equalization systems have been hotly debated by economists such as Buchanan
(1950, 1951, 1952), Scott (1950, 1952), Jenkins (1951), Musgrave (1961), Feldstein (1970),
Courchene (1981), Ladd and Yinger (1994), Oakland (1994), and Usher (2007). These debates
typically focus on how equalization may aid or impede efficient migration, or may steer public
resources more equitably towards needy communities. Such discussions are closely tied to those
on similar place-based policies (e.g. Gottlieb and Glaeser 2008; Busso et al. 2010) that are of great
interest to the European Union, the United States, and other countries.
In this paper, I clarify these debates using a theoretical framework similar to those in the previous literature, with mobile heterogeneous households who live, work, and consume local public
services in the same region. Unlike influential work by Buchanan (1950) and Boadway and Flatters
(1982a), I argue this framework only supports the equalization of source, and not residence, -based
revenues. In addition, I expand the traditional framework to incorporate federal taxes, residential
land, and inter-regional differences in amenities and private and public productivity. This expanded
framework establishes that it is efficient for federal grants to ignore differences in local costs, but
to refund higher federal-tax payments caused by higher local wage levels. The framework also
provides a richer context for how grants may be distributed to promote equity goals, expanding on
Buchanan (1950), who compares households based on their realized nominal incomes. Instead, I
1

argue that it is more sensible to compare households on their realized real incomes, adjusted for
local costs-of-living, or the potential incomes they would earn if they lived in the same region.
The expanded framework is also empirically compatible with observed inter-regional differences in wages, costs-of-living, and population. Therefore, it allows researchers to use real-world
data to evaluate whether existing equalization systems are efficient or equitable based on the criteria presented here. I perform such an evaluation of Canada’s equalization system. Over recent
history, the highest per-capita equalization payments were paid to the Atlantic provinces – Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick – and to two Prairie provinces,
Manitoba and Saskatchewan. As these six provinces are not deficient in source-based revenues and
also low federal-tax burdens, these payments create inefficient incentives for Canadians to move
to these provinces. Alberta, the remaining Prairie province, collects large source-based revenues
from oil and other resources, which the federal government does not redistribute these revenues
through asymmetry in its formula. These enormous revenues also create inefficient incentives to
move, as they are offered only to those who reside within Alberta’s borders. According to simulations below, the failure of equalization policy to eliminate fiscal imbalances causes the Atlantic and
Prairie provinces to be populated by 31 percent beyond their efficient levels, leading to inefficiency
costs of 0.41 percent of income, or C$4.3 billion per year. Furthermore, grants and other local benefits do not appear to be equitably targeted, as they go disproportionately towards provinces where
workers are well-skilled and real incomes are high.
Section 2 presents the theoretical model used to determine efficient grant levels and section 3
discusses equity criteria in greater detail. The measurable net fiscal benefits of residing in each
Canadian province are calculated in section 4, which involves estimating how much provincial
wage differences are due to location or to worker characteristics. Section 5 examines the externality
and equity justifications for net fiscal benefit differences empirically. The long-run effects of fiscal
distortions on provincial price levels, wages, employment and welfare are simulated in section 6.
The Appendix contains many interesting details on the theory and data.

2

2

Federal Location Model with Grants

2.1

Model Set-Up

Here, I model a competitive economy with heterogeneous households who are mobile across jurisdictions, with governments that provide a local good. This follows the mainstream literature on
fiscal federalism by Flatters, Henderson and Mieszkowski, (1974), Stiglitz (1977), Boadway and
Flatters (1982a), Wildasin (1980, 1986), and Mieszkowski and Zodrow (1989). For empirical viability, I expand the theoretical framework to incorporate regional differences in productivity and
quality of life, as in Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982), and federal taxes, as in Albouy (2009a).
The framework here resembles that of Albouy, Leibovici, and Warman (2012) – who use wage and
cost-of-living data to estimate productivity and quality-of-life differences across Canadian cities –
except that it incorporates local public sectors that vary in productivity, similar to Yinger (1986).
Households each supply one unit of labor and belong to one of E types, indexed by e = 1; :::; E,
where types may characterize skills or tastes. The number of households of each type is fixed in
the federation. Households may locate in any of J regions, j = 1; :::; J, where they live and work;
intra-regional issues are not considered. The population composition of region j is described by
P
the vector Nj = (N1j ; :::; NEj ), using the scalar N j = e Nej for region j’s total population.
Household preferences for each type are represented by the utility function

Ue x; y; g j ; Qj ;

which depends on three goods: (i) a tradable private good, x, (ii) a non-tradable (home) private
good, y, and (iii) a non-tradable publicly-provided good (or public service), g j = Gj (N j )

. Gj is

the aggregate level of public production, which is congested according to the parameter

2 [0; 1]:

= 0 corresponds to a pure public good, and

= 1, a publicly-provided private good. Private

consumption bundles in region j may vary by type e, but Gj , is uniformly provided across all types
within the population, and each individual contributes equally to congesting it, although tastes for

3

g j may differ. The local public sector does not provide services to capital or firms.
Each location j is characterized by exogenous levels of (i) quality of life, Qj , determined
by consumption amenities; (ii) productivity in the tradable sector, AjX ; (iii) productivity in the
non-tradable sector, AjY ; (iv) productivity in the public sector, AjG ; and (v) land supply, Lj . All
final goods are produced from land, labor, and mobile capital, K j . Factor markets are perfectly
competitive and factors are fully mobile within each region, and so command the same regional
price in all sectors, including the public sector.1 Land is immobile across regions and earns a local
price rj . Capital is fully mobile across regions and earns a gross price ij : the national supply of
capital may be fixed or determined internationally. Each household type owns a portfolio of capital
and land, which earn incomes Ie and Re that do not depend on where the individual lives.
Households are fully mobile across regions and earn the local wage wej , which varies to compensate workers for differences in cost-of-living due to pjY , quality of life, Qj , and the localgovernment good, g j . In equilibrium, regions with a high quality of life, Qj , or public-productivity,
AjG , have local costs that are high relative to local wage levels. Thus, lower wage levels compensate
workers for the non-market benefits they receive from residing where they do. Regions with high
private-sector productivity, AjX or AjY , should have wage and cost-levels that are high relative to
output prices, either 1 or pjY , as the ratio of input to output prices reflect the marginal productivity
of those inputs.2 As described in Albouy (2009b), the degree to which local wages and prices capitalize these different attributes depends on the proportions of land and labor in tradable production,
and federal-tax rates. The results below apply regardless of these capitalization effects.3
To pay for local-government goods, local governments levy linear taxes.4 Source (or origin)
1
Results would not change significantly if another fixed factor used only in the production sector, such as natural
resource reserve, is introduced. Land may also proxy for capital that is immobile.
2
If multiple output goods are produced then it seems possible that factor-price equalization will force factor prices
to converge across areas. However, productivity differences should still lead to higher wages for workers in more
productive areas. With free mobility, cities differing in amenities are likely to specialize in the production of a subset
of goods, putting them outside of the cone of diversification in which factor-price equalization holds.
3
Note that the Boadway and Flatters (1982) model has no non-tradable sector and only allows areas to differ in
land supply. As a result, provinces with more land have greater population and provision of Gj , which causes them to
have lower wages. This makes the model empirically unworkable, as wage levels are higher in more populated areas,
and vary for many other reasons.
4
Linear taxes are without loss of generality as progressive tax ratesl lead to similar conclusions. Whether tax rates
are set endogenously is not important to the locational distortions modeled here. Inefficiencies in local public-sector

4

-based taxes on land and capital are levied at rates

j
L

and

j
K.

taxes on income from wages, rents, and interest are given by

Residence (or destination) -based

j
w,

j
R,

and

j
I.

The budget constraint

of local governments requires that their expenditures equal their revenues:
pjG Gj = ( Lj Lj +

j
j
KK )

+ N j ( wj wj +

j j
RR

+

j j
II )

(1)

P
where pjG Gj are expenditures on the local government good and wj = (1=N j ) e Nej wej , Rj =
P
P
(1=N j ) e Nej Re , and I j = (1=N j ) e Nej Ie are the per-capita values of the three residence bases,
labor, rents, and interest. Following standard assumptions, local governments pay factors their

marginal product and produce and allocate Gj efficiently, so that it obeys the following Samuelson
rule, generalized to handle congestion (Stiglitz 1977)

(N j )1

j

j
M RS Gx = M RTGx

(2)

j

j
M RS Gx and M RTGx
are the average marginal rates of substitution and transformation between

the local-government good and the private tradable good. The condition reflects the intuition
that households decide locally how to allocate resources between private and public consumption. Thus, it is for local, not federal, agents to decide between buying, say, a better car or a better
roadway. As

increases, (2) resembles more the condition for the efficient provision of private

goods than for pure public goods. Notice that it applies regardless of cost differences due to factor
prices or public-productivity, AjG .5
The federal government levies taxes

F
w,

F
R,

and

F
I

to raise revenue. Besides making its own

purchases, valued at GF , the federal government provides transfers, or grants, to individuals, Fej ,
based upon their type e and region j.6 The signs of Fej are not restricted: a negative value represpending policies or taxes may have an effect on the quality of life or public or private productivity of the community.
5
Condition (2) generally rules out the case where G is provided equally across areas, e.g. Gj = G. This could lead
to inefficiently high or low levels of public consumption in different areas. The results below are largely unaffected if
local governments tax or provide Gj inefficiently, as this is usually equivalent to lowering AjG or Qj
6 F
G may enter the utility function, but since it benefits all households equally, there is no purpose in modelling it.
This may be violated if, for instance, households on the coasts benefit more from national defense than those in the
interior.

5

sents a non-distortionary head tax. Having grants target individuals rather than local governments
follows the previous literature, and allows the federal government to attain "first-best" efficient allocations. An interesting "second-best" scenario would occur when regional grants are fixed across
types, i.e., Fej = Fej0 , for each j and all e. This is a more difficult problem better-suited for future
research, although below I consider how results are affected when payments are made to local
governments.7 The federal government obeys the budget constraint:

GF +

XX
j

e

Nej Fej =

XX
j

Nej (

+

F
R Re

+

F
I Ie )

(3)

e

The average grant to region j is denoted F j = (1=N j )

2.2

F j
w we

P

e

Nej Fej .

Efficient Transfer Policy to Households across Regions

From the above set up, Appendix A derives the set of Pareto efficient transfers, using the solution
from a benevolent planner’s problem. The solution provides conditions that characterize efficient
levels of population, production, and consumption across regions. These conditions combine with
market conditions – describing efficient prices, household and government budget constraints, and
the like – to determine efficient transfer levels to each household type e by location j.
The planner’s problem assumes that households are fully mobile. Each household type receives
the same utility regardless of where it resides, but utility varies across types. Thus, a regional
planner would enact the same efficient transfers as a federal planner (Myers 1990). It is most
reasonable to assume that populations are mobile in a long-run setting: when mobility costs are
amortized over longer time periods, they become small relative to the potential gains from moving.8
According to the planner’s problem, households are located efficiently if the following first7

Considerations such as the "flypaper effect" are ignored in the treatment here, as the subject of this research is on
efficient location decisions, not public-service provision. In addition, this treatment does not consider how equalization
programs affect the incentives of local governments in raising revenues; see Smart (1998).
8
The conclusions below may hold even when some households are immobile, so long as there is a sufficiently large
number of mobile households of each type.

6

order condition is satisfied for each type e, across all provinces j:
@FXj
@NXe

xje

j j
ye
M RTyx

j
M RTGx

Gj
=
Nj

e;

if Nej > 0

(4)

The first term on the left is the marginal productivity of labor in tradable goods, the second and
third reflect the resource cost of private consumption, and the last, the resource cost of public
consumption through congestion effects. On the right is a type-specific Lagrange multiplier, which
decreases in the implicit weight type e would receive in a compatible social welfare function.
Condition (4) implies that is efficient for households to locate where their labor productivity is
high relative to the resource cost they need to achieve a nationally-determined level of utility. This
resource cost may differ, as households need fewer resources where quality of life is high.
The efficient federal transfer for type e in region j, denoted Fej is characterized by the following condition, derived from equation (4), after substitutions described in Appendix A,

Fej =

weF = (1=NeT OT )

F
j
w (we

P

j

weF ) +

Tej

pjG Gj
Nj

!

+ (1

)

pjG Gj
+ Fe ; if Nej > 0
Nj

(5)

Nej wej is the average wage of type e across locations; Tej is the average

residence-based tax paid by type e in location j.9 Each term in (5) requires explanation:
1. Federal-tax differential. The term

j
F
w (we

weF ) is the federal tax that a household of

type e in region j pays relative to the national average for type e. It can be positive or
negative, and encourages workers to locate in low-wage areas, as this lowers their federaltax burdens without lowering their federal benefits, presumably from GF . Federal grants
can undo this effect by increasing benefits to highly-taxed areas. This term isolates the
dependence of a household’s income on its location, apart from its type. Thus, efficient
grants undo redistribution across identical households in different regions.
2. Residence-based taxes net of per-capita expenditures. Tej pjG Gj =N j expresses Buchanan’s
9

This condition characterizes efficiency assuming that there are no other distortions in the economy. Most imporj
tantly, capital tax rates K
must be equal across regions for this equation to hold exactly.

7

(1949) "fiscal residuum" and equal to the cost of residence-based taxes borne by type e minus the average per-capita cost. These should be set to zero so that local residence-based
taxes exactly reflect local costs, and there is only one local tax price for residing in region j.
Substituting in the local government budget constraint (1) yields additional insight:

Tej

pjG Gj
=
Nj

j
j
w (we

wj ) +

j
R (Re

Rj ) +

j
I (Ie

Ij)

j j j
Lr L

+
Nj

j j j
Ki K

:

(6)

The first right-hand term in (6), in brackets, breaks down the residence-based taxes paid
by type e relative to the average local resident. Individuals paying more than the average
should have excess taxes refunded to them by the federal government, insuring that local
taxes operate as user fees. Because households are perfectly mobile, any local attempts at
income redistribution are inefficient and are undone by efficient transfers. The second term
in (6) expresses that local source-based revenues, whether on mobile (capital) or immobile
(land) factors, need to be taxed away and redistributed nationally. Otherwise, households
have distorted incentives to live in areas where valuable land and capital is taxed.10
3. Public-good externality, (1

)pjG Gj =N j is the net externality that members of region j

receive from a migrant arrives. It results from the non-rivalness of the public good when
< 1. By paying taxes, a new resident increases public expenditures by pjG Gj =N j , while
only consuming pjG Gj =N j in resources. An efficient transfer internalizes this externality
with a subsidy proportional to per-capita public expenditures (Buchanan and Goetz 1972).
Most empirical estimates of

are close to one (e.g. Bergstrom and Goodman 1973), meaning

this externality is likely small, although Oates (1988) argues that these estimates of

are

biased upwards.11
10

It may be efficient to tax capital and particularly land, but the revenues from these taxes need to be distributed
equally across regions to prevent inefficient migration. Some may see publicly redistributing oil revenues locally
as compensation for negative local externalities associated with oil drilling. Compensating payments of this kind
counteract the correct incentives to live away from polluted areas. It is inefficient to pay households yearly to live
on top of a toxic waste dump as it encourages them to live there. It is more sensible to make a one-time payment to
households on a waste dump when it opens, and not penalize them for moving away.
11
Oates’ critique applies to estimates of based on the elasticity of pG G to community size N . Demand for local
goods may increase with N , as larger communites may exploit economies of scale for certain hard-to-divide public

8

4. Location-independent transfer: Fe is a lump-sum transfer to households of type e, regardless of where they live. This term accomplishes redistributive goals federally: the greater
utility type e receives nationally, the higher is Fe . Since there is an Fe for each type, the
federal government can achieve any feasible distribution of utilities, precluding inefficient
local redistribution.
The federal transfer, Fej minus the first three terms in (5) reflect the total net fiscal benefits, or
NFB, of residing in region j for type e: Differences in these NFBs across regions distort migration
incentives, and thus efficient transfer policy may negate these differences by setting Fej so that the
NFB facing individual households are the same across regions.
The transfer formula implies that is inefficient to subsidize mobile households to live where either public or private goods are costlier to provide. Neither pjY , and pjG appear in (5) independently
of total expenditures pjG Gj , which matters only for the public-good externality. Thus variation in
these prices due either to factor costs or production efficiency are to be ignored.
According to the formula, the average per-capita amount sent to region j is

Fj =

where wj;F = (1=N j )

F
j
w (w

wj;F )

j j j
Lr L

+
Nj

j j j
Ki K

+ (1

)

pjG Gj
+ Fej
Nj

(7)

P

Nej weF is the average wage level in region j that would prevail at the
P
national wage level, and Fej = (1=N j ) e Nej Fe is the average location-independent grant by
e

type. The key result from this aggregation is that the residence-based tax terms in (6) add up to
zero, as discussed below.12

goods, such as zoos. This implies that expenditures may rise quickly with population size, even when congestion is
low, as communities increase the number of subfunctions of local government.
j
12
A version of the "Henry George Theorem" (Stiglitz 1977) applies when = 0; wF = K
= 0 and Lj = 1, in
which case pjG Gj = rj Lj + N j (F j Fej ). When local public expenditures equal local land values, net fiscal benefits
are zero, and location decisions are efficient.

9

2.3

Relationship to the Existing Literature

The analysis above is the first to consider how federal transfers may offset location distortions
caused by higher federal-tax burdens in higher-wage areas, which are examined in Hochman and
Pines (1993) and Albouy (2009a).13 Without such offsets, indexing transfers to local costs may be
efficiency improving if these costs are strongly correlated with local wage levels, as they often are.
Otherwise, it is efficient for transfers to ignore differences in local costs, both private and public.
This does not preclude higher transfers to areas with needier households, e.g., with many specialneeds children, but this is handled through the location-independent transfer, Fe . Hopefully, these
insights should clarify the debate for and (e.g. Ladd and Yinger 1994, Reschovsky 1994) and
against (e.g. Oakland 1994, Glaeser 1998) indexing transfers to local costs.
The literature establishes that it is generally efficient and equitable for federal governments to
equalize differences in fiscal capacity from source bases (Usher 1977; Boadway and Flatters 1982a;
Mieszkowski and Toder 1983; Mckenzie 2006), unless these taxes fund services to the factors they
are levied on. The case for equalizing differences in residence bases has been less clear. In the
Tiebout (1956) model, equalization policy breaks the Wicksellian link between residence taxes and
local benefits, causing households to locate inefficiently. However, this model requires households
to sort perfectly into communities so that each pays the same tax, which seems inapplicable to
large jurisdictions, where labor markets tie different households types together.
Without perfect sorting, Buchanan (1950) and Boadway and Flatters (1982a) conclude that
equalizing differences in residence-based tax capacities prevents inefficient migration towards
high-income communities. This conclusion appears widely accepted in the academic and policy
literature on fiscal federalism (see Inman and Rubinfeld 1997; Musgrave 1997; Boadway 2004). It
is based on the observation that the efficient transfer formula, seen through (5) and (6), is decreasing in the average income level, wj + I j + Rj . The intuition is that all households want to move to
areas with richer types, who contribute greatly to local public services.
13

Poschmann (1998) also considers provincial inequalities in federal taxation, but he does not distinguish amounts
due to differences in local wage levels apart from differences in local worker composition.

10

Yet, the corrective transfers needed to turn residence-based taxes into pure benefit taxes average
out to zero in (7) since each correction depends on household deviations from the local average.
Locally, the poor are taxed and the rich are subsidized in equal amounts to obtain efficient population levels. In areas with richer types, fiscal residua are eliminated by imposing higher taxes
on the poor, and giving smaller subsidies to the rich. Subsidizing households to live in areas with
poorer types overcrowds these areas. Penalizing areas that collect greater revenues from richer
types causes richer types to inefficiently seek out areas where tax rates and public services are low.
Buchanan’s reasoning is consistent with (7) but produces interregional transfers because he
requires the location-independent transfers, Fe , to be set so that transfers produce no net redisP j j
tribution across types, i.e.
j Ne Fe = 0: He considers only correcting the fiscal residuum,

Tej

pjG Gj =N j : Since poorer types pay corrective taxes, they need to be refunded more through Fe ,

implying that areas with more poor types receive a higher Fej . But this refunding is unnecessary, as
first explained by Jenkins (1951). Other rules may be set to make grants more or less redistributive,
without hindering efficiency. In an example with two types and two regions, Boadway and Flatters
(1982b) implicitly impose F1j = F2j , although this constraint is generally incompatible with (5)
when there are more than two regions and types.14
14

In Buchanan’s (1950) example j 2 fA; Bg and e 2 fs; ug where s is skilled and u is unskilled, all income is
from labor wsA = wsB = 10000, wuA = wuB = 1000 NsA ; NuA ; NsB ; NuB = (2; 1; 1; 2), with wA = wB = 0:1. No
externalities are considered. This implies efficient transfers are (FsA ; FuA ; FsB ; FuB ) = (Fs + 300; Fu 600; Fs +
600; Fu 300) where Fs and Fu are unspecified, implying aggregate transfers to region A and region B should differ
by
imposes the rule that no transfers are made across types, meaning
P Fu j jFs . In the name of equity, Buchanan
B
B
A
A
j Ne Fe = 0, and proposes the solution (Fs ; Fu ; Fs ; Fu ) = ( 100; 200; 200; 100), which is consistent with
(Fs ; Fu ) = ( 400; 400). The redistribution from the high wage region to the low-wage regions is not needed for
efficiency, i.e. correcting the "fiscal residua" that Buchanan emphasized, but only to satisfy Buchanan’s rule.
The supporting statement by Boadway and Flatters (1982, pp. 629-30), translated in the notation here uses the same
tax rate for for all income sources, Ij = Rj = wj = , with total personal income termed P I j = wj + I + R
0

Suppose, for instance, that both provinces levied the same personal tax rates ( 1 = 2 ). The
1
2
NFB difference due to residence-based taxes would simply be (P I
P I ) and would represent the
difference in per capita public sector benefits arising solely from differences in residence-based tax
bases. Notice that the NFB difference is identical over all income groups. Therefore the equalization
program that is called for on efficiency grounds is one that fully equalizes per capita revenues from both
source-based taxes and residence-based taxes.
This argument appears to make the most sense if we assume that F1j = F2j , in which case (FsA ; FuA ; FsB ; FuB ) =
( 150; 150; 150; 150), which is consistent with (Fs ; Fu ) = ( 450; 450). However, it cannot apply to more than
2 regions. Mieszkowski and Musgrave (1999) explore how Buchanan’s criterion produces smaller cross-provincial
transfers than Boadway and Flatters’.

11

2.4

Grants to Local Governments Instead of Households

The framework above assumes that federal grants are made to households, when they are actually
made to local governments. Such transfers are necessarily coarser, and filtered through another
decision-making body. This makes it more difficult for grants to accomplish the goals that they
would in the traditional framework. First, it becomes difficult to correct for type-specific differences in federal-tax burdens when regional wage differentials vary by household type. Second,
interregional grants are coarse instruments for redistributing income, as local governments are not
required to spend additional funds disproportionately on their poorest residents. Perhaps more
importantly, if local governments redistribute federal grants in equal-sized payments, they do not
eliminate fiscal residua, Tej

pjG Gj =N j (Musgrave 1961). Eliminating these residua with one grant

per region seems unlikely as the possible number of fiscal residua is J

E.

According to Bradford and Oates (1971a, 1971b), the local political process my cause federal
grants to lower local tax rates as they reduce the need for local revenues. Such a process redistributes grants according to each household’s local tax share. Lowering tax rates shrink fiscal residua,
but may also breaks the link between local taxes and public expenditures. To illustrate, suppose
local governments use only linear taxes. Then, federal grants can reduce fiscal residua, simply by
lowering local tax rates in (6). But once the size of these grants exceeds the expenditures in the
lowest-spending area, driving taxes rates there to zero, complications arise. If tax rates must be
non-negative, then as grants increase and more localities levy no taxes, areas with higher public
expenditures will receive greater federal payments, distorting location decisions towards those areas. If public expenditures are limited to be equal, then provision levels will not match local tastes,
as idealized by the Samuelson rule (2), undermining a core benefit of federalism.15
15
If local tax rates can be negative, then large uniform lump-sum grants could cause local governments to pay out
subsidies proportional to resident incomes, creating distortionary fiscal residuaa that benefit the rich relative to the
poor. This seems strange, since lump-sum payments would not be distortionary. But then there is a question of why
local governments do not resort to using efficient lump-sum taxes without federal grants.

12

3

Equity Criteria

The location-independent transfers, Fe , in the efficient transfer formula (5) imply that equity goals
are compatible with efficiency goals, so long as equitable transfers are based on household characteristics other than location. Deciding what types of transfers are equitable involves contestable
normative judgments. Keeping with the previous literature, I propose criteria based on measures of
income, but which take into account how income depends on location choices. The first criterion,
based on earnings potential, is fully consistent with the assumption that households are mobile and
that observed data reflect equilibrium outcomes. The second criterion, based on realized incomes
adjusted for cost-of-living, may apply out of equilibrium.

3.1

Earnings Potential

When households are mobile, equalization policy may aim to direct funds towards households
who have relatively low incomes regardless of where they live. Such a policy would depend on
earnings potential, which depends on household characteristics. For instance, inside of any region,
less-educated and minority groups earn less than others, on average. Potential income differs
from realized income, which depends on the workplace. In equilibrium, areas with low private
productivity offer lower nominal wages, but these are offset by lower costs-of-living, so that real
incomes are unaffected. Areas where real-wage levels are low compensate households with a
greater quality-of-life or more efficient public services.
Buchanan’s (1950) criterion for horizontal equity treats two households with the same nominal
incomes in different regions as equals: instead, the earnings-potential criterion treats the two as
equals if they earn the same income in the same region. This is consistent with the above framework, since two households of the same type e, have the same potential income. Earnings potential
also provides a criterion for vertical equity. It suggests a single metric for comparing households
who differ in race, education or other characteristics, depending on how each affects earnings.
Some characteristics may be purposefully excluded. Measuring potential income raises practical

13

issues in applications, since the earnings process may depend on unobservable characteristics and
may differ by region because of comparative advantage.
There is also the question of how potential earnings across households should be aggregated.
One candidate is to use the average, since this measures overall per-capita buying power. A dollar difference in average earnings potential may be compensated for by up to a dollar in higher
transfers, depending on the redistributive preferences of society. Transferring more than a dollar is
harder to justify, as the receiving area would then have a higher per capita post-transfer income.

3.2

Realized Income Adjusted for Local Costs

This second criterion treats households as equal if their realized incomes adjusted for local costs,
pj , are equal. When labor markets are in equilibrium, low real incomes in an area either measure
low earnings potential or above-average quality of life or public productivity. But, when markets
are in disequilibrium, they may signal an oversupply of labor unrelieved by emigration because of
moving costs or other frictions. In this case, real-income differences may not be compensated by
local benefits. It may then be equitable to provide transfers towards areas where real incomes are
low, since low households consumption levels reflect lower levels of welfare.
Transfers towards areas with low real incomes may improve the welfare of residents in the
short-run, but distort long-run incentives for labor to move to where it is in greatest demand.
Grants of this kind may perpetuate the real-income differences they ultimately seek to eliminate.

3.3

Categorical Equity

While it is inefficient to direct funds towards areas where public services are costlier, such a practice may help to secure greater equity in important categories of consumption, known as "categorical equity" (Tobin 1970). This assumes that local governments will indeed provide these services.
Furthermore, it suggests that public categories of consumption, e.g., for schools and sewers, are
more basic than private ones, e.g., for food, clothing, and shelter.

14

4

Estimating the Net Fiscal Benefits of Residence across Provinces

As seen in section 2.2, differences in NFB distort migration decisions. In practice, the components
of NFB differences are hard to measure, especially at the household level. Accordingly, in the
aggregated equation (7) I rearrange the components that are easiest to measure on the left,

\
N
FB

j

Fj

j
F
w (w

wj;F ) +

j j j
Lr L

+
Nj

j j j
Ki K

= (1

)

pjG Gj
1 X j
Ne F e ;
+
Nj
Nj e

(8)

j

\
to create the average measurable NFB of province j, N
F B . In per-capita terms, this measures
federal-grant receipts, minus federal-tax payments, plus local source-based revenues. It is normalized it to have a population average of zero. According to the right-hand side of (8), fiscal
j

\
equalization policy that improves efficiency should make N
F B positively related to local government expenditures if

< 1, or other un-modeled externalities. Fiscal equalization policy that
j

\
improves equity should make N
F B positively related with the criteria discussed in section 3.
I apply this model to Canada using 2001 data on individuals from the Census and on provinces
j

\
from CANSIM. These data measure the three components of N
F B , reported in Table 1, as well
as candidate measures of public-good externalities and fiscal need, reported in Table 2.16
Although incomplete, the theoretical model seems realistic enough to shed light on whether an
existing federal grant system is efficient and equitable, provided the main assumptions hold. In
particular, differences in NFB must be sufficiently stable for the static framework, giving households a long window over which they may be mobile. These assumptions should apply to Canada,
where inter-provincial mobility is quite high (e.g. Bernard et al. 2008), and measurable NFBs
show considerable persistence over time, as seen in Figure 3 below.
16

This model can also be applied in other countries. In the United States, Alaska may offer the highest measurable
NFB across states. In the year 2000, Alaska received federal grants of $3,619 per capita, or $2,582 above average,
while its federal-tax burden was only $259 above average. To this should be added source-based revenues: percapita revenues from oil and gas were $7,670, of which $1,964 was paid directly to residents through the Alaska
Permanent Fund. While I do not have data on source-based revenues in the rest of the United States, they are certainly
much smaller per capita. Alaska has no state sales or personal income tax, and yet had combined state and local
expenditures of $13,762 per capita, relative to a national average of $6,208. Per-capita personal income in Alaska was
$30,558 compared to $30,399 nationally.

15

4.1

Equalization and other Federal Grants

Federal grant differences across provinces stem mostly from explicit fiscal equalization payments,
which are unconditional block grants. These payments are calculated from a Representative Tax
System model that treats source and residence bases similarly, roughly according to the formula
(

EP j = max 0;

X
k

k

Bk

Bkj

)

(9)

where k indicates a tax base, Bkj is the quantity of the tax base in province j, Bk is the populationweighted average of the tax base, and k is a federally chosen representative tax rate. The sum
P
P
j
k k Bk measures the fiscal capacity of province j, while
k k Bk is the national standard to
which it is compared. The asymmetry of the formula benefits provinces with fiscal capacities
that are below average, but does not penalize those with capacities above average. Equalization
payments from this system in 2001 amounted to C$14.2B (billion), or 1.4 percent of GDP. Other
grant differences arise through small (and since disappeared) asymmetries in the Canadian Health
and Social Transfer, a system of block grants worth C$34.9B, and other federal grants, worth
C$3.5B. As shown in Appendix Table 1, grant differences outside equalization are fairly small.17
Column 1 of Table 1 reports the per-capita distribution of federal grants across areas, averaging
over 1999 to 2003 to smooth out any temporary variations. Together, residents of Ontario, Alberta,
and British Columbia receive C$378 less than average; Manitoba and Saskatchewan, C$863 more
than average; the Atlantic provinces, C$1,503 more; and the Territories, C$15,561 more. Quebec,
sometimes depicted as equalization’s greatest beneficiary, receives just C$32 more than average.
17

According to the Canadian Constitution
“Parliament and the government of Canada are committed to the principle of making equalization
payments to ensure that provincial governments have sufficient revenues to provide reasonably comparable levels of public services at reasonably comparable levels of taxation.” (Subsection 36(2) of the
Constitution Act, 1982)

Because of its asymmetry, the formula in (9) does not guarantee this Constitutional goal, which differs significantly
from the goal of economic efficiency.

16

4.2

Local Wage Levels and Federal-Tax Burdens

To calculate differences in federal-tax burdens across provinces, I first estimate wage-levels across
provinces, controlling for labor-force characteristics. These wage-levels are supposed to give the
causal effect of location on wages, which determine federal-tax burdens. For this exercise, I take
full-time workers, ages 25 to 55, from the 2001 Census, based on a 2.7 percent public-use sample
of Canadians. I estimate wage differences, W , with the regression equation

weij = Xe +

j

+ "ij ;

(10)

where weij is the logarithm of wages of individual i in province j, Xe is a vector of characteristics
for type e , and

j

are provincial indicators. The characteristics divide into three categories: (i)

standard human-capital, i.e., education (including field of study) and experience; (ii) minority
characteristics, related to immigration, language, and ethnicity; and (iii) industry and occupation.
Appendix B catalogues these variables in detail, which I fully interact with gender. Identification
using least-squares regression requires that the idiosyncratic error term, "ij , obeys E("ij jXe ;

j

)=

0.18
Average wages in a province, wj , decompose into the sum wj =

j

+ X j , where

j

is

the provincial wage level, and X j is the wage predicted by worker composition, where X j =
P
(1=N j ) e Nej Xe . I normalize these components to have a national average of zero. Figure 1a
graphs the estimated composition effects X j ^ against the estimated raw-wage differences, w^ j :

The distance between the markers and the diagonal line measures the estimated local-wage levels,
^j : Columns 1 and 2 of Table 2 report these components in dollar terms; column 3 reports predicted
wages due only to minority characteristics. I report detailed decompositions in Table A2.19
18

The regression equation implies that compensating wage differentials across provinces are multiplicatively uniform across types, eliminating comparative advantage. Thus, two individuals who have the same predicted wage in one
province have the same predicted wage in another. This appears to be fairly accurate: I have estimated coefficients
separately in different provinces and found them to be very similar.
19
These estimates exclude wage differences due to industry and occupation under the assumption that they capture
compensating differentials. Results including industry and occupation do not differ much from the results reported
here, and are available from the author.

17

The local-wage level estimates, ^j ; are large and significant. Ontario and British Columbia
offer a 6 percent premium over the average, while Alberta and Quebec offer wages just below.
The remaining six provinces have considerably lower wage levels. In comparison, the composition
effects, X j ^, are small : workers seem not to sort across provinces according to their overall
observable skill levels. Workers in Ontario and British Columbia are better educated, but are also
more likely to be lower-paid immigrants and minorities. The opposite is true of those in the Atlantic
and Prairie provinces. Interestingly, the coefficient from a regression of composition on raw-wage
differences in Figure 1 is -0.12 (s.e. = 0.03). Thus, workers in higher-paying provinces have lowerpaying characteristics, which is interesting since X j ^ measures average earnings potential.20
I estimate federal-tax differentials from local wage levels using an effective marginal federaltax rate of 24.1 percent. This rate accounts for federal income taxes and the General Sales Tax.21
In column 2 of Table 1, I report the estimated federal-tax savings, or "deficit", of moving into a
province using this calculation.

4.3

Source-Based Tax Revenues

Some judgment is needed to determine what provincial tax revenues are truly source-based. The
main criterion is that these revenues do not provide significant benefits to the factors they are levied
on. Instead, source-based revenues benefit local residents, who do not pay them. In the available
sources from CANSIM, four categories of revenues appear to be largely source-based. First, are
provincial corporate income taxes, worth C$14.3B in 2001, which I take as taxes on capital. Second
and third are "mining and logging taxes" and "natural resource taxes and licenses," worth C$1.1B
together, which are from land-based natural resources. Most tax revenues from natural resources,
Identification of j requires that workers do not sort across provinces according to unobserved characteristics that
affect wages. To test this possibility, I compare the location effects for workers currently in their province of birth –
69 percent of the sample – against location effects for the entire sample. The estimated location effects are virtually
identical suggesting that sorting across provinces does not severely bias the estimates.
21
Direct taxes are measured in CANSIM matrix 354-0006, excluding the General Sales Tax. These data imply larger
estimates of federal tax differences across provinces that are strongly correlated with the ones the more conservatie
estimates used here. Modeling progressive changes in federal tax rates would also increase the differentials, but by
only a small amount. Using larger tax differentials would only reinforce the conclusions made in this paper.
20

18

mainly from royalties, fall under CANSIM’s vaguely-named category of "investment income,"
worth C$28.0B. On average, source-based revenues comprise about 20 percent of provincial own
revenues, albeit 37 percent of Alberta’s.22
Differentials averaged over 1999 to 2003 are reported in column 3 of Table 1, with all of the
sub-components listed in Table A3, together with other provincial revenues. Alberta offers the
most in source-based revenues: C$2081 more than the national average. Saskatchewan, British
Columbia and Manitoba are also above average, while the other provinces are below.

4.4

The Distribution of Net Fiscal Benefits.

Column 4 of Table 1 adds up the measurable NFB for residing in different provinces. These are
seen in Figure 2, which plots federal grant levels against source-based revenues added to federaltax deficits. A province’s NFB is equal to the distance between its marker and the solid downwardsloping line that delineates the grants necessary to make measurable NFB zero. Here, we see the
provinces cluster into three groups. Ontario has the lowest NFB, at C$1,083 per capita below
average. Next are British Columbia and Quebec, with benefits C$186 below average. In the
remaining provinces, the NFB are quite positive, averaging C$1,766. Furthermore, we see that
equalization policy does not offset the fiscal benefits from source-based revenues and federal-tax
deficits. The positive slope of the regression line suggests the policy slightly exacerbates them.
Finally, in Figure 3, we see that differences in measurable NFB across the provinces are fairly
stable around the time period considered here. According to figures in Courchene and Beavis
(1973), these differences have persisted since the 1960s.
22

The distinction between source-based and destination-based taxes is imperfect in the data. The main distinction
is whether those taxes are compensated for by local benefits. For instance, consumption taxes are source-based to the
when they are paid by visitors from outside the province. The majority of consumption taxes are paid for by residents;
arguably, revenues paid by non-residents may pay for services, such as infrastructure, that they use.

19

5

Are Differences in Measurable Net Fiscal Benefits Justified?

Differences in federal grants or NFB may be justified if they help to reduce regional inequities or
correct for externalities. In Canada, these inequities or externalities need to be large to justify the
measured differences. Regression results in panels B and C, column 1, of Table 2, imply that a
worker who moves to raise her wage level by one dollar expects to see a 73-cent drop in NFB,
including a 43-cent drop in federal grants, so that her net wage rises by only 27 cents. Thus, the
current system seriously dulls the incentive to move to where labor productivity is high.

5.1

Equity

The first equity criterion requires that grants or NFB be directed towards areas with low average
earnings potential. These averages, already discussed in section 4.2, are reported in columns 2 and
3 of Table 2.23 Using these measures requires that the empirical model (10) is correctly specified
and identified: hopefully, it is accurate enough. Regression results in panels B and C indicate that
provinces with higher potential earnings receive more in grants and measurable NFB, contrary
to what seems equitable. The positive relationship in column 3 implies that benefits are directed
towards provinces with more English-speaking native whites, away from lower-earning immigrants
and minorities.24
The second equity criterion requires that grants or NFB be directed towards areas with low
realized real incomes. Income must be deflated by a local cost-of-living index, which I compute
from local housing-cost differences – following Albouy, Leibovici, and Warman (2012) – seen in
column 2 of Table 3. Local costs are high in British Columbia and Ontario, and low in the Atlantic
and Prairie provinces. Column 4 reports the resulting real-income differences, which according to
Panels B and C, are positively related to grants and NFB, again contrary to what seems equitable.
The first equity criterion is more applicable than the second when labor markets are in equi23

Sample selection problems are avoided by including the predicted earnings of non-workers.
One caveat to this observation is that transfers are directed disproportionately to provinces with more aboroginals,
but this is a small portion of the population of any province.Manitoba has the highest portion of 13 percent.
24

20

librium. In a typical disequilibrium setting, real income levels should be positively related with
population growth rates, as high real wages attract workers. Instead, the opposite is true: the correlation between growth rates and real incomes (controlling for characteristics) is -0.81. Migrating
to Ontario and British Columbia is strong in spite of their low real wages, possibly because of their
amenities. Yet, as seen in column 5, a 1-percent increase in the growth rate is associated with a
C$70 decrease in federal grants.
As for categorical equity, costs are not an explicit factor in Canada’s equalization formula –
unlike Australia’s – but they may be thought to justify it implicitly. Empirically, it appears that
public-service costs are lower in fiscally advantaged provinces. As seen in Figure 4, Wage-levels
in education, health, and public administration – mainly public services – are similar to wage levels
in other sectors. Following the results in column 1, fiscal benefits are directed towards areas where
public labor costs are lower. Costs may also increase in the area of land that needs to be serviced,
say for roads. Provinces with a low population density may be at a fiscal disadvantage as they have
fewer people to pay for their land. As seen in column 7, this explanation does not appear to apply
as fiscal benefits favor provinces with higher density, particularly in the Atlantic.
Equalization payments are directed towards areas where households have high potential earnings, encouraging them to stay despite declining populations, low nominal wages, low costs, and
high real wages, all of which suggest low productivity and quality-of-life.

5.2

Local Public-Good Externalities

The only externality modeled arises from local public-good externalities, represented by (1
)pjG Gj =N j : In a first-best world, where Gj is provided efficiently, estimating this externality requires knowing total local public expenditures and the congestion parameter, , which as discussed
above is likely small. Combined provincial and sub-provincial public expenditures per capita are
reported in column 6 in Table 2. Here we see that expenditures are particularly high in Quebec,
and generally high in the Western provinces. Expenditure levels do exhibit a slightly positive, but
insignificant, relationship with transfers and measurable NFBs. This evidence turns negative if ex21

penditures are adjusted to account for how they may be increased by NFB differences.25 Overall,
the evidence that equalization corrects for public-good externalities is weak.26

6

Simulated Effects of Inefficient Equalization Policy

As seen above, differences in measurable NFB across provinces are persistent and do not appear to
improve equity or correct for externalities. It seems appropriate to treat a province’s advantage in
NFB as a locational subsidy, raising the demand to live in that province. Consequently, fiscally advantaged provinces are not only overpopulated relative to efficient levels, but should have inflated
land and housing costs, and possibly depressed wage levels.
The theoretical model can predict the effects of NFB differences relative to a long-run equilibrium where NFB differences are zero. As migration happens slowly, these effects should take
25

These effects may be particularly important if there are "flypaper effects" (Hines and Thaler, 1995). In a previous
version, I correct for endogenous spending effects by subtracting from local expenditures its measurable NFB times a
coefficient of 0.36, the share of income spent on local and provincial public services. The relationship is significantly
negative, suggesting benefits are directed towards areas with smaller public-good externalities.
26
Other reasons, yet to be considered, may justify current equalization policy. In a dynamic setting, federal transfers
may stabilize local revenue differences over time: provinces may mutually insure each other through economic swings,
reducing inefficiencies due to volatile consumption and mobility. Boadway and Hayashi (2004) find that variation in
transfer payments over time appears to have the opposite effect of making provincial revenues less stable over time.
The framework above also ignores externalities from urban agglomeration and congestion. Incorporating them
would require quantifying their relative magnitudes across provinces, which is difficult with our current knowledge.
Qualitatively, some would argue that Canada’s larger cities – Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver – are inefficiently
overcrowded, and hence it is efficient for their provinces to pay others to stay away. This view conflicts partly with the
fact that nominal wages in these cities are high, while real wages are low, implying that these cities have high levels
of productivity and quality-of-life – see Albouy, Leibovici, and Warman (2012). Albouy and Seegert (2010) argue
that residents of the best cities may wish to pay others to live in less desirable areas, but that such a policy may be
inefficient federally. Moreover, the provinces contain many uninhabited areas outside of the metropolitan areas that
can population.
Another justification is that equalization policy promotes residence in remote areas, which provides direct public
benefits. Yet, the market is likely to provide most of the necessary incentives to procure such benefits, such as for
resource extraction. Among benefits that may have national externalities, e.g., through defense, transportation, or
preservation, most would be best procured through direct federal purchases: e.g., opening military bases, building
roads, or hiring rangers. Giving a broad subsidy to live in a remote region is a very blunt policy instrument. Furthermore, there may be national benefits from not occupying remote areas, such as in helping preserve wilderness areas.
Whatever the case, equalization policy, outside of the Territories, does not promote residence in provinces with fewer
residents per square kilometer.
Equalization could also promote federal unity. Provinces that benefit from unity may pay those who benefit less,
and raise aggregate welfare through greater economies of scale (Alesina and Spolaore 1997). This is a debatable point,
especially since the least-attached province, Quebec, gains little from equalization. Ultimately, it is difficult to provide
a strong compelling economic justification to merit such large NFB differences across provinces.

22

decades to occur. But, as equalization has been persistent for several decades, it is reasonable to
think that current prices and populations levels already reflect these effects. I simulate the effects
here assuming

= 1 and that households can be aggregated into a single type. This allows me to

apply the methods in Albouy (2009a), where higher taxes are a disamenity to households; here I
treat measurable NFB symmetrically as an amenity.
As derived in Appendix A.6, the percent effects of fiscal distortions on land rents, wage levels,
and housing costs, relative to their efficient levels, are approximated by:
1 dN F B j
drj
=
rj
sR m
j
dw
1 L dN F B j
=
wj
sw N m
j
j
1 N
dpY
L dN F B
=
sy
m
pjY
N

(11a)
(11b)
(11c)

sR and sw are the average shares of income received from land and labor, sy is the share of expenditures on housing,

N

and

L

are the shares of labor and urban land used to produce tradable

private goods, and dN F B j =m is the differential net benefit in province j, divided by average
income. These parameters are calibrated using the values sR = 0:10, sw = 0:70, sy = 0:33,
L

= 0:17, and

N

= 0:70, following Albouy, Leibovici, and Warman (2012).

Long-run employment effects are simulated with a reduced-form elasticity, ", which gives the
percent increase in local employment that arises from a permanent increase in NFBs equal to one
percent of average income, so that by definition
dN F B j
dN j
=
"
Nj
m
Estimates of this elasticity based on Canadian data are controversial, although Wilson (2003) gives
the most plausible number by extending the short-run estimates of Watson (1986) and Winer and
Gauthier (1983) to a long-run encompassing 50 years. His estimates imply an average elasticity

23

of " = 3:23.27 These population shifts create locational inefficiencies, with costs as a fraction of
income given by the dead-weight-loss formula:

DW L = " var

dN F B j
m

In the spirit of Harberger (1964) this formula captures not only the costs of distortions in the labor
market but also distortions in other factor markets, such as mobile capital.
Columns 1 through 5 of Table 3 report equilibrium wage, housing-cost, land-rent, qualityof-life, and net-fiscal benefit differences across provinces, ranked from most to least advantaged.
Columns 6 through 9 report the predicted effects on prices and population. Taken together, the
Atlantic and Prairie provinces have populations 31 percent, and housing-costs 21 percent, beyond
their efficient levels, while their wage levels are slightly depressed. The effects for Quebec and
British Columbia are small, meaning the results would not change considerably if Quebec residents
are less mobile. Ontario is the most adversely impacted, with housing-cost and employment levels
10 and 14 percent below their efficient levels. In sum, the results imply that Canada’s less amenable
and less productive provinces contain over 2 million people who would rather move if they were
not paid to stay where they are.
The employment and deadweight loss predictions are robust to many assumptions of the model,
since they are simulated from a reduced-form parameter, which may include many un-modeled
effects. The wage effects are sensitive to the assumption that NFB accrue to households; if they
improve the productivity of firms, the effects on wages would be positive, although the effects on
prices and rents would be similar.28 The mobility of households and capital imply that local land
owners bear the final incidence of NFB differences, raising the relative value of land in advantaged
provinces. If households are imperfectly mobile, the model predicts weaker effects on prices and
27

This is obtained by regressing proportional population flows between provinces, "deltm", on changes in net fiscal
benefits between provinces, "delt77", normalized as a fraction of income. The estimate of 3:23 using provinces
is almost half the size of " = 6 that Bartik (1991) finds using metropolitan areas. As mobility responses across
provinces should be smaller than across metropolitan areas, these differences seem plausible and consistent. Of course,
symmetric treatment of federal transfers and taxes may not be fully warranted.
28
If there are agglomeration effects from higher populations, the effects of NFB on wages may be positive, while
the effects on rents and housing will be larger.

24

wages; households bear some of the incidence, as real wages do not completely adjusted to offset
the NFB.
The average effects of NFB on prices, wages, and employment, and the total deadweight loss
across the economy are reported in column 1 of Table 4. The deadweight loss of the locational
inefficiencies created by NFB differences is 0.41 percent of income per year, or roughly C$4.3
billion in 2001 dollars. Since equalization policy exacerbates differences in NFB, columns 2 and
3 present counterfactual estimates of the efficiency costs without them. They imply that if the only
distortion came from source-based revenues and federal taxes the deadweight loss would be 0.26
percent of income. Therefore, equalization policy increases inefficiency costs by 0.15 percent of
income, or 1.6 billion dollars per year, more than 10 percent of the value of equalization grants.

7

Conclusion

If the analysis here is correct, it deserves considerable thought by economists and policy-makers
interested in place-based policies in Canada and elsewhere. The theoretical analysis adds to the literature by establishing that inter-regional transfers that maximize the efficiency of long-run household location choices will (i) focus on source, rather than residence, -based capacities; (ii) ignore
local cost differences; (iii) separate income differences due to the location of labor from those
due to its composition; and (iv) recognize that regions with higher federal-tax burdens are less
attractive unless they receive higher federal transfers. The analysis also suggests two extensions of
Buchanan’s equity criterion: rather than defining equals according to nominal income, they may
be defined according to real income or potential income.
According to the criteria used here, equalization policy in Canada appears to be rather inefficient and somewhat inequitable. Fiscal benefits are tilted towards less productive and less amenable
provinces and seem to disadvantage minority households. Equalization policy would be more efficient if it redistributed source-based revenues more intensely and refunded interregional federal-tax
disparities. Such reform would likely meet considerable political opposition: Evans (2005) finds

25

that per-capita representation in the House of Commons is 50 percent higher for provinces that
benefit from equalization relative to provinces that do not. While it may be that Canadians wish
to pay individuals to live in certain provinces for reasons not considered here, it could be that
equalization policy has more of a political basis than an economic one.
The theoretical lessons learned clearly have lessons for other countries as well. For example,
equalization systems in Australia, Scandinavia, and Japan all lower payments to areas with greater
residence-based tax capacities. Unlike the Canadian system, their systems also distribute more
to areas deemed to have higher public-service costs. Since each system has its idiosyncracies,
separate analyses are required to evaluate the efficiency and equity of equalization systems in other
countries, but they certainly seem to merit further study.

References
Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spolaore 1997 "On the Size and Number of Nations." The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112 (Nov.): 1027-1056
Albouy, David. 2009a. "The Unequal Geographic Burden of Federal Taxation." Journal of Political
Economy 117 (August): 635-667.
Albouy, David 2009b "What Are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the Capitalization of Local Amenity Values." NBER Working Paper No. 14981, Cambridge MA.
Albouy, David, Fernando Leibovici, and Casey Warman. 2012. "Quality of Life, Firm Productivity,
and the Value of Amenities across Canadian Cities." mimeo, University of Michigan.
Albouy, David and Nathan Seegert. 2010. "The Optimal Population Distribution across Cities."
mimeo, University of Michigan.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991 Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute.

26

Bernard, A., Finnie, R., and St-Jean, B. (2008) “Interprovincial mobility and earnings” Perspectives, Statistics Canada.
Bergstrom, T.C. and R.P. Goodman 1973. "Private Demands for Public Goods." American Economic Review 63: 280-296.
Boadway, Robin. 2004. "The Theory and Practice of Equalization." CESifo Economic Studies 50:
211-254.
Boadway, Robin and Frank Flatters. 1982a. "Efficiency and Equalization Payments in a Federal
System of Government: A Synthesis and Extension of Recent Results." The Canadian Journal of
Economics 15 (Nov.): 613-633.
Boadway, Robin and Frank Flatters. 1982b. "Equalization in a Federal State: an Economic Analysis." Ottawa: Economic Council of Canada.
Boadway, Robin and Masayoshi Hayahsi. 2003. "An Evaluation of the Stabilization Properties of
Equalization in Canada." Canadian Public Policy,30: 91-109.
Bradford, David and Wallace Oates. 1971a. "The Analysis of Revenue Sharing in a New Approach
to Collective Fiscal Decisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 85 (Aug): 416–439.
Bradford, David and Wallace Oates. 1971b. "Towards a Predictive Theory of Intergovernmental
Grants." American Economic Review, 61 (May): 440-448.
Buchanan, James. 1949. "The Pure Theory of Government Finance: A Suggested Approach." Journal of Political Economy 57: 496-505.
Buchanan, James. 1950. "Federalism and Fiscal Equity." American Economic Review 40 (Sep.):
583-99.
Buchanan, James. 1951. "Fiscal Equity in the Unequal Treatment of Unequals: A Rejoinder."
Journal of Political Economy 59 (Aug): 358-359.
27

Buchanan, James. 1952. "Federal Grants and Resource Allocation." Journal of Political Economy
60 (Jun.): 208-217.
Buchanan, James and Charles J. Goetz. 1972. "Efficiency Limits of Fiscal Mobility: An Assessment of the Tiebout Model." Journal of Public Economics 1: 25-43.
Buchanan, James and Richard E. Wagner. 1970. "An Efficiency Basis for Federal Fiscal Equalization." in J. Margolis, ed. The Analysis of Public Output (Columbia University Press: New York).
Busso, Mathis, Jesse Gregory and Patrick Kline. 2010. "Assessing Incidence and Efficiency of a
Prominent Place-Based Policy." mimeo, UC Berkeley.
Courchene, Thomas J. 1981. "A Market Perspective on Regional Disparities." Canadian Public
Policy 7: 506-518.
Courchene, Thomas J. and David A. Beavis. 1973. "Federal-Provincial Tax Equalization: An Evaluation." Canadian Journal of Economics 6 (Nov.) 483-502.
Evans, Tom A. 2005. "The Impact of Representation Per Capita on the Distribution of Federal
Spending and Income Taxes." Canadian Journal of Political Science.
Feldstein, Martin 1970. "Comment on An Efficiency Basis for Federal Fiscal Equalization." in J.
Margolis, ed. The Analysis of Public Output (Columbia University Press: New York).
Flatters, Frank and Douglas Purvis. 1980. "Ontario: Policies For and Problems of Adjustment in
the 80’s." in Developments Abroad and the Domestic Economy. vol. 1 (Ontario Economic Council:
Toronto): 129-65.
Flatters, Frank; Vernon Henderson; Peter Mieszkowski. 1974. "Public Goods, Efficiency, and Regional Fiscal Equalization." Journal of Public Economics 3: 99-112.
Glaeser, Edward L. 1998. "Should Transfer Payments be Indexed to Local Price Levels?" Regional
Science and Urban Economics 28: 1-20.
28

Glaeser, Edward L. and Joshua Gottlieb. 2008. "The Economics of Place-Making Policies." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring): 155-253.
Harberger, Arnold C. 1964 "Principles of Efficiency: The Measurement of Waste." American Economic Review, 54: 58-76.
Hochman, Oded and David Pines. 1993. "Federal Income Tax and its Effects on Inter- and Intracity
Resource Allocation." Public Finance Quarterly 21, 276-304.
Inman, Robert P. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1997. "Rethinking Federalism." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 11 (Autumn): 43-64.
Jenkins, H.P. 1951 "Fiscal Equity in the Unequal Treatment of Unequals: A Suggested Test."
Journal of Political Economy 59 (Aug.): 353-357.
Ladd, Helen F. and John Yinger. 1994. "The Case for Equalizing Aid." National Tax Journal. 47
(March): 211-224.
Mckenzie, Kenneth J. (2006) "Fiscal Federalism and the Taxation of Nonrenewable Resources"
in R. Bird and F. Vaillancourt, eds. Perspectives on Fiscal Federalism. (World Bank: Washington
DC)
Peter Mieszkowski and Richard Musgrave. 1999. "Federalism, Grants, and Fiscal Equalization."
National Tax Journal 52: 239-259.
Peter Mieszkowski and Eric Toder. 1983. "Taxation of Energy Resources" in C. McLure and P.
Mieszkowski, eds. Fiscal Federalism and the Taxation of Natural Resources, (Lexington Books).
Mieszkowski, Peter and George Zodrow. 1989. "Taxation and the Tiebout Model: The Differential
Effects of Head Taxes, Taxes on Land Rents, and Property Taxes." Journal of Economic Literature
27 (Sep): 1098-1146.
Musgrave, Richard A. 1961. "Approaches to a Fiscal Theory of Political Federalism." in Public
Finances: Needs, Sources, and Utilization, (National Bureau of Economic Research: New York).
29

Musgrave, Richard A. 1997. "Devolution, Grants, and Fiscal Competition." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 11 (Fall): 65-72.
Myers, Gordon M. 1990. "Optimality, Free Mobility, and the Regional Authority in a Federation."
Journal of Public Economics 43: 107-121.
Oakland, William H. 1994. "Fiscal Equalization: An Empty Box?" National Tax Journal 47
(March): 199-209.
Oates, Wallace 1988. "On the Measurement of Congestion in the Provision of Local Public Goods."
Journal of Urban Economics, 24: 85-94.
Poschmann, Finn. 1998. "Where the Money Goes: The Distribution of Taxes and Benefits in
Canada." C.D. Howe Institute.
Reschovsky. 1994. "Fiscal Equalization and School Finance." National Tax Journal 47(1): 185197.
Roback, Jennifer. 1982. "Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life." Journal of Political Economy 90
(December): 1257-1278.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1979. "Wages-based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life." in P. Mieszkowski and
M. Straszheim, eds. Current Issues in Urban Economics, Baltimore: John Hopkins Univ. Press.
Scott, A.D. 1950. "A Note on Grants in Federal Countries." Economica 17 (Nov.): 416-422.
Scott, A.D. 1952. "Federal Grants and Resource Allocation." Journal of Political Economy 60
(Dec.): 534-536.
Shaw, Paul R. 1986. "Fiscal versus Traditional Market Variables in Canadian Migration." Journal
of Political Economy 94 (June): 648-666.
Smart, Michael. 1998. "Taxation and Deadweight Loss in a System of Intergovernmental Transfers." Canadian Journal of Economics 31 (Feb.). 189-206.
30

Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1977. "The Theory of Local Public Goods." in M. Feldstein and R. Inman, eds.
"Economics of Public Services (Toronto: Macmillan).
Tiebout, Charles M. 1956. "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures." Journal of Political Economy
64 (May): 416-424.
Tobin, James. 1970. "On Limiting the Domain of Inequality." Journal of Law and Economics. 13:
263-270.
Usher, Dan. 1977 "Public Property and the Effects of Migration upon Other Residents of the Migrants’ Countries of Origin and Destination." Journal of Political Economy 85 (Oct.): 1001-1020.
Usher, Dan. 1997. "The Reform of Equalization Payments." Canadian Public Policy 33 (Sep.):
337-366.
Weingast, Barry R., Kenneth A. Shepsle, and Christopher Johnsen. 1981. "The Political Economy
of Benefits and Costs: A Neoclassical Approach to Distributive Politics." Journal of Political
Economy 89 (August): 642-664.
Watson, William G. 1986. "An Estimate of the Welfare Gain from Fiscal Equalization" The Canadian Journal of Economics 19 (May): 298-308.
Wildasin, David E. 1980. "Locational Efficiency in a Federal System." Regional Science and Urban Economics 10 (November): 453-471.
Wildasin, David E. 1986. Urban Public Finance. Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Wilson, L.S. 2003. "Equalization, Efficiency and Migration: Watson Revisited." Canadian Public
Policy 29: 385-396.
Winer, Stanley L.; Denis Gauthier.1983. Internal Migration and Fiscal Structure. Ottawa: Economic Council Canada.
31

Yinger, John. 1986. "On Fiscal Disparities across Cities." Journal of Urban Economics 19: 316337.

Appendix
A
A.1

Efficiency
Set-up

P
The total population is distributed across the regions according to the constraint j Nj = NT OT ,
where, NT OT = (N1T OT ; :::; NET OT ). Assume that capital is fixed in the economy at the level K T OT .
Consumption bundles within each region are described by the vectors xj = (xj1 ; :::; xjE ), and yj =
j
(y1j ; :::; yEj ). We use FX to denote the production function for tradable goods, the quantities KX
,
j
j
j
LX and NX = (N1X ; :::NEX ) to denote the capital, land, and labor used to produce the traded
good, and X j the amount of the traded good produced in region j. Notation for the non-traded
good and government-provided good is similar, leading to the following 3 production constraints
for each region j
j
FX (KX
; LjX ; NjX ; AjX )

Xj

FY (KYj ; LjY ; NjY ; AjY )

Yj

FG (KGj ; LjG ; NjG ; AjG )

Gj

In addition, there are J(2 + E) local resource constraints:
j
KX
+ KYj + KGj

Kj
Lj

LjX + LjY + LjG

Nj

NjX + NjY + NjG

although federally, capital and land are mobile, so that local resources are simply limited by the
1 + E aggregate constraints
X
K T OT
Kj
j

NT OT =

X

Nj

j

In addition, we may write a plethora of non-negativity constraints, the most interesting ones being
Kj

0, Nj

i

0

for each j. Finally there are two consumption constraints, a global one for the tradable goods, and
J local ones for non-tradable goods:
X
X
Xj
N j x j + xF
j

j

Y

j

Nj yj + y jF

where xF and y jF are goods appropriated by the federal government to produce GF , a process
which does not require modeling.

A.2

Pareto Efficient Allocations under Perfect Mobility

Pareto efficient allocations are solved for using a planner’s problem under the constraint of perfect
mobility. The perfect mobility case corresponds best with the market economy over the very long
run, and avoids problems of redistribution within types across different regions. With multiple
types, we maximize the utility of one type in a single region, chosen arbitrarily, and guarantee that
all others of that type in other regions get the same utility, so that there are no moves. Furthermore,
we assign each other type an arbitrary level of utility regardless of where they live, combining the
conditions for mobility and efficiency.
J
j
This planner then chooses Nj ; xj ; yj ;Gj ; KX
; KYj ; KGj ; LjX ; LjY ; LjG ; NjX ; NjY ; NjG j=1 to solve
the program
G1
; Q1
max U1 x11 ; y11 ;
(N 1 )
subject to the constraints
U1 xj1 ; y1j ;

Gj
; Qj
(N j )

U1 x11 ; y11 ;

G1
; Q1
(N 1 )

for all j and that
Ue xje ; yej ;

Gj
; Qj
j
(N )

Ue

for all j and each e.
Combining as many constraints as possible, and leaving out the non-negativity constraints,

ii

produces a combined Lagrangian
L() =
+

XX
j

X

j

j
e Ue

xje ; yej ;

e

j
Y

G
; Qj
j
(N )

FY (KYj ; LjY ; NjY ; AjY )

+

X

"

Nj y j

X

j
FX (KX
; LjX ; NjX ; AjX )

j

y jF +

j

+

X

Kj

j
KX

KYj

KGj +

X

K T OT

j

+

X

j
G

Kj

j

j
N

Nj

NjX

NjY

NjG +

X

NT OT

j

Nj xj

xF

j

X
j

j
K

X

!

FG (KGj ; LjG ; NjG ; AjG )
+

Nj

j

!

X

j
L

LjX

Lj

#

Gj
LjY

LjG

j

j
j
where the multipliers follow an obvious notation, with jN = ( N
= ( 1j ; :::; Ej ).29
1 ; ::; N E ), and
The necessary conditions for a solution are characterized by a large number of first-order
Karuch-Kuhn-Tucker conditions, not all of which can be explored here. For each of the goods
j
@L
j @U
j
=
X Ne
e
j
@x
@xe
j
@L
j
j @U
j
=
e
Y Ne
j
@y
@ye
X @U j
@L
j
=
(N j )
e
@Gj
@g
e

0
0
j
G

0

which hold with equality when the related quantities are positive. For the the allocation of factors
within regions, the conditions have the form
@FXj
X
@NXe

@L
j =
@NXe
@L
=
@KYj

X

@FXj
@KX

j
Ne
j
K

0;

@L
=
@NYj e

@L
=
@LjY

0;

j
Ye

@FYj
@NY e

@FYj
@LY

j
Y

j
Ne
j
L

0

0

Assuming all goods are produced within regions, we get the classical tangency result for private
29

The first term of the Lagrangian comes from defining

U1 x11 ; y11 ;

X
G1
1
;
Q
+
(N 1 )
j>1

j
1

U1 xj1 ; y1j ;

1
1

Gj
; Qj
(N j )

iii

=1

P

j>1

U1 x11 ; y11 ;

j
1 .and

simplifying

G1
; Q1
(N 1 )

XX
+
j

e>1

j
e Ue

xje ; yej ;

Gj
; Qj
(N j )

goods and a generalized Samuelson Rule for local-government goods:
Nej
j
e

X
j
G
X

j
@Ue =@y j
@FXj =@NXe
@Uej Nej j
@Uej
j
j
; j Y =
) Y = M RSyx
=
=
= M RTyx
j
j
@x
@y
@U
=@x
@FY =@NY e
X
e
e
j
j
X
1
@U =@g
j
j
=
Nej
) G = (N j )1 M RS Gx = M RTGx
j
j
(N ) e
@U =@x
X

=

The equations imply that within each region, standard allocative, production, and match efficiency
conditions should hold.
The most interesting conditions relate to the mobile production factors, particularly labor:
@L
=
@K j
@L
=
@Nej

j
K

0
X

Gj
@g (N j ) +1

j @U
e

e

j

j j
Y ye

j
X xe

+

j
Ne

e

0

With sufficient Inada conditions applied to the utility function, all regions produce both home and
government goods, with labor in each sector. Some regions may not produce tradable goods (e.g.
resort regions), but this is ignored for now since it adds little to the analysis. Positive agglomeration
j
spillovers may be contained in N
e as there is no assumption of constant returns to scale.
Using the within-region factor equations, the condition for capital reduces to
0

@FXj
@FXj
=
@KX
@KX
in any two regions j and j 0 with capital. Substituting in @L=@Gj = 0, which assumes that Gj > 0
and is set efficiently, the equation for labor, assuming Nej > 0 becomes
j
Ne

Dividing by

X

j
X xe

j j
Y ye

j
j G
G
j

N

=

e

and substituting in production conditions, this expression becomes
@FXj
@NXe

xje

j j
M RTyx
ye

j
M RTGx

Gj
=
Nj

e
X

seen in (4) above. Since the right-hand side does not depend on j the left-hand side must be equal
across all regions with Nej > 0. The first term accounts for the marginal productivity of labor. The
next two terms gives the resource cost of private consumption (perfectly congestible) that goes to
residents of each region. In regions with greater quality of life or uncongested local-government
goods, these terms will be smaller, since less consumption is required to compensate residents of
type e for living in region j. The term starting with gives the degree of congestion of the public
caused by the new inhabitant, which reflects their resource-cost in terms of the government good:
if = 0 this term vanishes.

iv

A.3

Market Equilibrium and Optimal Fiscal Grants

In the market environment, factors are perfectly mobile across sectors within region, and labor and
capital are perfectly mobile across regions. All input and goods markets are perfectly competitive,
and the government is efficient and pays factors their marginal product. Take x to be the numeraire
good, with a price pX = 1, and let pjY be the market price of home goods. The budget constraint
of a worker of type e in region j is given by
xje + pjY yej + Tej = wej + Rej + Iej + Fej
where Tej is the amount local taxes paid by resident e in region j. wej are local wages, Rej are
incomes from land, Iej are incomes from capital, and Fej are net fiscal transfers, which can include
federal income taxes. All income sources are super-scripted to indicate their possible dependence
on location.
With perfectly competitive markets we have that
j
@FXj
j @FY
= pY
= wej
@NXe
@NY e
j
= pjY and defining
This can be related to the conditions in the planner’s problem through M RTyx
j
pjG M RTGx
. Putting these into the population condition implies

wej

xje

pjY yej

pjG

Gj
=
Nj

e
X

Substituting in the budget constraint
Tej

Fej = pjG

Gj
+ Rej + Iej +
Nj

e
X

This condition says that local tax levels, net of fiscal transfers, i.e. total payments to both levels of
government, should equilibrate congestion of government-good consumption, and any place-based
income differentials from land and capital income. The constant term implies that this can differ
across types but not across regions.

A.4

The Boadway-Flatters (1982a) Model

In this article there is no private home-good sector, and no differences in Qj ; AjX , or AjY across
locations, only Lj . Gj is produced out of X j , which can be simulated here by assuming that
pjG = 1. Production exhibits constant returns to scale in all factors, implying falling returns to
scale in N and K.
Case 1 Lump-Sum Taxes and Local Rent Sharing
In this first case, labor is homogenous and there is no capital. Local government goods are paid
with a local uniform head tax, and residents inherit land in the location that they move to, sharing

v

it equally with all other residents (although they don’t live on it).
T j = Gj =N j
Rj = rj Lj =N j
where rj = @FXj =@LX = (X j
rearranging
F

j

F

j0

NXj @FXj =@NX )=Lj , by Euler’s Theorem. Substituting in and
= (1

)

0

Gj
Nj

Gj
N j0

Rj

Rj

0

for any two regions j and j 0 . Federal transfers should subsidize federal externalities, which increase
with the level of per-capita government-good provision, and completely tax away differences in
locally appropriated land rents.
Case 2 Source-Based and Residence-Based Taxes
Labor is still homogenous, but capital is reintroduced, and property is owned uniformly regardless of location. Source-based taxes on capital and land are given by Kj , Lj , and a residence-based
tax on labor is Nj . In addition, there is a property-tax rate, Pj on income from land and capital.
Ij =
Rj =
j

T =
Gj =

1
N T OT
1
N T OT

X

1

j
K

iK j =

1

j
L

rj Lj

j

X

X

1

N

i K T OT
T OT

j
j
KK

j

j
j
j
j
N w + P (I +
j
j j j
j
K iK + L r L

Rj )
+

j
j j
Nw N

+

j
j
P (I

+ Rj )N j

j
where rj = @FXj =@LX = (X j KX
@FXj =@KX NXj @FXj =@NX )=Lj , by Euler’s Theorem. Because these taxes are uniform within regions, they do not distort production efficiency within
rej
j0
gions. However, they do distort the allocation of mobile resources across regions. If K 6= K then
the allocation of capital will be distorted as

@FXj
1
i=
@KX

0

@FXj
=
1
@KX

j
K

j0
K

The allocation of labor will be distorted unless federal transfers are set so that
F

j

F

j0

= T
= (1

j

T
)

j0

Gj
Nj

Gj
Nj

0

Gj
N j0

0

Gj
N j0

+ T

j

Gj
Nj

Substituting in for T j and Gj inside the square brackets:
"
j
j j j
j
j0
j
G
G
0
K iK + L r L
F j F j = (1
)
Nj
N j0
Nj
vi

T

j0

j0
j0
K iK

0

Gj
N j0

0

0

+ Lj rj Lj
N j0

0

#

which is the result that fiscal externalities should be subsidized, and that all source-based revenues
should be redistributed.
Case 3 Worker Heterogeneity
In this case the location condition for workers becomes
Fej

0
Fej

Tej

Gj
Nj

Fej =

Tej

=

0

Gj
N j0

0
Tej

+ (1

Gj
Nj

)

0

Gj
N j0

or just
Gj
Nj

+ (1

Gj
Nj

)

+ Fe

where Fe satisfies the overall federal budget constraint.
With worker heterogeneity, residence-based taxes and total revenues are given by the following
formulas
Tej =

j
j
N we

j
j
P (Ie

+ Rej )
X
Gj = Kj iK j + Lj rj Lj +
+

j
j
K iK

j j j
Lr L

j
j j
N w e Ne

e
j
j j
Nw N

=
+
+
+
P
where wj = (1=N j ) e Nej wej . Substituting in we get
(
j
j j j
j
j
G
K iK + L r L
+ Nj wj
Fej = Fe + (1
) j
N
Nj

+

j
j
P (I

j
j
P (I

+ Rj )Nej

+ Rj )N j

wej +

j
P

(I j + Rj )

(Iej + Rej )

)

The addition here is that residents whose tax payments are below the local average should be given
less federal money; residents with above-average tax payments should receive a subsidy.
This implies that the average level of transfers that should be given to region j is given by
(
)
j
j j j
j
1 X j j
1 X j
Gj
j
K iK + L r L
F = j
Ne F e = j
Ne Fe + (1
) j
N j
N j
N
Nj
The terms related to income from labor and property add up to zero when averaged. The grants
have to be targeted directly at the right population or they do not have the corrective effect: effectively taxes on those types who are locating for fiscal reasons are exactly canceled out by subsidies
on those with above average incomes. The federal government can give differential grants according to the composition of types across locations, but this is for redistributional purposes, not for
efficiency.

A.5

The Final Model

The case in the main text is a fairly straightforward expansion of the last model, using the assumpj
tion that income from capital and land are location independent. pjG is assumed to equal M RTGx
vii

instead of one. The attribute differences, Qj , AjX ; AjY ; AjG , affect the quantities and prices in the
model, but do not change the fundamental nature of the conditions. In addition, we can redefine
Fe + wF we to add back in differential
federal grant differences F~ej F~e = (Fej + wF wej )
federal-tax payments, so that they then become pure federal transfers, with federal taxes accounted
for separately, and use the previously derived formulas.

A.6

Equilibrium Conditions and Foundations of the Simulated Effects

The expenditure function for a household, e(pj ; Qj ; w; g j ; T j :u) measures the cost of consumption
needed to attain utility u, and is increasing in pj , and decreasing in wj ; Qj , T j , and g j .30 Since
households are fully mobile, all cities must the same utility, u. This means that firms in cities with
higher prices or lower quality of life, compensate their workers with a greater after-tax income:
e(pj ; u; Qj ) = mj

(mj ) + N F B j :

The unit cost of producing a tradable good is cX (rj ; wj ; {; AjX ) = cX (rj ; wj ; {)=AjX where
c(r; w; i) c(r; w; i; 1).31 A symmetric definition holds for the unit cost of a home good, cY . As
markets are competitive, firms make zero profits in equilibrium. Therefore, for given output prices,
more productive cities must pay higher rents and wages to achieve zero profits. In equilibrium, the
following zero-profit conditions hold in all producing cities
cX (rj ; wj ; {)=AjX = 1

(A.1)

cY (rj ; wj ; {)=AjY = pj :

(A.2)

Applying the envelope theorem and Shepard’s Lemma, the differentials for these conditions
are:
y dpj

0

(1

) dwj = dN F B j

lX drj + nX dwj = 0
lY drj + lY dwj = dpj
where lX = LX =X, lY = LY =Y , etc. This is taken be an approximation around the national
average. Solving further yields the solution

N

l drj =
y dpj =

1

L

dwj =

1

L
N

1
1

L
N

N

0

dN F B j ;

dN F B j ;
1

L
N

0

1

L
N

0

(A.3a)
(A.3b)

dN F B j :

(A.3c)

30
Formally, e(pj ; u; Qj )
minx;y fx + pj y : U x; y; Qj
ug. The use of a single index Qj assumes that
amenities are weakly separable from consumption.
31
cX (rj ; wj ; {; AjX ) minL;N;K frj L + wj N + {K : AjX F (L; N; K) = 1g

viii

These lead directly to the solutions in section 6.

B

Data and Estimation

I use Canadian Census data from the 2001 Public Use Microdata Files to calculate wage and
housing-cost differentials. The wage differentials are calculated for workers ages 25 to 55, who
report working at least 30 hours a week, 26 weeks a year. The CMA (Census Metropolitan Area)
assigned to a worker is determined by their place of residence, with non-CMA residents pooled by
province into a single fictional CMA. The wage differential of an CMA is found by regressing log
hourly wages on individual covariates and indicators for a worker’s CMA, using the coefficients on
these CMA indicators. Province-level wage levels are calculated by averaging CMA-wage effects,
weighted by population. Just using province indicators would produce fairly similar results, but
would control less for rural-urban disparities.
The covariates are split into three main categories, as mentioned in the text, which can be
further sub-categorized.
i.a 9 indicators of educational attainment, and three variables indicating highest grade, years of
university, and years of other schooling;
i.b a quartic in potential experience, and potential experience interacted with years of education;
i.c 12 indicators for major field of study;
ii.a 13 indicators of industry (1980 definition);
ii.b 25 indicators of occupation (2001 SOC);
iii.a 4 indicators of marital status (married, divorced, widowed, separated);
iii.b 5 indicators of minority status (Black, Chinese, South Asian, Aboriginal and other);
iii.c Indicators of immigrant status, time since immigration, and citizenship status;
iii.d Indicators of mother tongue (English, French, or other) and indicators for bilingualism interacted with mother tongue, and for other mother tongue interacted with speaking only French
and only English;
All covariates are interacted with gender.

ix

TABLE 1: MEASURABLE NET FISCAL BENEFITS OF RESIDING IN CANADIAN
PROVINCES, RELATIVE TO THE NATIONAL AVERAGE: 2001
Measurable Net Fiscal Benefit

Province Code

Newfoundland NL
PEI PEI
Nova Scotia NS
New Brunswick NB
Quebec QC
Ontario ON
Manitoba MB
Saskatchewan SK
Alberta AB
British Columbia BC
Territories Terr

Population

522,033
136,663
932,454
749,801
7,396,331
11,896,663
1,151,439
1,000,221
3,058,017
4,076,264
99,134

Federal
Grant
Differential
(1)
2,117
1,856
1,161
1,436
32
-417
1,119
570
-343
-294
15,561

Federal Tax
SourceMeasurable
Deficit due
Based
Net Fiscal
to Wage
Revenue Benefit = (1)
Level
Differential + (2) + (3)
(2)
(3)
(4)
548
739
622
649
169
-244
415
515
45
-216
-536

-494
-643
-542
-71
-396
-422
214
716
2,081
339
1,157

2,171
1,952
1,241
2,014
-195
-1,083
1,748
1,801
1,783
-171
16,182

Measured in 2001 Canadian Dollars. Population from CANSIM Table 54-0001. Total federal
transfers from CANSIM 384-0011. Federal tax differential based on a marginal tax rate of 24.1
percent and log wage differences from table 2 using an earnings base of $16,721. Source-based
revenues the sum of corporate income taxes, mining and logging taxes, natural resources taxes and
licences, and investment income from CANSIM 385-0002. Federal transfer and source-based
revenue differentials averaged over 1998 to 2003. See text for further detail.

TABLE 2: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FEDERAL GRANTS AND MEASURABLE NET FISCAL BENEFITS WITH
EFFICIENCY AND EQUITY CRITERIA: 2001

Province

Nominal
Wage Level
(Location
Effect)
(1)

Predicted
Earnings
Human Cap
& Minority
(2)

Predicted
Earnings
Minority
Only
(3)

Realized
Income Adj
for Costsof Living
(4)

Population
Growth
1991 to
2001
(5)

Population
Density
(per sq. km)
(6)

Prov. &
Local
Public
Expenditures
(7)

Panel A: Measures
Newfoundland
PEI
Nova Scotia
New Brunswick
Quebec
Ontario
Manitoba
Saskatchewan
Alberta
BC
Territories

-2,278
-3,070
-2,584
-2,693
-705
1,009
-1,718
-2,136
-180
905
2,230

125
384
498
368
254
-145
-129
62
14
-223
-640

602
653
535
704
417
-303
70
317
70
-366
-319

1,240
-665
-65
144
700
-123
-2
-148
174
-1,241
3,672

-10.6
4.7
1.8
0.4
4.4
13.1
3.6
-0.5
16.5
18.8
9.9

1.29
24.15
16.87
10.28
4.80
11.05
1.78
1.54
4.62
4.31
0.03

652
-272
-1,108
-1,119
748
-395
221
293
-53
171
-3,517

Panel B: Regression on Federal Grants
Coefficient
Std. Error

-0.43
(0.06)

1.58
(0.65)

1.12
(0.40)

0.29
(0.16)

-70.1
(20.0)

-24.14
(49.21)

0.08
(0.34)

Adjusted R2

0.77

0.24

0.43

-0.02

0.59

-0.09

-0.12

Panel C: Regression on Measurable Net Fiscal Benefits
Coefficient
Std. Error

-0.73
(0.15)

2.25
(1.62)

1.83
(0.98)

0.31
(0.32)

-63.7
(53.4)

-133.34
(90.77)

0.27
(0.73)

Adjusted R2

0.55

0.07

0.26

-0.09

0.03

0.13

-0.11

Measured in 2001 Canadian Dollars. Predicted income based off of predicted wages using an income base of $21766. Local
and provincial expenditures based off of provincial and local government expenditures in CANSIM 385-0002 and 385-0003
averaging from 1999 to 2003. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions using 10 provinces, excluding territories,
weighted by population. See text for further detail.

TABLE 3: RELATIVE PRICE, WAGE, QUALITY-OF-LIFE DIFFERENCES ACROSS PROVINCES AND THE
EFFECTS OF NET FISCAL BENEFITS ON PRICES, WAGES, AND EMPLOYMENT: 2001
Predicted Long-Run Effects
BeneWage-Level
Inferred
Net
Quality
of Net Fiscal Benefits
fit
(Location Hous.
Land
of
Hous.
Land EmployFiscal
Rank
Province Effect)
Cost
Rent
Life
Wage
Cost
Rent
ment
Benefit
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Newfoundland
New Brunswick
PEI
Saskatchewan
Alberta
Manitoba
Nova Scotia
BC
Quebec
Ontario

-0.15
-0.18
-0.21
-0.15
-0.01
-0.11
-0.17
0.05
-0.03
0.06

-0.68
-0.41
-0.41
-0.63
-0.22
-0.52
-0.16
0.36
-0.23
0.07

-2.39
-1.29
-1.13
-2.06
-0.72
-1.66
-0.39
1.30
-0.80
0.15

0.10
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.06
-0.01
-0.01
-0.05

-0.22
-0.11
-0.08
-0.19
-0.14
-0.17
0.01
0.09
-0.05
0.03

-0.03
-0.03
-0.03
-0.03
-0.03
-0.03
-0.02
0.00
0.00
0.02

0.24
0.22
0.21
0.19
0.19
0.19
0.14
-0.02
-0.03
-0.11

1.01
0.93
0.91
0.84
0.81
0.80
0.58
-0.09
-0.11
-0.47

0.33
0.30
0.29
0.27
0.26
0.26
0.19
-0.03
-0.04
-0.15

All quantities expressed in log terms except for net-fiscal-benefit and quality-of-life, each measured as a fraction of average
income. Housing-cost and gross real income measures explained in the Appendix. Quality of life is equal to 0.33 times
housing cost minus 0.70 times wages minus net fiscal benefits. Wage, housing-cost, land-rent, and employment effects
based off of model in Albouy (2009) using Canadian parameters in Albouy and Leibovici (2009) and using an elasticity of
employment with respect to transfers of 3.23 based on Wilson (2003).

TABLE 4: ESTIMATED PRICE, EMPLOYMENT, AND WELFARE EFFECTS OF
NET FISCAL BENEFITS, OR ITS COMPONENTS, ACROSS PROVINCES, 2001
Total
Net
Fiscal
Benefit
(1)

SourceBased
Taxes
Only
(2)

Fed Taxes
& SourceBased
Taxes
(3)

Average Percent Effects (Mean Absolute Values)
Net fiscal benefit differential: E|NFB/m|
0.042
0.027
0.030
Wage effect: E|dw|
0.013
0.009
0.010
Home-good price effect: E|dp|
0.097
0.063
0.069
Land rent effect: E|dr|
0.418
0.270
0.295
Employment effect: E|dN|
0.135
0.087
0.095
Deadweight Loss from Locational Inefficiency
As a percent of income, E(DWL/Nm) 0.413%
0.212%
0.257%
Total DWL (Billions per year, 2001$)
4.3
2.2
2.7
Per Capita (per year, 2001$)
144.4
74.0
89.7
Territories excluded. Net fiscal benefit differential measured as a fraction of average
income. Other price changes in terms of log changes. Price effects based on calibrated
model similar to Albouy (2009) Employment elasticity with respect to net fiscal benefit
based on Wilson (2003). See text for formulas and other details.

TABLE A1: DECOMPOSITION OF FEDERAL TRANSFER DIFFERENCES
ACRSOSS CANADIAN PROVINCES: 2001
Federal Transfer Components

Province

Newfoundland
PEI
Nova Scotia
New Brunswick
Quebec
Ontario
Manitoba
Saskatchewan
Alberta
BC
Territories

Federal
Transfer
Equalization
Differential
Payments
(1)+(2)+(3)
(1)
2117
1856
1161
1436
32
-417
1119
570
-343
-294
15561

1678
1595
1033
1297
276
-395
824
-123
-393
-361
14560

Health and
Social
Transfer
(2)
134
127
127
127
-199
25
124
120
-3
153
-16

Other
Federal
Transfers
(3)
304
133
2
12
-45
-46
171
573
52
-86
1017

Measured in 2001 Canadian Dollars. Federal transfer data from CANSIM 3840011. Federal transfer differentials averaged over 1998 to 2003. See text for
further detail.

TABLE A2: WAGE DIFFERENCES ACROSS PROVINCES: COMPOSITION AND LOCATION EFFECTS, 2001
Subcategories of Composition (Predicted) Effects
Total:
Local-Wage
Composition
Immigration,
Location +
Level/Location
(Predicted)
Education &
Industry &
Language &
Province
Composition
Effects
Effects
Experience
Occupation
Ethnicity
(1)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(2)
Newfoundland
PEI
Nova Scotia
New Brunswick
Quebec
Ontario
Manitoba
Saskatchewan
Alberta
BC
Territories

-0.148
-0.202
-0.146
-0.164
-0.026
0.063
-0.132
-0.178
-0.005
0.031
0.139

(0.010)
(0.016)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.020)

-0.173
-0.231
-0.195
-0.203
-0.067
0.037
-0.134
-0.163
-0.034
0.031
0.105

(0.010)
(0.039)
(0.019)
(0.020)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.042)

-0.026
-0.022
-0.002
-0.012
-0.010
-0.025
-0.048
-0.066
-0.021
-0.050
-0.017

(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)

-0.054
-0.041
-0.027
-0.045
-0.035
-0.016
-0.038
-0.041
-0.029
-0.017
-0.047

(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)

-0.033
-0.046
-0.032
-0.035
-0.026
-0.016
-0.040
-0.070
-0.022
-0.036
0.025

(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)

0.011
0.014
0.007
0.017
0.000
-0.044
-0.021
-0.006
-0.021
-0.048
-0.045

(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.005)

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Wage data are taken from the Census 2001 PUMFI. Wage estimates are based on the average
logarithm of hourly wages for full-time workers ages 25 to 55. Education: highest grade, years of univeristy, other years, 9 indicators of
highest degree, and 12 field of study indicators. Experience: quartic in potential experience and experience interacted with years of
schooling. Industry: 13 indicators; occupation: 25 indicators. Immigration, time since immigration, citizenship status, visible minority
indicators interacted immigration status, mother tongue interacted with official languages spoken. Composition effects based on all
individual ages 25 to 55, regardless of employment. Further detail provided in the Data Appendix.

TABLE A3: PER-CAPITA DIFFERENCES IN GOVERNMENT REVENUE BY CANADIAN PROVINCE RELATIVE TO THE NATIONAL AVERAGE: 1999 to 2003
Provincial Own-Revenue Componennts
Source-Based Revenue Components

Province

Provincial
SourceOwnBased
Revenue:
Revenue
Total
(1)
(2)

Residence-Based Revenue Components

InvestNatural
Residence- Personal
ment
Corporate Mining & Resource
Income Consump- Property
Based
Logging Taxes & Income &
Income
Taxes tion Taxes Taxes
Taxes
Licenses Royalties Revenue
Taxes
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

Other
Taxes
(11)

Non-Tax
Income
(12)

Local
OwnRevenue:
Total
(12)

Panel A: Differential across Provinces relative to National Average
Newfoundland
PEI
Nova Scotia
New Brunswick
Quebec
Ontario
Manitoba
Saskatchewan
Alberta
BC
Territories

-1233
-1207
-1411
-988
577
-476
-218
408
1215
104
-528

-494
-643
-542
-71
-396
-422
214
716
2081
339
1157

-263
-222
-206
-207
-76
112
-150
-186
180
-142
1360

9
-11
-10
-6
-4
-6
3
113
-11
8
-11

-11
-16
-16
-8
-8
-16
-9
125
70
-12
-14

-229
-393
-310
150
-308
-511
369
665
1843
484
-178

-690
-539
-811
-725
962
-12
-172
-256
-1025
-355
-1856

-513
-575
-340
-503
599
-83
-161
-331
-153
-336
-507

172
205
23
-70
17
157
15
179
-721
5
-888

-251
70
-204
127
-21
-93
37
57
110
262
-169

-97
-238
-290
-279
367
6
-64
-161
-261
-286
-293

-48
-31
-59
-194
12
-41
-260
-52
159
120
157

-1020
-1182
-580
-889
-132
393
-200
50
18
-401
-322

0.002

0.003

0.126

0.698

0.301

0.273

0.047

0.076

0.097

0.279

Panel B: As a Percentage of Provincial Own-Revenue
1.000

0.204

0.073

Measured in 2001 Canadian Dollars. Provincial tax revenues from CANSIM 385-0002; local tax revenues from CANSIM 385-0003. Averaged over 1999 to 2003. See text
for further detail.

0.1
0.0

PEI

NBNS
SK NL
MB

QC

AB

BC ON

-0.1

Terr

-0.2

Wage Differential Predicted by Characteristics

Figure 1: Wages Levels across Provinces

-0.2

-0.1
0.0
Raw Wage Differential
Linear Fit, slope = -0.12 (s.e. = 0.04)
Diagonal, slope = 1.0

0.1

2000

Figure 2: Per-Capita Federal Grants Relative to
Federal Taxes & Source-Based Revenues
NL
PEI
NB

Federal Grants

1000

NS

MB

0

SK

QC
BC

AB

-1000

ON

0
1000
2000
Source-Based Revenues minus Federal Tax Differential
Offset Line: Measurable NFB = 0
Reg. Line, slope = 0.15 (s.e. = 0.24)

-1000

0

1000

2000

3000

Figure 3: Net Fiscal Benefits over Time

1991

1996

2001

2006

year
Atlantic

Quebec

Priarie

BC

Ontario

Atlantic Provinces include Newfoundland, PEI, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick. Prairie Provinces include Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and
Alberta.

0.2
0.1
0.0

BC
ON
QC

-0.1

AB
SK
NS NL
PEI NB

MB

-0.2

Provincial Wage Level: Educ, Health, and Public Admin

Figure 4: Local Wage Levels for Public Service Workers
Terr

-0.2

-0.1
0.0
Provincial Wage Level: All Workers
Linear Fit, slope = 0.64 (s.e. = 0.07)
Diagonal, slope = 1.0

0.1

