NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CHILD AND ADULT CARE FOOD PROGRAM:
WHO IS SERVED AND WHAT ARE THEIR NUTRITIONAL OUTCOMES?
Rachel A. Gordon
Robert Kaestner
Sanders Korenman
Kristin Abner
Working Paper 16148
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16148

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the USDA Nutrition Research Innovation and Development
Grants in Economics (RIDGE) Program. This paper benefited from two RIDGE workshops held at
the Harris School at the University of Chicago and the 2009 RIDGE Conference, in Washington DC.
We also thank seminar participants at Chapin Hall at the University of Chicago and the School of
Public Affairs, Baruch College/CUNY for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Rachel A. Gordon, Robert Kaestner, Sanders Korenman, and Kristin Abner. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Child and Adult Care Food Program: Who is Served and What are Their Nutritional Outcomes?
Rachel A. Gordon, Robert Kaestner, Sanders Korenman, and Kristin Abner
NBER Working Paper No. 16148
July 2010
JEL No. I38,J13,J18
ABSTRACT
This paper addresses three basic questions about an under-studied food subsidy program, the Child
and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP): (1) Does CACFP reach targeted low-income children? (2)
How do eligible families and child care providers who participate differ from those who do not participate?
(3) What is the association between attending CACFP-participating child care and children's food
intake, weight, and food security? We use the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Birth Cohort to
examine these questions for a representative sample of young children and their providers. We find
that program eligibility rules leave many poor children outside the CACFP program. Yet, among poor
preschoolers in center-based care, participation in the program is correlated with positive outcomes
such as increased consumption of milk and vegetables, and healthier weight (BMI). We discuss the
implications of our findings, especially in relation to other food and child care subsidy programs.
Rachel A. Gordon
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
ragordon@uic.edu
Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner@uic.edu

Sanders Korenman
School of Public Affairs
Baruch College
135 E. 22nd Street, Box D-900
New York, NY 10010
and NBER
sanders.korenman@baruch.cuny.edu
Kristin Abner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 410
Chicago, IL 60607
kabner2@uic.edu

Child and Adult Care Food Program

1

In 2008, nearly 15% of households were food insecure—had inconsistent access to
enough food for active healthy lives—including 6% with very low food security—reduced food
intake and disrupted eating patterns due to lack of food; these are the highest rates of food
insecurity recorded since the first national food security survey was conducted in 1995 (Nord,
Andrews, and Carlson 2009: 8). Rates of food insecurity were higher for households with
children, single-parent households, minority households, and poor households. Fully half of
low-income female-headed households with children were food insecure in 2008 (Nord et al.
2009: 15). The extent of food insecurity is worrisome because child hunger can adversely affect
children’s health, and their cognitive and social development (Tanner and Finn-Stevenson 2002).
Sustained child hunger can lead to short stature and low weight for height, which have been
linked to worse adult health and reduced economic well being even in the U.S. (Case and Paxson
2008; Fogel 2004).
To address inadequate child nutrition, more than a dozen federal programs provide food
and nutrition to children and families (Fox, Hamilton, and Christenson 2004). In FY 2008, $38
billion was spent on the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, formerly Food
Stamps), which represents more than half of federal expenditures for nutrition programs.
Expenditures on four other programs exceeded one billion dollars each: the National School
Lunch Program ($9.3 billion), the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants
and Children (WIC; $6.2 billion), the Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP; $2.4
billion), and the School Breakfast Program ($2.4 billion; Oliveira, 2009). All of these programs
have been widely studied, except for the CACFP. A review by Frederic Glantz (2004) identified
only a handful of studies of the CACFP and concluded, “Some studies have assessed the nutrient
contribution of CACFP meals and snacks to participants’ overall diets. However, there has been
no research on the impact of the program on participants’ nutrition and health status, relative to

Child and Adult Care Food Program

2

nonparticipants” (p. 236). In a comprehensive review of federal nutrition programs, Janet M.
Currie (2006a) makes a similar point: “One of the most important [of the smaller food programs]
is the Child and Adult Care Food Program, which operates somewhat like the school meals
programs, but serves approximately 1.7 million low-income children in daycare centers. There
has been little investigation of the benefits of participation in these programs, but the positive
effects of the school meal programs suggests that providing meals to younger children....makes
sense.” (86).
In this study, we begin to fill the gap in research about CACFP. We use a nationallyrepresentative sample of children and their childcare providers to examine three research
questions:
1. How well does the CACFP reach targeted low-income children who are most at risk of
nutritional deficits?
2. How do eligible families and child care providers who participate in the CACFP differ
from those who do not participate?
3. What is the association between attending CACFP-participating child care and children's
consumption of food, food insecurity, and weight?
Our study makes two contributions. First, we add to the limited evidence about whether CACFP
reaches targeted children and what characteristics of providers and families affect participation.
Previous research on CACFP has examined only participating homes (or those which had
recently participated) and has not included a comparison group of non-participating homes or
centers. The evidence on coverage we present should help policymakers and analysts understand
who is and is not being served by CACFP. Second, as far as we are aware, our study is the first
to compare children attending CACFP participating child care to nonparticipants in terms of food
intake, weight status and food insecurity of children.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

3

CACFP Program Features
The Child and Adult Care Food Program reimburses caregivers for meals and snacks
provided to children in child care centers or homes, after-school programs, and homeless
shelters, and to adults in adult day care centers. In FY 2008, 97% of CACFP reimbursed meals
and snacks were provided to children (as opposed to adults), including over 1.2 billion meals and
snacks served in child care centers and over 600 million served in family day care homes
(Oliveira, 2009).
Eligibility criteria are not very exclusionary; any child and most providers are eligible to
participate in the program, although reimbursement rates are higher if certain eligibility criteria
are met. Four central criteria determine eligibility and benefit levels: type of care (center vs.
home, for-profit vs. non-profit, licensed vs. unlicensed), neighborhood income, provider income,
and/or family income of children. Figure 1 describes these criteria.1
Home-based Providers
All licensed, home-based providers (which we will also refer to as family day care) are
eligible to participate, but they receive higher (Tier I) or lower (Tier II) reimbursement rates
depending on some combination of their neighborhood income, their own income and the
income of children in their care (U.S. Department of Agriculture 2002).2 In 2004-2005, Tier I
rates per child for breakfast, lunch/supper, and snack were $1.04, $1.92, and $0.57 respectively;
Tier II rates were $0.39, $1.16, and $0.15 respectively (U.S. Department of Agriculture n.d.).
Home-based providers participate through a local sponsoring agency, such as a local child care
1
2

This description corresponds to the period of our study data (2001-2005).

Federal guidelines allow states to extend eligibility to license-exempt homes, although a comprehensive
list of the states that do and do not extend eligibility is not readily available. In our national data set, we

Child and Adult Care Food Program

4

resource and referral agency, that determines eligibility and processes reimbursements. Family
day care providers are eligible for Tier I rates if they are located in low-income areas (based on
local elementary school free- and reduced-price lunch enrollment or census block-group
income); or if the provider’s household income is below 185% of the federal poverty line or she
is categorically eligible (receives TANF or Food Stamps). Notably, providers eligible for Tier I
reimbursement need not serve poor children.3 Licensed homes that do not meet the criteria for
Tier I reimbursement are eligible for Tier II (lower) reimbursement. However, these providers
can still be reimbursed at Tier I rates for children in their care who have low incomes. To
receive the higher rate (Tier I) for a low-income child, a Tier II provider must document that the
child’s family income is below 185% of the federal poverty threshold or that the family is
categorically eligible. Thus, all licensed family day care homes are eligible for some level of
subsidy.
Child Care Centers
The eligibility rules for centers are also shown in Figure 1. All centers are reimbursed on
a per-child basis and must determine each child’s rate based on family income. Centers can
either determine children’s eligibility directly or participate through a sponsor. Each child’s
reimbursement is either full (if the child’s family income is below 130% of poverty), reduced (if
family income is between 130% and 185% of poverty), or paid (if family income is above 185%
of poverty). Full rates were $1.23 for breakfast, $2.24 for lunch, and $0.61 for snacks in 20042005. Reduced rates were $0.93, $1.84 and $0.30, respectively. Paid rates were $0.23, $0.21,
and $0.05 respectively (U.S. Department of Agriculture n.d.). Children who participate in
observed unlicensed homes to participate in just 21 of 46 states, and the percentage participating exceeded
10 percent in only 5 of those 21 states.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

5

TANF, Food Stamps or Head Start are categorically eligible for full reimbursement. For-profit
centers can participate only if at least 25% of enrolled children are income-eligible or their care
is funded through Title XX (Social Services Block Grant funds; U.S. Department of Agriculture
2008).4 In short, all centers are eligible to receive some level of subsidy, except for-profit
providers that serve few poor children.
Nutritional Requirements
Providers receive information about federal nutritional guidelines for reimbursable meals
and snacks, although providers retain discretion in menu planning (Fleischhacker, Cason, and
Achterberg 2006; Oakley et al. 1995). For children aged 3 to 5, USDA meal patterns require that
children have three-fourths cup of milk, a half cup of a fruit or vegetable, and a half slice or half
serving of a grain for breakfast. For lunch or supper, they should consume three-fourths cup
milk, two half-cup servings of a fruit or vegetable, one serving of a grain or bread, and one
serving of meat or meat alternative. A snack must include two of the following four components:
one half cup of milk, one fruit or vegetable, one grain or bread, or 1 meat or meat alternative
(U.S. Department of Agriculture 2009). Providers must keep daily documentation of planned
menus and any variations from them, specifically what kinds of foods and drinks are served at
meals and snacks. They must also keep records of program enrollment, attendance, and number
of meals served. These records must be available for sponsors to review during visits.

3

Throughout the paper, when we refer to poor or low-income children we mean those who meet any individual
eligibility criteria for the CCFAP (household income below 185% of the federal poverty line (FPL) or participation
in the TANF or Food Stamp program).
4

As with license-exempt homes, states vary in which types of centers are not required to be licensed.
But, unlike license-exempt homes, which are typically small (3-4 children in care) and outside of any
regulatory scrutiny, states typically exempt from licensing centers and preschool programs overseen by
organizations such as schools, churches or local governments (National Child Care Information Center

Child and Adult Care Food Program

6

Implications of Program Rules
Determinants of Child Receipt of CACFP Benefits
An important feature of CACFP is that participation is ultimately determined by the
provider rather than the family, although families can seek out a participating provider. Thus,
unlike other nutritional entitlement programs (e.g., Food Stamps/SNAP), many poor children are
not served by CACFP because of provider ineligibility, and receipt of CACFP benefits will vary
among similar low-income children according to the characteristics and behavior of their care
providers. Ineligible children include those with no non-parental child care arrangements, which
includes at least half of children ages 0 to 2 and one-quarter of children ages 3 to 4 (Iruka and
Carver 2006). In addition, most children cared for by license-exempt caregivers such as
neighbors, friends or relatives are not eligible, which, in one three-city study, included over half
of low-income children (Li-Grining and Coley 2006). For children cared for in licensed family
day care or in centers, provider eligibility and program reimbursement levels depend
significantly on characteristics of providers. For centers, eligibility and reimbursement levels
depend on ownership (e.g., for-profit) status and the income levels of children served. For
licensed homes, eligibility and reimbursement levels depend on the provider’s income, the
poverty rate of the provider’s neighborhood or the income levels of children served. Because
provider characteristics influence eligibility and take up, even among children cared for in
licensed homes and centers, we expect to find that a significant portion of poor children do not
receive CACFP and a portion of non-poor children receive CACFP.
We expect costs and benefits (broadly defined) of participation to influence provider
participation. Provider size and eligibility for different reimbursement levels are key
and the National Association for Regulatory Administration 2009). In our national data set, we observed
unlicensed centers to participate in CACFP in 38 of the 44 states.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

7

determinants of participation benefits to providers. Because the costs of participation are
relatively fixed (e.g., a menu must be planned for three or three hundred children), but
reimbursement increases linearly with the number of children, especially poor children,
participation should become more attractive when the provider cares for more children,
particularly low-income children.
Table 1 illustrates how CACFP reimbursements vary according to type of care (home or
center), the total number of children in care and the number of low-income children (who are
reimbursed at a higher rate, except in Tier I homes). Amounts shown are monthly and assume
23 days of care per month per child, and reimbursement for breakfast, lunch and snack for each
child, which is the most common configuration of meals and snacks (Crepinsek et al. 2002). If
one assumes that centers and home-based care providers would serve meals and snacks in the
absence of the program, then it is clear that homes and centers that serve large numbers of poor
children (Tier I or full reimbursement) have very substantial monetary incentives to participate.
For many mid-size to large centers, benefits as high as $9,000 to $14,000 per month would likely
far exceed administrative costs of CACFP. Likewise, a large home would receive nearly $1,000
per month at the Tier I rate.
Comparing across columns of Table 1 shows how incentives for providers to participate
vary according to the incomes of children in their care. Monthly reimbursement levels increase
much more steeply with different reimbursement levels for centers than homes, giving centers
that serve poor children a greater incentive to participate than those serving non-poor children,
and also creating strong incentives for centers to serve more poor children. For homes, the ratio
of Tier 1 to Tier II reimbursement is only 2 to 1. For centers, in contrast, the ratio of reduced to
paid reimbursement is 6 to 1, and the ratio of full to paid reimbursement is 8 to 1.
One study provides evidence that providers respond to the financial incentives of

Child and Adult Care Food Program

8

different reimbursement rates. Abt Associates conducted a large national study of the switch
from one to two reimbursement tiers for home-based providers was introduced as part of the
1996 welfare reform legislations in order to better target low-income children (Glantz 2004; U.S.
Department of Agriculture 2002). The new category of Tier I homes was not affected by the
change, but homes in the new Tier II category received a lower rate. The Abt study reported that
the number of participating homes fell by about 14% following the introduction of tiering,
relative to projected trends (U.S. Department of Agriculture 2002). Among providers who
participated at the lower Tier II rate, nearly two-thirds reported that meal reimbursement rates
were unsatisfactory, compared to about ten percent of Tier I providers. Tier II providers also
reported spending about $20 less per week on food, on average, than Tier I providers ($110
versus $91).
Among similar children, several provider and family characteristics may influence
participation. For example, although the cost of participation is low for home-based providers in
low-income areas because all licensed home providers in the area are eligible and validation of
their income or the income of children in their care is not required, providers must still find out
about the program, be willing to work with a sponsor, and complete the required paperwork (e.g.,
submit menus to sponsors). These considerations suggest that characteristics related to access to
information such as participation in professional networks, or characteristics that make
paperwork and scrutiny less daunting such as participation in other public programs, should
increase participation. Licensed homes are predicted to have high participation rates because
licensing itself entails oversight procedures and the licensing agency likely provides many kinds
of information.
Centers typically have greater access to information and existing oversight relationships
than homes. Most center-based care is licensed or associated with larger organizations (e.g.,

Child and Adult Care Food Program

9

public and private schools or religious organizations) that regularly provide information to center
directors including information about CACFP. Still, broader professional networking may also
affect center participation. Because centers must determine the correct level of reimbursement
for each child, participation may be viewed as costly, especially when most children in care are
not poor. However, centers tend to have more formal administrative relationships with parents
than do home-based caregivers, which would facilitate income-eligibility checks. Also, poor
families may already be participating in other programs involving the provider such as general
child care subsidies or Head Start. Referral relationships with Head Start may be associated with
higher participation either because poverty rates are high among Head Start children, which
increase financial incentives to participate, or due to network/information ties to Head Start
providers or families, virtually all of whom are served by CACFP.
We also expect family characteristics to affect whether children participate. Families
affect participation in three ways: by their poverty status or other program participation, by their
residence in areas with more poor children, and by their choice of provider. In choosing care,
some parents may directly seek out a provider who participates in CACFP or who has
characteristics that may correlate with participation (like a higher quality care environment,
including higher nutritional quality). Other parents may avoid care settings with numerous poor
children, taking this as a signal of lower quality. Furthermore, providers may factor such
parental choices into their decisions about participation in CACFP. For example, a provider in a
mixed income area may, on the one hand, be able to raise revenues in the form of larger
reimbursements from the CACFP by serving more low-income children but, on the other hand,
may worry about the potentially adverse market signal this sends to some parents.
In sum, participation in CACFP depends on eligibility rules and characteristics of both
families and providers, particularly characteristics linked to the costs and benefits of provider

Child and Adult Care Food Program

10

participation. Below, we provide the first national portrait of participation in relation to the key
determinants of eligibility and reimbursement levels: type of care (center vs. home, for-profit vs.
non-profit, licensed vs. unlicensed), neighborhood income, provider income, and family income.
We then focus on a set of similar eligible children (low income children attending centers) and
employ multiple regression analyses that include characteristics of providers and families (such
as the center’s referral relationships with Head Start and willingness to accept child care
subsidies and the mother’s education level and reasons for choosing care) that may determine
who among these eligible children participates in the program.
CACFP Participation and Child Nutritional Outcomes
We also assess whether the CACFP is associated with child nutritional outcomes. As
described above, participating providers must develop menus that meet USDA meal patterns,
including requirements for serving nutritious foods such as vegetables, fruits, and milk. If
providers follow these patterns, children’s consumption of nutritious foods should increase when
cared for in a participating setting. Children’s consumption of less nutritious foods (such as
drinking soda or fruit-flavored drinks or eating sweet snacks) might also be reduced.
Reimbursements from CACFP may also allow providers to increase food portions, which may
help some poor children meet their calorie needs and reduce food insecurity. Whether and how
these changes in diet affect weight, however, is unclear, as weight is determined by caloric
intake; and, whereas some nutritious foods (e.g., fruit and whole milk) are high in calories, other
nutritious foods (like vegetables) are low in calories. Children in full-time care typically
consume half to two-thirds of their daily meals and snacks in the care setting (Ziegler et al.
2006). Thus, to the extent the program improves nutrition, food security, and appropriate caloric
intake, we expect the associations to be greater for children who are in care for longer hours.
On the other hand, CACFP participation might not be associated with child nutritional

Child and Adult Care Food Program

11

outcomes because providers have latitude in food menus and their meals are infrequently
monitored (i.e., one time per year). Some studies find relatively good adherence to menu
requirements. For example, a study by Abt Associates found that in Tier II homes over 90% of
breakfasts, lunches and snacks met the meal pattern requirements (Crepinsek et al. 2002). In
addition, the Feeding Infants and Toddlers Study (FITS) showed that children consumed more
milk, fruits and vegetables at lunches served at child care than at lunches served at home (Ziegler
et al. 2006).5 However, other studies that observed the meals served in CACFP-participating
settings reveal that meal patterns are sometimes not followed; substitutions from planned menus
are not documented, or children do not consume the food served. One study of participating
homes and centers in Texas found that no provider met the meal patterns all of the time, and the
only meal components served 100% of the time were milk at breakfast and meat at lunch
(Kuratko et al. 2000). In a study of Head Start centers, only four meals served out of 269
perfectly matched menu descriptions (Fleischhacker et al. 2006).
As far as we are aware, no prior study has examined how food intake, weight status and
food insecurity differ between children who attend CACFP-participating settings and those who
do not. Although our study has some limitations, including reliance on parental reports (except
for child height and weight) and non-random assignment of children to CACFP settings, it
provides the first estimates of associations between CACFP participation and nutrition-related
outcomes of preschool aged children.
Summary
In summary, the CACFP is clearly understudied compared to other federal nutritional
programs. In the remainder of this paper we present the first national portrait of participation in
the CACFP in relation to key program eligibility and reimbursement rules. An important feature
5

The study did not identify which child care providers participated in CACFP.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

12

of the CACFP is that eligibility for the program and the benefits and costs of participation are
linked to provider as well as family characteristics. We therefore describe how numerous
characteristics of providers and families correlate with participation for similar low-income
children in center care. We also compare nutrition-related outcomes for low income children
who attend a participating center to low income children who attend a non-participating center,
adjusting for other characteristics of providers and families that we found to be associated with
participation. We conclude with a detailed discussion of the implications of our findings,
especially in the context of other nutritional and child care subsidy programs.

Sample, Measures, and Methods
Sample
We use the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Birth Cohort (ECLS-B), which is a
longitudinal study of a nationally representative sample of children from birth onward.6 Children
in the sample were born in 2001 in 46 states. The sample size was 10,700, resulting from a
response rate of 74% at the initial 9-month interview. At the two- and four-year follow up
interviews, sample sizes were 9,850 and 8,950, respectively. The ECLS-B oversampled children
born with a low birth weight or a twin as well as American Indian and Asian children. At twoyears, 43% of children in the sample were non-Hispanic white, 16% non-Hispanic black, 20%
non-Hispanic other, and 21% were Hispanic. At the two- and four-year follow-ups the child’s
primary non-parental care provider, the person who cared for the child for the most hours per
week, was contacted for an interview. The weighted response rate in the two year follow-up was
70% for the child care provider interview (Bethel et al. 2007: 3-25). The weighted response rate
6

A data-sharing agreement is required for the restricted-use ECLS-B data. All sample sizes reported in
the text and tables are rounded to the nearest 50, as per the data-sharing agreement.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

13

in the four year follow-up was approximately 90% for center-based providers and 80% for homebased providers (Snow et al. 2007: 306). We use sampling weights in all analyses that were
created to adjust for the initial sampling design, initial nonresponse, and differential nonresponse
over time (Snow et al. 2007).
Measures and Methods
To answer our three research questions, we constructed measures of CACFP
participation, child nutritional outcomes, child care provider characteristics, and child and family
characteristics, including information about the family, provider, and ZIP code poverty to
approximate eligibility rules and reimbursement levels. We present descriptive statistics and
details about variable measurement in Appendix A.
Our analyses have three overarching purposes: to describe the populations served by
CACFP, to identify correlates of participation, and to estimate associations between participation
in CACFP and nutritional outcomes among low-income children. For the first purpose, we
present simple descriptive statistics. We calculate the percentage of children who are in different
types of care and, within these types of care, the percentage who receive CACFP and whose
families are poor. To examine the importance of area income, we then calculate CACFP
participation rates by area and family poverty, separately for homes and centers. Because we
anticipate age differences in types of care arrangements, we report all descriptive statistics
separately for two year olds and four year olds. We apply the appropriate sampling weight so
that these statistics are nationally representative of children born in 2001.
To identify which provider and area characteristics have independent associations with
take up among similar children, we estimate a series of four OLS linear probability models that
predict whether low income children who attend centers participate in CACFP or not (OLS is
used for simplicity of interpretation; the pattern of statistical significance is highly similar for

Child and Adult Care Food Program

14

logistic regression models; results are available from the authors). Standard errors are adjusted
for heteroskedasticity and for clustering at the ZIP code level. Our first model includes key
determinants of the financial benefits to centers of participating, including area poverty, forprofit status, licensure status and licensed capacity, but with only minimal controls (for the
sampling weight, dummy variables for child age in months, and dummy variables for geographic
state or region). In our second model, we add center covariates that may indicate organizational
capacity to find out about and enroll in the program, such as referral relationships with Head
Start and the director’s tenure at the center. In the third model, we add child and family
characteristics that may influence whether parents choose participating centers, such as the
mother’s reasons for selecting care and her education level. In the fourth model, we add lagged
(measured at age two) child milk consumption, BMI, and food insecurity to study whether or not
children who participate in CACFP are nutritionally selected, conditional on other characteristics
of their families and care providers. Evidence of such selectivity has been found for other
nutritional programs, such as Food Stamps, where families most in need are also most likely to
take up (Burstein et al., 2004; Gibson-Davis & Foster 2006).
For our third research question, examining associations between CACFP participation
and child nutritional outcomes, we estimate another series of OLS linear probability models in
which four year olds’ food consumption, food insecurity and weight status are outcomes and a
dummy indicator of attending a CACFP-participating center is the central predictor (the pattern
of significance is again highly similar for logistic regression models; results are available from
the authors). Similar to our models predicting participation, we estimate a series of four models.
The first child outcome model includes an indicator of CACFP participation and minimal
controls for the sampling weight and dummy variables for child age in months, for geographic
state or region, and for whether the parent respondent is the mother. The second model adds the

Child and Adult Care Food Program

15

child and family covariates described above and shown in Appendix A, which may select
children into participating settings based on health, nutritional or socioeconomic status and also
be correlated with child outcomes. The third model adds controls for center characteristics that
are potential confounders; for example, directors with a longer tenure at the center may be more
likely to seek reimbursements from CACFP and already deliver effective care in other ways,
such as better health practices. Our fourth model includes controls for child outcomes measured
at age two (i.e., lagged child outcomes) to adjust for unmeasured stable characteristics associated
with child health and nutrition at age four as well as age two. We do not use child fixed effects
(i.e., first differences) because we do not have exact repeated measures for all outcomes and
because we anticipate that the association between CACFP participation and child outcomes
might vary for two and four year olds (but standard fixed-effects models constrain the
associations to be identical at age two and age four).
For the participation and outcome regression models, we restrict our analysis to lowincome four-year olds who are cared for in non-Head Start centers. We focus on centers because
a small percentage of children, and small numbers of children in our sample, are in licensed
homes at ages two or four. We study four-year olds because many more children are in centers at
age four than two. We drop children in Head Start centers from our analyses because virtually
all Head Start centers participate in CACFP, so it is difficult to distinguish effects of CACFP
from those of the Head Start program; we lack a comparison group of Head Start participants
who are not CACFP participants. We study low-income children in order to increase
comparability between participating and non-participating children.
We also re-estimated the participation and outcome regressions for children who were not
in care at age two, to assess whether covariates of CACFP participation and associations of
participation with preschoolers’ outcomes were similar among those who had not been in care as

Child and Adult Care Food Program

16

two year olds. In addition, anticipating that associations with child nutrition and calorie
consumption might be larger for children who spend more time in care (and thus who eat more
meals and snacks in care) we re-estimated the outcome models for children who were in care 30
or more hours per week and who were in community centers (which are often full day, as
opposed to school or church based preschool programs, which are often part day).

Results
How Well Does the CACFP Reach Targeted Low-Income Children?
According to the ECLS-B data, the overall rate of participation in the CACFP is low,
including among poor children. Among two years olds, just 9% receive CACFP, and receipt
varies little by poverty status (10% of non-poor two-year-olds and 8% of poor two-year-olds
receive CACFP). Among four year olds, participation is higher, especially among poor children,
although it is still the case that the majority do not receive CACFP. Overall, 28% of four-year
olds receive CACFP; 20% of non-poor four-year-olds and 37% of poor four-year olds. We now
turn to more detailed descriptive analyses by type of care and area poverty in order to better
understand the sources of low participation overall, the modest differences in participation by
poverty status, and much better coverage and targeting of benefits on poor children at the
preschool age.
To begin, Table 2 shows basic information about the percentage of two year old children
in each type of care arrangement, the CACFP participation rate (in relevant care types), and the
family poverty rate (overall in each type of care and, where relevant, within CACFP participation
status). The results show that many poor two-year olds are missed because they are not in
eligible settings, and that coverage of poor children is better in centers than licensed homes. In
particular, most two-year olds are cared for in settings that are either ineligible for CACFP (61%

Child and Adult Care Food Program

17

are in exclusive maternal care), or that are either ineligible or participate at low rates; one fifth
of all two-year olds, and one-half of those in child care, are in unlicensed homes, and just 5% of
unlicensed providers said they participate in CACFP.
Many children who are not served are poor, including over half (55%) of children in
exclusive maternal care and over one-third of those in unlicensed homes (46% of those cared for
at home or by a relative; 37% of those care for by a nonrelative outside of the child’s home). In
contrast, although nearly two-thirds of licensed home providers participate in CACFP, just 5% of
all two-year olds and 13% of two-year olds in care are in this type of setting. In addition, just
over one-quarter (28%) of two-year olds in licensed homes are poor, and the poverty rate is the
same among children in participating and non-participating settings. In terms of centers, twoyear olds are nearly evenly split between for-profit and non-profit centers; together, over onethird of two-year olds who are in child care are cared for in centers (17% in non-profit centers;
19% in for-profit centers). Coverage of poor children is better in for-profit and non-profit
centers than in licensed homes. The majority of centers do not participate in CACFP—just under
one out of every three for-profit centers and about two out of five non-profit centers
participate—but children who attend participating centers are more likely to be poor than those
in non-participating centers (about half versus one-fifth to one-quarter).
Participation is higher, and coverage of poor children is better, at age four than at age
two. The primary explanation is that more children are cared for in centers than in exclusive
maternal care or unlicensed care. As Table 3 shows, less than one-quarter of four-year olds are
in exclusive maternal care and only 16% are in unlicensed homes (13% with a relative or in their
own home; 3% with nonrelatives outside their own home). Yet poverty rates remain high in
these settings: two-thirds of children who are in exclusive maternal care at age four are poor, as
are over half of those in unlicensed care provided by a relative or in their own home and over

Child and Adult Care Food Program

18

one-third of those in unlicensed care by a non-relative away from home.
Coverage of poor children remains better in centers than licensed homes at four years.
Although a high proportion of licensed home providers who care for four-year olds participate in
CACFP (66%), the percentage of children in this type of care is low (4% of all children; 5% of
children in care) and the child poverty rate is similar in homes that participate in CACFP and
those that do not (27% and 34% respectively). In contrast, family poverty is much higher for
children attending CACFP-participating centers than non-participating centers, especially nonprofit centers where coverage of poor children is particularly good. About one-third of all fouryear olds (34%) and nearly half of those in care (45%) are cared for in non-profit centers. And,
whereas 63% of those at CACFP-participating non-profit centers are poor, just 21% of those at
non-participating non-profit centers are poor. Also as expected, participation in CACFP is
nearly universal for Head Start centers (94%), and most children in Head Start centers are poor
(88%).
To assess the role of area poverty, we focus our attention on licensed homes and nonHead Start centers because virtually all Head Start centers participate and almost no unlicensed
homes participate. Table 4 shows CACFP participation rates by both family and area-level
poverty for licensed homes at ages two and four. The table also shows whether participating
providers are low income (with incomes under $40,000). Strikingly, among licensed home
providers, there is little consistent association between participation in CACFP and either area
poverty levels or the poverty status of the children in their care. Regardless of the poverty status
of the child’s family or the fraction of children who are eligible for free or reduced lunch in local
schools, generally about two-thirds of children who attend licensed homes receive CACFP. In
terms of provider income, in most cases less than half of licensed home providers who
participate in CACFP have incomes below $40,000 regardless of family and area poverty levels.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

19

Although our approximation of provider poverty is crude because we do not know the providers’
household size, it is striking that among CACFP participating providers who serve non-poor
children in areas with no poor schools just one-fifth (at age two) to half (at age four) fall below
this income cutoff. Of course, if we could have identified whether the provider received Tier I or
Tier II reimbursement rates, we may have found a stronger link between area poverty and
participation, since Tier I eligibility is linked to local poverty rates (see again Figure 1).
Among children in centers (Table 5), in most cases, those who live in a lower-income
area are more likely to receive CACFP; the exception is non-profit centers serving poor two-year
olds, where the majority participates regardless of the area poverty level. Presumably this
gradient reflects the fact that the incentive for any center to participate is greater when the center
serves more low-income children; and for-profit centers located in low-income neighborhoods
are more likely to meet the criterion of serving at least 25% low-income children. Although
within each type of area, poor children are more likely than non-poor children to receive
CACFP, they are generally least likely to receive CACFP when they live in non-poor areas. At
both two years and four years, when poor children attend for-profit centers, one-third or fewer
participate in CACFP if they are located in a non-poor area (<10% poor) in contrast to half to
two-thirds in poor areas (>= 20% poor). Many more four-year olds than two-year olds attend
non-profit centers, and at four years a similar gradient is seen by area poverty: 48% are at
participating centers when located in non-poor areas in comparison to three-quarters in poor
areas. Thus, the chance that a poor child will receive CACFP in a center depends on the level of
poverty in the local area.
In sum, our results indicate that the majority of children do not receive CACFP because
many are cared for in settings such as maternal care or an unlicensed home that are either
ineligible for or do not participate in CACFP. This is especially true for two year olds. The

Child and Adult Care Food Program

20

majority of these children are poor. Licensed homes have high CACFP participation rates, but
few children are in this type of care and participation is equally high among non-poor and poor
children. Coverage of poor children is better in centers than licensed homes, and by four years
of age the majority of children are cared for in centers. But, among centers, poor children are
less likely to participate when they live in higher-income areas, especially those who attend forprofit centers.
Provider and Family Correlates of Participation in CACFP
Estimates from the regression models predicting CACFP participation are presented in
Table 6. The results in Column 1 of Table 6 confirm our descriptive results; among low-income
four-year olds who attend centers, CACFP participation is higher in higher-poverty areas. In
addition, for-profit centers are 19 percentage points less likely to participate in CACFP than nonprofit centers.7 Unlicensed centers and small licensed centers are less likely to participate than
large licensed centers; predicted participation rates holding covariates at their means are 73%,
65%, and 52% for large, medium and small licensed centers, respectively, and 50% for
unlicensed centers.
When we control for other characteristics of centers (column 2; only significant
covariates are shown in Table 6; see Appendix C for all coefficients) significant effects of some
determinants including local poverty are reduced, but remain substantial in size (about 10 to 20
percentage points). Of the new covariates, we see that centers with a referral relationship to
Head Start are more likely to participate (16 percentage points), which likely reflects the
presence of more poor children at the center or the influence of informational links to Head Start
programs. School-based prekindergarten and other preschool programs, which are sometimes
part-day programs and may serve fewer meals, are less likely to participate than community

Child and Adult Care Food Program

21

centers, which are typically full-day programs. Accredited centers are more likely to participate
(10 percentage points), which may indicate the selection of higher quality centers into the
program, the ability of participating centers to invest in quality, or access to better informational
networks. When the center director reports accepting subsidies the center is (unexpectedly) less
likely to participate; this result may reflect the fact that the question asks whether subsidies
would be accepted, rather than actually received.
As shown in Column 3 of Table 6, several child and family characteristics are
significantly related to CACFP participation (see Appendix C for all coefficients). Children are
more likely to attend a participating center if they are in care 30 or more hours per week (10
percentage points), if their mother is less educated (14 percentage point increase for high school
graduate versus having some college or more),8 and if the mother reported that small care group
size was very important to her child care decision (8 percentage points). In Column 4, two
lagged child outcomes also predict attending a participating center (estimates in Column 4):
families in which the child was food insecure at age two are 16 percentage points more likely to
attend a participating center at age four; and children who drank more milk at age two are more
likely to attend a participating center at age four (10 percentage points for those who drank milk
at meals versus neither meals nor snacks). These associations remain significant when we
restrict the analysis to those who had not been in care at two years old (Appendix D).
To summarize, our estimates suggest that provider, family and locational characteristics
all affect participation in CACFP. Poor children who reside in low-income areas are more likely
to participate than similar poor children in wealthier areas. These area differences likely reflect
the fact that the benefits to participation are greater for centers that serve many poor children.
7

Interactions between profit-status and area poverty were not significant.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

22

Provider characteristics also clearly matter. Large, licensed, accredited and non-profit centers
are more likely to participate, as are those connected to Head Start through referrals. These
patterns of participation by providers suggest the importance of both direct financial incentives
(costs and benefits) as well as informational/organizational linkages. As expected, family
characteristics also affect participation, even among low-income families. Not surprisingly,
controlling for provider characteristics, participation is higher among parents of lower
socioeconomic status and whose children are in care more hours.
What is the Association between CACFP Participation and Child Outcomes?
The coefficients of CACFP participation for each model and outcome are summarized in
Table 7 (the full set of regression coefficients is available from the authors). Overall, estimates
indicate that attending a CACFP-participating center is associated with increased consumption of
milk, vegetables, and (to some extent) fruits, a lower probability of being underweight (versus
healthy weight) and is not associated with overweight or food insecurity. In Column 1 of Table
7, the center’s participation in CACFP is associated with an 8 percentage point increase in the
chance that a child will drink two servings of milk per day and with a similar percentage point
increase in the chance that a child will consume fruits and vegetables at least twice daily. The
differentials for milk and vegetable consumption are generally robust to the addition of child,
family, and provider controls (Table 7, Columns 2 and 3), and lagged outcomes (Column 4).
The associations are also sizable, given that just about two-thirds of poor four year olds in
centers, on average, drink two or more cups of milk and just over one-third, on average, eat two
or more servings of fruits and vegetables daily. Predicted probabilities for the full models in
Column 4, holding covariates constant at their means, indicate that about 62% of children who
8

Mothers with less than a high school education were also more likely to participate than those with some
college or more in some models.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

23

attend centers that do not participate in CACFP drink two or more cups of milk per day versus
nearly 71% of those at participating centers. For fruits and vegetables, the increases are from
38% to 43% and from 33% to 42%, respectively.
In contrast, we find limited evidence that CACFP is associated with weight status or food
insecurity (see again Table 7). There is some evidence that children at participating centers are
more likely to be healthy weight than underweight; predicted probabilities indicate that about 8%
are underweight at non-participating centers versus about 3% at participating centers, based on
Column 4. Regarding overweight, about one-third of all poor four-year olds in centers are
overweight (not shown in tables), and being healthy versus overweight is not significantly
associated with CACFP participation (Table 7). Regarding food insecurity, on average, about
40% of all poor children who are in centers at four years have some household-level food
insecurity and about 25% of these children are themselves food insecure (not shown in tables).
The coefficient for CACFP-participation in Table 7 is small, never statistically significant and
usually (unexpectedly) positive in sign for household and child food insecurity. However, the
coefficient for child food insecurity reverses in sign to the expected negative direction in models
with lagged outcomes (Column 4 of Table 7). Indeed, we saw in Table 6 that children who were
food insecure at age two were more likely to attend a CACFP-participating center at age four.
Appendix E presents sensitivity analyses, re-estimating the models with minimal controls
for children who were not in care at two years of age, who were in care 30 or more hours per
week, and for children who were in community centers (as opposed to pre-kindergarten or
preschool). The associations between CACFP participation and milk and vegetable consumption
remained significantly positive and of similar magnitude in the models restricted to children who
had not been in care at two years (Appendix E, Column 3). The coefficients of CACFP
participation for children who are in care longer hours or in community centers are consistently

Child and Adult Care Food Program

24

positive and sometimes larger than for the full sample, but significant only for milk consumption
(Appendix E, Columns 1 and 2). Although we had expected the coefficients might be even
larger for children with greater exposure to the care setting, it is also possible that children whose
parents put them in longer hours of care and in community settings may be selectively different
than children placed in care for fewer hours or in preschool.
In summary, among lower-income children, attending a CACFP-participating center is
associated with greater consumption of milk, vegetables, and (to some extent) fruits at four years
of age. In addition, poor children at CACFP participating centers are no more likely to be
overweight and are less likely to be underweight than children at non-participating centers. Food
insecurity does not differ between poor children attending CACFP-participating and nonparticipating centers.

Summary and Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first study to provide a national portrait of the determinants
of receiving CACFP benefits and the association of CACFP participation with children’s
nutrition-related outcomes. Our results reveal that the CACFP program misses many poor
children, and a sizable fraction of non-poor children participate in the program. Coverage of poor
children is particularly limited at age two because over 80% of two-year olds are cared for by
parents at home or in an unlicensed child care home, and family poverty rates are relatively high
for two-year old children who are cared for in these settings. The program reaches a higher
fraction of poor four-year olds because many poor children spend time in Head Start centers,
where CACFP participation rates are nearly 100%, or in other participating centers. Yet, poor
children who are cared for in centers are much less likely to receive CACFP when they live in
wealthier areas than when they live in poorer areas, especially if they attend a for-profit center.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

25

Furthermore, even at four years, nearly 40% of children are cared for by parents at home or in an
unlicensed child care home, and a relatively high proportion of children in these settings are
poor. Licensed family day care is notable because few children are cared for in these settings at
either two years or four years, and there is little variation in CACFP participation by family,
provider, or area poverty.
We also found that provider, family, and locational characteristics all affect participation
in CACFP. As noted, poor children who reside in low-income areas are more likely to
participate in CACFP than poor children in wealthier areas. CACFP participation is higher
among parents of lower socioeconomic status and whose children are in care more hours.
Provider characteristics clearly matter. Large, licensed, accredited and non-profit centers are
more likely to participate, as are those connected to Head Start through referrals (or who serve
children who are also served by Head Start). These results are broadly consistent with the
conclusion reached by Currie (2006b) that standard transaction costs (and benefits) as well as
administrative burden importantly affect the take-up of social programs (though our results
would also suggest a role for information networks).
Finally, we found evidence that CACFP is associated with increased milk, vegetable, and
(to some extent) fruit consumption and lower prevalence of underweight among low-income
four-year olds in centers. The associations with milk, vegetables, and healthy weight were
robust to inclusion of detailed child, family and provider controls, including lagged milk
consumption and lagged food insecurity. The findings for milk persisted when we restricted the
sample to children in care full-time and to those not in care at age two. We found no evidence
that CACFP increased the prevalence of overweight among this group of four-year olds, and we
also found no evidence for an association with child or household food insecurity. Evidence that
the program may benefit participating children underscores the importance of the finding that the

Child and Adult Care Food Program

26

program fails to reach a substantial portion of poor children.
It is worth considering what the rationale might be for a nutrition redistribution program
that does not reach all poor children, and that treats poor children differently depending on the
characteristics of their child care provider. Considering how CACFP intersects with other
nutritional and child care subsidy program is revealing in this regard. Consider first that
consuming food away from home in child care (including when meals are paid for by the
CACFP program) does not reduce eligibility for, or benefits from, other nutritional assistance
programs (such as Food Stamps/SNAP or WIC). Whether this rule advances redistributional
objectives depends in part on the goals of the CACFP program, the economic incidence of the
subsidy, and the impact of the different food subsidy programs on food consumption. If CACFP
is meant to subsidize meals consumed away from home by poor children, and Food Stamps and
WIC benefit amounts are set optimally, then Food Stamp or WIC benefits would have to be
adjusted downward if CACFP raises children’s food consumption.9 On the other hand, if
CACFP is meant to augment inadequate levels of Food Stamps and WIC benefits, then it would
be more efficient to raise the benefit amounts in those programs to an adequate level, or, failing
that, to make all low-income children eligible for CACFP, regardless of provider characteristics
(including poor children cared for in their own homes). A third possibility is that CACFP is
conditioned on care outside the home because it is intended to reward employment by offsetting
costs to families associated with holding a job, the most important of which are child care costs
9

Anecdotal evidence suggests that most providers supply meals, rather than having parents send meals
with children, and our data shows that 95 percent or more of providers report serving meals and snacks.
Thus, Food Stamps and WIC benefits must cover fewer of the families’ total food consumption when
children are in child care. Providers might include meal costs in fees. But, families will not directly pay
these fees if their care is covered by CCDF child care subsidies, thus they are effectively better off (in
terms of total food subsidies) than comparable families whose children are not in care. And, if they do
pay the fees directly, including the child’s meal costs, then they are left with less fungible income than
they would be if more food subsidies went directly to the provider (since Food Stamps and WIC must be
spent on foods, and a limited bundle of foods at that).

Child and Adult Care Food Program

27

and the implicit tax on earnings inherent in means-testing benefits. Nonetheless, if other meanstested nutritional assistance benefits are set optimally, it would be more efficient to use direct
(cash) subsidies to child care to promote employment of the poor, rather than link eligibility to
provider characteristics or characteristics of other children in the care setting.
It is also worth considering the rationale for more stringent eligibility requirements for
for-profit than non-profit centers. One possibility is that these different payment schedules are
intended as a crude quality-adjustment of the subsidy (see, e.g., Blau 2001) under the assumption
that non-profit centers are of higher quality, on average, than for-profit centers (Cleveland and
Krashinsky 2009). Policymakers might similarly have made eligibility criteria more stringent
among for-profit centers out of concern that for-profit centers are more likely to use the subsidy
to increase profit rather than to increase the quality of care. However, even if quality of nonprofit centers is higher, on average, because there is substantial variation in quality within each
sector, it would be more efficient to target quality directly with quality-adjusted subsidies than
with a nutritional subsidy that is higher for care in the non-profit sector. States are increasingly
adopting Quality Rating and Improvement Systems to provide such tiered reimbursement,
although they have not been rigorously evaluated (National Child Care Information Center
2009).
Policymakers may similarly have excluded license-exempt homes from the national
CACFP rules to assure some oversight or to assure of a lower bound on quality for settings that
receive public subsidy. This practice would be in contrast to federal policy in the Child Care and
Development Fund (CCDF) which provides general child care subsidies. In the 1980s and
1990s, the CCDF program moved increasingly toward reimbursing whatever type of care parents
choose, including license-exempt care (Kahn and Kamerman 1987; U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services 2009). Nationally, one-quarter of children who receive CCDF subsidies are

Child and Adult Care Food Program

28

in license-exempt care; in some states as many as two-thirds are in such care (U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services 2008). This inclusion of settings outside of the licensing system
may reflect a combination of a preference for supporting parental choice, a need to rapidly
increase the supply of care when the welfare reforms of the 1990s required parents to seek
employment, and evidence that small home-based and unregulated settings are not inferior to
licensed settings, at least according to some definitions of quality (such as the warmth and
sensitivity of caregivers to infants and toddlers, NICHD 1996; and flexibility to parental needs,
but not developmental quality, Li-Grining, and Coley 2006). Whatever the impetus, the two
subsidies (food subsidy and general subsidy) for child care differ in this respect. It is also the
case that if the general child care subsidy were set optimally, an additional child care food
subsidy would be inefficient.10 If the general subsidy is too low, it would be more efficient to
increase it than to have a separate food subsidy (unless perhaps the food subsidy’s nutritional
training and menu requirements are effective in increasing the nutritional quality of food, which
our results suggest they may be).
State child care regulations often include nutritional standards that states use to attempt to
improve nutrition in licensed settings. In a review of state regulations Sara E. Benjamin and
colleagues (2009) found that 10 states’ regulations for centers and 27 states’ regulations for
homes included none of the standards recommended by the National Health and Safety
Performance Standards. A related review found that fewer than 10 states limited sugar
sweetened beverages and foods of low nutritional value in child care licensing standards
(Benjamin et al. 2008).
10

CCDF reimbursement rates are set by states. Federal guidelines require states to regularly conduct
market rate surveys and recommend that reimbursement rates be 75th percentile of market rates. The most
recent state plans indicate that half the states set their reimbursement rates below this benchmark, and
rates range from the 10th to the 85th percentile (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2009).

Child and Adult Care Food Program

29

In sum, the CACFP eligibility and benefit rules result in some undesirable efficiency and
equity properties because equity criteria (especially poverty reduction) would require greater
targeting of poor children and less reliance on provider characteristics, and because efficiency
would be enhanced either by using direct, cash child care subsidies (possibly quality-adjusted),
by increasing nutritional assistance through the Food Stamps or WIC programs, or by states
increasing the nutritional requirements in child care licensing standards. Still, political support
may be greater for a nutritional subsidy than a cash subsidy, or for a subsidy to child care rather
than one that would also benefit poor families that care for children at home.
We are left with the conclusion that the structure of the CACFP program most likely
reflects a compromise among multiple goals such as:


provide nutritional assistance to poor children



promote employment among low-income families



support care providers who have low incomes or who serve low-income communities



provide greater support to higher quality child care

Different individuals will attach different weights to each of these goals. More explicit
consideration and agreement about any or a subset of these goals might lead to an assistance
program that achieved distributional objectives more efficiently. The results for child food
consumption and healthy weight that we present provide some evidence that the first (nutritional)
goal may be met to some degree (although additional research is needed to replicate this result,
ideally with a stronger causal design). The evidence on program coverage we present should
help policymakers and analysts understand who is and is not being served by CACFP, and,
therefore, to suggest the trade-offs in attempting to reach the full range of possible goals.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

30

References
American Heart Association. n.d. “Milk Products: AHA Recommendation.” American Heart
Association, Dallas, TX. http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=4684
(accessed May 10, 2010).
Bethel, James, James L. Green, Graham Kalton, Christine Nord, Gail M. Mulligan, and Sandy
Eyster. 2007. Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Birth Cohort (ECLS-B), Sampling
Report for the 2-Year Data Collection. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education,
Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics.
Benjamin, Sara E., Angie Cradock, Elizabeth M. Walker, Meghan M. Slining, and Matthew W.
Gillman. 2008. “Obesity Prevention in Child Care: A Review of State Regulations.” BMI
Public Health 8 (188).
Benjamin, Sara E., Kristen A. Copeland., Angie Cradock, Brain Neelon, Elizabeth Walker,
Meghan M. Slining, and Matthew W. Gillman. 2009. “Menus in Child Care: A
Comparison of State Regulations with National Standards.” Journal of the American
Dietetic Association 109 (1): 109-115.
Besharov, Douglas J. 2003. “Growing Overweight and Obesity in America: The Potential Role
of Federal Nutrition Programs.” Testimony Prepared for the Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition, and Forestry, U.S. Senate, April. http://www.welfareacademy.org/pubs/
foodassist/ testimony-040303.pdf (accessed November 18, 2010).
Blau, David M. 2001. The Child Care Problem. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Burstein, Nancy, Cristofer Price, Peter H. Rossi, and Mary Kay Fox. 2004 “Food Stamp
Program.” Pp. 30-90 in Effects of Food Assistance and Nutrition Programs on Nutrition
and Health (Volume 3, Literature Review), edited by Mary Kay Fox, William Hamilton,
and Biing-Hwan Lin. Food Assistance and Nutrition Research Report Number 19-3.
United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Case, Anne and Christina Paxson. 2008. “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor
Market Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy 116 (3): 499-532.
Cleveland, Gordon and Michael Krashinsky. 2008. “The Nonprofit Advantage: Producing
Quality in Thick and Thin Child Care Markets.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 28: 440-462.
Crepinsek, Mary K., Nancy R. Burstein, Ellen B. Lee, Stephen D. Kennedy, and William L.
Hamilton. 2002. Meals Offered by Tier II CACFP Family Child Care Providers: Effects
of Lower Meal Reimbursements. Food Assistance and Nutrition Research Program
Report no. 02-006. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic
Research Service.
Currie, Janet M. 2006a. The Invisible Safety Net: Protecting the Nation's Poor Children and

Child and Adult Care Food Program

31

Families. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
-----. 2006b. “The Take-Up of Social Benefits.” 80-148 in Public Policy and the Income
Distribution, edited by Alan J. Auerbach, David E. Card and John M. Quigley. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Fleischhacker, Sheila, Katherine L. Cason, and Cheryl Achterberg. 2006. “’You Had Peas
Today?’: A Pilot Study Comparing a Head Start Child-Care Center's Menu with the
Actual Food Served. Journal of the American Dietetic Association 106 (2): 277-280.
Fogel, Robert William. 2004. The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Fox, Mary K., William Hamilton, and Christenson, Sharon. 2004. “Introduction.” 1-12 in Effects
of Food Assistance and Nutrition Programs on Nutrition and Health: Volume 3,
Literature Review, edited by Mary K. Fox, William Hamilton, and Biing-Hwan Lin. Food
Assistance and Nutrition Research Report no. FANRR 19-3. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Gibson-Davis, Christina and E. Michael Foster. 2006. “A Cautionary Tale: Using Propensity
Scores to Estimate the Effect of Food Stamps on Food Insecurity.” Social Service
Review, 80, 93-126.
Glantz, Frederic B. 2004. “Child and Adult Care Food Program.” 236-249 in Effects of Food
Assistance and Nutrition Programs on Nutrition and Health: Volume 3, Literature
Review, edited by Mary K. Fox, William Hamilton, and Biing-Hwan Lin. Food
Assistance and Nutrition Research Report no. FANRR 19-3. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Gordon, Erika, Francine Barrington, Pedro J. Saavedra, and JoAnn Kuchak. 2008. Child and
Adult Care Food Program (CACFP) Assessment of Sponsor Tiering Determinations
2006. Special Nutrition Programs Report no. CN-07-TD. Alexandria, VA: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service.
Hofferth, Sandra L. and Sally Curtin. 2005. “Poverty, Food Programs, and Childhood Obesity.”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24 (4): 703-726.
Iruka, Iheoma U. and Pricilla R. Carver. 2006. Initial Results from the 2005 NHES Early
Childhood Program Participation Survey. National Center for Education Statistics no.
2006-075. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for
Education Statistics.
Kahn, Alfred J. and Sheila B. Kamerman. 1987. Child Care: Facing the Hard Choices. Dover,
MA: Auburn House Publishing Company.
Kuratko, Connye N., Ruth E. Martin, William Y. Lan, James A. Chappell, and Mahassen
Ahmad. 2000. “Menu Planning, Food Consumption, and Sanitary Practices in Day Care

Child and Adult Care Food Program

32

Facilities.” Family and Consumer Sciences Research Journal 29 (1): 81-91.
Li-Grining, Christine P. and Rebekah L. Coley. 2006. “Child Care Experiences in Low-Income
Communities: Developmental Quality and Maternal Views.” Early Childhood Research
Quarterly 21 (2): 125-141.
National Child Care Information Center and the National Association for Regulatory
Administration. 2009. The 2007 Child Care Licensing Study. Lexington, KY: National
Association for Regulatory Administration. http://www.naralicensing.org/associations/
4734/files/2007%20Licensing%20Study_full_report.pdf (accessed October 12, 2009).
National Child Care Information Center. 2009. “QRIS Definition and Statewide Systems.”
National Child Care Information Center, Fairfax, VA. http://nccic.acf.hhs.gov/pubs/qrsdefsystems.html (accessed November 12, 2009).
NICHD. Early Child Care Research Network. 1996. “Characteristics of Infant Child Care:
Factors Contributing to Positive Caregiving.” Early Childhood Research Quarterly 11:
269-306.
Nord, Mark, Margaret Andrews, and Steven Carlson. 2009. Household Food Security in the
United States, 2008. Economic Research Report no. 83. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Oakley, Charlotte B., Anne K. Bomba, Kathy B. Knight, and Sylvia H. Byrd. 1995. “Evaluation
of Menus Planned in Mississippi Child-Care Centers Participating in the Child and Adult
Care Food Program.” Journal of the American Dietetic Association 95 (7): 765-768.
Oliveira, Victor. 2009. The Food Assistance Landscape: FY 2008 Annual Report. Economic
Information Bulletin no. 6-6. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Economic Research Service.
Snow, Kyle, Lisa Thalji, Azucena Derecho, Sara Wheeless, Jean Lennon, Susan Kinsey, James
Rogers, Melissa Raspa, and Jennifer Park. 2007. Early Childhood Longitudinal Study,
Birth Cohort (ECLS-B), Preschool Year Data File User’s Manual (2005–06). National
Center for Education Statistics no. 2008-024. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics.
Tanner, Emily M. and Matia Finn-Stevenson. 2002. “Nutrition and Brain Development: Social
Policy Implications.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 72 (2): 182-93.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2009. “Poverty Thresholds: 2005.” U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, DC.
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/threshld/thresh05.html (accessed May 15,
2009).
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service. n.d. “CACFP Reimbursement
Rates for Meals Served in Homes and Centers.” U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Alexandria, VA. http://www.fns.usda.gov/CND/Care/ProgramBasics

Child and Adult Care Food Program

33

/Rates/2005HomesContig.htm and http://www.fns.usda.gov/CND/Care/ProgramBasics/
Rates/2005CentersContig.htm (accessed September 2, 2009).
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service. 2009. “Meal Patterns.” U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Alexandria, VA. http://www.fns.usda.gov/CND/Care/
Program Basics/Meals/Meal_Patterns.htm (accessed October 9, 2009).
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service. 2008. Final Rule: For-Profit
Center Participation in the CACFP. Federal Register 7 CFR Part 226. Alexandria, VA:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. 2002. Effects of CACFP Meal
Reimbursement Tiering: Major Findings of the Family Child Care Homes Legislative
Changes Study. Food Assistance and Nutrition Research Program Report no. 24.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families.
2008. “Child Care and Development Fund Average Monthly Percentages of Children
Served in Regulated Settings vs. Settings Legally Operating Without Regulation (FFY
2006).” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and
Families, Washington ,DC. http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ccb/
data/ccdf_data/06acf800/table4.htm (accessed November 18, 2009).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families.
2009. “Child Care and Development Fund: Report of State and Territory Plans, FY 20082009.” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and
Families, Washington ,DC. http://nccic.acf.hhs.gov/pubs/stateplan2008-09/part3.pdf
(accessed November 18, 2009).
Ziegler, Paula, Ronette Briefel, Michael Ponza, Timothy Novak, and Kristy Hendricks. 2006.
“Nutrient Intakes and Food Patterns of Toddlers’ Lunches and Snacks: Influence of
Location.” Journal of the American Dietetic Association 106 (1): S124-S134.
Zotov, Natasha, Shao-hsen Keng, and William Hamilton. 2002. Family Child Care Providers in
the CACFP: Operational Effects of Reimbursement Tiering. Electronic Publication from
the Food Assistance & Nutrition Research Program no. 02-004. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.

Child and Adult Care Food Program
Figure 1. Eligibility and reimbursement rules for child care providers participating in the Child and Adult Care Food Program
(CACFP).
Eligibility

For-profit
Center
Not for-profit

Level of Reimbursement

Must have 25% of enrolled
children <= 185% FPL or
funded through Title XX.

Each child in the center must have income level
determined for full (<130% of FPL), reduced (130185% FPL), or paid (>185% FPL) reimbursement
levels. (All Head Start children are eligible for full).

Tier I
Either: Located in low-income areas:



Local elementary school free- and reducedlunch (50% plus eligible).
Census block group income (50% plus
children<= 185% FPL).

Or: Provider is low-income:


Home

Provider’s income <=185% of FPL.
Provider already determined <=185% FPL by
other program like TANF or Food Stamps.

Must be licensed
(In most states)
Tier II
All others, but individual children receive higher rate if:



NOTE. FPL=federal poverty level

Child’s family income <=185% FPL.
Child already determined <=185% FPL by
other program like TANF or Food Stamps.

34

Child and Adult Care Food Program

35

Table 1. Examples of CACFP monthly reimbursement levels for homes and centers.
HOMES
All Tier II
117
235
469

Small (3 children)
Mid-size (6 children)
Large (12 children)

All Tier I
244
487
974

Ratio of Tier I to
Tier II
2:1
2:1
2:1

CENTERS

Small (50 children)
Mid-size (100 children)
Large (150 children)

Paid
564
1,127
1,691

Reduced
3,531
7,061
10,592

Full
4,692
9,384
14,076

Ratio of
Reduced to
Paid
6:1
6:1
6:1

Ratio of
Full to
Paid
8:1
8:1
8:1

NOTE: Author calculations based on reimbursement rates effective July 1, 2004 to June 30, 2005
(U.S. Department of Agriculture n.d.) for a breakfast, a lunch and one snack (the most typical
configuration of meals and snacks; Crepinsek et al. 2002) for care occurring 23 days per month.
CACFP=Child and Adult Care Food Program.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

36

Table 2. Two year olds’ child care arrangements, CACFP participation rate, and family poverty
(overall and within CACFP participation status).

Type of Care
Exclusive maternal care
Unlicensed
(child's home or relative caregiver)
Unlicensed
(nonrelative not in child's home)
Licensed homes
Non-Profit centers
(Not Head Start)
For-Profit centers
(Not Head Start)
Head Start

Percentage
Distribution of
Study Children
If in
All
Care

Percentage of Study Children
Who Are Poor
Percentage
Receiving
CACFP

All

By CACFP Status
Not
CACFP
CACFP

61

--

--

55

--

--

16

41

--

46

--

--

4

10

5

37

36

46

5

13

66

28

28

28

7

17

44

36

25

49

7

19

31

32

22

56

--

--

--

--

--

--

NOTE: n = 7,450 (unweighted sample size rounded to nearest 50 as per the ECLS-B data sharing
agreement). Statistics are weighted by the Parent Analysis Weight (W2R0). Child-level eligibility
for CACFP based on income less than 185% of federal poverty level, family is on TANF, or family
receiving Food Stamps. CACFP=Child and Adult Care Food Program.
-- not applicable (Children in exclusive maternal care are not eligible for CACFP. In the ECLS-B,
providers were not asked the CACFP question if they cared for the child in the child's home or (at
two years) if they were related to the child. No two year olds participated in Head Start.)

Child and Adult Care Food Program

37

Table 3. Four year olds’ child care arrangements, CACFP participation rate, and family poverty
(overall and within CACFP participation status).

Type of Care
Exclusive maternal care
Unlicensed
(child's home or relative caregiver)
Unlicensed
(nonrelative not in child's home)
Licensed homes
Non-Profit centers
(Not Head Start)
For-Profit centers
(Not Head Start)
Head Start

Percentage
Distribution of
Study Children
If in
All
Care

Percentage of Study Children
Who Are Poor
Percentage
Receiving
CACFP

All

By CACFP Status
Not
CACFP
CACFP

24

--

--

66

--

--

13

17

--

54

--

--

3

4

4

37

37

a

4

5

66

29

34

27

34

45

39

37

21

63

14

18

23

25

18

47

9

12

94

88

80

88

NOTE: n = 6,900 (unweighted sample size rounded to nearest 50 as per the ECLS-B data sharing
agreement). Statistics are weighted by the Parent Analysis Weight (W3R0). Child-level eligibility
for CACFP based on income less than 185% of federal poverty level, family is on TANF, or family
receiving Food Stamps. CACFP=Child and Adult Care Food Program.
-- not applicable (Children in exclusive maternal care are not eligible for CACFP. In the ECLS-B,
providers were not asked the CACFP question if they cared for the child in the child's home or (at
two years) if they were related to the child.)
a

Percentage not presented because cell size less than 10.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

38

Table 4. Among children cared for in licensed homes, percentage enrolled in a CACFPparticipating child care setting and provider low-income status, by family- and area-level poverty
and child age.
Child Age

Family and Area Poverty

Two Years
Percentage of
Providers Who Are
Low-Income by
CACFP Status
Percentage
Not
Receiving
CACFP
CACFP
CACFP

Family: Poor
No Poor Schools
Some Poor Schools
All Poor Schools

74
69
67

Family: Not Poor
No Poor Schools
Some Poor Schools
All Poor Schools

70
68
72

21
20

Unweighted sample size
(rounded to nearest 50)

300

100

a

27
73

a

Four Years
Percentage of
Providers Who Are
Low-Income by
CACFP Status
Percentage
Receiving
CACFP

Not
CACFP

50
46
81

60
82
53

a

a

a

18
35
56

67
72
84

31
40

49
19
34

150

200

50

a

a

CACFP
56
21

100

NOTE: CACFP=Child and Adult Care Food Program. Family-level poverty based on income less
than 185% of federal poverty level or income already verified for enrollment in another program
(TANF, Food Stamps). Area-level poverty based on the number of elementary schools in the
child's ZIP code in which 50% or more of children are free- or reduced-lunch eligible. Provider
low-income defined as below $40,000 (approximately 185 percent of the poverty threshold for
family of four in 2005). Percentages weighted by Parent Analysis Weight (two years: W2R0; four
years: W3R0).
a

Percentage not presented because cell size less than 10.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

39

Table 5. Among children cared for in non-profit and for-profit centers, percentage enrolled in a
CACFP-participating child care setting, by family- and area-level poverty and child age.
Child Age

Family and Area Poverty

Two Years
NonForprofit
profit
centers
centers

Four Years
NonForprofit
profit
centers
centers

Family: Poor
ZIP Young Child Poverty <10%
ZIP Young Child Poverty 10-19%
ZIP Young Child Poverty >=20%

74
53
62

33
43
67

48
60
75

28
46
50

Family: Not Poor
ZIP Young Child Poverty <10%
ZIP Young Child Poverty 10-19%
ZIP Young Child Poverty >=20%

27
31
59

11
30
43

17
27
39

12
19
31

Unweighted sample size
(rounded to nearest 50)

500

500

2,400

950

NOTE: CACFP=Child and Adult Care Food Program. Family-level poverty based on income
less than 185% of federal poverty level or income already verified for enrollment in another
program (TANF, Food Stamps). Area-level poverty based on the percentage of young children
who are poor in ZIP code. Percentages weighted by Parent Analysis Weight (two years:
W2R0; four years: W3R0).

Child and Adult Care Food Program

40

Table 6. Summary of coefficients from OLS linear probability models predicting CACFP participation
among low-income four-year old children in non-Head Start centers.
Add Center
Covariates
(2)

Add
Child, and
Family
Covariates
(3)

Add
Lagged Child
Outcomes
(4)

0.128*
(0.052)
0.213*
(0.045)

0.108*
(0.050)
0.164*
(0.043)

0.082
(0.050)
0.124*
(0.049)

0.094+
(0.051)
0.125*
(0.049)

-0.187*
(0.042)

-0.100*
(0.046)

-0.107*
(0.047)

-0.099*
(0.046)

-0.188*
(0.046)
-0.201*
(0.043)
-0.048
(0.043)

-0.166*
(0.048)
-0.188*
(0.044)
-0.042
(0.045)

-0.164*
(0.048)
-0.197*
(0.044)
-0.055
(0.045)

-0.122*
(0.051)
-0.217*
(0.054)
-0.207*
(0.099)
0.101*
(0.035)
0.155*
(0.034)
-0.102*
(0.040)

-0.111*
(0.053)
-0.190*
(0.054)
-0.212*
(0.103)
0.113*
(0.036)
0.125*
(0.034)
-0.104*
(0.040)

-0.099+
(0.052)
-0.182*
(0.054)
-0.218*
(0.107)
0.114*
(0.036)
0.125*
(0.034)
-0.099*
(0.040)

0.095*
(0.035)

0.099*
(0.035)

0.064
(0.041)
0.144*
(0.041)
(0.043)

0.067+
(0.041)
0.143*
(0.041)
(0.043)

0.081*
(0.034)

0.081*
(0.034)

Key Variables
With Minimal
Controls
(1)
Key Determinants of Benefits
Area young child poverty (Ref: <10%)
10-19%
20% or more

Center for-profit

Center license status and size (Ref: Licensed for more than 100 children)
Not licensed
-0.224*
(0.047)
Licensed for 50 children and below
-0.211*
(0.043)
Licensed for 51 to 100 children
-0.077+
(0.046)
Center Covariates
Center type and location (Ref: Community center)
School-based prekindergarten
Other preschool
Something else
Center accredited
Center refers to/from Head Start/
Early Head Start
Center accepts CCDF child care subsidies
Child and Family Covariates a
Child in care 30 or more hours
Mother education (Ref: Some college or college graduate)
Less than high school
High school graduate

Small care group size very important
to mother’s child care decision

Child and Adult Care Food Program

41

Table 6. Summary of coefficients from OLS linear probability models predicting CACFP participation
among low-income four-year old children in non-Head Start centers.
Key Variables
With Minimal
Controls
(1)

Add Center
Covariates
(2)

Add
Child, and
Family
Covariates
(3)

Add
Lagged Child
Outcomes
(4)

Lagged Child Outcomes
Household and child food insecurity at two years (Ref: No food insecurity)
Household and child food insecure

0.164*
(0.048)
0.048
(0.048)

Household food insecure
Child milk consumption at two years (Ref: Milk at neither meals nor snack)
With meals
With snack
With snack and meals
Constant

0.673*
(0.088)

0.676*
(0.104)

0.153
(0.385)

0.100*
(0.044)
0.051
(0.042)
0.035
(0.045)
0.044
(0.390)

NOTE: n = 850 (unweighted sample size rounded to nearest 50 as per the ECLS-B data sharing
agreement). Minimal controls in Column 1 are the parent sampling weight (W3R0) and dummies for child
age and for geographic state or region. Results for additional center, child and family characteristics
shown in Appendix C. Robust standard errors in parentheses, which adjust for clustering within ZIP
codes. CACFP=Child and Adult Care Food Program. CCDF=Child Care and Development Fund.
a

95% of respondents are the biological mother.

+ p<.10, * p<.05

Child and Adult Care Food Program

42

Table 7. Summary of coefficients from OLS linear probability models regressing child nutritional
outcomes on CACFP participation status for low-income four-year olds in non-Head Start centers.
Minimal
Controls
(1)

Add
Child and Family
Covariates
(2)

Add
Center
Covariates
(3)

Add
Lagged
Outcomes
(4)

0.083*
(0.034)
0.016
(0.035)
0.016
(0.025)

0.080*
(0.037)
0.005
(0.038)
-0.024
(0.027)

0.089*
(0.039)
-0.004
(0.040)
-0.033
(0.028)

0.091*
(0.038)
-0.001
(0.041)
-0.034
(0.029)

0.089*
(0.035)
0.074*
(0.035)
0.004
(0.012)
-0.004
(0.026)
0.007
(0.022)

0.102*
(0.037)
0.062
(0.038)
-0.009
(0.014)
-0.023
(0.028)
-0.006
(0.023)

0.104*
(0.041)
0.060
(0.041)
-0.014
(0.014)
-0.033
(0.030)
-0.006
(0.025)

0.092*
(0.041)
0.055
(0.041)
-0.016
(0.014)
-0.028
(0.030)
-0.011
(0.025)

Healthy weight versus
overweight/at risk of overweight

-0.023
(0.035)

0.001
(0.038)

0.003
(0.039)

0.008
(0.038)

Healthy weight versus
underweight

0.033+
(0.019)

0.049*
(0.023)

0.052*
(0.023)

0.049*
(0.023)

Household

0.060
(0.036)

0.027
(0.038)

0.007
(0.041)

-0.017
(0.040)

Child

0.043
(0.030)

0.017
(0.032)

0.013
(0.035)

-0.003
(0.035)

Child Outcomes
Two or more cups per day of:
Milk
100% fruit juice
Soda or fruit-flavored drinks
Two or more servings per day of:
Vegetables (excluding French fries)
Fruits
Fast food
Sweet snacks
Salty snacks
Child CDC Growth Chart Status

Any food insecurity

NOTE: n = 850 for all outcomes except “healthy weight versus overweight/at risk of overweight”
where it is 800 due to the exclusion of underweight children and “healthy weight versus
underweight” where it is 550 due to the exclusion of children at risk of overweight or overweight
(unweighted sample size rounded to nearest 50 as per ECLS-B data sharing agreement). Minimal
controls are: parent sampling weight and dummies for child age, geographic region/state, and
whether parent respondent is mother. Additional child/family (Column 2), center (Column 3), and
lagged outcome (Column 4) variables listed in Appendix A were controlled. Robust standard
errors, adjusted for clustering within ZIP codes, in parentheses. CACFP=Child and Adult Care
Food Program. CDC=Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. + p<.10, * p<.05

Child and Adult Care Food Program

43

Appendix A: Measures in the ECLS-B and Descriptive Statistics
CACFP participation.—At the two year follow up, center directors and home-based
providers were asked: Do you receive commodities or cash reimbursement from the Child and
Adult Care Food Program or the Child Care Food Program for the meals and snacks you serve?
The question was skipped when care was provided by a relative or when the care took place in
the child’s home. At the four year follow up, center directors were asked: Do you currently
receive reimbursement from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) for meals or
snacks served to children in your {center/program}? And home-based providers were asked: Do
you participate in the Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP), or the Child Care Food
Program for the meals and snacks you serve? At the four year follow up, the question was
skipped only for providers of care in the child’s home (relatives in another home answered the
question). At both waves, we coded the small fraction (5% or less) of centers and homes that did
not serve meals or snacks as non-participants. At neither wave were participating home
providers asked if they received Tier I or Tier II reimbursement.
CACFP reimbursement levels.—We use information about the family, provider, and ZIP
code poverty to approximate eligibility rules and reimbursement levels. Of the several criteria
that can be used to demonstrate eligibility for Tier I reimbursement levels (see Figure 1), prior
research has found that nearly three-quarters of Tier I providers are determined eligible based on
local school data (Gordon et al. 2008). We merged National Center for Education Statistics data
about elementary schools in the family’s ZIP code and classified ZIP codes according to whether
in none, some, or all of these schools were at least 50% of pupils eligible for free or reducedprice lunch. The next most commonly used criterion for Tier I homes is provider income
(Gordon et al. 2008). Although we lacked complete information about the provider’s household

Child and Adult Care Food Program

44

size, we approximated provider eligibility based on whether the provider’s income was above or
below $40,000 (approximately 185% of the poverty threshold for a family of four in 2005). The
least common criterion to determine homes’ eligibility for Tier I reimbursement is local census
data (Gordon et al. 2008); however, local poverty may better approximate the benefits to centers
of participating. Thus, we also merged data from the U.S. Decennial Census of Population and
classified ZIP codes to determine whether fewer than 10%, 10 to 19%, or 20% or more of young
children (under age 5) in the ZIP code had family incomes below 100% of the federal poverty
level. The two measures of local area poverty (school lunch program eligibility and ZIP code
poverty rates) are highly correlated (see Appendix B).
The ECLS-B study child’s eligibility for the highest reimbursement levels in Tier II
homes and in centers was based on whether their household income fell below 185% of the
federal poverty line (FPL) for a household of their size (Snow et al. 2007: 405-411) and whether
the family participated in TANF or Food Stamps. When we refer to poor or low-income children
we mean those who meet any of these individual eligibility criteria (less than or equal to 185%
FPL or receiving TANF or Food Stamps).
Type of child care provider.—We classified children according to whether the child was:
(1) not in care, (2) in unlicensed care, either in their own home or by a relative in another home,
(3) in unlicensed care by a non-relative in another home, (4) in licensed family day care, (5) in a
for-profit non-Head Start center (referred to as for-profit center for simplicity), (6) in a nonprofit non-Head Start center (referred to as non-profit center), or (7) in a Head Start center
(referred to as Head Start). The parent reported whether or not the child was in care, and
provider interviews determined the type of care. Children who were in multiple types of
arrangements were classified based on the setting where they spent the most hours.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

45

Approximately 19% of children were in more than one care arrangement and, on average, these
children spent 65% of their time in care in their primary setting.
Child and family covariates.—Child and family covariates were chosen because they
might predict whether the child attended a participating center and/or the child’s food
consumption, weight, and food security; they included: child gender and race-ethnicity
(Hispanic, Non-Hispanic black, or Non-Hispanic other versus Non-Hispanic white), whether the
home language is not English or the mother was born outside of the U.S., whether the family’s
income is below 100% of the federal poverty line (versus 100 to 185% of poverty), the mother’s
education level (less than high school or high school graduate versus more than high school), the
mother’s employment status (full-time or part-time versus not employed), whether the family
had rules about food the child could eat, whether the mother reported that a small group size in
child care was important to her child care selection, whether she had difficulty finding child care,
whether she was married, her age (less than 25, 25 to 29, 35 to 39, or 40 or more versus 30 to
34), whether the family had received WIC (for the study child) or Food Stamps since the last
interview, whether the child was born low birth weight, whether the child was lactose intolerant,
the number of child’s well-child doctor visits since the last interview (zero or one, or two, versus
three or more), whether the child was ever breast fed, whether the mother’s health was excellent
or very good, whether the child was in multiple care arrangements, whether the child spent 30 or
more hours in care, and the percentage of residents of the family’s ZIP code who were Hispanic
and non-Hispanic black. We also adjust in regression models, but do not show: dummy
variables for the child’s age (in months) at the four year follow up interview, whether the parent
respondent was the child’s mother, the parent’s sampling weight from the four year follow up,
and dummy indicators of the state or region where the child lived. Ten states with 25 or more

Child and Adult Care Food Program

46

study children had their own dummy variable; other states were indicated by their region
(Northeast, Midwest, West, South).
Center covariates.— Our regression analyses are restricted to four-year-old children in
center care. We include in these models characteristics of centers that may influence their
CACFP participation decision and affect outcomes of children in their care. These controls
include the center’s location (community-based center, preschool, school-based prekindergarten, or something else), accreditation status, employee turnover rate, and the director’s
years of experience at the center. Although the survey information is not precise enough to
determine eligibility among for-profit centers, we do know whether the center accepts children
from or refers children to Head Start, and whether the center reports a willingness to accept
subsidies. To approximate total benefit levels, we use license status and licensed capacity (not
licensed versus licensed for 50 or fewer, 51 to 100, or more than 100 children).11
Child nutritional outcomes.— At the four year follow-up, the mother reported the
frequency with which the child drank milk, juice, and soda and consumed fruits, vegetables, fast
food, sweet snacks, and salty snacks over the seven days prior to the interview. We created
dummy variables to distinguish between children who drank two or more cups of drinks or had
two or more servings per day of foods, versus those who consumed less. We used the cutoff of
two based roughly on the CACFP meal guidelines and other nutritional guidelines (American
Heart Association n.d.). The mother was explicitly instructed to think about all the meals and
snacks the child had from the time she got up until the time she went to bed. She was further
11

We define the variable in this way because unlicensed centers were not asked their size in the main
interview. A subset of directors who were selected for their center to be observed reported the center size
on a self-administered questionnaire. Based on this report, although a similar proportion of unlicensed
and licensed centers were large in size (had more than 100 children, 43 percent of unlicensed and 40
percent of licensed) a higher percentage of unlicensed centers were small (less than 50 children, 37
percent versus 28 percent) than mid-size (51 to 100 children, 20 percent versus 32 percent).

Child and Adult Care Food Program

47

asked to “Be sure to include food {CHILD} ate at home, preschool, restaurants, play dates,
anywhere else, and over the weekend.” For juice, mothers were told to include 100% fruit juice,
and to not include “punch, Sunny Delight, Kool-Aid, sport drinks or other fruit-flavored drinks.”
Instead, mothers were asked to include these fruit-flavored drinks with their reports about the
child drinking soda. For vegetables, the mother was asked to exclude French fries and other
fried potatoes, but to “include vegetables like those served in a stir-fry, soup, or stew.”
Children’s height and weight were measured by interviewers with a stadiometer ruler and
digital bathroom scale. Two measurements were taken for both the child’s height and weight and
the measurements were averaged. Based on measured height and weight, we computed the
child’s body mass index (BMI) then defined the child as underweight (less than the 5th
percentile), healthy weight (5th percentile to less than the 85th percentile), at risk of overweight
(85th to less than the 95th percentile) and overweight (equal to or great than the 95th percentile)
based on CDC Growth Charts appropriate for the child’s age.
Parents reported food insecurity for the family as a whole and specific to the child using
the 18 item Current Population Survey-Food Security Scale (CPS-FSS; Nord et al. 2009). The
standard continuously scored measure was highly skewed because few sample members
endorsed the items. Thus, we created a dichotomous indicator of whether the mother endorsed
any item about the children in the household (of eight items such as whether children’s meals
were reduced in size, children skipped a meal or went hungry, or did not eat a balanced meal) or
the entire household (which was based on the eight child items as well as 10 additional items
such as whether the adults cut the size of meals or skipped meals and whether the mother
currently worried food would run out or the household couldn't afford to eat balanced meals).
We also include lagged child outcomes from the two year follow up in some models. We

Child and Adult Care Food Program

48

dummy coded whether the mother reported that the two-year-old child drank milk at both meals
and snacks, meals only, snacks only, or neither. We used the child’s measured height and weight
to calculate the child’s Body Mass Index (BMI) at age two.12 We also include lagged measures
of household and child food insecurity when the child was two-years-old, based on the same
scale as used at the four year follow up, with two dummies: any food insecurity for both
household and child and any food insecurity for the household but not the child, versus the
reference category of no food insecurity.
12

Due to missing data on two year old BMI, we included a dummy indicator of not missing two year old BMI in
regression models and assigned missing two year old BMI values to zero.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

49

Appendix A. Descriptive statistics for low-income four-year old children in non-Head Start centers.
Mean
Not
Participating
in CACFP

Participating in
CACFP

Standard
Deviation

Min

Max

10-19%
20% or more

0.27
0.43

0.24
0.63

0.43
0.50

0
0

1
1

Center For-Profit

0.30

0.17

0.42

0

1

0.18
0.27
0.18

0.41
0.45
0.40

0
0
0

1
1
1

Key Determinants of Benefits
Area Young Child Poverty (Ref: <10%)

Center license status and size (Ref: Licensed for more than 100 children)
Not licensed
0.28
Licensed for 50 children and below
0.32
Licensed for 51 to 100 children
0.22
Center Covariates
Center type and location (Ref: Community centers)
School-based prekindergarten
Other preschool
Something else

0.44
0.36
0.06

0.54
0.25
0.03

0.50
0.46
0.20

0
0
0

1
1
1

Center accredited
Center refers to/from head start/early head start
Center accepts CCDF child care subsidies
Center employee turnover rate/10
Director experience at center/10

0.43
0.36
0.56
1.74
0.74

0.58
0.61
0.37
1.62
0.72

0.50
0.50
0.50
2.23
0.71

0
0
0
0
.01

1
1
1
10
4.6

Child is female

0.51

0.49

0.50

0

1

Child race-ethnicity (Ref: Non-Hispanic white)
Non-Hispanic black
Non-Hispanic other
Hispanic

0.18
0.06
0.25

0.27
0.05
0.37

0.42
0.23
0.47

0
0
0

1
1
1

0.21
0.33
0.07
0.65
104.35
0.05

0.14
0.52
0.09
0.64
104.65
0.04

0.38
0.50
0.28
0.48
5.57
0.20

0
0
0
0
85
0

1
1
1
1
120
1

0.18
0.64

0.18
0.63

0.39
0.48

0
0

1
1

Child Covariates

Child in >1 care arrangement
Child in care 30 or more hours
Child low birth weight
Mother ever breast fed child
Child height at 4 years (centimeters)
Child lactose intolerant
Child number of well-child visits (Ref: Three or more)
Zero or One
Two

Child and Adult Care Food Program

50

Appendix A. Descriptive statistics for low-income four-year old children in non-Head Start centers.
Mean

Since last interview, child received WIC

Not
Participating
in CACFP
0.47

Participating in
CACFP
0.64

Standard
Deviation
0.49

Min
0

Max
1

Appendix A. Descriptive statistics for low-income four-year old children in non-Head Start centers.
Mean
Not
Participating
in CACFP

Participating in
CACFP

Standard
Deviation

Min

Max

Family Household Income <100% of FPL
Mother married

0.41
0.51

0.49
0.43

0.50
0.50

0
0

1
1

Number of children in household (Ref: One)
Two
Three
Four or more

0.38
0.29
0.14

0.39
0.29
0.14

0.49
0.45
0.35

0
0
0

1
1
1

Mother education (Ref: Some college or college graduate)
Less than high school
High school graduate

0.34
0.19

0.39
0.27

0.48
0.42

0
0

1
1

Mother’s age (Ref: 30 to 34)
Less than 25
25 to 29
35 to 39
40 or More

0.19
0.32
0.15
0.10

0.24
0.32
0.12
0.09

0.41
0.47
0.34
0.29

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

Mother Employment status (Ref: Not employed)
Full time
Part time

0.40
0.20

0.40
0.18

0.49
0.39

0
0

1
1

0.57
0.43
0.21
0.75
0.63

0.53
0.51
0.31
0.69
0.66

0.50
0.50
0.45
0.45
0.48

0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1

0.62

0.63

0.49

0

1

Percentage Non-Hispanic black in ZIP code (Ref: 55or more)
<25
0.77
25-54
0.13

0.75
0.16

0.43
0.36

0
0

1
1

Percentage Hispanic in ZIP code (Ref: 55 or more)
<25
25-54

0.67
0.16

0.45
0.36

0
0

1
1

Family Covariates

Mother health excellent or very good
Since last interview, family used Food Stamps
No English at home or mother not born in U.S.
Household has rules about food
Small care group size very important to mother’s
childcare decision
Mother had no difficulty finding care

0.81
0.14

Child and Adult Care Food Program

51

Appendix A. Descriptive statistics for low-income four-year old children in non-Head Start centers.
Mean
Not
Participating
in CACFP

Participating in
CACFP

Standard
Deviation

Min

Max

Lagged Child Outcomes
Household and child food insecurity at two years (Ref: No food insecurity)
Household and child food insecure
0.10
Household food insecure
0.11

0.15
0.12

0.34
0.32

0
0

1
1

Child milk consumption at two years (Ref: Milk at neither meals nor snack)
With meals
0.25
With snack
0.23
With snack and meals
0.24

0.22
0.26
0.26

0.42
0.43
0.43

0
0
0

1
1
1

Child BMI
Not Missing BMI

14.60
0.84

15.58
0.88

6.47
0.34

0
0

30.7
1

0.63
0.47
0.15
0.36
0.39
0.03
0.15
0.09
0.62
0.96
0.34
0.18
350

0.74
0.49
0.16
0.43
0.47
0.03
0.12
0.08
0.62
0.97
0.43
0.28
500

0.46
0.50
0.36
0.49
0.50
0.17
0.34
0.27
0.49
0.18
0.49
0.43

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Child Outcomes at 4 Years
Child drank 2 or more cups of milk per day
Child drank 2 or more cups of juice per day
Child drank 2 or more cups of soda per day
Child ate 2 or more servings of vegetables per day
Child ate 2 or more servings of fruit per day
Child ate 2 or more servings of fast food per day
Child Ate 2 or more servings of sweets per day
Child ate 2 or more servings of salty snacks per day
Healthy weight vs. at risk/overweight
Healthy weight vs. under weight
Household food insecure
Child food insecure
Observations
(unweighted sample size rounded to nearest 50 as per
the ECLS-B data sharing agreement)

850

NOTE: Statistics weighted by Parent Analysis Weight (W2R0; W3R0). CCDF=Child Care and
Development Fund. FPL=Federal poverty level. WIC= Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for
Women, Infants, and Children. BMI=Body mass index.

Child and Adult Care Food Program

Appendix B. Cell percentages from cross-tabulation of area-poverty categories
based on: (1) eligibility for free/reduced lunch at elementary schools and (2)
percentage in poverty among children under five years old.
Area Categories Defined By
ZIP Code Poverty Rates
Among Young Children (<5)
Area Categories Defined By School
Free/Reduced Lunch

< 10%

10% to 19%

>=20%

No Schools in ZIP code Meet Criteria

26

6

2

Some Schools in ZIP code Meet Criteria

9

14

14

All Schools in ZIP code Meet Criteria

1

5

24

No Schools in ZIP code Meet Criteria

28

6

2

Some Schools in ZIP code Meet Criteria

9

13

13

All Schools in ZIP code Meet Criteria

1

6

22

Wave 2

Wave 3

NOTE: N = 7,700 for Wave 2; N = 7,200 for Wave 3 (unweighted sample size
rounded to nearest 50 as per the ECLS-B data sharing agreement; includes
children in care and children not in care). Area-level eligibility based on the
number of schools in the child's ZIP code in which 50% or more of children are
free- or reduced-lunch eligible. Percentages weighted by Parent Analysis
Weight (W2R0; W3R0).

52

Child and Adult Care Food Program

53

Appendix C. OLS Linear probability models predicting CACFP participation among low-income four-year
old children in non-Head Start centers.
Key
Variables
With
Minimal
Controls
(1)

Add Center
Covariates
(2)

Add
Child and
Family
Covariates
(3)

Add
Lagged Child
Outcomes
(4)

All
Coefficients
With Minimal
Controls
(5)

0.128*
(0.052)
0.213*
(0.045)

0.108*
(0.050)
0.164*
(0.043)

0.082
(0.050)
0.124*
(0.049)

0.094+
(0.051)
0.125*
(0.049)

0.136*
(0.054)
0.231*
(0.046)

-0.187*
(0.042)

-0.100*
(0.046)

-0.107*
(0.047)

-0.099*
(0.046)

-0.184*
(0.042)

-0.166*
(0.048)
-0.188*
(0.044)
-0.042
(0.045)

-0.164*
(0.048)
-0.197*
(0.044)
-0.055
(0.045)

-0.100*
(0.043)
-0.136*
(0.041)
-0.020
(0.045)

-0.111*
(0.053)
-0.190*
(0.054)
-0.212*
(0.103)
0.113*
(0.036)
0.125*
(0.034)
-0.104*
(0.040)
0.002
(0.008)
-0.017
(0.023)

-0.099+
(0.052)
-0.182*
(0.054)
-0.218*
(0.107)
0.114*
(0.036)
0.125*
(0.034)
-0.099*
(0.040)
0.001
(0.008)
-0.018
(0.022)

0.002
(0.051)
-0.178*
(0.056)
-0.095
(0.089)
0.187*
(0.035)
0.222*
(0.034)
-0.151*
(0.036)
0.002
(0.009)
-0.038
(0.026)

-0.025
(0.033)

-0.020
(0.032)

-0.018
(0.035)

0.103+
(0.054)

0.112*
(0.054)

0.185*
(0.049)

Key Determinants of Benefits
Area Young Child Poverty (Ref: <10%)
10-19%
20% or more
Center For-Profit

Center license status and size (Ref: Licensed for more than 100 children)
-0.188*
Not licensed
-0.224*
(0.047)
(0.046)
-0.201*
Licensed for 50 children and below
-0.211*
(0.043)
(0.043)
-0.048
Licensed for 51 to 100 children
-0.077+
(0.046)
(0.043)
Center Covariates
Center type and location (Ref: Community center)
School-based prekindergarten
Other preschool
Something else
Center accredited
Center refers to/from head start/
early head start
Center accepts CCDF child care subsidies
Center employee turnover rate/10
Director experience at center/10

-0.122*
(0.051)
-0.217*
(0.054)
-0.207*
(0.099)
0.101*
(0.035)
0.155*
(0.034)
-0.102*
(0.040)
0.003
(0.009)
-0.021
(0.022)

Child Covariates
Child is female
Child race-ethnicity (Ref: Non-Hispanic white)
Non-Hispanic black

Child and Adult Care Food Program

54

Appendix C. OLS Linear probability models predicting CACFP participation among low-income four-year
old children in non-Head Start centers.
Key
Variables
With
Minimal
Controls
(1)
Non-Hispanic other
Hispanic
Child in >1 care arrangement
Child in care 30 or more hours
Child low birth weight
Mother ever breast fed child
Child height at 4 years (centimeters)
Child lactose intolerant
Child number of well-child visits (Ref: Three or more)
Zero or one
Two
Since last interview, child
received WIC

Add Center
Covariates
(2)

Add
Child and
Family
Covariates
(3)
0.040
(0.056)
0.012
(0.054)
-0.013
(0.040)
0.095*
(0.035)
-0.033
(0.046)
-0.003
(0.037)

Add
Lagged Child
Outcomes
(4)
0.035
(0.057)
0.004
(0.056)
-0.005
(0.041)
0.099*
(0.035)
-0.028
(0.045)
0.004
(0.037)

All
Coefficients
With Minimal
Controls
(5)
0.087
(0.055)
0.158*
(0.052)
-0.017
(0.045)
0.166*
(0.036)
0.035
(0.044)
-0.060+
(0.036)

0.002
(0.003)
0.011
(0.087)

0.001
(0.003)
0.051
(0.088)

0.003
(0.003)
-0.027
(0.088)

0.065
(0.053)
0.048
(0.041)
0.027
(0.034)

0.070
(0.053)
0.048
(0.040)
0.023
(0.034)

0.063
(0.058)
0.027
(0.045)
0.106*
(0.034)

-0.050
(0.037)
-0.046
(0.038)

-0.057
(0.037)
-0.046
(0.037)

0.086*
(0.033)
-0.107*
(0.033)

0.089+
(0.045)
0.070
(0.050)
0.070
(0.060)

0.082+
(0.045)
0.060
(0.049)
0.071
(0.059)

0.045
(0.048)
0.021
(0.050)
0.031
(0.058)

0.064
(0.041)
0.144*
(0.041)

0.067+
(0.041)
0.143*
(0.041)

0.148*
(0.039)
0.215*
(0.042)

0.047
(0.051)

0.059
(0.050)

0.116*
(0.049)

Family Covariates a
Family household income <100% FPL
Mother married
Number of children in household (Ref: One)
Two
Three
Four or more
Mother education (Ref: some college or college graduate)
Less than high school
High school graduate
Mother’s age (Ref: 30 to 34)
Less than 25

Child and Adult Care Food Program

55

Appendix C. OLS Linear probability models predicting CACFP participation among low-income four-year
old children in non-Head Start centers.
Key
Variables
With
Minimal
Controls
(1)

Add Center
Covariates
(2)

25 to 29
35 to 39
40 or more
Mother employment status (Ref: Not employed)
Full time
Part time
Mother health excellent or very good
Since last interview, family
used Food Stamps
No English at home or
mother not born in U.S.
Household has rules about food
Small care group size very important
to mother’s child care decision
Mother had no difficulty finding care
Percentage Non-Hispanic black in ZIP code (Ref: 55 or more)
<25
25-54
Percentage Hispanic in ZIP code (Ref: 55 or more)
<25
25-54

Add
Child and
Family
Covariates
(3)
0.066
(0.045)
-0.001
(0.055)
0.009
(0.059)

Add
Lagged Child
Outcomes
(4)
0.071
(0.045)
-0.011
(0.055)
-0.006
(0.060)

All
Coefficients
With Minimal
Controls
(5)
0.106*
(0.046)
-0.003
(0.060)
0.011
(0.067)

0.072+
(0.038)
0.056
(0.043)
-0.041
(0.033)
0.026
(0.039)
0.068
(0.050)
-0.003
(0.036)
0.081*
(0.034)
-0.017
(0.034)

0.071+
(0.038)
0.060
(0.043)
-0.037
(0.033)
0.009
(0.039)
0.085+
(0.050)
0.006
(0.035)
0.081*
(0.034)
0.001
(0.034)

0.044
(0.038)
0.009
(0.047)
-0.068*
(0.034)
0.081*
(0.036)
0.056
(0.045)
-0.092*
(0.037)
0.052
(0.036)
0.013
(0.035)

0.097
(0.068)
0.013
(0.065)

0.087
(0.068)
0.011
(0.065)

0.001
(0.061)
0.041
(0.069)

-0.102
(0.066)
-0.071
(0.068)

-0.125+
(0.067)
-0.091
(0.068)

-0.306*
(0.065)
-0.187*
(0.069)

0.164*
(0.048)
0.048
(0.048)

0.157*
(0.049)
0.072
(0.053)

0.100*
(0.044)
0.051
(0.042)

0.029
(0.048)
0.047
(0.047)

Lagged Child Outcomes
Household and child food insecurity at two years (Ref: No food insecurity)
Household and child food insecure
Household food insecure
Child milk consumption at two years (Ref: Milk at neither meals nor snack)
With meals
With snack

Child and Adult Care Food Program

56

Appendix C. OLS Linear probability models predicting CACFP participation among low-income four-year
old children in non-Head Start centers.
Key
Variables
With
Minimal
Controls
(1)

Add Center
Covariates
(2)

Add
Child and
Family
Covariates
(3)

0.673*
(0.088)

0.676*
(0.104)

0.153
(0.385)

With snack and meals
Child BMI at two years
Constant

Add
Lagged Child
Outcomes
(4)
0.035
(0.045)
0.011
(0.008)
0.044
(0.390)

All
Coefficients
With Minimal
Controls
(5)
-0.003
(0.049)
0.015+
(0.008)

NOTE: n = 850 (unweighted sample size rounded to nearest 50 as per the ECLS-B data sharing
agreement). Minimal controls, not shown, are: (1) the parent sampling weight (W3R0) and dummies for
child age and for geographic state or region in all columns, and (2) whether the parent respondent is the
mother in columns 3, 4, and 5, and (3) not missing BMI at two years in columns 4 and 5. Robust standard
errors in parentheses, which adjust for clustering within ZIP codes. CACFP=Child and Adult Care Food
Program. CCDF=Child Care and Development Fund. FPL=Federal poverty level. WIC= Special
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children. BMI=Body mass index.
a

95% of respondents are the biological mother.

+ p<.10, * p<.05

Child and Adult Care Food Program

57

Appendix D. OLS Linear probability models predicting CACFP participation among low-income
four-year old children in non-Head Start centers, restricted to subsample of children not in care at
two years.
Key
Variables
With
Minimal
Controls
(1)

Add Center
Covariates
(2)

Add
Child and
Family
Covariates
(3)

Add
Lagged Child
Outcomes
(4)

All
Coefficients
With
Minimal
Controls
(5)

0.148*
(0.072)
0.249*
(0.064)

0.115
(0.071)
0.194*
(0.061)

0.074
(0.075)
0.162*
(0.071)

0.084
(0.075)
0.160*
(0.069)

0.164*
(0.072)
0.275*
(0.065)

-0.235*
(0.063)

-0.120+
(0.069)

-0.181*
(0.073)

-0.176*
(0.073)

-0.235*
(0.063)

-0.125+
(0.068)
-0.097
(0.064)
-0.018
(0.072)

-0.134+
(0.069)
-0.129+
(0.067)
-0.037
(0.073)

-0.077
(0.055)
-0.064
(0.055)
0.016
(0.073)

-0.227*
(0.092)
-0.285*
(0.096)
-0.235
(0.154)
0.126*
(0.050)
0.115*
(0.050)
-0.121*
(0.053)
-0.010
(0.011)
-0.024
(0.033)

-0.184*
(0.090)
-0.242*
(0.096)
-0.233
(0.159)
0.121*
(0.050)
0.117*
(0.051)
-0.112*
(0.054)
-0.010
(0.011)
-0.023
(0.032)

-0.016
(0.089)
-0.186+
(0.096)
-0.034
(0.132)
0.212*
(0.049)
0.247*
(0.049)
-0.210*
(0.053)
-0.009
(0.012)
-0.056+
(0.033)

-0.058
(0.046)

-0.050
(0.045)

-0.024
(0.048)

Key Determinants of Benefits
Area Young Child Poverty (Ref: <10%)
10-19%
20% or more
Center For-Profit

Center license status and size (Ref: Licensed for more than 100 children)
-0.125*
Not licensed
-0.154*
(0.064)
(0.063)
-0.095
Licensed for 50 children and below
-0.115+
(0.064)
(0.064)
Licensed for 51 to 100 children
-0.019
0.003
(0.075)
(0.071)
Center Covariates
Center type and location (Ref: Community center)
School-based prekindergarten
Other preschool
Something else
Center accredited
Center refers to/from head start/
early head start
Center accepts CCDF child care subsidies
Center employee turnover rate/10
Director experience at center/10

-0.178+
(0.093)
-0.256*
(0.100)
-0.193
(0.153)
0.131*
(0.049)
0.166*
(0.049)
-0.122*
(0.054)
-0.010
(0.011)
-0.025
(0.030)

Child Covariates
Child is female
Child race-ethnicity (Ref: Non-Hispanic white)

Child and Adult Care Food Program

58

Appendix D. OLS Linear probability models predicting CACFP participation among low-income
four-year old children in non-Head Start centers, restricted to subsample of children not in care at
two years.
Key
Variables
With
Minimal
Controls
(1)
Non-Hispanic black
Non-Hispanic other
Hispanic
Child in >1 care arrangement
Child in care 30 or more hours
Child low birth weight
Mother ever breast fed child
Child height at 4 years (centimeters)
Child lactose intolerant
Child number of well-child visits (Ref: Three or more)
Zero or one
Two
Since last interview, child
received WIC

Add Center
Covariates
(2)

Add
Child and
Family
Covariates
(3)
0.102
(0.083)
0.087
(0.081)
-0.004
(0.076)
0.016
(0.065)
0.109*
(0.055)
-0.051
(0.067)

Add
Lagged Child
Outcomes
(4)
0.098
(0.084)
0.083
(0.082)
-0.018
(0.079)
0.017
(0.066)
0.103+
(0.053)
-0.038
(0.069)

All
Coefficients
With
Minimal
Controls
(5)
0.198*
(0.073)
0.119
(0.076)
0.162*
(0.072)
0.068
(0.068)
0.200*
(0.054)
0.036
(0.061)

0.049
(0.055)
0.001
(0.004)
0.006
(0.118)

0.061
(0.054)
0.000
(0.004)
0.036
(0.124)

-0.034
(0.051)
0.002
(0.004)
-0.057
(0.125)

0.067
(0.079)
0.003
(0.064)
0.074
(0.051)

0.076
(0.078)
0.013
(0.063)
0.077
(0.051)

0.089
(0.085)
0.059
(0.067)
0.154*
(0.049)

-0.039
(0.054)
-0.121*
(0.053)

-0.050
(0.055)
-0.122*
(0.053)

0.117*
(0.049)
-0.154*
(0.048)

-0.003
(0.074)
0.021
(0.080)
0.033
(0.086)

0.006
(0.074)
0.025
(0.078)
0.061
(0.086)

0.021
(0.079)
0.021
(0.081)
0.054
(0.086)

0.115+
(0.065)
0.261*
(0.060)

0.118+
(0.064)
0.255*
(0.059)

0.229*
(0.056)
0.342*
(0.058)

Family Covariates a
Family household income <100% FPL
Mother married
Number of children in household (Ref: One)
Two
Three
Four or more
Mother education (Ref: some college or college graduate)
Less than high school
High school graduate

Child and Adult Care Food Program

59

Appendix D. OLS Linear probability models predicting CACFP participation among low-income
four-year old children in non-Head Start centers, restricted to subsample of children not in care at
two years.
Key
Variables
With
Minimal
Controls
(1)

Add Center
Covariates
(2)

Mother’s age (Ref: 30 to 34)
Less than 25
25 to 29
35 to 39
40 or more
Mother Employment status (Ref: Not employed)
Full time
Part time
Mother health excellent or very good
Since last interview, family
used Food Stamps
No English at home or
mother not born in U.S.
Household has rules about food
Small care group size very important
to mother’s child care decision
Mother had no difficulty finding care
Percentage Non-Hispanic black in ZIP code (Ref: 55 or more)
<25
25-54
Percentage Hispanic in ZIP code (Ref: 55 or more)
<25
25-54

Add
Child and
Family
Covariates
(3)

Add
Lagged Child
Outcomes
(4)

All
Coefficients
With
Minimal
Controls
(5)

0.022
(0.072)
0.086
(0.062)
-0.078
(0.073)
0.015
(0.081)

0.016
(0.073)
0.059
(0.064)
-0.108
(0.074)
-0.034
(0.080)

0.115
(0.071)
0.131+
(0.068)
-0.064
(0.080)
0.056
(0.088)

0.066
(0.062)
0.028
(0.061)
-0.057
(0.046)
-0.069
(0.055)
0.032
(0.074)
0.017
(0.052)
0.121*
(0.049)
-0.038
(0.049)

0.052
(0.062)
0.014
(0.062)
-0.046
(0.046)
-0.072
(0.055)
0.043
(0.074)
0.025
(0.053)
0.112*
(0.048)
-0.026
(0.049)

0.078
(0.058)
-0.015
(0.064)
-0.064
(0.048)
0.042
(0.051)
0.078
(0.061)
-0.081
(0.054)
0.070
(0.050)
0.015
(0.052)

0.061
(0.101)
-0.028
(0.105)

0.051
(0.097)
-0.024
(0.103)

-0.078
(0.087)
-0.089
(0.107)

0.009
(0.093)
0.014
(0.098)

-0.016
(0.095)
0.005
(0.100)

-0.235*
(0.088)
-0.032
(0.097)

0.157*
(0.070)
-0.042
(0.074)

0.169*
(0.069)
-0.072
(0.078)

Lagged Child Outcomes
Household and child food insecurity at two years (Ref: No food insecurity)
Household and child food insecure
Household food insecure
Child milk consumption at two years (Ref: Milk at neither meals nor snack)

Child and Adult Care Food Program

60

Appendix D. OLS Linear probability models predicting CACFP participation among low-income
four-year old children in non-Head Start centers, restricted to subsample of children not in care at
two years.
Key
Variables
With
Minimal
Controls
(1)

Add Center
Covariates
(2)

Add
Child and
Family
Covariates
(3)

0.540*
(0.127)

0.599*
(0.160)

0.233
(0.524)

With meals
With snack
With snack and meals
Child BMI at two years
Constant

Add
Lagged Child
Outcomes
(4)
0.113+
(0.064)
0.070
(0.064)
-0.003
(0.065)
0.004
(0.012)
0.067
(0.530)

All
Coefficients
With
Minimal
Controls
(5)
0.075
(0.071)
0.093
(0.068)
-0.031
(0.069)
0.013
(0.011)

NOTE: n = 450 (unweighted sample size rounded to nearest 50 as per the ECLS-B data sharing
agreement). Minimal controls, not shown, are: (1) the parent sampling weight (W3R0) and dummies
for child age and geographic state or region in all columns, and (2) whether the parent respondent is
the mother in columns 3, 4, and 5, and (3) not missing BMI at two years in columns 4 and 5. Robust
standard errors in parentheses, which adjust for clustering within ZIP codes. CACFP=Child and
Adult Care Food Program. CCDF=Child Care and Development Fund. FPL=Federal poverty level.
WIC= Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children. BMI=Body mass
index.
a

95% of respondents are the biological mother.

+ p<.10, * p<.05

Child and Adult Care Food Program

61

Appendix E. Summary of coefficients from OLS linear probability models regressing child
nutritional outcomes on CACFP participation status for low-income four-year olds in center care
(Subsample models, with minimal controls).

Child Outcomes

Subsample:
Currently
>= 30 Hours
(n = 400)
(1)

Subsample:
In Community
Centers
(n = 150)
(2)

Subsample:
Not in Care
at Two Years
(n = 450)
(3)

0.153*
(0.059)
0.052
(0.058)
0.026
(0.044)

0.238*
(0.099)
-0.006
(0.103)
-0.018
(0.075)

0.113*
(0.049)
0.032
(0.051)
0.031
(0.036)

0.067
(0.056)
0.082
(0.057)
-0.002
(0.022)
0.002
(0.046)
0.033
(0.035)

0.151
(0.101)
0.123
(0.102)
-0.000
(0.058)
-0.077
(0.084)
0.026
(0.073)

0.099*
(0.050)
0.067
(0.050)
0.004
(0.012)
-0.009
(0.039)
0.003
(0.030)

-0.077
(0.055)
0.063
(0.041)

-0.024
(0.095)
-0.033
(0.054)

-0.010
(0.048)
0.025
(0.019)

0.041
(0.060)
0.019
(0.053)

0.126
(0.104)
0.128
(0.097)

0.056
(0.050)
0.038
(0.042)

Two or more cups per day of:
Milk
100% fruit juice
Soda or fruit-flavored drinks
Two or more servings per day of:
Vegetables (excluding French fries)
Fruits
Fast food
Sweet snacks
Salty snacks
Child CDC Growth Chart Status
Healthy weight versus
overweight/at risk of overweight
Healthy weight versus
underweight
Any food insecurity
Household
Child

NOTE: The sample sizes are as listed at the top of each column, except for “healthy weight
versus underweight” where the sample sizes are 250, 100, and 300 respectively (unweighted
sample size rounded to the nearest 50 as per the ECLS-B data sharing agreement). Minimal
controls are: parent sampling weight and dummies for child age, geographic region/state, and
whether parent respondent is mother. Robust standard errors shown, which adjust for clustering
within ZIP codes, are in parentheses. CACFP=Child and Adult Care Food Program.
CDC=Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. + p<.10, * p<.05

