NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF
RATIONAL BUBBLES

Behzad T. Diba
Herschel I. Grossman

Working Paper No. 1615

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Pvenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May

1985

The National Science Foundation Grant SES—8210129 has supported
this research. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research programs in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and
Economic Fluctuations. ny opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1615
May 1985

The Impossibility of
Rational Bubbles

ABSTRACT

A rational bubble would involve a self—confirming belief that
an asset price depends on information that includes variables or
parameters that are not part of market fundamentals. The existing
literature shows that, if market fundamentals are economically
interesting, i.e., forward looking, any rational bubbles would be
either explosive or implosive. Further arguments based on the
existing literature show that utility maximizing behavior implies
finite bounds on asset.prices and, accordingly, precludes both
explosive and implosive rational price expectations, except for the possible case of an implosion in the value of fiat money.
These arguments rule out both positive and negative rational
bubbles, except for the pcissibility of rational inflationary
bubbles.
This paper extends the theoretical analysis of rational
bubbles in two ways. First, it shows that, although a supply
response of the current asset stock to the current asset price
dampens fluctuations in market fundamentals, such a response would
cause a rational bubble to explode or to implode even faster.
Thus, the explosiveness or implosiveness of rational bubbles is
not an artifact of assuming that the asset stock evolves
autonomously. Second, and more importantly, the present analysis
considers the inception of rational bubbles and shows that, for a
negative rational bubble——such as a rational inflationary bubble——
to get started, a positive rational bubble also would have to have
positive probability. Specifically, the expected initial absolute
value of a potential negative rational bubble cannot exceed the
expected, initial value of a potential positive rational bubble.
This result dramatically expands the theoretical basis for
precluding rational bubbles. Specifically, because utility
maximization directly rules out rational deflationary bubbles, the
inception of a rational inflationary bubbles is also precluded.

Behzad Diba
Department of Economics
Tulane University
New Orleans, Louisiana 70118

Herschel I. Grossman
Department of Economics
Brown University
Providence, Rhode Island 02912

The recent literature includes various examples that
apparently illustrate the theoretical possibility of rational
bubbles in asset prices. In synthesizing these contributions,
Burmeister, Flood, and Garber (1983)——henceforth BF&G——focus on a
model in which the logarithm of asset demand, measured in units of
a basket of consumption goods, depends linearly on the rational
expectation of the rate of change in the asset price.
Accordingly, the logarithm of the market—clearing asset price
satisfies a first—order linear partial difference equation with a
stochastic forcing term that consists of the variables that shift
demand and supply. To motivate this setup, BF&G refer explicitly
to the standard Cagan demand function for fiat money used in

studies of inflation, interpreting the asset price as the inverse
of the price level and the expected rate of decrease in the asset
price as the expected inflation rate. This reference reflects the
earlier interest of Flood & Garber (1980) in modelling hyper—
inflations as negative rational bubbles in the value of fiat

money. The same basic setup, however, also could represent an
approximation to a portfolio balance equation that equates the
demand and supply for a real asset, interpreting the asset price
as the exchange ratio between the asset and a basket of
consumption goods.

Within this framework, BF&G define the market—fundamentals
component of the asset price to be the particular solution to the

partial difference equation for the asset price that we obtain by
setting the solution to the homogeneous equation equal to zero,
and they define other solutions to the homogeneous equation to be
the rational—bubbles component. Defined in this way, the market—
fundamentals component relates the current price uniquely to the
parameters of the demand and supply functions and, except in
extreme cases of the forcing processes, to the current and
expected future values of the stochastic forcing variables.' More
interestingly, given their definitions, nothing in the
specification of the BF&G model precludes the additional presence
of a rational—bubbles component. As the discussion below

—2—
explains, such a rational bubble would involve a self—confirming
belief that the current relative asset price also depends on a
variable (or a combination of variables) that is intrinsically
irrelevant——that is, not part of market fundamentals——or on truly
relevant variables in a way that involves parameters that are not
part of market fundamentals.2
The result in the BF&G analysis that, except in extreme cases
of the forcing processes, the only well—defined solution for the
market—fundamentals component is forward looking accords with the
usual economic intuition. This result obtains because BF&G
assume, analogously to a downward sloping demand curve, that the
demand for the asset depends positively on the expected rate of
change in the asset price. This assumption means that the
eigenvalue of the partial difference equation governing the asset

price is greater than unity. Importantly, the eigenvalue greater
than unity, as BF&G observe, also implies that a rational bubble
would involve an explosion, either positive or negative, of the
rational expectation of the logarithm of the asset price.
Specifically, with the eigenvalue greater than unity, the
existence of a rational bubble would imply that the expected
values of the logarithm of the asset price conditional on current
information either increase or decrease (at an increasing rate-)
into the infinite future.3
The main attraction of the simple first—order log—linear
model of an asset price analyzed by BF&G is that it provides
explicit mathematical representations of the market—fundamentals

component and the rational—bubbls component for general
specifications of the stochastic processes generating the
variables that are part of or not part of market fundamentals.
Unfortunately, however, the log—linear approximation to the asset
demand function can have seriously misleading implications for the
behavior of the value of asset demand at extremely high or low
asset prices. Specifically, as various authors have observed,
the implications of utility maximizing behavior can directly
preclude the explosive behavior of the expected value of the
-

—3—
logarithm of the asset price associated with the rational bubbles

analyzed by BF&G. The general idea—-see, tor example, Tirole
(1982), Blanchard and Watson (1982), or Gray (1984)——is that,
under any reasonable specification of preferences, asset holders,
even if their planning horizons are infinite, are not willing to
adopt plans that involve permanent postponement of consumption.

The development of this idea differs in a subtle, but
important, way between positive and negative rational bubbles.
For positive rational bubbles, the relevant concept of consumption
includes all sources of utility except the service flow from the
asset stock itself. The essential argument is that, at a

sufficiently high, but finite, asset price and associated value
tar the asset stock, asset holders would he unwilling to continue
to hold on to the asset stock no matter how fast they expected the

asset price to be increasing. For example, if the price of gold
were already so high that (say) an ounce of gold could buy the
world, even if gold itself yields a positive service flow, we
should expect, contrary to the implication of the log—linear
demand function, that holders would spend their gold now rather
than plan to wait (torever) until the price of gold reached
infinity. Given this prospective disappearance of the demand for
gold, which involves reinforcing substitution effects and wealth
effects, asset holders could not rationally expect the price of
gold to increase explosively without bound, as would have to be
the case under a positive rational bubble.
Taking into account a potentially unlimited succession of

overlapping generations modifies this argument slightly. In this
expanded framework, although each generation could plan to consume
in the finite future by selling its asset holdings to the next
generation, the endowments of each new generation would limit the
prices at which each old generation could exchange its asset
holdings for consumption. Consequently, given that current asset
holders do not rationally expect consumption endowments to
explode, again they also could not rationally expect the price of
any asset to increase explosively without bound.

—4—
For negative rational bubbles, the relevant concept of
consumption is the service flow from the asset itself. The
analogous argument is that, at a sufficiently low, hut positive,
asset price, asset holders would want to acquire more than the
existing asset stock no matter how fast they expected the asset
price to be decreasing. For example, if the price of gold were to
fall so low that the wages of a few moments of work effort could
buy a ton of gold, keeping in mind that the asset price approaches
zero as its logarithm becomes increasingly negative, the multitude
of consumers who admire the beauty of gold would exercise their
demand for gold now rather than, as the log—linear demand function
implies, plan to wait (forever) until the price of gold reached

zero. Given this prospective arbitrarily large demand for gold,
which involves the eventual dominance of substitution effects over
wealth effects, asset holders could not rationally expect the
logarithm of the price of gold to decrease explosively, as would
have to he the case under a negative rational bubble.
As noted above, the log—linear approximation to the demand
functions used by BF&G could apply to fiat money as well as to a

real asset like gold. Unlike the analogous argument against
positive bubbles, however, the preceding argument against negative
bubbles is relevant only for real assets. It does not apply to
inflationary bubbles. Specifically, as various authors have
shown——for recent contributions, see Kingston (1982), Obstfeld and
Rogoff (1983), or Gray (l984)——an expectation of an implosive
decrease in the value of fiat money to zero could be rational as
long as fiat money is inessential in the sense that, at a finite
expected rate of decrease of its price, asset holders would be
willing to reduce their holdings increasingly close to zero in
exchange for finite increases in consumption. As Obstfeld. and
Rogoff and Gray explain, this condition seems consistent with a
reasonable view of the way in which fiat money enhances utility.
The essential difference between fiat money and real assets
in this regard is that utility does not derive from physical units

—5—
of fiat money——that is, nominal balances——but rather from the
value of these units——that is, real balances. A negative rational
bubble in the price of (say) gold would mean that the expected
cost of a unit of the services of gold in terms of units of other

sources of utility would decrease towards zero. The above
argument against negative rational hubbies is that this
expectation would imply the contradictory expectation that. the
demand for physical units of gold eventually would become

arbitrarily large. In contrast, with an inflationary rational
bubble, although the expected price of a unit of tiat money would
decrease towards zero, the expected cost of a unit of the services
of fiat money in terms of units of other sources of utility would
not decrease. Accordinglr, there is no reason to expect the
demand for either real or nominal balances to become arbitrarily
large and thwart the inflationary bubble.

To summarize the arguments in the existing literature, the
log—linear asset demand function analyzed by BF&G suggests that
rational bubbles are theoretically possible.
In general, however,
this functional form, although a useful approximation for some
purposes, is not globally consistent with utility maximizing

behavior. Specifically, the implications of any reasonable
specification of preferences enable us directly to rule out both
positive and negative rational bubbles a priori, except for the
possibility, stressed by BF&G, of rational inflationary bubbles.
The present paper extends the theoretical analysis of
rational bubbles in two ways. First, it introduces into the BF&G
model a supply response of the current asset stock to the current
asset price. This analysis shows that a rational bubble would
imply either explosive or implosive price expectations even if the
behavior of the asset stock dampens fluctuations in market

fundamentals. Second, and more importantly, the present paper
considers explicitly the inception of rational bubbles——a problem
from which the existing literature largely abstracts. This
analysis shows that, for a negative rational bubble to get

—6—
started, a positive rational bubble also would have to have

positive probability. This result dramatically expands the
theoretical basis for precluding rational bubbles, including the
apparently exceptional case of rational inflationary bubbles.
1.

Analytical Framework

The log—linear model analyzed by BF&G assumes that the
logarithm of the value of the demand for the asset at date t,

in

terms of a basket of consumption goods, depends positively on the
expected rate of change of the price of the asset from date t to
date t+1 relative to the price of the consumption basket, and
that the price of the asset adjusts to equate this demand to the
value of the existing asset stock. Thus, the relative price of
the asset satisfies
(1)

where

+

Pt

=

(EP+i_

)

+ d,

is the logarithm of the physical asset stock at

date t,
is the logarithm of the ratio of the asset price
to a relevant index of prices of consumable goods
and services,
is an operator that denotes a rational expectation,

i.e., an expectation consistent with this model,

conditional on information available at date t,
dt represents the effects on demand of all factors
other than the expected rate of change of the
relative price of the asset,
and
is a positive constant.In this setup, the variable (or
combination of variables) represented by dt is stochastic and
its innovations are independent of past prices.
The preceding discussion pointed out that, although BF&G
interpret Q as the logarithm of the nominal stock of fiat money
and P as the logarithm of the inverse of the price level,

—7—
equation (1) could also represent an approximation to a portfolio
balance equation for a real asset. Nevertheless, as stressed
above, this log—linear demand function, in general, is not a good
approximation at extremely high or low asset prices.
Specifically, utility maximization suggests that, for either fiat
money or a real asset, demand would become arbitrarily small at a
sufficiently high current price, no matter how high the expected
future price. Also, for a real asset, but not necessarily for
fiat money, demand would become arbitrarily large at a
sufficiently low current price, no matter how low the expected
future price. Given that the asset stock is always positive, hut
finite, we can incorporate these considerations into the log—
linear model by imposing limits on the range of possible values
of Pt, and on the relevance of equation (1) , of the torm
(2)

P P

for real assets and
p

for fiat money,

where P and P are finite.
BF&G assume that the current asset stock evolves

autonomously. The present analysis extends this framework to
allow the current asset stock to depend on the current asset
price. Specifically., the current asset stock satisfies
=

aP

+

where a is a non—negative constant
and s represents the effects on the current asset stock of
all factors other than the asset price.

Like dt, St is also stochastic with innovations independent of
past prices.

Equation (3) incorporates simplifying assumptions that serve
to minimize the mathematical complexity of the analysis by

—8—
preserving the property that the logarithm of the asset price
satisfies a first—order partial difference equation even if ci is
positive. First, the asset price affects the asset stock with no
lag. A more realistic model for a real asset might include
production and consumption lags and, hence, have the current asset
stock depend on past expectations of the current price. Second,
only the current asset price affects the current asset stock. A
more realistic model for a real asset might have the current price
affect the flow of production or consumption of the asset and,

hence, have the current asset stock depend on past prices. Either
of these extensions in general would lead to a higher—order
partial difference equation for the asset price. (See Evans and
Honkapolija (1983) for a discussion of mathematical properties of
solutions for models that imply such higher—order systems.)
Equation (3) also does not address the peculiar issues concerning
public finance and monetary institutions involved in motivating
the issuance of fiat money.
2.

Market Fundamentals

Combining equations (1) and (3) to eliminate Q yields the

following relation involving P, EtPt+i dt and St:
(4)

(l+a-I-)Pt —

EtPt+l

dt + St =

0.

The general solution of equation (4) for P, which is also
subject to condition (2), is the sum of a particular solution and
the general solution to the homogeneous equation. Following BF&G,
denote the particular solution in terms of current and expected

future values of the exogenous variables d and s and the
to be the market—fundamentals component of
parameters a and

price, Ft. Thus, Ft satisfies
(5)

Ft =

(l+a+)

l(

EtFt+i + dt — St)

—9—
Also following BF&G, denote the homogeneous solution, which can
involve current and past realizations of other variables as well
as other parameters, to be the potential rational—bubbles

component of price, Bt. Thus, Bt satisfies
(6)

EtBt+1 —

'(l+a+)Bt

=

0.

In general,
(7)

Pt=Ft+Bt,

subject to condition (2).

The solution of equation (5) for Ft requires the derivation
of an expression for EtFt+i in terms of expectations of the
forcing variables. Assuming that condition (2) does not impose a
binding constraint on the evolution of F, the assumption of
rational expectations implies that in forming EtFt÷i market
participants behave as if they know that market fundamentals will
conform to equation (5) in all future periods. Leading equation
(5)

j

periods,

j

1, and applying the operator Et gives the

partial difference equation,
(8)

EtFt+. =

(l+a+)'Et(E+.Ft.i±

d._ St÷.)

=

Et(dt÷_ st+.)].
Equation (8) is a partial, rather than an ordinary, difference

equation because EtF+. depends on both t and j.
To solve for EtFt+1, fix t and treat equation (8) as an
ordinary difference equation in j. Because the eigenvalue,
is greater than unity, the forward—looking solution
to this equation involves a convergent sum, as long as the

expected difference, Et(d._ st+.), for any t does not
grow with i at a geometric rate equal to or greater than

— 10 —

(An important advantage of the log—linearity of
equation (4) is that it permits the derivation of explicit
expressions for the market—fundamental and rational—bubble
components of price without imposing any additional restrictions
on these processes. For example, to allow maximum generality,

dt and St can be moving average processes of infinite order nd
can accommodate any specific autoregressive representation of the
demand and supply functions as a special case.)

Using the forward operator L1, this forward—looking
solution is, for j = 1,
(9)

(1++13)Et{[1_13(l+a+13)'L1]'(dt+1_ s+1)}

EtFt+i
=

—l

0

—ii
[13(1+ct-I-13)

13

i=1

]

Et(dt+.— s÷t)

Substituting equation (9) for EtFt÷i into equation (5) gives the
market—fundamentals component of price,
(10)

Ft =

(1+a+13)'{dt_

i=l

Et(dt+_ St+.) }.

Equation (10) says that Ft is proportionate to a weighted sum of
current and expected future realizations of the variables that

shift demand and supply. The factor of proportion is inversely
and the weights are powers of the eigenvalue such
related to 13,

that the contribution of Et(dt+— st÷) to Ft declines
exponentially with i.
3.

Rational Bubbles

The general solution for Pt also includes the rational—
which satisfies the homogeneous equation
bubbles component,
(6) . The assumption of rational expectations implies that in
forming EtBt+., for all j > 0, asset holders behave as if they
know that any rational bubble component would conform to equation
(6) in all future periods. Accordingly, any solution to equation
(6) would have the property

— 11 —

(11)

EtBt+i =

['(1++)]J

B for all j > 0.

Equation (11) confirms the result stressed above that with an
eigenvalue greater than unity, the existence of a rational bubble
would imply that the expected values of the logarithm of the asset
price conditional on current information either increase or
decrease (at an increasing rate) into the infinite future. Thus,
equation (11) shows that, except for the possibility of a negative
value of Bt in the case of fiat money, any solution to equation

other than Bt = 0,

would imply rational expectations
inconsistent with condition (2), which specifies finite limits on
the range of possible logarithms of asset prices. This result
limits interest in nontrivial solutions to equation (6) to the
potential case of rational inflationary bubbles.
(6) ,

Solutions to equation (6), satisfy the stochastic difference
equation
(12)

Bt+i —

'(l+a+)Bt

=

where z, a random variable (or combination of variables),
representing new information available at date
(13)

E z

= 0

for

-r,

satisfies

T > t.

The key to the relevance of equation (12) for the general solution

for Pt is that equation (6) relates Bt to EtBt+ll rather
than to Bt÷l itself as would the case in a perfect—foresight
model.
In this formulation, the realizations of Z
embody all
sources of divergence between
and Ft. In other words,
is the source of potential rational bubbles. The random variable
z
can be intrinsically irrelevant——that is, unrelated to the
forcing variables present in Ft——or it can depend on truly

relevant variables1 like dt and s, through parameters that

— 12 —

are not present in Ft. The only critical property of Z, given
by equation (13), is that its expected future values are always
zero. (In the model developed by Blanchard and Watson (1982) the
analog to z
satisfies equation (13) even though it is not
variance stationary.)

A solution to equation (12) is
-

(14)

Bt =
T 1

[—l (l+a+)] t—t z,

where date one, a given point in the finite past, marks the

inception of the process generating Z, or, equivalently, the
first nonzero realization from this process. (Note that for Pt
to be finite, the inception of a rational bubble could not have
been infinitely long ago.) Equation (14) says that the rational—
bubbles component is a weighted sum of current and past
realizations of z. The weights are powers of the eigenvalue
such that the contribution of z
to Bt increases exponentially
with the difference between t and r. For example, the initial

realization z1 contributes only the amount z1 to B1, but

contributes [—1 (l+a+)] t—l z1 to Bt.
BF&G distinguish between deterministic bubbles and stochastic
bubbles. The significance of this distinction would seem to be to
separate factors that have no effect on the conditional variance

of P from factors that make P more variable than Ft. The
expression for Bt in equation (14) shows that this separation
depends on the point in time at which it is made. Specifically,
at date t—j, j > 0, only the realizations of z from date t—
j+1 to date t are both unknown and relevant for Bt. Thus, if
z
has constant variance c2, equation (14) implies that the
variance of Bt conditional on information available at date
t—j

is
2
T

rt—j+l

— 13 —

Accordingly, from the perspective of date t—j, the stochastic
part of Bt is

1= t —

j +1

[l(1)]t-T Z,

and the deterministic part, which is the rest of

at date t—j,

Rt and is known

is

t—j

T0

l(l+a+)}t_T Z.

Specifically, from the perspective of date zero, Bt, for all
is entirely stochastic.4

t > 0,
4.

The Effect of Endogeneity of the Asset Stock

Conventional demand and supply analysis suggests that,
ceteris paribus, a larger positive response of supply to price
should dampen price fluctuations. In the present model, this
conclusion is clearly applicable to the market—fundamentals

component of price. Specifically, equation (10) implies that,
given the process generating jdt —
the variance of Ft
},
conditional on information available at any date t—j, j > 0,
is negatively related to a.

s

Interestingly, however, this dampening effect on the variance
of the relative price would not apply to a potential rational—

bubbles component. Instead, equation (14) implies that, although
the variance of Bt conditional on information available at any
date t—l equals the conditional variance of Zt and is
independent of
a,
the variance of Bt conditional on
information available at any earlier date t—j, j > 1,
is
positively related to a. This effect on the variance of the
asset price results from the fact that a positive value of u
would transmit a rational bubble in the asset price to the asset
stock. The effect on the stock in turn would amplify the
implications of the rational bubble for expected future asset
prices.

— 14 —

This perverse effect of a on the conditional variance of a
hypothetical rational—bubbles component of the asset price
reflects the self—confirming nature of the expectations generated
by a nonzero realization of z. Note that in the market—
fundamentals component of the asset price, a positive innovation
with Et(dt+_ s+) for all i > 0 unchanged,
in dt —

Stl

leaves EtFt+i unchanged. Hence, market clearing requires a
positive innovation in Ft, but this required innovation is
smaller the larger is a. In contrast, given a positive
realization of Ztl implying a positive innovation in Bt, the
existence of a rational bubble would require a larger positive
innovation in EtBt+i to satisfy market clearing. The larger
the larger this requird innovation in EtBt+1.
a,
For example, a current positive realization of Zt, which
by that amount, also
according to equation (14) would raise
would raise Q by an amount proportionate to a. But, given

Bt, the larger is a and, hence, the larger is Q, the larger
has to be EtBt+1 in order to keep demand equal to the current
asset stock. Moreover, given EtBt+i the larger is a, the
larger is the rational expectation of 0t÷l' and, hence, the
larger has to he EtBt+2 and so on.
5.

The Inception of Rational Inflationary Bubbles

The preceding analysis considered solutions to equation (12)
given the presumption that nontrivial solutions exist that do not

violate condition (2). The arguments developed above have already
ruled out this presumption for all cases except the possibility of
rational inflationary bubbles. This section considers the
possible inception of a rational inflationary bubble.

As discussed above, condition (2), together with the
assumption of rational expectations, implies for the case of fiat

0 for
money that any solution to equation (6) must satisfy Bt
all values of t. In other words, the rational—bubble component
of the value of fiat money can never become positive. Whether or

— 15 —

not this implication of condition (2) turns out to be a binding
constraint on the actual time path of Bt given by equation (14)
depends on the realizations of z, for all T = 1 ...

t.

Specifically, for any solution to equation (12), such as equation
(14), to be a nontrivial solution to equation (6) for fiat money,
the new information contained in z
must enter the price of fiat
money in such a way that
(15)

z

—

1(l+a+)B

) 0

for all

T = 1 ...

t.

Taking account of condition (2), the process generating Z
satisfy condition (15) in addition to equation (13).

For t = 1,

condition (15) implies

must

0. But, given
0 implies that z1 equals zero with
equation (13), z1
probability one. Thus, a rational inflationary bubble cannot get
z1

started at date one, nor, by extension, at any subsequent date.
In other words, the inception at a rational inflationary bubble
would involve a contradiction, because, for a rational
inflationary bubble to get started at date -r, expectations would
have to fail to be rational at date i—l. Specifically, asset
holders would have to fail to recognize at date i—i that z

would have to satisfy both equations (13) and (15) in order to
have a self—confirming effect on P.
The essential idea underlying this line of argument is that,
because the inception of a rational bubble involves an innovation
in the asset price, the expected initial values of a positive
rational bubble and a negative rational bubble would have to be

equal. Accordingly, given that rational expectations hold at all
times, the fact that condition (2) directly rules out rational
deflationary bubbles means that rational inflationary bubbles also
cannot get started.
6.

Summary
A rational bubble would involve a self—confirming belief that

an asset price depends on information that includes variables or
parameters that are not part of market fundamentals. The existing

— 16 —

literature

shows that, if market fundamentals are economically

interesting, i.e., forward looking, any rational bubbles would be

either explosive or implosive. Further arguments based on the
existing literature show that utility maximizing behavior implies
finite bounds on asset prices and, accordingly, precludes both
explosive and implosive rational price expectations, except for
the possible case of an implosion in the value of fiat money.
These arguments rule out both positive and negative rational
bubbles, except for the possibility or rational inflationary
bubbles.

The preceding discussion extended the theoretical analysis of

rational bubbles in two ways. First, it showed that, although a
supply response of the current asset stock to the current asset
price dampens fluctuations in market fundamentals, such a
response, given the self—confirming nature of expectations
inherent in a rational bubble, would cause a rational bubble to

explode to to implode even faster. Thus, the explosiveness or
implosiveness of rational bubbles is not an artifact of assuming
that the asset stock evolves autonomously. Second, and more
importantly, it considered the inception of rational bubbles and
showed that, for a negative rational bubble——such as a rational
inflationary bubble——to get started, a positive rational bubble
also would have to have positive probability. Specifically, the
expected initial absolute value of a potential negative rational
bubble cannot exceed the expected initial value of a potential
positive rational bubble. This result implies that, because
utility maximization directly rules out rational deflationary
bubbles, theoretical analysis also precludes the inception of a
rational inflationary bubble.

— 17 —
FOOTNOTE S

'The BF&G definition of market fundamentals seems natural and
straightforward if the forcing variables reflect aspects of
technology and resource endowments——for example, the flow of
services from the stock of a real asset or the economizing on

transactions services made possible by the stock of fiat money.
The interpretation of market fundamentals would be more subtle for
a hypothetical asset that did nothing except permit the shifting
of consumption over time on attractive terms. Although not of any
direct empirical relevance, the analysis of such a pure store of
value has stimulated theoretical interest. For example, Weil
(1984) and Tirole (1985) ierive conditions under which a pure
store of value could have a positive price. They also,

unfortunately, create some semantic confusion by defining such a
positive price to be a "bubble". It would seem more consistent
with the definitions of BF&G to denote the equilibria derived by
Weil and Tirole, if consistent with rational expectations, to be
fundamental.
2The concept of a rational bubble as defined by BF&G is not a
peculiarity of linear models. For example, Azariadis (1981)
illustrates the possible effect on price of intrinsically
irrelevant variables within a general preference structure that

does not necessarily imply a linear demand function. To make his
analysis tractable, however, Azariadis restricts the price process
to be a two—state Markov chain.
3The results of Mussa (1984) underscore the association of
economically interesting market fundamentals with explosive or
implosive rational bubbles. He shows that various examples of
attempts to construct alternative models in which potential
rational bubbles are convergent all preclude a forward—looking
market—fundamentals solution for some relevant price variable.

— 18 —

4me seminal study of rational inflationary bubbles by Flood
and Garber (1980) focuses on a term that is the product of the

eigenvalue raised to the power t and a constant. According to
the present analysis, such a constant would represent a single
at date one. The bubble term that
nonzero realization of z
Flood and Garber consider would represent the effect of this
single realization on the time path of price.

— 19

REFERENCES

C. Azariadis, "Self—Fulfilling Prophecies," Journal of Economic
Theory, 25, December 1981, 380—396.
0.3. Blanchard and M.W. Watson, "Bubbles, Rational Expectations,
and Financial Markets," in Crises in the Economic and

Financial Structure, P. Wachtel, ed. (Lexington Books, 1982)
E. Burmeister, R. Flood, and P. Garber, "On the Equivalence of
Solutions in Rational Expectations Models," Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 5, 1983, 311—321.
G. Evans and S. Honkapolija, "A Complete Characterization of ARMA
Solutions to Linear Rational Expectations Models,"
unpublished, November 1983.
R. Flood and P. Garber, "Market Fundamentals Versus Price Level
Bubbles: The First Tests," Journal of Political Economy, 88,
August 1980, 745—770.
J.A. Gray, "Dynamic Instability in Rational Expectations Models:
An Attempt to Clarify," International Economic Review, 25,
February 1984, 93—122.
G.H. Kingston, "The Semi—Log Portfolio Balance Schedule is

Tenuous," Journal of Monetary Economics, 9, May 1982, 389—
399.

M. Mussa, "Rational Expectations Models with a Continuum of
Convergent Solutions," NBER Technical Working Paper No. 41,
June 1984.
M. Obstfeld and K. Rogoff, "Speculative Hyperinflations in
Maximizing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?" Journal of
Political Economy, 91, August 1983, 675—687.
J. Tirole, "On the Possibility of Speculation under Rational
Expectations," Econometrica, 50, September 1982, 1163=1181.
3. Tirole, "Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations,"
Econometrica, 53, 1985.
P. Weil, "Confidence and the Real Value of Money in an

Overlapping Generations Economy," unpublished, November 1984.

