NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELF-FULFILLING RISK PANICS
Philippe Bacchetta
Cédric Tille
Eric van Wincoop
Working Paper 16159
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16159

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

We would like to thank Daniel Cohen, Luca Dedola, Stefan Gerlach, Paul Klein, Jaume Ventura, and
audience members at the 2010 Bundesbank Annual Conference, the 2010 European Summer Symposium
in International Macroeconomics, the ECB, NYFed, Dallas Fed, PSE, Cambridge, St. Andrews, Lausanne,
Carlos III and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority for useful comments and discussions. We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0649442), the Hong
Kong Institute¸˛for Monetary Research, the National Centre of Competence in Research "Financial
Valuation and Risk Management" (NCCR FINRISK), and the Swiss Finance Institute. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Philippe Bacchetta, Cédric Tille, and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Self-Fulfilling Risk Panics
Philippe Bacchetta, Cédric Tille, and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 16159
July 2010
JEL No. E44,G01,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
Recent crises have seen very large spikes in asset price risk without dramatic shifts in fundamentals.
We propose an explanation for these risk panics based on self-fulfilling shifts in risk made possible
by a negative link between the current asset price and risk about the future asset price. This link implies
that risk about tomorrow's asset price depends on uncertainty about risk tomorrow. This dynamic mapping
of risk into itself gives rise to the possibility of multiple equilibria and self-fulfilling shifts in risk.
We show that this can generate risk panics. The impact of the panic is larger when the shift from a
low to a high risk equilibrium takes place in an environment of weak fundamentals. The sharp increase
in risk leads to a large drop in the asset price, decreased leverage and reduced market liquidity. We
show that the model can account well for the developments during the recent financial crisis.

Philippe Bacchetta
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Lausanne
Extranef
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
philippe.bacchetta@unil.ch
Cédric Tille
Graduate Institute for International
and Development Studies
Department of Economics
Pavillon Rigot, Avenue de la Paix 11 A
1202 Geneve, Switzerland
cedric.tille@graduateinstitute.ch

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16159

Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu

1

Introduction

Sharp surges in risk are a prominent feature of nancial panics, such as the turmoil
in the Fall of 2008 or the 2010 Eurozone debt crisis. Volatility, as measured by the
VIX index, more than quadrupled in the wake of the Lehman Brothers failure, and
tripled during the debt crisis. While crises entail adverse fundamental news, these
are hard-pressed to account for such large surges in risk. The precarious scal
situation of Greece was long known. Similarly, while the 2008 panic was linked to
large scale mortgage market losses, these were not suddenly discovered in the Fall
of 2008 and had instead gradually built for at least a year prior to the panic. We
o er a theory for such events, which we refer to as \risk panics", that focuses on
sudden large self-ful lling shifts in risk, as well as the volatility of risk.1
Our main contribution is to develop a theoretical foundation for such risk panics. Self-ful lling shifts in risk can occur when the current equilibrium asset price
depends on risk associated with the future asset price.2 Intuitively, higher risk
reduces asset demand, which reduces the price. There is then a dynamic degree
of freedom in the model. Risk is de ned in terms of uncertainty about the asset
price tomorrow. But the asset price tomorrow in turn depends on risk perceptions
tomorrow. Therefore risk today depends on uncertainty about risk tomorrow.
As risk does not just depend on uncertainty about future asset payo s but also
on future risk itself, self-ful lling shifts in both risk and the volatility of risk are
possible.
The possibility of self-ful lling shifts in risk arises only when the current asset price depends on risk about the future asset price. This link is absent in the
standard frictionless expected utility framework used in macroeconomics, where
1

We do not wish to rule out the importance of fundamental shocks during the recent crises,
but we are not aware of any model that would generate such a huge spike in risk in response
to observed fundamental shocks. An alternative approach to ours is that of Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2008), who consider a model with Knightian uncertainty (i.e. inmeasurable
risks). In that setup \new shocks" (e.g. the decision to let Lehman Brothers fail) can generate
increased uncertainty as there is no history of events to measure probabilities. Another approach
is found in Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008), where the economy can suddenly switch to a bad
state with increased asset payo risk. In our setup the increase in risk is entirely self-ful lling
and does not involve an exogenous increase in payo risk.
2
When we talk about \the asset price", we refer to a market portfolio of risky assets or stocks
rather than the equity of a particular rm.

1

only risk associated with future asset payo s matters. The asset price then depends on the covariance between the stochastic discount factor and these payo s.
However, when introducing constraints on risk exposure, such as value-at-risk or
margin constraints, the asset demand again depends on risk associated with future
asset prices. Such constraints are natural in a world where highly leveraged nancial institutions are subject to the possibility of default. A substantial literature
introducing such constraints has developed in recent years.3
A simple way to model the impact of future risk and to illustrate the possibility
of self-ful lling risk shifts is to consider a mean-variance portfolio model. This can
capture the impact of risk-based portfolio constraints, while avoiding their inherent complexity.4 Moreover, the mean-variance portfolio model has a long history
in academics and is widely used in the nancial industry. It has the important
advantage of generating a simple relationship between future asset price risk and
portfolio demand, which leads to a linear relationship between the asset price and
future asset price risk in equilibrium.
We nd that beyond a regular fundamental equilibrium there are equilibria in
which risk and the volatility of risk uctuate in an entirely self-ful lling way. There
is always a variable that is a coordination device for the self-ful lling shifts in beliefs about risk. This can either be a variable extrinsic to the model or a macro
fundamental that is part of the model. We refer to these as respectively sunspot
and sunspot-like equilibria.5 In a sunspot-like equilibrium the fundamental variable plays a dual role. It a ects the asset price both through its regular role as
fundamental (e.g. through asset payo s or wealth) and as a sunspot-like variable
around which beliefs about risk are coordinated.6 Sunspot-like equilibria are con3

Examples are Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Danielsson, Shin and Zigrand (2009) and
Gromb and Vayanos (2002). Danielsson et. al. (2009) nd multiplicity in equilibrium risk
through a feedback between asset prices and wealth. This mechanism is absent in our main
analysis.
4
Campbell et al. (2001) show that under some conditions the mean-variance and value-at-risk
portfolio selections are the same.
5
In the limiting case where fundamental uncertainty goes to zero, sunspot-like equilibria
converge to pure sunspot equilibria.
6
The term \sunspot-like" equilibria was rst coined by Manuelli and Peck (1992). They
write: \There are two ways that random fundamentals can in uence economic outcomes. First,
randomness a ects resources which intrinsically a ects prices and allocation. Second, the randomness can endogenously a ect expectations or market psychology, thereby leading to excessive

2

ceptually distinct from accelerator mechanisms where frictions in markets amplify
the impact of a change in the fundamental variable. Those are pure fundamental
equilibria.
Risk panics are closely related to the presence of sunspot-like equilibria. Apart
from a pure fundamental equilibrium and sunspot-like equilibrium, the model also
exhibits switching equilibria where there are exogenous shifts between a low-risk
state and a high-risk state based on a Markov process. A panic is a switch from
the low- to the high-risk state. During a panic, a macro variable suddenly becomes
a focal point for self-ful lling shifts in beliefs about risk. The panic is therefore
not triggered by a change in the variable, but by the sudden self-ful lling shift
in beliefs about risk that is coordinated around this variable. The panic is larger
when this variable is weak at the time of the shift (e.g. the net worth of leveraged
institutions is low or the Greek debt is high).
Our theory is consistent with the two-stage pattern of the 2007-2008 crisis:
while it started in mid-2007, a full scale nancial panic did not hit until the Fall
of 2008. We illustrate the self-ful lling risk shift in a version of the model where
investors ( nancial institutions) are hit by a negative wealth shock. We stress the
dual role of the deteriorating net worth of nancial institutions. First, it has a
fundamental e ect that can account for the initial stage of the crisis. It reduces
liquidity in the market for risky assets, which raises the volatility of asset prices
and lowers their levels.7 These e ects are however relatively small. Second, it sets
the stage for a large nancial panic. This occurs when the low net worth suddenly
becomes the focal point for a self-ful lling increase in beliefs about risk. The lower
the net worth is, the larger is the impact of the panic on asset prices, volatility,
liquidity and leverage.8
volatility."
7
The links between market liquidity, risk and nancial leverage have received a lot of attention
in recent contributions such as Adrian and Shin (2008), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009),
Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2009), Gromb and Vayanos (2008), He and Krishnamurthy (2008a,
b), Kyle and Xiong (2001) and Xiong (2001).
8
It bears emphasizing that our focus in this paper is on the possibility of self-ful lling risk
shifts or risk panics. Every crisis has its own idiosyncratic aspects and the recent crisis obviously
has many important features that go beyond the scope of this paper. For example, we abstract
from aspects such as bank runs (through the repo market) and security complexity issues. We
also make no attempt to account for the large losses in the securitized subprime mortgage market,

3

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shows how
self-ful lling shifts in risk naturally occur when the equilibrium price of an asset depends on the variance of the future asset price, regardless of the speci cs
of the model. In Section 3 we develop the possibility of sunspot and sunspot-like
equilibria in a simple mean-variance portfolio model with stochastic asset payo s
(dividends). We consider both a simple model with a closed form solution and a
more general one. In Section 4 we show that the model can also generate risk panics. Section 5 introduces wealth shocks, leading to an application to the 2007-2008
crisis in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.

2

Self-Ful lling Risk

The key point of the paper is general and can be illustrated without relying on
the speci cs of a particular model. Consider a market where demand or supply
depends not only on the current price but also on risk associated with the future
price. The equilibrium price then depends on this risk. We write this in simple
linear form as:
Qt = 0 + 1 Riskt + 2 Et Qt+1 + 3 yt
(1)
where Riskt = vart (Qt+1 ). Apart from risk, the price can depend on the expected
price tomorrow and on a fundamental variable yt that exogenously shifts demand
or supply. The expected future price naturally emerges in dynamic asset pricing
models, but is not critical to the main point here (i.e. 2 could be zero). The key
parameter for our point is 1 , which relates the price to risk about the future price.

2.1

Fundamental and sunspot equilibria

Consider rst a case where the price is not directly a ected by the fundamental
yt , i.e. 3 = 0 in (1). It is immediate that there is an equilibrium, which we refer
to as the fundamental equilibrium, where the price is constant:
Qt =

0

1

(2)
2

which we simply model as a negative wealth shock to leveraged investors.

4

This is not the only equilibrium however. Consider equilibria where the asset price
depends on a sunspot variable St that does not enter (1):
~
Qt = Q

V St2

(3)

~ and V are parameters. Assume that St is persistent through an AR
where Q
process:
St+1 = St + t+1
(4)
where 2 h0; 1i and the innovation t+1 has a symmetric distribution with mean
zero and variance 2 . We denote the variance of 2t+1 by ! 2 .
Equations (3) and (4) imply that:
~
Et Qt+1 = Q

2

V

St2

2

V

Riskt = vart (Qt+1 ) = 4V 2

2 2

(5)
St2 + V 2 ! 2

(6)

Note that risk is time-varying in a sunspot equilibrium where V 6= 0. Substituting
~ and V by equating respectively
(3), (5) and (6) into (1), solve for the parameters Q
the constant terms and terms proportional in St2 on the left and right hand side.
The resulting system has two solutions. One is the fundamental equilibrium, with
~ equal to (2), and the other is:
V = 0 and Q
1
4
1

V =
~=
Q

1

1

2
2
2 2

0

(7)
+

1V

2

!2

2V

2

(8)

2

The key parameter is clearly the coe cient on Riskt in (1). When risk does
not a ect the asset price ( 1 = 0), there is only the fundamental equilibrium.
Otherwise the sunspot equilibrium also arises. The underlying intuition is most
easily discussed when the expected future price does not enter (1), so that 2 = 0.
In that case:
Qt = 0 + 1 Riskt
(9)
The same equation one period later tells us that the future asset price depends on
future risk:
Qt+1 = 0 + 1 Riskt+1

5

Taking the variance on both sides shows that current risk is linked to uncertainty
about future risk:
Riskt = 21 vart (Riskt+1 )
(10)
Risk does not depend on uncertainty about future fundamental shocks, but
instead on uncertainty about future risk itself. This dynamic mapping of risk into
itself opens up the possibility for multiple equilibria. Clearly, zero risk is an equilibrium. But any process for Riskt , unrelated to fundamentals, is an equilibrium
as long as it satis es (10). This process must clearly lead to joint shifts in risk and
uncertainty about risk as they are proportional in (10). One process that satis es
(10) is described in (6), where Riskt is linear in St2 and the sunspot follows an
AR process. Uncertainty about future risk will then depend on St2 as well because
2
) = 4 2 2 St2 + ! 2 .9
vart (St+1

2.2

Sunspot-like equilibrium

We have shown that when the fundamental yt does not enter (1), the model exhibits
a fundamental and a pure sunspot equilibrium. The sunspot variable St on which
expectations of risk coordinate can be any variable. In particular, it can be the
variable yt . This corresponds to a situation where changes in a variable, such as
the scal prospects of a country, a ect the price in a market that is not linked to
the country in any fundamental way.
Consider now the situation where yt has a fundamental impact, i.e. 3 6= 0 in
(1). In addition to the fundamental equilibrium, there is a sunspot-like equilibrium
where yt plays a dual role. It rst has a fundamental role through its direct impact
on the asset price in (1). It also has a sunspot role as the variable on which agents
coordinate beliefs about risk.
To solve for the sunspot-like equilibrium, assume that yt follows the same autoregressive process as (4), and conjecture the following form of the asset price:
~ + vyt
Qt = Q

V yt2

~ v and V are solved analogously to that for the sunspot equiThe parameters Q,
librium. There are again two equilibria. The rst is the fundamental equilibrium
9

In fact, an alternative way to solve (9) is to simply conjecture Riskt = + St2 with St an
AR process. In that case (1) gives Qt and one can solve for and by equating the conjectured
process for Riskt with that implied by the solution for the price.

6

2 2
~
where V = 0, v = 3 = (1
)=(1
2 ) and Q = ( 0
1v
2 ). In the fundamental equilibrium the asset price depends linearly on yt (i.e. V = 0), and risk is
constant: Riskt = v 2 2 .
The other equilibrium is the sunspot-like equilibrium, where:

1
4

V =

(11)

3

v=
~=
Q

1

2
2
2 2

(12)

1
1
1

0
2

+

2 2 2
1v

+

1V

2

!2 +

2V

2

(13)

This equilibrium converges to the pure sunspot equilibrium of the previous section
in the limit where 3 ! 0. In that pure sunspot equilibrium yt only plays a
sunspot role (v = 0 and V 6= 0). As we raise 3 above 0, yt takes on a dual
role as a fundamental and a sunspot. But even as 3 becomes big, the sunspot
role remains large. The coe cient V in (11) is not a function of 3 at all and
is identical to the pure sunspot case (7). The term V yt2 in the equilibrium price
therefore captures self-ful lling shifts in risk coordinated around the variable yt .
Although in a very di erent context, not involving self-ful lling risk shifts,
Manuelli and Peck (1992) and Spears, Srivastava and Woodford (1990) present
models with sunspot-like equilibria. Spears, Srivastava and Woodford (1990) point
out that \...a sharp distinction between \sunspot equilibria" and \non-sunspot
equilibria" is of little interest in the case of economies subject to stochastic shocks
to fundamentals." Indeed, as we raise 3 slightly above 0, the sunspot-like equilibrium is technically no longer a pure sunspot equilibrium, but it is e ectively
indistinguishable.

3

A Simple Mean-Variance Portfolio Choice Model

We now show how the linkage between risk on the future asset price and the current
price emerges in a simple mean-variance portfolio choice model. The model centers
on the allocation of portfolios between risky equity and a risk-free bond. We rst
consider the case where the return on the bond is exogenous as this allows us to
derive a closed-form solution for the fundamental and sunspot-like equilibria. We
then endogeneize the interest rate in a full general equilibrium setup.
7

3.1

Model Description

The model complexity is kept to a strict minimum. We consider an overlapping
generation setup where investors are born with wealth WI . They invest in equity
and bonds and consume the return on their investment when old.
The bond pays an exogenous constant gross return R. This assumption, which
is often made in the nance literature, allows us to derive a closed form solution. It
implicitly assumes that there is a risk-free technology with a constant real return
R that is in in nite supply. This assumption is not crucial to our results and is
relaxed in Section 3.5 below.
Equity consists of a claim on a tree with stochastic payo . There are K trees,
each producing an exogenous stochastic output (dividend) At . Denoting the equity
price by Qt , the equity return from t to t + 1 is:
RK;t+1 =

At+1 + Qt+1
Qt

(14)

Agents face uncertainty both about the dividend and the future equity price. The
dividend is equal to A(1 + mSt ), where St follows the process (4). St is the only
state variable in the model. When m = 0 the dividend is a constant and St becomes
a pure sunspot. When m > 0, St has a fundamental impact on the equity payo .
Investors born at time t maximize a mean-variance utility over their portfolio
return:
p
p
)
(15)
0:5 vart (Rt+1
Et Rt+1
where

measures risk aversion and the portfolio return is:
p
Rt+1
=

t RK;t+1

+ (1

t )R

denotes the portfolio share invested in equity. The gross return on equity and
bonds are RK;t+1 and R respectively. The equity market clearing condition is
t

t WI

= Qt K

(16)

The OLG assumption is not critical to the results but simpli es the analysis
in two ways. First, it avoids the well-known dynamic hedge term in the optimal
portfolio that arises in multi-period portfolio problems. Second, the wealth level
would be an additional state variable (in addition to St ) if agents had in nite
8

lives. We would then be unable to solve the model analytically or even represent
the equilibria graphically. While we cannot get a closed form solution when the
bond interest rate is endogenous, we can still represent the equilibria graphically
as there is only one state variable. A shortcoming of the OLG assumption is that it
prevents movements in asset prices from feeding back into the wealth of investors,
a channel that can be important in a crisis. We introduce such a feedback e ect
in the Technical Appendix through a simple extension of the OLG setting, with a
brief discussion in Section 6.3.

3.2

Equilibrium Condition for Equity Price

The maximization of (15) with respect to t gives the optimal portfolio share,
which re ects the expected excess return on equity scaled by the variance of the
equity return:
Et RK;t+1 R
(17)
t =
vart (RK;t+1 )
Equation (17) does not restrict the portfolio share of equity to be lower than
100 percent. This share can exceed 100 percent when the equity return is not very
risky, or when investors put little weight on risk. In that case the investors are
leveraged, with long positions in equity and short positions in bonds.
Using (17), the market clearing condition (16) becomes:
Et (At+1 + Qt+1

RQt ) =

K
vart (Qt+1 + At+1 )
WI

(18)

Equation (18) equates the equilibrium expected excess payo on equity to a risk
premium that depends on the variance of the payo Qt+1 + At+1 . We use it to
solve for the equilibrium asset price Qt as a function of the single state variable St .

3.3

Sunspot Equilibria

First consider the case where m = 0, so that St is a pure sunspot. In that case (18)
can be written in the same form as (1) with 0 = A=R, 1 =
K=(RWI ) and
2 = 1=R. We again get two equilibria. The rst is the fundamental equilibrium
where the asset price is constant:
Qt =

A
R
9

1

(19)

~
The second is the sunspot equilibrium Qt = Q
V =

WI R
K 4

V St2 where:10
2

(20)

2 2

The intuition for the sunspot equilibrium is exactly the same as in Section 2.
An interesting point is that the impact of the sunspot on the equity price is
larger when investors have a low risk aversion or a large wealth WI . As can
be seen from (18), low risk aversion or large wealth reduce the risk premium and
makes it less sensitive to changes in risk. It is precisely because agents respond
less to risk (i.e. are less risk averse) that large self-ful lling shifts in risk can more
easily ourish. Paradoxically this implies that the asset price is more a ected by
such self-ful lling shifts in risk.

3.4

Sunspot-Like Equilibria

Next consider the case where m > 0, so that shocks to St are also fundamental
shocks to the asset payo . We conjecture that the asset price is linear-quadratic
in St :
~ + vSt V St2
Qt = Q
(21)
The only slight di erence with the fundamental shocks to yt in Section 2 is that
the risk is now given by var(Qt+1 + At+1 ) instead of vart (Qt+1 ). There are again
two equilibria: a fundamental one and a sunspot-like one.
In the fundamental equilibrium we have V = 0 and v = m =(R
), and the
asset price is:
~ + m A St
(22)
Qt = Q
R
Shocks have a bigger impact on the asset price when they are persistent. Asset
price risk is constant.
In the sunspot equilibrium we have:
V =

WI R
K 4

10

2
2 2

(23)

An additional restriction to make sure that the asset price is always positive is that the
~ = A
distribution of t is bounded. In that case St is bounded as well. Since (R 1)Q
2
2 2
V
( K=WI )V ! , a su cient condition for the asset price to always be positive is that A is
su ciently large.

10

v=

mA
1

(24)

As in Section 2, this sunspot-like equilibrium converges to the pure sunspot equilibrium as the fundamental shock vanishes to zero (m ! 0). In addition, the
coe cient on St2 is again the same in the pure sunspot equilibrium (20) as in the
sunspot-like equilibrium (23). St therefore plays a double role of a macro fundamental that a ects asset payo s and as a sunspot that leads to self-ful lling risk
shifts.

3.5

Full General Equilibrium

Our analysis so far is not a full general equilibrium approach as we assume that
there is an in nite supply of the risk-free bond at the rate of return R. In the
remainder of the paper we relax this assumption and explicitly model the bond
market equilibrium.
The bond market clearing condition equates the investors' demand for bonds
to the supply. It is important that the supply of bonds be interest rate elastic.
Otherwise, investors could not reallocate between stocks and bonds in equilibrium.
The equity price would then be entirely pinned down by investors' wealth and
there could be no sunspot or sunspot-like equilibria. There are many ways to
introduce an interest rate elastic supply or demand schedule of bonds, for example
by introducing interest elastic consumption/savings or investment decisions. We
do so by introducing another set of agents, which we call households, who invest
in bonds and a household technology detailed below.
There are overlapping generations of households born with wealth WH . Households invest their endowment in bonds and a household technology, and consume
the proceeds when old. Investing KH;t+1 in the household technology at time t
yields a certain household production of f (KH;t+1 ) at t + 1. The technology exhibits decreasing returns to scale, f 0 (:) > 0 and f 00 (:) < 0. Households therefore
face no uncertainty. Households born at time t maximize consumption at time
t + 1, which is equal to f (KH;t+1 ) + Rt+1 (WH KH;t+1 ), where Rt+1 is the interest
rate on the bond. Consumption is maximized by equalizing the marginal return
on the technology to the bond yield: f 0 (KH;t+1 ) = Rt+1 .
For convenience we assume a simple quadratic form for household technology.
11

The capital demand is then linear in the interest rate11 : KH;t+1 =
the demand for bonds by households is:
WH

KH;t+1 = WH

Rt+1 , and

+ Rt+1

(25)

Equation (25) can be positive, in which case households lend bonds to investors,
or negative, in which case they borrow from investors.
The bond market clearing condition is:
(1

t )WI

+ WH

+ Rt+1 = 0

Using the equity market clearing condition (16), we rewrite this as
Qt K +

Rt+1 = W

(26)

where W = WI + WH is the aggregate initial wealth. (26) gives a linear positive
relationship between the equity price and the interest rate. A higher equity price
raises the supply of equity. Clearing the equity market then requires investors to
shift their portfolio towards equity and reduce their purchase of bonds (or borrow
more from households). Bond market clearing then requires households to lower
their borrowing (or increase their bond purchase), which they are induced to do
through a higher interest rate.12
Using (26), the equity market clearing condition (18) becomes:
Et At+1 + Qt+1

W

Qt

K

Q2t

!

=

K
vart (Qt+1 + At+1 )
WI

(27)

The equilibrium condition (27) only involves the equity price, which we again
solve with the method of undetermined coe cients. We now no longer have an
analytical solution because the time-varying interest rate leads to a non-linearity
through the term Q2t on the left hand side. We therefore adopt a numerical approximation method along the following lines (details are given in Appendix A).
As is standard in the literature, we consider an approximation of the equilibrium
asset price in logs:
qt = q~ + vSt V St2
(28)
11

2
Speci cally, we assume that f (KH;t+1 ) = KH;t+1 0:5KH;t+1
= .
There is a third market clearing condition, for goods, but we can drop it thanks to Walras'
Law.
12

12

We then take a quadratic approximation of Qt and Qt+1 around St = St+1 =
0, and use the result to compute the expectation and variance of Qt+1 + At+1 .
We substitute the resulting expressions into (27). We nally take a quadratic
approximation around St = 0, which gives a linear-quadratic expression in St :
Z0 + Z1 St + Z2 St2 = 0

(29)

~ = eq~; v; and V . We solve for the value of
where Z0 , Z1 , and Z2 are functions of Q
these parameters by setting Z0 = 0, Z1 = 0, and Z2 = 0.
~ v and V , we can represent the
While we are solving for three parameters, Q,
~ v) space. De ne V~ = QV
~ . In Appendix A we show
equilibria graphically in a (Q,
that Z0 = 0 implies
V~ = 1 + 2 v 2
(30)
~ Substituting this into the expressions associwhere 1 and 2 are functions of Q.
ated with Z1 = 0 and Z2 = 0 we obtain
h1 + h2 v + h3 v 2 + h4 v 3 = 0

(31)

g1 + g2 v + g3 v 2 + g4 v 3 + g5 v 4 = 0

(32)

~
where hi and gi are functions of Q.
We solve numerically for the roots of the third and fourth order polynomials
~ into
(31) and (32). The polynomials represent two schedules that map a given Q
~ v) space
v, with possibly multiple solutions. We plot these two schedules in a (Q,
~ and v. V~ ,
with each intersection representing an equilibrium combination of Q
and therefore V , then follow from (30).
For a given process for St a typical parameterization gives 4 equilibria. This is
illustrated in Figures 1 and 2 for respectively m = 0 and m = 1. Schedule (31) is
represented by the solid line and (32) by the broken line. When m = 0 the variable
St is a pure sunspot. Figure 1 shows that there is one fundamental equilibrium
where v = V = 0. The other three equilibria are all sunspot equilibria. The
fact that for a given process for St there are now three sunspot equilibria rather
than the single sunspot equilibrium we found before is a result of the non-linearity
generated by the time-varying interest rate.
In Figure 2, where m = 1, St is a fundamental that drives the asset payo s.
There are again 4 equilibria. Equilibrium 1 is a pure fundamental equilibrium.
13

As we let m ! 0, it converges to Equilibrium 1 in Figure 1 where v = V =
0. The other three equilibria are all sunspot-like equilibria. As we let m !
0, they converge to the corresponding sunspot equilibria in Figure 1. Figure 3
illustrates the convergence of the sunspot-like Equilibrium 2 of Figure 2 to the
sunspot Equilibrium 2 of Figure 1 when m goes to zero. It is remarkable that
~ v and V change very little, especially
even when we get far away from m = 0, Q,
in comparison to the near-zero levels of v and V in the fundamental equilibrium.
This suggests that even when the fundamental role of St is important, the impact
of St on the asset price is dominated by self-ful lling shifts in risk.

4
4.1

Risk Panics
Switching across states

Risk panics can happen in equilibria that allow for a switch between low and high
risk states. In the previous section the economy was either in a fundamental or
sunspot-like equilibrium. We now consider an equilibrium that allows for switches
between a low risk state (indexed by 1, akin to the fundamental equilibrium) and
a high risk state (indexed by 2, akin to the sunspot equilibrium). Switching occurs
through an exogenous Markov process. The probability that we remain in a low
risk state next period when we are in a low risk state today is p1 > 0:5. Similarly,
the probability that we remain in a high risk state next period when we are in a
high risk state today is p2 > 0:5.
Equilibria 1 and 2 in Figure 2 are the points to which the low and high risk
states converge, respectively, in the limit where switching is not possible (p1 =
p2 ! 1). When switching is possible, the low risk state becomes riskier than
the pure fundamental equilibrium 1 in Figure 2. This is because there is now a
possibility of switching to the high risk state, a switch that implies a signi cant
drop in the equity price. Even when the probability of switching is low, the main
source of uncertainty in the low risk state becomes the possibility of a jump to
the high risk state rather than the pure fundamental uncertainty in Equilibrium 1
of Figure 2.13 Agents take the possibility of switching into account when forming
13

This is similar to what is found in the \rare disaster" literature (e.g., Barro, 2006, Gabaix,
2009) where a small probability of a large disaster a ects what happens in the no disaster periods.

14

their expectations.
We conjecture that the log equity price in state i is
qi;t = q~i + vi St

Vi St2

(33)

As there are two such equations we solve for 6 unknown parameters (3 for each
state). This is done by imposing equity market equilibrium as before, but separately for both states. We compute the expectation and variance of Qt+1 taking
into account that a switch to a di erent state is possible. The algebra is presented
in Appendix B.
~ i , vi and Vi in the low and
As an illustration, Figure 4 shows the values of Q
high risk states for the case where p1 = p2 . As pointed out above, the two states
correspond exactly to Equilibria 1 and 2 of Figure 2 when p1 = p2 = 1. Switching
equilibria only exist when the probability of remaining in the same state is high
enough. But when p1 = p2 is higher than this cuto (su ciently low probability
of switching), the di erence between the two states quickly becomes very big. A
lower probability of switching particularly reduces risk in the low risk state (lower
values of v and V ).
A risk panic is a switch from the low to the high risk state. Apart from the spike
in risk, the panic also entails an increase in the volatility of risk, a sharp drop in
the equity price and a shift out of equity (i.e. deleveraging when investors initially
hold leveraged portfolios). We graphically illustrate these e ects in Section 6 in
an application to the 2008 nancial crisis.

4.2

Panics and fundamentals

It is important to be clear both about the role that fundamentals do and do not play
in a panic. First, a panic is not caused by a change in fundamentals. It happens
for a given level of St . Second, the magnitude of the panic is larger the weaker the
fundamental (the more negative St ). Finally, once a panic occurs the asset price
becomes much more sensitive to subsequent uctuations in the fundamental. The
market becomes on edge regarding any news about St .
Consider the rst point: a panic does not result from a change in the fundamental. As can be seen from Figure 4, during the switch to the high risk state
the coe cients v and V increase, generally by a large magnitude. This a ects risk
15

and the asset price for a given level of St . What changes is not St itself but rather
the role that it plays. As we switch to the high risk state, St suddenly becomes a
key variable around which agents coordinate their perceptions of risk. There is a
sudden self-ful lling increase in risk with the variable St being the focal point for
the change in risk perceptions.14
Notice that a risk panic is therefore conceptually distinct from nancial accelerator models where the impact of shocks is magni ed through nancial constraints.
While small shocks have a large e ect in such models, the mechanism at work is
a purely fundamental mechanism. Our framework instead puts the coordination
of expectations center stage. During the panic asset prices and risk move sharply
even though the state variable does not change.
Next consider the second point: the magnitude of the panic is larger the weaker
the fundamental. To illustrate this point, consider the change in the equity price
from the low to the high risk state. From (33) it follows that the change in the log
equity price is
q2;t

q1;t = q~2

q~1 + (v2

v1 )St

(V2

V1 )St2 < 0

Since v2 v1 and V2 V1 are both positive (see Figure 4), the drop in the equity
price is larger the more negative is St (i.e. the weaker the fundamental). Consider
for instance that p1 = p2 = 0:65. In that case a panic lowers the equity price by
only 13% when St = 0, but by 65% when St is two standard deviations below its
unconditional mean of 0.
In this light a large risk panic can also be viewed as a delayed ampli cation effect. Consider a deterioration of the fundamental (a drop in St ) when the economy
is in the low risk state. The shock lowers the equity price through the standard
fundamental mechanism, but this impact is relatively small. The delayed ampli cation e ect occurs if at some later date there is a switch to the high risk
equilibrium. At that point, the sunspot role of St suddenly surges. The impact of
the panic on the asset price is much larger than the fundamental impact of St in
the rst stage. We will further illustrate this point in Section 6 in the context of
the recent nancial crisis.
14

Even in the low risk state St plays to some extent a sunspot role if p1 < 1. But this role
is generally much stronger in the high risk state. In the low-risk state this role only re ects the
possibility of switching to the high risk state.

16

Finally consider the last role of the fundamental in a panic: once a panic
occurs the asset price becomes much more sensitive to subsequent uctuations
in the fundamental. Once we switch to the high risk state, the fundamental St
becomes the focal point around which investors coordinate their beliefs about
risk. This causes them to react strongly to any change in the variable. A further
deterioration can lead to a signi cant further drop in the equity price. Conversely,
an improvement in the fundamental becomes a signi cant stabilizing force. In the
example above with p1 = p2 = 0:65, the equity price drops from 100 to 35 during a
panic when the fundamental is two standard deviations below its mean. But when
the fundamental reverts to it mean, the equity price goes all the way back to 87,
even though we are still in the high risk state.

5

Financial Shocks

We now slightly modify our framework to show that the mechanism of self-ful lling
risk that we stress in this paper could explain various aspects of the recent nancial
crisis. We focus on nancial shocks that redistribute wealth between households
and investors. These shocks t more closely the storyline of the 2007-2008 nancial
crisis where nancial institutions experienced large negative shocks to their wealth
(net worth) connected to mortgage market losses. For convenience, we abstract
from aggregate shocks in our benchmark analysis, but we show that our results
are robust to allowing for aggregate losses. Financial shocks that only a ect the
distribution of wealth impact the relative demand for bonds and equity as only
investors are present in the equity market.
In addition to their closer link to the nancial crisis, nancial shocks are interesting as they give rise to another type of multiplicity through a circular relationship between risk and market liquidity. This type of multiplicity, that we call
static multiplicity, has already been identi ed in the literature, although perhaps
not in the context of a simple portfolio choice model. It is however distinct from
the dynamic multiplicity that we identi ed in previous sections.
We make two changes relative to the model in Section 3.5. First, we assume
that asset payo shocks have no persistence ( = 0). This simpli es the analysis
as the wealth of investors is then the only state variable. Second, we introduce

17

shocks to the wealth of investors as follows:
WI;t = e

m

0:5m2

t

2
t

WI

(34)

where
t+1

=

t

+

t+1

(35)

and t+1 is a shock with mean zero and variance 2 . Financial shocks only redistribute wealth and leave aggregate wealth unchanged: WI;t + WH;t = W . We
assume that nancial shocks t+1 and asset payo s At+1 are uncorrelated. Equation
(34) ensures that investors' wealth is linear in t up to a quadratic approximation:
WI;t = WI (1 m t ). A rise in t implies a drop in the relative wealth of investors.
The parameter m allows us to vary the fundamental impact of wealth shocks. If
m = 0, t does not a ect wealth and becomes a pure sunspot.
The equity market clearing condition remains the same as (18), but now with
time-varying wealth of investors:
Et (At+1 + Qt+1

RQt ) =

K
vart (Qt+1 + At+1 )
WI;t

(36)

The model is solved the same way as in Section 3.5, with a quadratic approximation
of the market clearing condition around t = 0. The details can be found in the
Technical Appendix. The asset price is again a linear-quadratic function of the
state variable:
qt = q~ v t V t2
We now examine more closely the two types of multiplicity that arise with nancial
shocks.

5.1

Static Multiplicity: Interaction Between Risk and Liquidity

The static multiplicity generated by nancial shocks is linked to the concept of
market liquidity. It is most clearly illustrated by assuming that the state variable
= 0) so the model essentially becomes a static setting.
t shows no persistence (
Risk is then constant as the current state variable has no e ect on the future asset
price.
18

Market liquidity is related to the price impact of asset demand shocks. Liquidity
is low when shocks have a large impact on either the price or the expected excess
payo of the asset. The two are related as a larger change in the equilibrium
expected excess payo requires a larger adjustment of the current price. For our
purposes it is convenient to de ne liquidity as the impact of wealth shifts on the
expected excess payo :15
@Et (At+1 + Qt+1
@WI;t

Rt+1 Qt )

(37)

A reduction in the wealth of investors (a higher t ) lowers the demand for equity.
The expected excess payo on equity then needs to increase to bring investors
back into the market. The more it increases, the more negative (37) is and the
lower liquidity. Di erentiating the equity market clearing condition (36), liquidity
is equal to:
Kvart (Qt+1 + At+1 )
(38)
2
WI;t
Liquidity is low ((38) is more negative) when risk is high or wealth is low. High
risk implies that equity is unattractive and investors take a small position in the
equity market. With a limited exposure to the equity market, investors respond
less to changes in the expected excess payo on equity. Larger changes in the
expected excess payo are then necessary to clear the equity market, so liquidity
is low. Similarly, lower wealth means that less money is on the line in the equity
market. Larger changes in the expected excess payo are then needed to clear the
market.16
The model implies a circular relationship between risk and liquidity. High risk
implies that investors hold a small portfolio share in equity. The equity market is
then thin and liquidity low. Low liquidity in turn implies a large price impact of
asset demand shocks, so that risk is indeed high. This circular relationship leads to
two equilibria for = 0. This is illustrated in Figure 5, which represents schedules
(31) and (32). Apart from wealth shock parameters, the parameterization is the
15

See Amihud et al. (2005) and Vayanos and Wang (2009) for surveys of various liquidity
measures.
16
When
> 0 there will be an extra term in (38) associated with time-varying risk. It is
equal to [ K=WI;t ][@vart (Qt+1 + At+1 )=@WI;t ]. When a drop in wealth raises risk, it requires
an even larger increase in the expected excess payo to clear the market.

19

same as used in Figures 1 and 2. Equilibrium 1 is the low risk equilibrium, where
v and V are close to zero, while Equilibrium 2 is the high risk equilibrium.
The static multiplicity is closely related to multiple equilibria in limited participation models such as Pagano (1989), Allen and Gale (1994) and Jeanne and
Rose (2002).17 In these models there are relatively few agents in the market in the
high risk equilibrium. Liquidity is then low and risk high. The opposite is the case
in the low risk equilibrium. Even though we do not allow agents to enter or exit
the market, investors' exposure to equity is lower when risk is high.
While the static multiplicity has been recognized in the literature, its appeal is
limited for two reasons. First, risk is constant within each equilibrium (low- and
high risk), which is empirically not satisfactory. Second, the static multiplicity
arises only for nancial shocks, but not for shocks on asset payo s for instance.
With transitory asset payo shocks, the only equilibrium is the fundamental one
where the asset price and risk are constant.

5.2

Dynamic Multiplicity: Sunspot and Sunspot-Like Equilibria

The dynamic multiplicity that arises when
> 0 is the focus of the paper. It is
illustrated in Figure 6, which uses the same parameterization as Figure 5 except
that we set
= 0:4. Panel A shows results for m = 2 and Panel B for m = 0.
In both panels Equilibrium 1 is the fundamental equilibrium. The other equilibria
in Panel A are all sunspot-like equilibria, which converge to the corresponding
pure sunspot equilibria in Panel B when m ! 0. These equilibria again exhibit
self-ful lling shifts in risk, which are now coordinated around the variable t . The
dynamic multiplicity can thus generate time-varying risk.
Even though the fundamental shock is now di erent from earlier sections, the
sunspot-like equilibria in Panel A are quite similar to those in Figure 2 for the
asset payo shocks. The reason for this similarity is the dominance of the sunspot
aspect of the variable. Any macro variable can play this role, irrespective of the
particular role that is plays as a fundamental within the model.
17

There are other examples of static multiplicity with di erent levels of risk in other contexts.
See for example McCa erty and Driskill (1980) or Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006).

20

6

Application to 2007-2008 Financial Crisis

This section uses our setting to shed light on the 2007-2008 nancial crisis. After
presenting some basic nancial data, we simulate the model and show that it
generates an outcome qualitatively similar to what happened during the crisis. It
should be emphasized that there are many important aspects of the recent crisis
that are well beyond the scope of this paper. To the extent that our model is
applicable in shedding light on the crisis, it is primarily in the context of the
self-ful lling shifts in risk perceptions that are the focus of this paper. We take
the accumulating nancial losses of leveraged investors as given (re ected in the
nancial shocks) and focus on the implications for the dynamics of risk, leverage,
liquidity and asset prices.

6.1

Dynamics of Risk, Leverage, Liquidity, and Asset Prices

The crisis came in the form of a one-two punch. The rst part is the relatively
calm period from the beginning of 2007 until September 2008. The second part is
the nancial panic that started in September 2008. The panic peaked by the end
of 2008 and it took several quarters for the situation to return to a more normal
state. Using data for the United States, we focus on the following variables: (1)
stock prices, (2) T-bill rate, (3) equity price risk, (4) volatility of risk, (5) net
worth of leveraged institutions, (6) leverage, and (7) market liquidity. Stock prices
are measured by the DJ U.S. total stock market index. Risk is measured as the
CBOE SPX volatility VIX index. Volatility of risk is the standard deviation of
the VIX index over the past 30 days. Net worth and leverage are based on U.S.
brokers and dealers as reported by the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds. Market
liquidity is di cult to measure in the data as it is a theoretical concept that does
not have a straightforward empirical counterpart. We construct a measure similar
to Amihud (2002) which, of di erent market liquidity measures, correlates the
most with estimates of price impact computed using very high-frequency data (see
Goyenko et al., 2009). Starting with individual stocks, we compute the average
absolute daily stock price change over a month per dollar of daily trading volume.
This is then averaged over 100 stocks from the S&P index.18 A high value of our
18

We are grateful to Giorgio Valente for providing us with the updated measure. Holding
period returns and volumes are from Reuters Datastream. To deal with stationarity, in the spirit

21

measure indicates low market liquidity. It is therefore a measure of illiquidity.
The dynamics of the variables during the crisis are illustrated in Figure 7. The
vertical line represents the collapse of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008,
which we consider to be the start of the nancial panic. After a modest decline
in stock prices and a small increase in risk during the tranquil period of the crisis,
stock prices suddenly crashed and risk spiked in September 2008. The volatility
of risk also shot up, while it showed no trend in the rst stage. A ight to quality
lowered the T-bill rate to near zero. Net worth gradually declined after mid 2007
until the third quarter of 2008, to quickly recover after the crisis. Financial leverage
rst rose signi cantly during the tranquil period, and then fell sharply during the
panic stage. Finally, liquidity fell modestly during the tranquil part of the crisis,
followed by a sharp drop in liquidity during the panic and then a return back to
normal by mid-2009.

6.2

Model Simulation

We illustrate the dynamics of the variables in the model, and relate them to the
recent crisis, using the two-state switching equilibrium as described in Section 4.
The parameters are shown at the bottom of Figure 8. The main results are robust
to the precise parameter values chosen, as discussed below. We set p1 = 0:95 and
p2 = 0:7. This ensures that the high risk state occurs much less frequently than
the low risk state, as the economy spends only 14% of the time in the high risk
state. Panics of a large magnitude are even less frequent because they require not
only a switch to the high risk state but also a very weak fundamental.
The parameterization is chosen to make sure that investors are substantially
leveraged. Investors' initial equity holdings are four times their net worth (wealth),
and are nanced by borrowing from households through bonds. High leverage is
characteristic of most nancial institutions. We therefore also refer to the investors
as leveraged nancial institutions.19
of Acharya and Pedersen (2005) the illiquidity measure is multiplied by the ratio of the aggregate
volume for all stocks in the sample at the end of a month to the same aggregate volume at the
beginning of the sample.
19
While leverage is less than seen in the data for brokers and dealers, our investors should be
seen as an aggregate of all investors. A possible re nement is to consider two sets of investors with
di erent degrees risk aversion. A rst group of \long" investors with a relatively high risk aversion

22

We simulate the model over 16 periods, which we interpret as quarters. We
do no make any attempt to match the process of nancial losses in the data, but
instead illustrate the drivers of the model through a simple step function for t ,
along with a simple switching between low and high risk states. The dynamics of
t are illustrated through the wealth of investors, which follows the same path, in
the rst chart of Figure 8. The economy is initially in a low risk state with t at
its unconditional mean of zero. t rises from 0 to 0.3 in period 2, which we can
think of as Q1 2007 when the losses of leveraged institutions on mortgage securities
became apparent, leading to a reduction of their the wealth. This situation lasts
until period 8, which we can think of as Q3 2008, where the economy switches to
the high risk state. It stays in that situation until period 11 (Q2 2009) when t falls
back to zero thanks, for example, to a recapitalization of leveraged institutions.
The economy reverts back to the low risk state in period 14 (Q1 2010).
These dates are not meant to match the exact length of the panic or the period
of nancial weakness of leveraged nancial institutions. Our focus is instead to
highlight the separate roles of the nancial health of leveraged institutions and
the speci c risk state. This is done by considering all possible combinations of
nancial health (normal versus bad) and the state (low risk, high risk) in order to
evaluate the speci c contribution of both elements.
The simulation is presented in Figure 8. Periods during which t changes are
marked by vertical dotted lines, while the shaded area denotes the time spent in the
high risk state. The wealth of investors follows the overall pattern seen in the data
for brokers and dealers in Figure 7, although the deterioration of the net worth
of nancial institutions was obviously more gradual in the data. The other panels
show the paths of the equity price, risk, the volatility of risk, interest rate, leverage
and illiquidity. The stock price (normalized at 100 initially) and gross interest rate
are Qt and Rt+1 . Risk is measured as the standard deviation of Qt+1 =Qt , taking
into account the possibility of switching to another state. The volatility of risk is
would not be leveraged, while the second group with low risk aversion would be the \leveraged"
investors. This would connect somewhat closer to reality, but would not fundamentally change
any of the results. The basic market clearing equation (18) would be similar with two groups
of investors. The only di erence is that the ratio WI;t = would be replaced by a risk-aversion
weighted wealth (WL;t = L + WN L;t = N L ), where the subscripts L and N L stand for respectively
leveraged and non-leveraged investors.

23

the standard deviation at time t of our risk measure at t + 1.20 Leverage is equal
to the share of equity in investors' portfolio, t . Finally, illiquidity is measured
as the absolute value of the derivative of the log equity price with respect to t .
This connects well to the Amihud measure used in the data, which is also meant
to capture the price impact of shocks. Results are very similar when illiquidity is
de ned as the impact of t on the expected excess payo , as in Section 5.1.
During the tranquil part of the crisis the shift in wealth away from leveraged
nancial institutions reduces demand for equity and therefore its price. It also
leads to a decline in liquidity (see Section 5.1), which increases risk and reduces
the equity price further. Nonetheless Figure 8 shows that these e ects are all quite
modest. The only large change is leverage, which almost doubles. While the small
increase in risk reduces leverage, this is more than o set by an increase in the
expected excess return due to the lower equity price.21
The second stage of the crisis, when the economy shifts into the high-risk stage,
is characterized by a surge in risk and its volatility. This prompts a sharp reduction
in the equity price and leverage. The drop in leverage in turn dries up liquidity in
the equity market. The switch to bonds leads to a sharp drop in the interest rate.
An important message from Figure 8 is that a large surge in risk requires two
ingredients, either one of which alone is not su cient. First, there needs to be a selfful lling risk panic (switch to the high risk state). Second, the fundamental around
which the market perceptions of risk coalesce (net worth of leveraged institutions)
must be weak. A deterioration of the macro fundamental alone is not enough
to generate a surge in risk. Even though the net worth of leveraged institutions
drops by more than 50% during the rst stage of the crisis, risk remains relatively
modest. A switch to the high risk state by itself is not enough either. Risk is
restored slightly below its pre-panic level in period 11, when we are still in the
high risk state but the leveraged institutions are recapitalized.
While the simple exercise we have conducted here is not meant to match precise
data, the overall pattern in these variables is broadly in line with the data in Figure
20

In computing the volatility of risk, we assume that we remain in the same state the next
period. This makes it more consistent with the data, where it is measured as the volatility of
risk over the past 30 days, which usually captures volatility within the same state.
21
The model does not account for the drop in the interest rate prior to the panic as that is
largely related to monetary policy.

24

7. During the pre-panic state of the crisis the impact on the equity price, risk and
liquidity is quite modest in both the data and the model. The substantial increase
in nancial leverage during this period is also consistent with that in the model.
Then, during the switch to the panic state the model accounts for the sharp drop
in the equity price, nancial leverage, and market liquidity and the sharp increase
in risk.
The volatility of risk also behaves similarly to that in the data. It surges
together with risk during the panic and later on declines with the fall in risk itself.
This joint behavior of risk and the volatility of risk is a critical element of the
model, as discussed in Section 2.1. Risk spikes in the model only because future
risk becomes more uncertain.

6.3

Sensitivity Analysis

Self-ful lling shifts in risk occur as long as the asset price is negatively a ected
by risk about the future asset price. One might therefore expect the ndings in
the simulation above to apply much more broadly than for the particular model
assumptions and parameterization underlying Figure 8. We con rm this through
a variety of sensitivity analysis that we summarize here, with the details given in
the Technical Appendix.
We rst check that the results in the simulation exercise presented in Figure
8 are robust to alternative parameter values. This is done by halving and doubling most parameters. The results remain qualitatively intact for all alternative
parametrizations. In particular, a risk panic leads to a sharp increase in risk and
the volatility of risk, and a large decrease in the equity price, market liquidity and
leverage. The precise magnitudes are certainly sensitive to parameterization. In
particular, the size of the risk panic is larger the smaller , , , and m and the
larger
W.
Second, we assess how the speci cs of the model a ect the results. We have
already seen that the nature of the fundamental around which risk panics are
coordinated is not critical to the results, as shocks to asset payo s also lead to
multiple equilibria and risk panics. Another modeling aspect is the assumption
that nancial shocks redistribute wealth between investors and households, with
no aggregate loss. We consider an alternative where the wealth loss for investors

25

is not o set by a gain for households and nd that the results remain very similar.
Lastly, we abstracted from any feedback of the asset price to wealth. We include
this aspect in our OLG setting by assuming that some of the endowment when
born consists of trees. This ampli es the risk panic. For example, when 29% of
the wealth is subject to asset price shocks (in the low risk state at t = 0), we nd
that the feedback e ect from the asset price to wealth increases the magnitude of
risk panics, with risk spiking from 26% during the tranquil part of the crisis all
the way to 129% at the height of the panic.
Finally, we check the robustness with respect to the approximation in the solution method. This is done by considering a cubic approximation of the market
clearing condition instead of a quadratic one. The simulation results are not substantially a ected, providing con dence that the precision of the approximation
method is not critical to the results.

7

Conclusion

Motivated by several recent crises that have shown very large spikes in risk without
correspondingly large shifts in fundamentals, we develop a theory for self-ful lling
shifts in risk. These shifts can occur when the asset price depends negatively on
the perceived risk of the future asset price. Risk associated with tomorrow's asset
price then depends on uncertainty about risk tomorrow. This dynamic mapping
of risk into itself gives rise to the possibility of self-ful lling shifts in risk.
Although a risk panic occurs without any change in fundamentals, it has a
larger impact the weaker the macro fundamental on which agents coordinate their
perceptions of risk at the time of the panic. The sharp increase in risk and accompanying volatility of risk in turn give rise to a large drop in the asset price,
decreased leverage and reduced market liquidity. The model can generate a twostage crisis, where a deteriorating fundamental at rst generates a modest impact
on risk, asset prices and market liquidity, followed later on by a panic stage with
much larger movements as the weak macro fundamental suddenly becomes the
focal point for a self-ful lling spike in risk. This matches the developments during
the 2007-2008 nancial crisis.
Our ndings open up several directions for future research. First, the equilibria
that we have identi ed can be found in any model where the actions of agents
26

depend on the risk of an endogenous variable. While we have focused on asset
markets, the same may be the case for example in goods and labor markets. The
issue is also not limited to prices. We could replace Q with any other variable that
depends on risk associated with its future level. This could for example be output.
It is well-known that reduced uncertainty about the future economic environment
is good for business today (e.g. see Bloom, 2009).
Another direction for future research is to consider multiple assets. In our entire analysis there is only one risky asset. This should therefore be interpreted
as the market portfolio of risky assets, which could be a country-wide or even a
global equity index. A natural question is what the implications are for stocks of
individual rms. Closely related, in an open economy context one would like to
know whether all countries will be a ected by a risk panic or whether it could be
contained to a limited number of countries. This question relates to the widely discussed issue of nancial contagion and is analyzed in Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2010).
A nal direction for further research pertains to nancial crises. We have kept
the model as simple as possible to focus on the role of self-ful lling risk shifts. A
natural question is how this interacts with other elements that we have ignored
for convenience. A non-exhaustive list includes nancial constraints on leveraged
institutions (borrowing constraints, value at risk constraints), the possibility of
default and associated bank runs, and the interaction between the nancial crisis
and real economic activity. Moreover, a crucial issue is the policy recommendation
that arises from our analysis. In Bacchetta et al. (2010) we examine the role of
leveraged institutions in the context of our model. We nd that, despite their
stabilizing role in normal times, less risk averse leveraged institutions increase the
magnitude of risk panics. We conclude that a policy making nancial institutions
more risk averse, or more prudent, could substantially reduce volatility.

27

Appendix
A

Numerical Solution of Model in Section 3.5

In this Appendix we describe the solution of the equilibria in the version of the
model in Section 3.5. We take a quadratic approximation of the market clearing
condition around St = 0. Before doing so, we rst need to compute the expectation
and variance of Qt+1 + At+1 . From the conjecture (28) we have
~ vSt
Qt = Qe

V St2

(39)

~ = eq~. A quadratic approximation around St = 0 gives
where Q
~ + vSt + ( V + 0:5v 2 )St2 )
Qt = Q(1

(40)

For consistency we now also model the asset payo in logs: ln(At ) = ln(A)+mSt
0:5m2 St2 . This speci cation implies that a quadratic approximation of At around
St = 0 is At = A(1 + mSt ). Using these quadratic approximations of Qt and At at
t + 1 and then substituting St+1 = St + t+1 gives
~ 1 + v St + ( V + 0:5v 2 )( 2 St2 +
Et (Qt+1 + At+1 ) = Q
A + m A St
~ 2 v + ( V + 0:5v 2 )2 St
var(Qt+1 + At+1 ) = Q
m 2 A2

2

2

) +
(41)

2

2

+

~ A v + ( V + 0:5v 2 )2 St
+ 2Q

2

m

(42)

Here we have simpli ed slightly by adopting approximation 2t+1 = 2 or var( 2t+1 ) =
0. This holds exactly in a simple distribution where t can only take on the values
and + . More generally, it is frequently adopted as a continuous time
approximation. Under a normal distribution the variance of 2t+1 is 2 4 , which is
a small fourth-order term. Dropping this small term makes it easier to represent
the equilibria graphically.
Substituting these results into the market clearing condition (27) and taking a
quadratic approximation around St = 0 gives an equation of the form (29). Setting
the coe cients Z0 , Z1 and Z2 equal to zero, we obtain respectively
~ + Q(
~ V + 0:5v 2 )
W A+Q
Km2 A2

2

~ 2 Kv 2
+Q

2

2

~ Av
+ K2Q
28

1
2

(

m

~
W )Q

1

!

~2 =
KQ
(43)

~
W Qv(

1

(

1

W)

~ A( V + 0:5v 2 )
4K Q
"

2

2

W ( V + 0:5v )

~ V + 0:5v 2 )2
4K Q(

2

+

m

1

2

~ + mW A = 4K Q
~ 2 v( V + 0:5v 2 )
2K Q)

(44)
1

2

(

W )( V + 0:5v )

#

~ V + v2) =
2K Q(

2 2

(45)

Here we de ne W = WI = .
~ we rst solve QV
~ from (43)
The strategy is as follows. For a given value of Q
as a quadratic function of v. We substitute the result in (44) and (45). This
gives respectively a third and fourth order polynomial in v that needs to be solved
~ into v (possibly multiple
numerically. This leads to two schedules that map Q
values of v) that can be graphed. Equilibria are the points where these schedules
intersect.
From (43) we can solve
~ =
QV

1

+

2v

+

3v

2

(46)

where
1

=

1

1

~
A+Q

2

~
W )Q

(

1

~2

KQ

!

K A2 m 2
W

~ Am
2K Q
W
~ 2K
Q
~
=
0:5
Q
3
W
From (44) we have
2

1

=

+

2v

+

3v

2

+

(47)
(48)
(49)

4v

3

+

~ ]+

5 [QV

~ ]v = 0

6 [QV

(50)

where
1

= WA m

2

~
= WQ

3

=

4

=

5
6

1

~A
2K Q
~2
2K Q

= 4K A
~
= 4K Q

2

(

2

m

2

m

2

W)

1 ~
2QK

!

(51)
(52)
(53)
(54)
(55)
(56)

29

Finally, (45) can be written as
1v

+

2v

2

+

3v

4

~ ]+

+

4 [QV

~ ]2 +

~ ]v 2 = 0

5 [QV

6 [QV

(57)

where
1

=0

(58)
1

2

~
= 0:5W Q

3

=

~2
KQ

2 2

4

=

W

2

5

=

6

4K
~
= 4K Q

2

1

~
0:5W Q(

(

1

W)

1 ~
2QK

W)

~2
2W K Q

(59)
(60)

!

(61)

2 2

(62)

2 2

(63)

Substituting (46) into (50), we have
h1 + h2 v + h3 v 2 + h4 v 3 = 0

(64)

where
h1 =

1

+

5 1

(65)

h2 =

2

+

6 1

+

5 2

(66)

h3 =

3

+

5 3

+

6 2

(67)

h4 =

4

+

6 3

(68)

Substituting (46) into (57), we have
g1 + g2 v + g3 v 2 + g4 v 3 + g5 v 4 = 0

(69)

where
4 1

g2 =

1

+

4 2

+2

5 1 2

g3 =

2

+

4 3

+2

5 1 3

g4 = 2
g5 =

+

2
5 1

g1 =

5 2 3
3

+

+

2
5 3

+

(70)

6 2
6 3

30

(71)
+

6 1

+

2
5 2

(72)
(73)
(74)

Equations (64) and (69) are third and fourth order polynomials that we solve
~ into v. There may be multiple solutions (mulnumerically. The solutions map Q
~ We then plot these two schedules in a space with v on the
tiple v for a given Q).
~ on the horizontal axis, as in Figures 1-2. There is an equivertical axis and Q
librium when the two schedules intersect. The precise equilibria can be found by
~
solving (43)-(45) numerically in Gauss as a xed point problem in v, V and Q.
We choose starting values that are close to the equilibria found through visual inspection of where the two schedules intersect. Visual inspection gives approximate
~ and v. The corresponding value for V follows from (46).
values for Q

B

Solving the Switching Equilibria

We now consider the equilibria in Section 4 of the paper where we allow for a switch
between a low and high risk state. p1 (p2 ) is the probability that next period we
will be in the low (high) risk state when this period we are in the low (high) risk
state. The log equity prices in the low and high risk states are
qtlow risk = q~1 + v1 St

V1 St2

(75)

qthigh risk = q~2 + v2 St

V2 St2

(76)

Assume that currently we are in the low risk state at time t. Analogous to (41),
the expectation of Qt+1 + At+1 , conditional on being in a low risk state in t + 1, is
Et+1 (Qt+1 + At+1 jt + 1 is low) = a1;low + a2;low St + a3;low St2
~ 1 (1 + !1 2 ) + A, a2;low = Q
~ 1 v1 + mA , a3;low = Q
~ 1 !1 2 and
where a1;low = Q
!1 = V1 + 0:5v12 . Similarly, the expectation of Qt+1 + At+1 conditional on being
in the high risk state at t + 1 is
Et+1 (Qt+1 + At+1 jt + 1 is high) = a1;high + a2;high St + a3;high St2
~ 2 (1 + !2 2 ) + A, a2;high = Q
~ 2 v2 + mA , a3;high = Q
~ 2 !2
where a1;high = Q
!2 = V2 + 0:5v22 .
The expectation of Qt+1 + At+1 is then

2

and

Et (Qt+1 + At+1 )
= p1 Et+1 (Qt+1 + At+1 jt + 1 is low) + (1
= d1;low + d2;low St +

d3;low St2

p1 )Et+1 (Qt+1 + At+1 jt + 1 is high)
(77)

31

where di;low = p1 ai;low + (1 p1 )ai;high , i = 1; 2; 3.
The variance of Qt+1 + At+1 is
var(Qt+1 + At+1 ) = Et (Qt+1 + At+1 )2

(Et (Qt+1 + At+1 ))2

(78)

Dropping terms in St that are third and higher order, (77) gives
(Et (Qt+1 + At+1 ))2 = d21;low + 2d1;low d2;low St + (d22;low + 2d1;low d3;low )St2

(79)

Next consider Et (Qt+1 + At+1 )2 . Conditional on being in a low risk state at
t + 1, we have
Qt+1 + At+1 = a1;low + a2;low St + a3;low St2 + a4;low

t+1

(80)

~ 1 (v1 + !1 2 St ) + mA. Using the de nition of a4;low , we then have
where a4;low = Q
2
Et ((Qt+1 + At+1 )2 jt + 1 is low) = b1;low + b2 St;low + b3 St;low

(81)

~ 1 v1 +mA)2 2 , b2;low = 2a1;low a2;low +4Q
~ 1 (Q
~ 1 v1 +mA)!1 2 ,
where b1;low = a21;low +(Q
~ 2 ! 2 2 2 . Similarly, conditional on being in a
and b3;low = a22;low + 2a1;low a3;low + 4Q
1 1
high risk state at t + 1 we have
Et ((Qt+1 + At+1 )2 jt + 1 is high) = b1;high + b2;high St + b3;high St2

(82)

Here bi;high (i = 1; 2; 3) is de ned analogously to bi;low with subscripts low replaced
~ v and ! replaced by 2. This implies that in the
by high and subscripts 1 for Q,
low risk state at t:
Et (Qt+1 + At+1 )2 = c1;low + c2;low St + c3;low St2
where ci;low = p1 bi;low + (1
It follows that

p1 )bi;high , i = 1; 2; 3.

var(Qt+1 + At+1 ) = c1;low
+ c3;low

d22;low

(83)

d21;low + (c2;low

2d1;low d2;low ) St

2d1;low d3;low St2

(84)

Finally, a quadratic approximation around St = 0 of Qt Rt+1 gives
Qt Rt+1 = e1;low + e2;low St + e3;low St2
32

(85)

h

i

h

i

~1 Q
~ 1 , e2;low = 1 (
~1 Q
~ 1 v1 and
W ) + KQ
W ) + 2K Q
i
h
~ 1.
~ 1 ( V1 + v12 ) Q
e3;low = 1 (
W )!1 + 2K Q
Substituting these results into the market equilibrium condition (27), and taking a second order approximation around St = 0, again gives (29). Setting Z0 = 0,
Z1 = 0 and Z2 = 0 gives respectively

where e1;low =

1

(

W (d1;low

e1;low ) = K(c1;low

d21;low )

(86)

W (d2;low

e2;low ) = K(c2;low

2d1;low d2;low )

(87)

W (d3;low

e3;low ) = K(c3;low

d22;low

(88)

2d1;low d3;low )

All of this is conditional on being in the low risk state at t. We can similarly impose
market equilibrium conditional on being in the high risk state at t. De ne ci;high
and di;high (i = 1; 2; 3) the same as ci;low and di;low , with p1 replaced by 1 p2 . Also
~ v, V and
de ne ei;high (i = 1; 2; 3) the same as ei;low , with the subscripts 1 for Q,
! replaced by subscripts 2. Then imposing market clearing we get three equations
analogous to (86)-(88) with the subscripts low replaced by high. Solving these six
~ 1, Q
~ 2 , v1 , v2 , V1 and V2 . This is done
equations jointly gives the solutions for Q
numerically in Gauss, using as starting values the solutions for equilibria 1 and 2
without switching.

33

References
[1] Acharya, Viral V. and Lasse H. Pedersen (2005), \Asset Pricing and Liquidity
Risk," Journal of Financial Economics 77(2), 375-410.
[2] Adrian, Tobias and Hyun S. Shin (2008), \Financial Intermediary Leverage
and Value-at-Risk," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta Reports no. 338.
[3] Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (1994), \Limited Market Participation and
Volatility of Asset Prices," American Economic Review 84, 933-955.
[4] Amihud, Yakov, Haim Mendelson and Lasse H. Pedersen (2005), Liquidity
and Asset Prices, Foundations and Trends in Finance, now Publishers.
[5] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2006), \Can Information Heterogeneity Explain the Exchange Rate Determination Puzzle?," American Economic Review 96, 552-576.
[6] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2010), \On the Global Spread of
Risk Panics," mimeo.
[7] Bacchetta, Philippe, Cedric Tille, and Eric van Wincoop (2010), \Leverage
and Risk Panics," mimeo.
[8] Barro, Robert J. (2006), \Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth
Century," Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(3), 823-866.
[9] Bloom, Nicholas (2009), "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks," Econometrica
77, 623-685.
[10] Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Lasse H. Pedersen (2009), \Market Liquidity
and Funding Liquidity," Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.
[11] Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Yuliy Sannikov (2009), \A Macroeconomic
Model with a Financial Sector," mimeo.
[12] Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2008), \Collective Risk Management in a Flight to Quality Episode," Journal of Finance LXIII (5), 21952230.
34

[13] Campell, Rachel, Ronald Huisman, and Kees Koedijk (2001), "Optimal Portfolio Selection in a Value-at-Risk framework," Journal of Banking and Finance
25, 1789-1804.
[14] Danielsson, J., H.S. Shin, and J.-P. Zigrand (2009), \Risk Appetite and Endogenous Risk," mimeo.
[15] Fostel, Ana and John Geanakoplos (2008), \Leverage Cycles and the Anxious
Economy," American Economic Review 98(4), 1211-1244.
[16] Gabaix, Xavier (2009), \Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in Macro-Finance," mimeo.
[17] Goyenko, Ruslan, Craig Holden and Charles Trzcinka (2009), \Do Liquidity
Measures Measure Liquidity?," Journal of Financial Economics 92, 153-181.
[18] Gromb, Denis and Dimitri Vayanos (2002), \Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with Financially Constrained Arbitrageurs," Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361-407.
[19] Gromb, Denis and Dimitri Vayanos (2008), \Leverage and Liquidity Dry-Ups:
A Framework and Policy Implications," mimeo.
[20] He, Zhiguo. and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2008a), \Intermediary Asset Pricing," NBER WP No. 14517.
[21] He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2008b), \A Model of Capital and
Crises," NBER WP No. 14366.
[22] Jeanne, Olivier and Andrew K. Rose (2002), \Noise Trading and Exchange
Rate Regimes," Quarterly Journal of Economics 77, 537-569.
[23] Kyle, Albert S. and Wei Xiong (2001), \Contagion as a Wealth E ect," The
Journal of Finance 56(4), 1401-1440.
[24] Manuelli, Rodolfo E. and James Peck (1992), \Sunspot-like E ects of Random
Endowments," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16, 193-206.

35

[25] McCa erty, Stephen and Robert Driskill (1980), \Problems of Existence and
Uniqueness in Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models," Econometrica 48,
1313-1317.
[26] Pagano, Marco (1989), \Endogenous Market Thinness and Stock Price
Volatility," Review of Economic Studies 56, 269-288.
[27] Spear, Stephen E., Sanjay Srivastava, and Michael Woodford (1990), \Indeterminacy of Stationary Equilibrium in Stochastic Overlapping Generations
Models," Journal of Economic Theory 50, 265-84.
[28] Vayanos, Dimitri and Jiang Wang (2009), \Liquidity and Asset Prices: A
Uni ed Framework" CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7410.
[29] Xiong, Wei (2001), \Convergence Trading with Wealth E ects: An Ampli cation Mechanism in Financial Markets," Journal of Financial Economics 62,
247-292.

36

Figure 1 Sunspot Equilibria*

v
Equilibrium 2:

~
Q = 0.5; v = 1.9;V = 4.5

~

Equilibrium 1: Q

= 1.2; v = 0;V = 0

~
Q

Equilibrium 3:

~
Q = 0.34; v = 0;
V = 8.9

Equilibrium 4:

~
Q = 0.5; v = −1.9;V = 4.5

*A = 0.3;υ − W = 0.1;η = 1; σ = 0.4; ρ = 0.4; γ = 4;W = 2; m = 0; K = 1
I

Figure 2 Sunspot-Like Equilibria*

v
Equilibrium 2:

~
Q = 0.5; v = 1.6;V = 2.8
Equilibrium 1:

~
Q = 1.1; v = 0.05;V = 0.003

~
Q

Equilibrium 4:

Equilibrium 3:

~
Q = 0.48; v = −2.1;V = 6.7

~
Q = 0.39; v = −1.4;V = 8.7

* Parameters are as in Figure 1 except that m=1.

Figure 3 Solution as Function of m (Equilibrium 2)*

~
Q

1

V

v

0.8

6

Q1

0.6

υQ , 2

4
0.4

2
0.2

0

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

m

* Parameters are identical to those in Figure 1.

0

m

0.2

0.4

0.6

m

0.8

1

Figure 4 Switching Equilibria*
solid=low risk state; broken=high risk state

~
Q

2

v

2

1.6

1.5

3

Q1

1.2

V

4

1

υQ , 2

2
0.8
1

0.5

0.4

0

0

0
0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

p1= p2

0.9

1

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

p1= p2

0.9

1

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

p1= p2

* This is based on the parameters of Figure 2. When p1=p2=1, the high and low risk states correspond exactly to equilibria 1 and 2 in
Figure 2.

1

Figure 5 Equilibria with Financial Shocks: No Persistence*

v
Equilibrium 2:

~
Q = 0.18; v = 3.1;V = 15.0

Equilibrium 1:

~
Q = 1.1; v = 0.02;V = 0.05

~
Q

* A = 0.3;υ − W = 0.1;η = 1; σ = 0.4; σ θ = 0.4; ρθ = 0; γ = 4;WI = 2; m = 2; K = 1

Figure 6 Sunspot and Sunspot-Like Equilibria with Financial Shocks*

Panel A Sunspot-Like Equilibria

v

Panel B Sunspot Equilibria

~

Equilibrium 2: Q = 0.79; v = 0.75;V = 2.3

~
Equilibrium 1: Q = 1.1; v = 0.03;V = 0.05

v
~

Equilibrium 2: Q = 0.5; v = 1.9;V = 4.5

~
Equilibrium 1: Q = 1.1; v = 0;V = 0
~
Q

Equilibrium 3:

~
Q

~
Q = 0.32; v = −0.17;
V = 9.0
Equilibrium 4:

~
Q = 0.27; v = −2.9;V = 10.1

Equilibrium 4:

~
Q = 0.5; v = −1.9;V = 4.5
Equilibrium 3:

~
Q = 0.32; v = 0;V = 8.9

* Panel A assumes ρθ=0.4, m=2. Panel B assumes ρθ=0.4, m=0 ; otherwise the parameters are the same as in Figure 5.

Figure 7a Stock prices, interest rate, and risk
vertical lines = Lehman Brothers bankruptcy (Sept. 15, 2008)
Interest Rate

Stock Price
6

120.0

110.0

5
100.0

4
90.0

3

80.0

70.0

2
60.0

1
50.0

40.0
01.01.07 01.05.07 01.09.07 01.01.08 01.05.08 01.09.08 01.01.09 01.05.09 01.09.09 01.01.10 01.05.10

0
01.01.07

01.05.07

01.09.07

Risk

01.01.08

01.05.08

01.09.08

01.01.09

01.05.09

01.09.09

01.01.10

01.05.10

Volatility of risk

90

16.0

80

14.0

70

12.0

60

10.0
50

8.0
40

6.0
30

4.0
20

2.0

10

0
01.01.07

01.05.07

01.09.07

01.01.08

01.05.08

01.09.08

01.01.09

01.05.09

01.09.09

01.01.10 01.05.10

0.0
01.01.07 01.05.07

01.09.07

01.01.08 01.05.08

01.09.08

01.01.09 01.05.09

01.09.09

01.01.10 01.05.10

Source: Datastream, daily data. Stock prices are the DJ U.S. total market price index (January 1, 2007 = 100). The interest rate is the U.S. 3 month Treasury
bill. The risk measure is the CBOE SPX volatility VIX index. The volatility of risk is the 30 days standard deviation of the VIX index.

Figure 7b Net worth, leverage and illiquidity
Net worth brokers and dealers
90
80
70
60

illiquidity

50
40

20
30
20

15

10
0
2007.1

2007.3

2008.1

2008.3

2009.1

2009.3

2010.1

10

Leverage brokers and dealers
5

80
70

0

60

March
2007

50

Sept
2007

March
2008

Sept
2008

March
2009

Sept
2009

40
30
20
10
0
2007.1

2007.3

2008.1

2008.3

2009.1

2009.3

2010.1

Source: Data on brokers and dealers from the Fed’s Flow of Funds (L.129); net worth is assets minus liabilities, billion US $; leverage is net worth
divided by assets. The illiquidity measure is an updated measure of Amihud (2002). The vertical lines represent Q3 2008 for the quarterly net worth
and leverage series and September 2008 for the monthly illiquidity series.

Figure 8 Model Simulation*
shaded area = high risk equilibrium; vertical lines = endowment shock

Wealth of investors

Equity Price

Risk Equity Price

Volatility Risk

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0

2

4

6

8

10 12 14 16

Gross Interest Rate

Leverage

illiquidity

* The economy starts in the low risk equilibrium. At time 2 the endowment of investors falls from 6 to 2.8. The economy stays in the low risk equilibrium
until time 8, at which point is shifts to the high risk equilibrium. At time 11 endowments shift back towards the initial allocation. The economy remains in
the high risk equilibrium until time 14, at which points it shifts back to the low risk equilibrium.

A = 0.15;υ − W = 190;η = 200; σ a = 0.1; σ θ = 0.1; ρθ = 0.7; γ = 1;WI = 6; m = 2; K = 20; p1 = 0.95; p2 = 0.7

