                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE EFFECT OF CIVILIAN CASUALTIES IN AFGHANISTAN AND IRAQ

                                           Luke N. Condra
                                          Joseph H. Felter
                                          Radha K. Iyengar
                                          Jacob N. Shapiro

                                        Working Paper 16152
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16152


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2010




The authors thank Eli Berman, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, Lee Ewing, Brian Fishman, Jason Lyall,
Kyle Pizzey, and David Siegel for helpful comments and assistance with data. Condra acknowledges
financial support from Stanford University‘s School of Humanities and Sciences Graduate Research
Opportunity Fund. We acknowledge financial support from grant #FA9550-09-1-0314 from the Air
Force Office of Scientific Research. The views expressed are the authors' and in no way reflect those
of their universities, the Department of Defense, the International Security Assistance Force, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Luke N. Condra, Joseph H. Felter, Radha K. Iyengar, and Jacob N. Shapiro. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Civilian Casualties in Afghanistan and Iraq
Luke N. Condra, Joseph H. Felter, Radha K. Iyengar, and Jacob N. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 16152
July 2010, Revised October 2010
JEL No. F51,F52,H56,J22,K42,O53

                                                 ABSTRACT

A central question in intrastate conflicts is how insurgents are able to mobilize supporters to participate
in violent and risky activities. A common explanation is that violence committed by counterinsurgent
forces mobilizes certain segments of the population through a range of mechanisms. We study the
effects of civilian casualties in Iraq and Afghanistan to quantify the effect of such casualties on subsequent
insurgent violence. By comparing uniquely detailed micro-data along temporal, spatial, and gender
dimensions we can distinguish short-run 'information' and 'capacity' effects from the longer run 'propaganda'
and 'revenge' effects. In Afghanistan we find strong evidence that local exposure to civilian casualties
caused by international forces leads to increased insurgent violence over the long-run, what we term
the 'revenge' effect. Matching districts with similar past trends in violence shows that counterinsurgent-generated
civilian casualties from a typical incident are responsible for 1 additional violent incident in an average
sized district in the following 6 weeks and lead to increased violence over the next 6 months. There
is no evidence that out-of-area events—errant air strikes for example—lead to increased violence,
nor is there evidence of short run effects, thus ruling out the propaganda, information, and capacity
mechanisms. Critically, we find no evidence of a similar reaction to civilian casualties in Iraq, suggesting
the constraints on insurgent production of violence may be quite conflict-specific. Our results imply
that minimizing harm to civilians may indeed help counterinsurgent forces in Afghanistan to reduce
insurgent recruitment.


Luke N. Condra                                           Radha K. Iyengar
Stanford University                                      London School of Economics
Department of Political Science                          Department of Economics
Encina Hall West, Room 100                               Houghton St
616 Serra Street                                         London
Stanford, CA 94305                                       WC2A 2AE
condra@stanford.edu                                      United Kingdom
                                                         and NBER
Joseph H. Felter                                         R.Iyengar1@lse.ac.uk
Hoover Institution
434 Galvez Mall                                          Jacob N. Shapiro
Stanford University                                      Woodrow Wilson School of Public Policy
Stanford, CA 94305-6010                                  and International Affairs
felter@hoover.stanford.edu                               Princeton University
                                                         Robertson Hall
                                                         Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
                                                         jns@princeton.edu
Introduction

Civilian casualties are a tragic reality of counter-insurgency campaigns. Recent policy debates

have arisen about the degree of risk commanders of counterinsurgency forces should assume in

an effort to protect civilians from harm. The discussion on the impact of civilian casualties has

also fed the growing concern that counterinsurgent forces bear the cost for civilian casualties

even when they are caused by insurgent groups.2 These debates center on an empirical question:

do higher civilian casualties increase insurgent violence? If they do, then in addition to moral

and legal concerns, there may be military strategic value in reducing civilian casualties.

Underlying both issues is a set of theories as to how insurgents are able to mobilize the

population and produce violence. The most common is that violence committed by

counterinsurgent forces generates resentment and antipathy that enable political violence by

angering the population and encouraging insurgent recruitment. This hypotheses merits testing as

there is no a priori reason to expect violence against civilians would have an angering effect, as

opposed to intimidating the population into quiescence (Birtle 2008).

        Understanding which factors enable insurgent groups to motivate people to fight is

critical on two fronts. First, quantifying the relationship between civilian causalities and violence

is necessary in developing policies governing the use of force. For example, often when

planning military operations, commanders are forced to choose how much risk their own troops

should accept in an effort to avert civilian injury or death. Second, civilian casualties make it

possible to identify the role different factors play in mobilizing support for insurgent violence,




2
  In Afghanistan, the conventional wisdom on this question is summed up by the chief spokesman for the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), U.S. Army Colonel Wayne Shanks: “When the Taliban blow up a
bunch of people, you don't see a lot of protest. But when we screw up and accidentally kill somebody, you get riots
in the streets.” Quoted in Wood (2010).


                                                                                                            2 of 85
which can inform debates about how the international community can best help provide security,

development, and governance in conflict environments.

        This study analyzes the impact of civilian casualties on insurgent violence in the conflict

in Afghanistan using micro-level, geocoded data on civilian casualties and violence between

International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) units and insurgents. We use a series of analytic

comparisons to distinguish between four prominent theories on the how civilian casualties may

affect violence: revenge, propoganda, population-provided information, and insurgent group

capacity. Separating out levels of future violence from long-run trends (using a 3-month period

moving average) allows us to distinguish the short-run ‘information’ and ‘capacity’ effects from

the longer run ‘‘propaganda’ and ‘revenge’ effects. Examining differences in the impact of

events that kill women and children from those that kill men allows us to separate the

‘information’ and ‘capacity’ effects. Studying how local responses to nearby civilian casualties

differ from local response to civilians casualties in other parts of the country helps disentangle

the ‘propoganda’ and ‘revenge’ effects.

        To conduct our analysis, we linked ISAF reports on violent incidents in Afghanistan with

civilian casualty data from the ISAF Civilian Casualty Tracking Cell (CCTC) aggregated to the

district bi-month level.3 Overall there is a positive relationship between civilian casualties and

levels of future violence in an area. Using a matched sample, we find that if the average ISAF-

caused incident, which resulted in 2 civilian casualties, was eliminated, then in an average-sized

district there would be 6 fewer violent incidents between ISAF and insurgents (i.e., SIGACTs)

over the next 6 weeks. The relationship is somewhat asymmetric, larger for ISAF than insurgent,




3
 Incident data from the from the ISAF Combined Information Data Network Exchange (CIDNE) database include
unclassified fields such as date, time, location, and type of attack.


                                                                                                   3 of 85
but weakly positive regardless of which side – ISAF or insurgents – is responsible for the civilian

casualties.

       While we find a robust relationship between civilian casualties and long-run trends in

IED incidents, there is little evidence of a short-run effect, suggesting the information and

capacity mechanisms are not substantial drivers of the response to civilian casualties in

Afghanistan. Instead, the data are consistent with the claim that civilian casualties are affecting

future violence through increased recruitment into insurgent groups after a civilian casualty

incident. Local exposure to violence from ISAF appears to be the primary driver of this effect.

       Given the frequent comparisons made between Iraq and Afghanistan and the importance

of externally validating our results, we conduct a parallel analysis on civilian casualty and

violence data from Iraq. The differences between the consequences of civilian casualties across

these conflicts provide valuable inferential insight into the processes underlying the production

of violence by insurgents. In Iraq, we find no evidence that civilian casualties affect long-run

trends in violence. Considered alongside Condra and Shapiro’s (2010) finding that civilian

casualties in Iraq have a short-run, symmetric effect, this suggests that insurgents face

fundamentally different constraints in these two conflicts. In Iraq, the evidence suggests

insurgents face an information constraint: when Coalition forces kill civilians and people respond

by sharing less information with counterinsurgents, there is a short-run increase in violence. In

Afghanistan, the evidence suggests insurgents face a labor constraint: when ISAF units kill

civilians, this increases the number of willing combatants, leading to an increase in insurgent

attacks.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section one outlines the mechanisms

that have been identified for connections between civilian casualties and insurgency in




                                                                                                4 of 85
Afghanistan. Section two describes our data on insurgency and civilian casualties in Afghanistan.

Section three analyzes the Afghanistan data in detail, providing short-term and long-term results.

Section four replicates the empirical approach on data from Iraq, showing that the dynamics of

the two conflicts are quite different, at least in the long run, and suggesting possible reasons for

the disparity in the results. Section five concludes by detailing the implications of our findings

for research and ongoing policy debates.



1. MECHANISMS LINKING CIVILIAN CASUALTIES AND INSURGENT VIOLENCE

Anecdotally, civilian casualties are routinely associated with higher Taliban recruitment and

violence.4 Some commanders and those responsible for formulating rules of engagement (ROE)

feel that reducing harm to civilians during battlefield operations, while risky, is nevertheless

necessary for purposes of gaining the support of the local population. Despite the current support

for the need to limit violence against civilians, there has been relatively little systematic analysis

on how civilian casualties influence insurgent violence.

           To frame the discussion suppose that insurgents’ production of violence at any point in

time requires two inputs: labor, l, and organizational capital, , which captures a range of factors

including monetary resources, weaponry, and organizational infrastructure. The production of

violence is restricted by the ability of counterinsurgents to attack the group, destroying a portion

of its production. Counterinsurgents capacity to attack is a function of their force levels as a

proportion of the total population, f, and the amount of tactically-relevant information—the

location of weapons caches, identities of insurgents, and the like—shared by the population, i.

The more information is shared, the more efficiently counterinsurgents can capture/kill



4
    See, e.g., Nadery and Humayoon (2008).


                                                                                               5 of 85
insurgents and defend their installations. Assuming insurgents produce at capacity, total violence

produced in any period can be represented with the following Cobb-Douglas production function

                                                               1         ,

where f ,i [0,1] , with i =1 implying that all tactically relevant information is shared.5

         It is trivially apparent that actions which increase l by enhancing insurgent recruiting will

increase violence. Actions which decrease —killing key leaders or raiding weapons caches—

will decrease violence, and that actions which increase (decrease) i will decrease (increase)

violence. What is more interesting is the effect of force size on violence. As f gets large, the

increase in violence from a positive shock to insurgent labor or capacity gets smaller,                       ,


                   0, while the decrease in violence from an increase in information,                   ,


               0, gets larger. The implication is that, on average, we should expect insurgent

violence in Afghanistan to be more sensitive to labor or capacity shocks than in Iraq, where force

levels were much higher. Symmetrically, we should expect insurgent violence in Iraq to be much

more sensitive to shocks to information provision.

         The existing policy and academic literatures identify three mechanisms by which civilian

casualties and violence would influence violence in this simple setting. We term these effects:

“revenge”, “propaganda”, and “information” effects. A fourth mechanism that has not been

much discussed complicates efforts to study the issue, what we call the “capacity” effect. We

discuss each of these in turn.

         First, civilians might be driven to participate in violence, increasing l, after

Coalition/ISAF civilian casualties out of a desire to avenge specific harm to family, friends, or

5
  See Hanson, Iyengar, and Monten (2009) for an explicit analysis of insurgent substitution between capital and
labor in the production of violence. For the comparative statics that interest us what matters is that insurgents are at
the production frontier before the shock, and so that regardless of the reallocation following a negative labor or
capital shock, there will be less violence.


                                                                                                                  6 of 85
neighbors; what we call the ‘revenge effect’. Notice that this mechanism encompasses arguments

that the social traditions of the Pashtun ethnic group, which dominates the Taliban and other

Islamic extremist groups in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region, are a key factor in

supporting the insurgency. Johnson and Mason (2008) argue, for example, that the Pashtun social

code (Pashtunwali) places a high value on personal revenge. “If a Pashtun man is dishonored, he

must avenge that dishonor “or he will lose face and social status to the point of becoming an

outcast” (Johnson and Mason 2008, 63).6 If this is correct, then any revenge effect should be

both (1) concentrated in Pashtun areas where social norms create strong incentives and (2) highly

localized. Stepping away from our stylized model, we also expect the revenge mechanism to lead

to increasing long-run trends in violence as it takes some time to integrate new fighters into

insurgent units.

         Second, we could see heightened violence in areas that sustain civilian casualties if

casualties make people angrier and more easily recruited by insurgent groups, what we call the

‘propaganda effect’. This commonly cited concern matches the conventional wisdom among

journalists, soldiers, and policymakers that civilian casualties are used by insurgent groups as a

recruitment tool.7 During his June 2009 testimony before the U.S. Senate Armed Services

Committee prior to being confirmed as Commander of ISAF and US Forces in Afghanistan,

General Stanley McChrystal talked about how civilian casualties affect popular perception and

behavior. “I would emphasize that how we conduct operations is vital to success….This is a

6
  See also Gutman (2010): “To a great extent, though, the Taliban remain motivated by revenge. The massacre in
2001 of hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Taliban detainees at the hands of an Uzbek warlord in northern Afghanistan
still motivates Taliban to fight. ‘That massacre was the base or foundation for all the fighting that is now going on,’
[Vahid] Mojdeh [former Taliban foreign ministry official] said. The senior ISAF general agreed the massacre was
‘absolutely’ a recruiting tool for the Taliban. ‘Those kinds of things thicken the hatred and cause more people to
join.’”
7
  For example, Michael O’Hanlon, of the Brookings Institution, says, “It is certainly the consensus view among
NATO intelligence that the inadvertent killing of civilians is one of the two or three things, along with corruption
and favoritism perhaps, that most help the Taliban in recruiting.” Quoted in Pleming (2010).


                                                                                                              7 of 85
struggle for the support of the Afghan people. Our willingness to operate in ways that minimize

casualties or damage, even when doing so makes our task more difficult, is essential to our

credibility.”8 U.S. Secretary of Defense, Robert Gates, expressed the same opinion before

Congress. “But I will tell you that I believe that the civilian casualties are doing us enormous

harm in Afghanistan, and we have got to do better in terms of avoiding casualties. And I say that

knowing full well that the Taliban mingle among the people, use them as barriers. But when we

go ahead and attack, we play right into their hands.”9

        The propaganda mechanism differs from the revenge one in that it does not require local

exposure to civilian casualties in order to boost insurgent recruitment. Instead, recruitment

increases because civilian casualties create a feeling of antipathy toward the national government

and Coalition/ISAF forces, which promotes involvement in insurgent organizations. Thus the

propaganda mechanism suggests civilian casualties even outside the immediate neighborhood

should lead to increased insurgent violence.

        Third, civilian casualties might affect levels of future violence if casualties affect the

level of civilian cooperation with ISAF and government units, i, what we term the ‘information

effect’. Insurgent operations such as planting IEDs, setting ambushes, and training inevitably

reveal information to non-combatants. This information is key for counterinsurgents as

government forces and their allies have an overwhelming advantage in combat power but often

lack information about insurgents’ identity and whereabouts. When ISAF forces kill civilians,

the local population may be angered or perceive a greater threat to their physical security from

ISAF and consequently share less information with them. In contrast, when insurgents kill


8
  Congress, Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Hearing to Consider Nominations, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 2 June
2009, 11.
9
  Congress, Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Hearing to Receive Testimony on the Challenges Facing the
Department of Defense, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 27 January 2009, 21.


                                                                                                         8 of 85
civilians, the local population may choose to share more information with US forces, meaning

insurgents are less able to produce violence in subsequent periods.10 The information

mechanism suggests we should see a short-run, symmetric reaction to civilian casualties as

information on insurgents’ whereabouts and weapons caches can have an immediate impact on

violence by enabling raids that substantially reduce insurgent capabilities.

        Fourth, there may be a mechanical correlation between civilian casualties and insurgent

capacity, c, what we term the ‘capacity effect’. If ISAF soldiers are more likely to employ force

in ways that have a high potential to cause civilian casualties when the target is particularly

valuable from a counterinsurgency perspective (as their rules of engagement suggest they

should), then we should see ISAF-generated casualties associated with a drop in insurgent

violence, at least in the short term (which we will define as two weeks or less).11 We would

expect this capacity effect to be relatively short-term as a successful attack on a high-value target

should result in an immediate loss of organizational capacity for insurgents. In the long-run

(which we will define as between 2 and 3 months), insurgent capacity can be replenished as

leadership and supplies are replaced, confining the capacity effect to the short-run. The capacity

effect can thus be thought of as impacting the short-run ability of insurgent groups to plan and

execute specific activities but, assuming some ability to reallocate men and materiel across

districts, will not affect the long-run output of the groups.

        In this study we present a series of comparisons between different models to distinguish

these four theories. Table 1 presents some basic expectations for each mechanism: revenge,

propaganda, information, and capacity. We test these expectations in several ways: comparing

short-run fluctuations with long-run trends; comparing the effects within an area to those in

10
  See Condra and Shapiro (2010) for more complete discussion of this argument.
11
  In the longer term insurgents might be able to move additional weapons and personnel into an area to make up
some portion of the lost capacity.


                                                                                                          9 of 85
neighboring areas; and comparing the effect between men and women. By analyzing data at

different levels of temporal aggregation we separate the short-run ‘information’ and ‘capacity’

effects from the longer run ‘recruiting’ and ‘propaganda’ effects. By examining differences in

the impact of events that kill women and children from those that kill men, we resolve the

‘information’ and ‘capacity’ effects. By studying how local responses to local violence against

civilians differ from local response to violence against civilians in other parts of the country we

separate the ‘recruiting’ from the ‘propaganda’ effects.

                                      [INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE.]




2. DATA AND DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FROM AFGHANISTAN

2.1 Data Summary

The data on civilian casualties we use were collected by ISAF’s Civilian Casualty Tracking Cell

(CCTC). When ISAF units are involved in incidents in which civilians are wounded or killed, the

unit makes a series of reports on the specifics of the incident to ISAF HQ.12 The CCTC reviews

these reports and collects data on civilian casualties that occur at the hands of insurgents and

ISAF forces. The CCTC data are culled of any casualties involving people with ambiguous

combatant status under the Law of Armed Conflict, including Afghan government personnel,



12
   When an event involving a civilian casualty event occurs, the patrol unit submits a First Information Report (FIR)
within 4 hours of the event via radio to the Regional Command. The unit submits a Second Information Report
(SIR) within 24 hours of the incident. The SIR contains more information about the incident than was included in
the FIR, including any media assessment, the cause(s) of the incident, whether key leaders were engaged or solatia
(compensation) was paid, etc. If the incident resulted in wounded civilians, the incident reporting is concluded at
this point (though, if civilians involved in the incident later die, the incident is re-opened). If the incident resulted in
civilian death, another report is submitted within 72 hours called an Investigation Information Report (IRR). This
final incident report is sent to the Legal Adviser at ISAF HQ who makes recommendations to COM-ISAF on any
further steps that should be taken to address the situation.


                                                                                                                  10 of 85
interpreters, security guards, and contractors. The CCTC cross-checks its data against media

reports for completeness.

         These data include the perpetrator (ISAF, insurgents, other, or unknown), the type of

weapons used by ISAF and insurgents, the nationality of any ISAF units involved, and the

number of killed and wounded in three categories, men, women, and children. We aggregate

these data to the district-bimonth level from January 2009 through March 2010.13 These data

contain 4,077 civilian casualties from 2,118 incidents, 10 percent of which involve women and

children.

         In that 15 month period there were 10.5 confirmed civilian casualties per day on average.

While most of the civilian casualties are caused by insurgents, an equal number of women or

children are killed by both insurgents and ISAF. This means that as a proportion of all civilian

casualties, ISAF kills or injures more women and/or children.14

         As a measure of combat occurring between ISAF units and insurgents we use incident

reports submitted by ISAF forces, commonly known as ‘significant activity’ or SIGACT reports.

Unclassified data on 24,937 separate incidents drawn from the ISAF Joint Command (IJC)

CIDNE Database provide the location, date, time of incidents in various categories which we

combine into six major categories: direct fire, indirect fire, IED explosions, IEDs found and

cleared, IED hoaxes, and premature detonations. We analyzed the impact of civilian casualties

on the sum of all these categories and also focus in on just the direct fire and IED attacks (this

latter category is the sum of IED explosions, IEDs found and cleared, and IED hoaxes), as they


13
  Although data on civilian casualties was collected by the Civilian Casualty Tracking Cell since about September
2007, between September 2007 and June 2008 there is data only on Afghan civilians killed by ISAF. Injuries and
not-ISAF-generated-civilian casualties are not included. Beginning in July 2008 the CCTC tracks non-ISAF and
injuries but the data consistency and fidelity are not verifiable until about January 2009.
14
   This can be at least partially explained by the fact that insurgents live and operate among the population which
greatly increases the risk to civilians during counterinsurgency operations.


                                                                                                            11 of 85
make up the vast majority of the incidents. We created a bimonthly panel dataset at the district-

level using these incident data over the period for which we have corresponding data on civilian

casualties (January 2009 through March 2010).

           To facilitate cross-district comparisons we scaled the counts of civilian casualties and

total incidents by the population multiplied by 1000. Scaling by population is not trivial in the

Afghan context where there has not been a population census in nearly 30 years. There are

generally three available data sources for population: the Afghan Central Statistics Office (CSO)

estimates based on surveys and a village census, the Gridded Population of the World (GPW)

data, and the LandScan population data. We determined the LandScan data were the most

reliable as they are gridded at a higher resolution than GPW and the CSO population data do not

include population on villages larger than 5,000. The LandScan data (2008) comprise worldwide

population estimates for every cell of a 30" X 30" latitude/longitude grid. Population counts are

apportioned to each grid cell based on an algorithm which takes into account proximity to roads,

slope, land cover, nighttime illumination, and other information.15



2.2 Descriptive Statistics

As a starting point we examined how civilian casualties and insurgent violence are distributed

across space in Afghanistan; and what kind of weapons were used in incidents which result in

civilian casualties.

           Both combat and civilian casualties tend to be concentrated in specific districts, mostly in

the Regional Command East and Regional Command South areas as illustrated in the map in

Figure 1. This map combines two important sets of data. The districts are color coded on a

sliding scale according to the number of SIGACTs reported (per 1000 people). The size of the
15
     Full details on the LandScan population data are available at http://www.ornl.gov/sci/landscan/.


                                                                                                        12 of 85
circle in each district reflects the number of civilians killed or wounded (per 1000 people) during

the period under study. As expected, in most cases the most violent districts are also those that

report the highest number of civilian casualties. This is likely because these areas are where there

is the most combat and the greatest troop presence. There are, however, areas in the east of the

country with high levels of combat and low civilian casualties and areas south of Kabul, near

Khost and Jalalabad, with high civilian casualties and low levels of combat.

                               [INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

       Figure 1 does not show the degree of variation in the number and the nature of civilian

casualties over time. Time trends in standardized units are shown in Figure 2. This scaling

highlights the fact that there is much greater week-to-week fluctuation in civilian casualties than

in insurgent violence. This degree of volatility suggests that the number of civilians killed or

injured in any given week is quasi-random with respect to long-run trends in violence. As Figure

2 shows, this is more likely to be true for the lower levels of ISAF-generated civilian casualties

than the more persistent, higher level of insurgent caused civilian casualties.

       This difference in volatility between insurgent attacks and civilian casualty levels forms

the basis of our causal identification strategy. The key assumption is that within a short to

medium time span of a civilian casualty, conditional on other determinants of long-run trends,

the change in violence is due to the causal effect of civilian casualties. The volatility of the

civilian casualties’ time series makes the causal interpretation of estimates from a simple linear

specification reasonable. If the number of individuals killed depends largely on a stochastic

process uncorrelated with other determinants of violent activity—once we control adequately for

factors affecting the long-run trends in insurgent violence—then a first-difference or lag-

dependent variable specification can identify the effect of civilian casualties on security and




                                                                                              13 of 85
stability, as measured by SIGACTs. The validity of this identifying assumption is easily assessed

with a “placebo test” that places the lead of civilian casualties on the RHS.16

                                       [INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]

           It is important to note that the vast majority of ISAF recorded civilian casualties are

generated by insurgents, although such a distinction may not matter in terms of public perception

or support. From January 2009 through March 2010, over 86 percent of civilian casualties were

perpetrated by insurgents. In addition, there is an order of magnitude more casualties of men than

of women and children.

             Figure 3 breaks down the trends in attacks and civilian casualties for 9 prominent

majority-Pashtun provinces. There is no obvious correlation between civilian casualties and

attacks. In Kandahar, there appears to be an increase in both time-series in the middle of our data

(Fall 2009). In Khost, by contrast, a number of months with significant numbers of civilian

casualties in Spring and Summer 2009 do not appear to have changed the long-term trends in

violence. Breaking the data down in this way suggests that as we move to lower levels of

geographic aggregation, we are more likely to be able to get solid identification from the random

component of the civilian casualty time-series.

                                       [INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE]

           Figure 4 shows the rough distribution of civilian casualties by event type and party

responsible for males and women and children. Most civilian casualties for which insurgents are

responsible are generated by IED attacks (60 %), with the other two predominant forms of

violence being indirect fire (IDF) and direct fire (DF). Civilian casualties generated by ISAF

forces, on the other hand, are more evenly distributed. Direct fire accounts for 21 percent of

women and children casualties and indirect fire accounts for 35 percent. Escalation of force
16
     We present the results of this test for our core specifications in Appendix Tables 4 and 5.


                                                                                                   14 of 85
(EOF) accounts for 11 percent.17 Despite the negative publicity they receive, air strikes account

for only about 6 percent of casualties, a little less than a third that of road and traffic incidents,

which account for over 16 percent of casualties of women or children.

         Because we wish to compare Iraq and Afghanistan, we also include Table 2 which

provides descriptive statistics for the core variables in Iraq and Afghanistan. There are two

important things to note here. First, the insurgency was roughly twice as violent on a per-capita

basis in Iraq. In both countries insurgent violence was highly concentrated but the overall

intensity was substantially higher in Iraq. Second, the risk to civilians from combat in Iraq quite

different than it is in Afghanistan. Coalition forces killed roughly the same number of civilians

per attack in Afghanistan, about one in every 40 attacks. However, insurgents kill roughly four

times as many civilians per attack in Afghanistan, roughly one in every 4 attacks in Afghanistan

vs. one in every 20 attacks in Iraq.18

                                    [INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE.]



3. WHAT WE KNOW FROM AFGHANISTAN


We begin analyzing the relationship between civilian casualties and insurgent violence in

Afghanistan by using the substantial randomness in the number of civilians killed to estimate the

impact of violence against civilians. We then turn to a more sophisticated matching approach to

capture the sources of unobserved heterogeneity in motivations to mistreat civilians.




17
   “Escalation of Force” incidents typically involve ambiguous situations when convoys or checkpoints are
approached by unknown vehicles or individuals on foot. In such situations, there are a series of steps soldiers are
trained to take to make the person stop if they are deemed to be a threat. The steps involve verbal and visual
warnings, non-lethal force, and then finally lethal actions.
18
   Note these comparisons exclude the sectarian violence in Iraq.


                                                                                                             15 of 85
3.1 Estimating a Short-Run relationship between Civilian Casualties and Violence

Our initial estimation studies the relationship between total incidents (SIGACTs) and civilian

casualties caused by either ISAF or insurgents. The unit of analysis is a district bi-month. In

Table 3, we predict the relationship between total incidents in a given period and civilian

casualties from the previous 4 periods (8 weeks). The estimation relies on an event-study design

where the number of women and children killed at time t is assumed to be uncorrelated with

violence in period t+1 when controlling for district and month-year fixed effects as well as the

level of violence in period t. We estimate the following model:

                         ∑                        ∑                                            (1)

       In equation (1), SIGACT is the total number of incidents per 1000 people in a district at

time t, and similarly for IED attacks and direct fire attacks in columns (3) and (5) respectively.

IEDs are a particularly relevant category of violent incident for our analysis. Unlike other

categories, IEDs are initiated almost completely by insurgents; the only ISAF behavior that

contributes to them is the frequency of patrols. Direct fire incidents, by contrast, can occur either

because insurgents initiate contact or because ISAF forces are engaged in raids and offensive

actions. IED attacks therefore represent the cleanest measure we have of how insurgent violence

responds to civilian casualties.

       The core specification includes current and 4 lagged periods of civilian casualties

separated into ISAF responsible civilian casualties (CivCasISAF) and insurgent responsible

civilian casualties (CivCasINS). We include district fixed effects ( ) and month-year fixed effects

( ), as well. This approach is designed to test whether the cumulative impact of civilian

casualties on insurgent violence is positive.

                               [INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]




                                                                                              16 of 85
       At first glance in this specification we find a positive effect on violence for ISAF and

insurgent responsible civilian casualties, though the effect is clearly stronger for insurgent-

caused casualties. To formally test whether past civilian casualties affect current violence we

conduct a joint significance test on the sum of the lagged coefficients. We can reject the null of a

jointly zero impact of past ISAF-caused civilian casualties on current violence at the 95%

confidence level for IED attacks, and for insurgent-caused civilian casualties we can reject the

null for total SIGACTs.

       Recall that the identification strategy relies on properly specifying the long-run

determinants of violence. Therefore, a concern with this core specification is that if increased

civilian casualty rates are associated with trends in levels of combat that change over time, say as

insurgents and counterinsurgents move their forces to different areas for military advantage, then

the fixed effect will not fully control for future determinants of combat. A simple dependent

variable lag may be inappropriate to control for underlying trends in violence as it will control

for both the long-run trend in violence and the short-term fluctuations. Because the primary

potential weakness in the identifying assumption comes from the long-run trend, we include a 3-

period (6 week) lagged moving average in columns (2), (4), and (6). The three period moving

average is estimated as                                 . Including this moving average of violent

incidents in the fixed effects specification controls for long-run trends in violence, thus allowing

us to identify the variation generated by short-run, high frequency events. If our results are being

generated by the impact of civilian casualties on the short-run variation in violence, including the

lagged moving average should not alter our results.

       Columns (2), (4), and (6) of table 3 show that controlling for the moving average

eliminates any significant positive effect of past civilian casualties on insurgent violence. The



                                                                                             17 of 85
joint test on the sum of the lagged civilian casualty coefficients is insignificant in all the models

once we include the lagged moving average of insurgent violence. This is consistent with civilian

casualties operating on more long-run trends, rather than short-run effects. This is more

consistent with the long-run mechanism such as propaganda or revenge, rather than the

mechanisms we would expect to affect short-run fluctuations such as information or capacity.

        Once we control for the lagged moving average, the core model passes a “placebo” test

so that the lead of civilian casualties for ISAF-generated casualties does not predict violence.19

However, the lead of insurgent-generated civilian casualties does predict violence which

suggests we should still be concerned with reverse-causality for results that relate future violence

to insurgent triggered incidents. We have greater confidence in the relationship for ISAF-

initiated events.

        In interpreting these results it is useful to recall that our identifying assumption is that

realized level of civilian casualties has a substantial random component after we control for the

systematic component that is driven by levels of combat. Figure 2 certainly suggests this

assumption is correct but a more formal way to assess it is to compare how much of the variance

in different kinds of violence is accounted for by our core controls.20 If our identifying

assumption is met, then we would expect district fixed effects, month fixed effects, and the

lagged moving average of attacks to explain a great deal of the variance in attacks, a small

amount of the variance in the number of civilian casualty incidents, and an even smaller amount

of the variance in the number of civilian casualties. Table 4 shows the proportion of variance in

key variables explained by different controls. It is quite clear that variables which control for a

substantial portion of the variance in the intensity of combat explain very little of the variance in

19
   Appendix table 4, column 1 presents results for ISAF-generated casualties and column 2 for insurgent generated
casualties.
20
   We thank Eli Berman for suggesting this diagnostic.


                                                                                                         18 of 85
the number of civilian casualty incidents and even less of the variance in levels of civilian

casualties.

                                             [INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]



3.2 Estimating a Long-Run relationship between Civilian Casualties and Violence

As described above, civilian casualties may affect two different components of violence: long-

run trends and/or short-run fluctuations. Table 2 shows that the long-run trends in violence,

estimated by the 3-period moving average, are not substantially less volatile then the period-to-

period rate. Any ability to predict long-run trends is therefore unlikely to be an artifact of their

reduced volatility. The distinction between short-term fluctuations and long-term trends is,

however, valuable for distinguishing mechanisms through which civilian casualties may affect

insurgent violence.

            In particular, the long-run trends are more likely influenced by recruitment and

population disaffection than more rapid changes in information and intelligence. Given this

assumption, we estimate the relationship between civilian casualties and proxies for long-run

trends and short-run fluctuations. To measure long-run trends, we estimate a three-period (six-

week) moving average. We then estimate the relationship of current and lagged civilian

casualties on the future 3-period moving average,                                                       . Table 5

presents the results from regressions with the lead moving average of different kinds of violent

incidents as dependent variables.21

                                        [INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]




21
     All regressions in table 5 contain the spatial lag of the dependent variable to control for spatial auto-correlation.


                                                                                                                   19 of 85
       ISAF-generated civilian casualties predict an increase in violence for the following 2

months, and this effect is driven largely by IED attacks, as shown in column 5. We prefer the

IED specification because we hypothesize that IED incidents are a cleaner measure of insurgent

imitated violence, while other forms of attack can be responsive to ISAF activities. The results in

column (5) suggest that ISAF-generated civilian casualties are associated with a substantively

and statistically large increase in attacks. An incident which results in 10 civilian casualties will

generate about 1 additional IED attack in the following 2 months. The effect for insurgent

activity dependent civilian casualties is much weaker and not jointly significant.

           We can also test if the volatility of the insurgent attacks time series is affected by civilian

casualties. To do this, we estimated the effect of civilian casualties on the mean 3-period

absolute deviation of insurgent attacks. To do this, we estimated the absolute deviation for three

periods:                           for n= 1, 2, 3. We then used mean absolute deviation over three

periods as the dependent variable:                                     . The results for all violent

incidents are presented in column (2) and the results for IED attacks are presented in column (6).

Again we focused on IED attacks which appear largely unaffected by civilian casualties. In

general, the coefficients are both small in magnitude and insignificant.

       The results from Table 3 and Table 5 present a consistent story; civilian casualties do not

appear to affect the short-run fluctuations in violence but do impact the long-run trends. This

relationship largely rules out the short-run mechanisms of information and capacity. Because

these short-run effects are expected to operate in opposite directions for ISAF-generated civilian

casualties—the information mechanism predicts ISAF-generated casualties predict increased

violence and the capacity mechanism predicts the opposite—we tested the extent to which

reaction to ISAF-generated casualties differs by the gender of the civilians killed or injured. The



                                                                                                 20 of 85
underlying assumption for these opposing effects is that the capacity effect should be more

pronounced when ISAF soldiers kill male civilians and the revenge effect should be more

pronounced when ISAF soldiers kill women and children. We find no significant short-run effect

when controlling for the lagged moving average regardless of the gender or age of the civilian

casualty. 22

        It appears that the two long-run mechanisms, propaganda and revenge, are more

consistent with the data. We can distinguish these as the revenge mechanism relies on personal

exposure to violence whereas the propaganda effect depends only on violence against a relevant

peer group, implying the relationship between violent incidents and civilian casualties in

surrounding districts is informative. If the effect of civilian casualties is to increase violence via

increased ability to recruit, then the relationship between civilian casualties and violence should

spill over to nearby districts. On the other hand, if the increase in violence after a civilian

casualty is driven by locality-specific motivations for revenge, it should be more localized. The

impact of the spatial lag of civilian casualties is presented in columns (3) and (7) for all violent

incidents and IED incidents respectively. Clearly the positive impact of ISAF-caused casualties

is being driven by local exposure to violence.

        This is supported by analysis comparing Pashtun and non-Pashtun areas. As Table 2

shows, Pashtun and mixed areas appear to have much more combat and much higher rates of

civilian casualties. Table 6 presents the results by Pashtun and non-Pashtun areas. In particular, it

appears the anti-ISAF reaction is driven almost entirely by behavior in Pashtun areas.23 The

analysis indicates that the neighboring districts effect is much smaller than the in-district one

when ISAF is responsible for civilian casualties. This is consistent with a strong revenge

22
  Results by gender are presented in Appendix Table 3.
23
  This result is consistent with Johnson and Mason’s (2008) argument about the centrality of Pashtun social norms
in creating strong incentives for taking up arms to avenge civilian casualties caused by international forces.


                                                                                                         21 of 85
mechanism in which ISAF-generated civilian casualties increase participation and support for

insurgent activity because of personal loss or exposure to violence. If revenge is the motivating

factor, we expect a null result on the spatial lag, since revenge is triggered when family and

friends are killed – which is most likely to occur within one’s own district, not in neighboring

areas.

         While it appears that insurgent-caused civilian casualties in neighboring districts might

also have a weak effect on violent incidents in a district, the effect is substantively and

statistically small and out-of-district insurgent-generated civilian casualties fail the “placebo

test”.

         In summary, the relationship between civilian casualties and violent incidents in

Afghanistan is characterized by three important facts:

     (1) There is a positive relationship between civilian casualties and levels of future violence in

         an area and that relationship is much stronger for ISAF-caused civilian casualties.

     (2) Civilian casualties affect the long-run trends in violence, not short-term fluctuations.

     (3) The relationship between civilian casualties and violence does not appear to spill over

         district boundaries.

We do not find evidence of significant short run effects, casting doubt on the possibility that

either the information or the capacity mechanisms are driving behavior. Instead, the data are

consistent with the claim that civilian casualties are affecting future violence primarily through

the revenge mechanism.24



3.3 Matched Sample Estimates of the Relationship between Civilian Casualties and Violence

24
  Appendix Tables 1-8 present more complete results of the model specifications and robustness checks for
Afghanistan discussed in this section.


                                                                                                        22 of 85
An alternative approach to estimating the causal effect of civilian casualties on subsequent

violence is to compare outcomes across district/bi-months that are matched on factors

influencing the propensity of both sides to kill civilians. In previous sections we showed that

civilian casualties predict the long-run trends in violence, but we could not rule out reverse-

causality for insurgent-generated casualties. If it is the case the trends in violence predict the

propensity of both sides to harm civilian casualties, but the realized level is largely random, then

if we match on those long-run trends we can treat the particular occurrence of civilian casualties

as quasi-random, potentially providing a more robust solution to omitted variable bias than the

parametric approach applied above. Many of the factors which affect both violence and civilian

casualties are unobservable but are likely captured in the long-run trends in violence over past

weeks, the history of violence through time t in district i. If we look at the set of units that

experienced similar levels of violence in the past—say t-6 through t—during similar time

periods—quarters—and are of similar ethnic mix—Pashtun, mixed, or non-Pashtun, then we

expect ISAF and insurgent forces operating in those districts/bi-months to face similar incentives

regarding the use of force and level of care taken to avoid civilian casualties.

        This expectation suggests a simple analytical path: 25 (1) use a matching algorithm to

identify district/bi-months with similar histories; (2) within each stratum use a simple bivariate

regression model to estimate the relationship between the number of civilians killed today and

the average rate of attacks in the next 3 periods (the same long-run trend analyzed above); and

(3) take the average of these results weighting by the size of the strata. The resulting estimate

provides the average treatment effect for district/bi-months that experience any history of

violence represented in the set of strata used at step (2).

25
  Condra and Shapiro (2010) apply this approach to studying the impact of civilian casualties on insurgent violence
in Iraq.


                                                                                                          23 of 85
         We matched district/bi-months using the Coarsened Exact Matching (CEM) algorithm

implemented in the cem package for Stata (Iacus, King, and Porro 2008). The procedure is

simple. First, we coarsen the data on each matching variable so that it falls into meaningful bins,

just as one would when constructing a histogram. Second, perform exact matching on the

coarsened data so that all district/bi-months with roughly the same history are placed in a

common stratum. This procedure has a variety of desirable properties relative to more

commonly-used methods such as propensity score matching, including reduced model

dependence and ease of use for matching on continuous variables.26 Our matching solution uses

current incidents per 1,000 population, the lagged moving average of incidents in the previous

three periods, three lags of that moving average, the quarter, and the district ethnicity. For

current incidents and the lags we use the 10th, 33rd, 66th, and 90th percentiles of the variables as

the cut-points between bins. The intuition for this choice is that places with very high or very low

violence are fundamentally different than areas with moderate levels of violence.27 For ethnicity

we code districts as Pashtun if greater than 66% of their area is coded as Pashtun, as non-Pashtun

if greater than 66% of their area is a single non-Pashtun ethnicity, and as mixed otherwise.

         This analytical approach is justified by the assumption that matching long-run trends in

past insurgent violence, ethnicity, and time effectively controls for characteristics impacting the

propensity of actors to kill civilians. The results are summarized in Figure 5 which plots the

marginal effect of civilian casualties in period 0 on the 3-week moving average of incidents in

periods t to t+2. The x-axis in each plot is the number of weeks before or after the period in

which civilian casualties occur, period t. The y-axis in the top plot is the average marginal effect
26
   See Iacus, King, and Porro (2008) for a detailed comparison of CEM to other matching techniques.
27
   The challenge in doing this matching is to coarsen the data so that in matched strata there is zero
contemporaneous correlation (or close to it) between insurgent attacks and civilian killings—i.e. within matched
strata civilian killings are uncorrelated with insurgent violence—without matching so finely that there are too few
district/bi-months in each history. Full replication code available from the authors.


                                                                                                            24 of 85
of ISAF civilian killings in time 0 on the moving average of SIGACTs/1000 population. The y-

axis in the bottom plot is the average marginal effect of insurgent civilian killings for the same

sample. We estimate the mean of the marginal effects for each strata, weighting by strata size

and providing the 95% confidence interval around the mean.28



                                    [INSERT FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE]



         If our procedure matched effectively and there is no causal impact of past insurgent

attacks against Coalition forces on current civilian casualties within matched strata, then these

differences will be close to zero through period t and will then spike up (or down) for at least one

period after week t reflecting the effect of killing civilians. These plots confirm that our matching

exercise effectively controls for selection on unobservable characteristics. Greater violence

against civilians by ISAF predicted higher levels of attacks, while greater violence by insurgents

has no such effect. These plots also show that the effect of ISAF caused casualties is enduring,

peaking 14 weeks after the event. This validates our hypothesis that civilian casualties by ISAF

forces predict greater violence through a long-run effect. The effect of insurgent- caused civilian

casualties is statistically insignificant.29 As we would expect from table 6, this result is driven

almost entirely by Pashtun areas. Appendix figure A1 shows the same matching solution for

Pashtun areas, the pattern is almost the same as for the entire country.




28
  Appendix Table 9 provides estimates and confidence intervals for this matching exercise.
29
  Results of the average marginal effect of killing one additional civilian are show in the appendix. The coefficient
for period t-2, for example, captures the correlation within matched strata between civilian casualties in time t-2 and
the average of SIGACTs over period t-2, t-1, and t. That this average is statistically indistinguishable from zero until
period t helps to verify that this approach controls appropriately for contemporaneous correlation and reverse
causality.


                                                                                                              25 of 85
           Two facts stand out from this matching exercise. First, we can confirm our previous

findings that ISAF-generated casualties have a statistically significant effect on the long-run

trend in civilian casualties. In the entire country we find a significant positive treatment such that

each civilian per 1,000 population killed by ISAF predicts an additional 0.03 attacks per 1,000

people in the next 6-week period. The average ISAF-generated incident resulted in 2 civilian

casualties. Thus, in an average-sized district of 83,000 people this amounts to 1 additional

SIGACT over the next 6 weeks. Parametric estimates of the lead moving average of SIGACTs

are consistent with these estimates: an additional civilian casualty accounts for 0.03 to 0.08 more

IED attacks per 1,000 in the population. Second, there is no evidence that insurgent-generated

civilian casualties affect the number of attacks. Insurgent-generated civilian casualties’ estimates

are more subject to reverse-causality concerns: they fail a placebo test even with spatial lags of

the dependent variable included.30 To the extent that this matching approach controls for

underlying trends in insurgent activity that may be otherwise omitted in the fixed effects

approaches, we should be a bit more skeptical about the positive finding on insurgent-caused

casualties in Table 3 (models 1 and 3).



4. CIVILIAN CASUALTIES AND INSURGENT VIOLENCE IN IRAQ

Any intensive study of micro-data from one conflict raises issues of external validity. While

there are many important differences between the two conflicts, Iraq provides a useful outside

comparison to Afghanistan. There are three important reasons to compare insurgent behavior in

Iraq and Afghanistan. First, many policy makers and strategists base policy and planning in

Afghanistan on the lessons learned in Iraq. A similar analysis of Iraq can shed light on whether

the patterns that we observe in Afghanistan are particular to that conflict or whether they

30   See Appendix Table 4 for results from placebo tests.


                                                                                              26 of 85
represent a more general trend of behavior in these types of insurgencies. Second, the

comparison can shed light on whether there are Afghanistan-specific factors driving the results in

section 3. If these underlying mechanisms are dominant in Afghanistan, Iraq provides a natural

falsification check for these theories. Third, while the conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq have

some similarities, the insurgencies’ operating environments differ dramatically. In Iraq, the

insurgency operated in an urban environment and faced relatively high counterinsurgent force

levels, compared to Afghanistan where the insurgency operates in a largely-rural environment.

To the extent that civilian casualties affect insurgents’ labor supply or the flow of information to

counterinsurgents, we should their effects to vary substantially across these conflicts.31

           We therefore replicated the analysis above on data from the war in Iraq. Figure 6

provides some basic intuition for the difference between the conflicts. The most striking

difference is that while risks to civilians from insurgents are roughly similar in Sunni areas of

Iraq and Pashtun areas of Afghanistan, the risk to civilians from Coalition forces is substantially

higher in Iraq than the risk from ISAF units in Afghanistan. This could lead to different

dynamics as could the vastly greater scale of civilian casualties in Iraq. Additionally, the time

series for Iraq is much longer, almost five years as opposed to just 15 months for Afghanistan.

           In contrast to Afghanistan, it appears that there is little to no long-run effect of civilian

casualties on violence in Iraq. At the district/bi-month level there is no consistent relationship

between civilian casualties and violence. To the extent that civilian casualties in Iraq affect

insurgent violence they do so on a week-to-week level, impacting short-term fluctuations. As

Condra and Shapiro (2010) argue, that pattern is most consistent with the information

mechanism whereby the local population withholds (shares) information on insurgents when

Coalition forces (insurgents) are responsible for civilian casualties.
31
     For more detailed discussion of insurgent group structure and empirical evidence, see Iyengar and Monten (2009).


                                                                                                           27 of 85
4.1 Data on Civilian Casualties and Violence in Iraq

The civilian casualty data for Iraq come from Iraq Body Count (IBC), a non-profit organization

dedicated to tracking civilian casualties using media reports, as well as hospital, morgue and

other figures.32 These data capture 18,474 incidents in which civilians were killed that can be

accurately geo-located to the district level, accounting for 59,245 civilian deaths. We divided

these casualties into four categories: (1) Insurgent killings of civilians in the course of attacking

Coalition or Iraqi government targets; (2) Coalition killings of civilians; (3) Sectarian killings

which capture all killing that are reported as being conducted by an organization representing an

ethnic group that did not occur in the context of attacks on Coalition or Iraqi forces; and (4)

Unknown killings which capture all other violence, including much of the ethnic cleansing, and

reprisal killings, To replicate the Afghanistan results we use only categories (1) and (2) which

most closely match the coding rules used by the Afghan data collected by the Civilian Casualties

Tracking Cell (CCTC).

        Unlike the data from Afghanistan, the Iraq data do not include reliable information on the

gender or age of the victims. We could not separately control for the impact of incidents that kill

men from that of incidents that kill women and children. Thus, while we can use the Iraq data to

do a first-order check for the external validity of our Afghanistan results, we cannot replicate the

full analysis.

        Since the data from Iraq are based on press reporting, they are subject to biases which are

not as much of a concern for the Afghanistan data. The first concern is that there is likely to be

23
  See http://www.iraqbodycount.org/. The data we use were produced through a multi-year collaboration with IBC
and contain several improvements on the publicly available IBC data including more consistent geo-coding. See
Condra and Shapiro (2010) for more details.




                                                                                                      28 of 85
enormous noise associated with attributing casualties across these categories and that such

measurement error would be non-random with respect to violence, posing significant problems

for our analysis. To check for such a possibility, we investigated whether the percent of civilian

casualties (both the number of casualties and the number of casualty-related incidents) in the

“unknown” category is a function of incidents of violence. Once we control for the sectarian

composition of the area, or when we introduce district and time fixed effects, there is no

significant relationship between unknown casualty events and violence between insurgents and

Coalition forces. This approach and finding indicates that our attempt to code civilian casualties

is not contaminated by systematic measurement error.

       The second concern is that the probability an incident is excluded from our analysis

because it lacks the information necessary to match it to a district location may be correlated

with violence. If reporters avoid high-violence areas, for example, then districts with high levels

of violence would have more missing data. By contrast, if the desire for a good story (or other

career concerns) pushed reporters to cover the most dangerous places, we might see the opposite

bias. Because our data include 2,612 incidents for which the governorate is known but the

district is not, we are able test for this possibility by analyzing whether the proportion of

incidents at the governorate level that cannot be attributed to a specific district correlates with

levels of violence. There is no significant relationship between levels of insurgent violence and

the proportion of incidents that cannot be resolved to the district level.

       Our measure of attacks against Coalition and Iraqi government forces is based on

193,264 ‘significant activity’ (SIGACT) reports by Coalition forces that capture a wide variety

of information about “…executed enemy attacks targeted against coalition, Iraqi Security Forces

(ISF), civilians, Iraqi infrastructure and government organizations” occurring from February




                                                                                                29 of 85
2004 through December 2008. Unclassified fields were drawn from the Multi-National Forces

Iraq SIGACTS III Database and provide the location, date, time, and type of attack incidents but

do not include any information pertaining to the Coalition Force units involved, Coalition Force

casualties or battle damage incurred. Moreover, they exclude coalition-initiated events where no

one returned fire, such as indirect fire attacks not triggered by initiating insurgent attacks. We

filter the data to remove attacks we can positively identify as being directed at civilians or other

insurgent groups, leaving us with a sample of 168,730 attack incidents.

        For this study we created bimonthly data from February 4, 2004 through December 31,

2008. Descriptive statistics of key variables for all of Iraq across this time period and by ethnic

group are presented in Table 2.



4.2 Estimating a Relationship between Civilian Casualties and Violence

We replicated the short-run Afghanistan results with data from Iraq in Table 7 and the long-run

results in Table 8. In neither case do we find any significant effect of civilian casualties on

violent incidents.33 Appendix figure A2 present the results of applying the matching approach

described above to data from Iraq. The pre-treatment match for Coalition-caused casualties is

poor and, if anything, the Iraq data provide evidence of a capacity effect in that Coalition-caused

casualties appear to predict a long-run decrease in insurgent attacks.

        These results contrast with the findings of Condra and Shapiro (2010), who find civilian

casualties have a robust week-to-week impact on insurgent violence. Analyzing a weekly time-

series for Iraq, they find that Coalition-caused casualties predict increased violence, with each

death predicting approximately 0.038 additional attacks in the following week per 100,000


33
  Appendix Tables 10-17 present more complete results of the model specifications and robustness checks for Iraq
discussed in this section.


                                                                                                        30 of 85
population. The effect is especially strong for Sunni areas where a median Coalition-caused

incident resulted in 2 civilian deaths, so that for an average Sunni district in Iraq – which has

146,365 residents – an average Coalition-caused incident results in roughly 0.63 extra attacks on

Coalition forces in the subsequent week. Condra and Shapiro (2010) also found the reactions are

symmetric: insurgent-caused civilian casualties lead to fewer insurgent attacks. An average

insurgent-caused incident involves 3.7 civilian deaths, meaning that it predicts roughly 0.43

fewer insurgent attacks on Coalition forces in the next week in an average district of roughly

277,238 people.

         The disparity between the two sets of Iraq results is due to the fact that Condra and

Shapiro (2010) analyze the effects of casualties on violence on a weekly basis, while in this

study we replicate the models from Afghanistan at the bimonthly level.34 The differences

between these conflicts are quite stark. In Afghanistan we find robust evidence of a local revenge

effect against ISAF forces. In Iraq, there is no such effect. Instead, there is strong evidence in the

weekly time series of an information effect. In the context of the simple model we started with in

section 1, the fact that force levels were much higher in Iraq would suggest that violence in

Afghanistan should be more sensitive to labor shocks—e.g. increased recruiting due to local

exposure to civilian casualties—while violence in Iraq should be much more sensitive to

information shocks—e.g. individuals making decisions about sharing information on the margins

based on both sides’ mistreatment of civilians.




34
  The results presented here apply specifications most appropriate for the Afghan data to the Iraq case. Condra and
Shapiro’s (2010) results replicate with the bimonthly data, albeit with less precision (likely due to smaller sample).


                                                                                                             31 of 85
5. Conclusions

A central question in intrastate conflicts is how insurgents are able to mobilize supporters to

participate in violent and risky activities. An often cited mechanism is that violence committed

by counterinsurgent forces, such as ISAF in Afghanistan or Coalition forces in Iraq, generates

resentment and anger that increase both passive and active support for insurgent groups. There

are also important policy reasons to consider the relationship between civilian casualties and

violence. In 2010 Afghan and Western counterinsurgents are being asked to accept high levels of

personal risk, and some are dying for it, on the theory that doing so will be militarily

advantageous in the long-run. Both policymakers and military commanders must determine the

degree of risk they are willing to accept in order to reduce civilian casualties. A better

understanding of the extent to which such casualties increase future violence can inform efforts

to balance short-term versus long-term trade-off in terms of violence and risk when determining

standards and practices for rules of engagement.

       This study contributes to the existing literature on this issue in four ways. First, we use

fixed effects and a more nuanced matching strategy to estimate the causal effect of civilian

casualties on violence. We find that if the average ISAF-caused incident (which resulted in 2

civilian casualties) was eliminated, then in an average-sized Afghan district there would be 1

fewer insurgent attack over the next 6 weeks. This evidence supports the hypothesis that in order

to reduce violence to ISAF soldiers, units should seek to minimize civilian casualties during

operations.

       Second, we find evidence that the civilian response to casualties in Afghanistan is

asymmetric with respect to the armed actor responsible. If civilians were willing and able to

respond in a way that punished the armed actor responsible for civilian casualties, we would




                                                                                             32 of 85
expect that ISAF-generated casualties would meet with higher subsequent violence, while

insurgent-generated casualties would lead to fewer attacks—perhaps through the sharing of more

intelligence with the ISAF counterinsurgency forces. Instead, violence changes only when ISAF

is responsible for the casualties, indicating an asymmetric burden on the ISAF soldiers.

       Third, we attempt to systematically distinguish between four theories that explain the

relationships we observe between civilian casualties and insurgent violence: information,

capacity, recruitment, and revenge. Our approach uses differing levels of temporal aggregation

as well as analyzing the geospatial effect of violence to find evidence consistent with particular

theories. Given the long-run effect in Afghanistan and weak evidence of geospatial spillovers,

the effects in Afghanistan appear consistent with a revenge effect, rather than propaganda,

capacity, or information effects.

       Fourth, we test the external validity of our findings by conducting the same analysis on

the conflict in Iraq where previous research has shown there is a symmetric, short-run reaction to

civilian casualties. The evidence shows that the conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq are different in

how civilian casualties affect the ability of insurgents to produce violence. In Afghanistan, we

find strong evidence of a revenge effect. In Iraq, we do not find this effect. This highlights two

important differences in these insurgencies. The insurgency in Afghanistan is rural and faced

relatively low counterinsurgent force levels while that in Iraq was urban and faced a strong

counterinsurgent presence. We suspect that the greater population density in Iraq made insurgent

activity easier to observe and, combined with higher counterinsurgent force levels, increased

insurgents’ reliance on the general populations’ reluctance to cooperate with counterinsurgents.

In Afghanistan, the more dispersed population and lower counterinsurgent force levels indicate

that the supply of insurgents is much more likely to be a major constraint.




                                                                                            33 of 85
       Overall, the empirical evidence from Afghanistan sheds light on the way in which

insurgent groups operate. In particular, it appears that while in high population-density, urban

conflicts (such as Iraq) information flows are a critical component to counterinsurgency

operations, in more rural insurgencies the most salient factor is the availability of fighters. To the

extent that counterinsurgent forces engage in unpopular and aggressive operations that generate

specific local grievances, they are likely to facilitate increased recruitment and support for

insurgent groups. Thus, the counterinsurgent force faces an asymmetric problem. In responding

to such a situation, military leaders face the task of balancing population protection with

restrictions on their own operations. Minimizing counterinsurgents’ harm to civilians appears to

minimize the recruiting potential of insurgent forces. Thus, on a long-term basis the goal of

reducing civilian casualties is not necessarily in conflict with the objective of protecting the lives

of international forces.




                                                                                              34 of 85
REFERENCES

Birtle, Andrew J. 2008. “Persuasion and Coercion in Counterinsurgency Warfare.” Military
        Review (July-August): 45-53.
Condra, Luke N. and Jacob N. Shapiro. “Who Takes the Blame? The Strategic Effects of
        Collateral Damage.” Working Paper. Stanford University and Princeton University.
        March 19, 2010.
Department of the Army. “Counterinsurgency Field Manual No. 3-24.” December 15, 2006.
Gutman, Roy. “We’ve met the enemy in Afghanistan, and he’s changed.” McClatchy
        Newspapers (March 14, 2010). Available from:
        http://www.mcclatchydc.com/2010/03/14/90083/weve-met-the-enemy-in-
        afghanistan.html. Accessed April 29, 2010.
Hanson, Matthew, Radha Iyengar, and Jonathan Monten, “The Impact of Reconstruction
        Spending on the Labor Market for Insurgents,” Working Paper, 2009.
Iacus, Stefano M., Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro. 2008. “Matching for Causal Inference
        Without Balance Checking.” Available at http://gking.harvard.edu/files/cem.pdf.
Iyengar, Radha and Jonathan Monten. 2009. “Is There an ‘Emboldenment’ Effect? Evidence
        from the Insurgency in Iraq.” NBER Working Paper 13839.
Johnson, Thomas H. and M. Chris Mason. “No Sign Until the Burst of Fire.” International
        Security 32, no. 4 (Spring 2008): 41-77.
LandScan Global Population Database. 2008. Oak Ridge, TN: Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
        Available at http://www.ornl.gov/landscan/.
Nadery, Nader and Haseeb Humayoon. “Peace Under Friendly Fire.” New York Times (October
        4, 2008): WK11.
Pleming, Sue. “Civilian Deaths Complicate Afghan Mission.” Reuters (February 22, 2010).
        Available from: http://www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/N22211525.htm. Accessed
        April 29, 2010.
U.S. Congress. Senate. Committee on Armed Services. Hearing to Consider the Nominations of
        Admiral James G. Stavridis; Lieutenant General Douglas M. Fraser; and Lieutenant
        General Stanley A. McChrystal. 111th Cong., 1st sess., 2 June 2009. Transcript available
        from: http://armed-services.senate.gov/Transcripts/2009/06%20June/09-36%20-%206-2-
        09.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2010.
U.S. Congress. Senate. Committee on Armed Services. Hearing to Receive Testimony on the
        Challenges Facing the Department of Defense. 111th Cong., 1st sess., 27 January 2009.
        Transcript available from: http://armed-
        services.senate.gov/Transcripts/2009/01%20January/A%20Full%20Committee/09-
        02%20-%201-27-09.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2010.
Wood, David. “Taliban Causes Most Civilian Deaths, but U.S. Gets the Blame.” Politics Daily
        (January 15, 2010). Available from: http://www.politicsdaily.com/2010/01/15/taliban-
        cause-most-civilian-deaths-but-u-s-gets-the-blame/. Accessed April 1, 2010.




                                                                                        35 of 85
Figure 1. Civilian Casualties and Violent Events, Jan 2009-March 2010




Notes: Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on
LandScan population estimates. Civilian casualties’ estimates based on data from the Civilian Casualties
Tracking Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Violent Events based on data
on significant actions (SIGACTs) against ISAF. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised
explosive device explosions, improvised explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device
hoaxes, and premature detonations.




                                                                                                36 of 85
Figure 2. Deviations from mean in Civilian Casualties and Violent Events




Notes: Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on
LandScan population estimates. Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian Casualties
Tracking Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Violent Events based on data
on significant actions (SIGACTs) against ISAF. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised
explosive device explosions, improvised explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device
hoaxes, and premature detonations.




                                                                                                37 of 85
Figure 3. Incidents and Civilian Casualties in Key Provinces




Notes: Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on
LandScan population estimates. Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian Casualties
Tracking Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Violent Events based on data
on significant actions (SIGACTs) against ISAF. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised
explosive device explosions, improvised explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device
hoaxes, and premature detonations.




                                                                                                 38 of 85
Figure 4. Sources of Civilian Casualties for Women and Children vs. Men




Notes: Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian Casualties Tracking Cell, International
Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Event type based on description available in first incident
report provided to ISAF by military sources. Categories include direct fire (DF), Escalation of Force
(EOF), Indirect Fire (IDF), Road and Traffic Accidents, Air Strikes, and Improvised Explosive Devices
(IED). Descriptions available not in these categories were assigned to “other” categories. Events with no
description were assigned to “unknown” category.


                                                                                                    39 of 85
40 of 85
Figure 5. Estimates of the effect of Civilian Casualties on Violent Incidents from Matched Sample




Notes: Matched on SIGACTs/1,000 population in period t, three-period lagged moving average of
SIGACTs in t through t-3, ethnicity and quarter, this created 2,135 strata of which 1,723 had three or more
district/bi-months. 148 of 902 district/bi-months with civilian casualties had no matching unit without
civilian casualties. Multivariate L1 distance for match = 0.746. Estimates of Civilian Casualties and
SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on LandScan population estimates. Strata with greater
than 200 district/bi-months dropped. Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian
Casualties Tracking Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. District
classification based on National Geospatial Agency (NGA) shape files on ethnic areas in Afghanistan.
Violent Events based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs) against ISAF. SIGACTs include direct
fire, indirect fire, improvised explosive device explosions. Excludes improvised explosive devices found
and cleared, improvised explosive device hoaxes, and premature detonations.




                                                                                                    41 of 85
Figure 6. Iraq versus Afghanistan Civilian Casualties by Ethnic Area.




District classification based on National Geospatial Agency (NGA) shape files on ethnic areas in
Afghanistan. Districts classified as Pashtun if more than 66% of their area fall into regions NGA defines as
Pashtun, as non-Pashtun if more than 66% of their area falls into regions NGA defines as one specific
non-Pashtun ethnicity, and mixed otherwise.




                                                                                                   42 of 85
Table 1: Mechanisms and Expected Relationships
 Mechanisms         Party              Short-Run                 Long-Run
                 Responsible  Total       Men    Women   Total     Men    Women
Panel A: In Area
Revenge        ISAF             +          +       +      +        +       +
               Insurgents       –          –       –      –        –       –
Propaganda     ISAF             0          0       0      +        +       +
               Insurgents       0          0       0      –        –       –
Information ISAF                +          +       +      0        0       0
               Insurgents       –          –       –      0        0       0
Capacity       ISAF             –          –       0      0        0       0
               Insurgents       0          0       0      0        0       0
Panel B: Out-Area
                                       Short-Run                 Long-Run
                              Total       Men    Women   Total     Men    Women
Revenge        ISAF             0          0       0      0         0       0
               Insurgents       0          0       0      0         0       0
Recruitment ISAF                0          0       0      +         +       +
               Insurgents       0          0       0      –         –       –
Information ISAF                +          +       +      0         0       0
               Insurgents       –          –       –      0         0       0
Capacity       ISAF             0          0       0      0         0       0
               Insurgents       0          0       0      0         0       0




                                                                                  43 of 85
Table 2. Events per 100,000 population per district/bimonth for Afghanistan and Iraq
Variable                   Observations Mean Std. Dev.               Observations          Mean         Std. Dev.
                             Afghanistan (Jan. 2009 – Mar. 2010)              Iraq (Feb. 2004 – Dec. 2008)
                                        Entire Country                               Entire Country
Insurgent Attacks               12672          2.87          8.93           13312           5.26          15.06
Civilians Killed                12672          0.07          0.89           13312           0.14          2.28
(Coalition)
Civilians Killed                12672          0.50          5.13           13312           0.25          1.78
(Insurgents)
                                   Pashtun Districts (n=137)                     Sunni Districts (n=14)
Insurgent Attacks                4521          4.87       10.30             1792           17.38          22.84
Civilians Killed                 4521          0.13          1.32           1792            0.69          6.73
(Coalition)
Civilians Killed                 4521          0.94          7.63           1792            0.94          4.23
(Insurgents)
                                    Mixed Districts (n=68)                       Mixed Districts (n=28)
Insurgent Attacks                2244          4.11       10.30             3584            9.66          20.79
Civilians Killed                 2244          0.09          0.90           3584            0.10          0.73
(Coalition)
Civilians Killed                 2244          0.54          3.49           3584            0.36          1.43
(Insurgents)
                                Non-Pashtun Districts (n=179)              Shiite and Kurdish Districts (n=62)
Insurgent Attacks                5907          0.87          6.49           7936            0.55          1.83
Civilians Killed                 5907          0.01          0.19           7936            0.03          0.42
(Coalition)
Civilians Killed                  5907           0.14       2.66               7936             0.03    0.45
(Insurgents)
Notes: All figures are per 100,000 population. Insurgent attacks for Afghanistan are from ISAF CIDNE
database. Civilian casualty estimates for Afghanistan are from ISAF Civilian Casualties Tracking Cell.
Insurgent attacks for Iraq are from MNF-I SIGACT-III database. Civilian casualty estimates for Iraq are
from Iraq Body Count. Insurgent attacks include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised explosive device
explosions, improvised explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device hoaxes, and
premature detonations. District classification for Afghanistan calculated from National Geospatial
Intelligence Agency Afghanistan Ethnic Map (2007). District calculations for Iraq are based on December
2005 election results. Population figures are from LandScan (2008). Afghanistan results nclude 384
districts with more than 1 insurgent attack in period under study. Iraq results include all districts.




                                                                                                      44 of 85
Table 3. Linear Regression Estimates of SIGACTs on Civilian Casualties (Afghanistan)
                                         (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)       (5)               (6)
Dependent Variable                        SIGACTs per 1000                       IEDs per 1000            Direct Fire per 1000
(mean)                                          0.0226                              0.0072                       0.0097
Panel A: ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t              0.342**            0.120            0.147*             0.0727      0.178*          0.0483
                                       (0.16)            (0.11)           (0.076)            (0.058)    (0.091)          (0.072)
Civilian casualties at t-1             0.144            -0.0665           0.0400            -0.0365      0.0621          -0.0409
                                       (0.11)           (0.084)           (0.047)            (0.034)    (0.069)          (0.064)
Civilian casualties at t-2            0.255*            0.0997            0.128*             0.0698      0.0966          0.0326
                                       (0.13)            (0.14)           (0.068)            (0.069)     (0.10)           (0.12)
Civilian casualties at t-3            0.0240            -0.168*          0.131**             0.0645     -0.0318          -0.120*
                                       (0.12)           (0.098)           (0.061)            (0.047)    (0.087)          (0.065)
Civilian casualties at t-4             0.199            0.0379          0.0994**             0.0224      0.0723          0.0114
                                       (0.17)            (0.12)           (0.048)            (0.046)     (0.14)          (0.086)
Joint F-test of lags                    1.44             -0.34              2.57               1.34       0.62            -0.55
(p-value)                              (0.15)            (0.73)            (0.01)             (0.18)     (0.53)           (0.59)
Panel B: Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t             0.123***          0.0978**         0.0551**            0.0484*    0.0502***         0.0357**
                                      (0.044)           (0.039)           (0.027)            (0.025)     (0.017)          (0.015)
Civilian casualties at t-1           0.0992**           0.0550*           0.0242             0.0102     0.0440*           0.0236
                                      (0.040)           (0.033)           (0.015)            (0.013)     (0.026)          (0.023)
Civilian casualties at t-2            0.0602           -0.00128          0.0162*           -0.000554     0.0400           0.0112
                                      (0.042)           (0.026)          (0.0094)           (0.0055)     (0.033)          (0.025)
Civilian casualties at t-3           0.0763**           0.0130           0.0190*            0.00103    0.0467**          0.0169**
                                      (0.032)           (0.011)           (0.011)           (0.0062)     (0.021)         (0.0078)
Civilian casualties at t-4            0.0386            -0.0154           0.0132            0.00169      0.0212          -0.00837
                                      (0.024)           (0.015)          (0.0088)           (0.0052)     (0.015)         (0.0090)
Joint F-test of lags                    2.11              0.97              1.84               0.63        1.68             0.93
(p-value)                              (0.04)            (0.33)            (0.07)             (0.53)      (0.09)           (0.35)
3-Period Moving Average                  N                  Y                N                   Y          N                Y
Observations                           31104             31104             31104              31104       31104            31104
R-squared                               0.50              0.64              0.36               0.46        0.42             0.58


                                                                                                                                    45 of 85
Notes: The Dependent variable is significant actions, IED incidents or Direct Fire incidents per 1000 in the population respectively. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the district level are reported in parentheses. All specifications include district and month-year fixed effect. Estimates which are
significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with ** (*, ***). Moving average estimates are 3-period (6 week) previous week linear estimate of the
moving average of the dependent variable. Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on LandScan
population estimates. Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian Casualties Tracking Cell, International Security Assistance Forces
(ISAF) headquarters. Violent Events based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs) against ISAF. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised
explosive device explosions, improvised explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device hoaxes, and premature detonations.




                                                                                                                                                   46 of 85
Table 4. Proportion of Variance Explained by Different Controls
                                          ISAF-caused         ISAF-caused       Insurgent-caused         Insurgent-caused       SIGACTs
Dependent Variable                          Casualties          Incidents           Casualties               Incidents           per 1,000
                                            per 1,000           per 1,000           per 1,000                per 1,000
Controls:
District FE                                   0.0246             0.0280               0.0220                  0.0393              0.4627
Controls:
District and Month FE                         0.0285             0.0330               0.0293                  0.0594              0.4829
Controls:
District and Month FE
Lagged 3-Period Moving Average
(SIGACTs/1000)                                0.0314             0.0369               0.0308                  0.0650              0.6347
Controls:
District and Month FE
Lagged 3-Period Moving Average
(SIGACTs/1000)
Lagged DV                                     0.0320             0.0370               0.0315                  0.0667              0.6582
Notes: All figures are per 1,000 population. Insurgent attacks for Afghanistan are from ISAF CIDNE database. Civilian casualty estimates for Afghanistan
are from ISAF Civilian Casualties Tracking Cell. Insurgent attacks include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised explosive device explosions, improvised
explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device hoaxes, and premature detonations.




                                                                                                                                                 47 of 85
Table 5. Linear Regression Estimates of Moving Average or Mean Absolute Deviation of SIGACTs on Civilian Casualties (Afghanistan)
                                   (1)              (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)              (6)             (7)             (8)
                                                  SIGACTs per 1000                                             IEDs per 1000
Civilian Casualty Location             In-District               Out-of-District                In-District                    Out-of-District
DV: SIGACTs                   Lead MA         Lead MAD      Lead MA      Lead MAD       Lead MA        Lead MAD          Lead MA       Lead MAD
Panel A: ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t        -0.0140           0.0197    -0.00732       -0.00939       0.0288           0.0242        -0.00396       -0.000741
                                (0.088)          (0.022)     (0.030)        (0.011)      (0.041)           -0.024         (0.017)         (0.0073)
Civilian casualties at t-1     -0.00375           0.0571      0.0386         0.0148       0.0415           0.0394         0.00904         0.0120*
                                 (0.10)          (0.036)     (0.030)        (0.016)      (0.039)           -0.026         (0.016)         (0.0069)
Civilian casualties at t-2      -0.0710          -0.0175      0.0301         0.0194       0.0320           0.0169         0.00846       -0.000710
                                (0.099)          (0.042)     (0.034)        (0.016)      (0.029)           -0.024         (0.019)         (0.0080)
Civilian casualties at t-3       0.0133         -0.00412      0.0369        0.00823     0.0896**           0.0522         0.0215         -0.00324
                                 (0.10)          (0.022)     (0.038)        (0.012)      (0.037)           -0.037         (0.018)         (0.0065)
Civilian casualties at t-4     -0.00197          -0.0140    -0.00959        -0.0209     0.0753**           0.0375         0.0217         -0.00332
                                (0.081)          (0.024)     (0.033)        (0.013)      (0.034)           -0.037         (0.016)         (0.0056)
Joint F-test of lags              -0.20            0.26        0.90           0.57         2.13             1.25            1.00            0.27
(p-value)                        (0.84)           (0.80)      (0.37)         (0.57)       (0.03)           (0.21)          (0.32)          (0.79)
Panel B: Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t         0.0545          0.0152*     0.00579       -0.00148       0.0109          0.00284        0.00390*        0.000495
                                (0.034)         (0.0078)    (0.0042)       (0.0021)     (0.0074)          -0.0052        (0.0024)         (0.0013)
Civilian casualties at t-1       0.0227          0.00474    0.00702*      -0.000736      0.00114         -0.00354       0.00394**        0.000896
                                (0.025)         (0.0072)    (0.0041)       (0.0018)     (0.0058)          -0.0031        (0.0019)         (0.0011)
Civilian casualties at t-2      0.00924           0.0101   0.00752**      -0.000386      0.00321          0.00328         0.00318        0.000798
                                (0.011)         (0.0082)    (0.0035)       (0.0016)     (0.0056)          -0.0047        (0.0020)         (0.0014)
Civilian casualties at t-3     -0.00459          0.00115     0.00176       -0.00112      0.00210          0.00297         0.00182        0.00154*
                                (0.012)         (0.0055)    (0.0032)       (0.0014)     (0.0052)          -0.0047        (0.0018)        (0.00092)
Civilian casualties at t-4      -0.0127        -0.000388    0.000574        0.00255      0.00454          0.00265         0.00258        0.00240*
                                (0.016)         (0.0076)    (0.0035)       (0.0027)     (0.0042)          -0.0047        (0.0024)         (0.0014)
Joint F-test of lags              0.49             0.86        1.63           0.07         0.64             0.37            1.76            1.81
(p-value)                        (0.62)           (0.39)      (0.10)         (0.94)       (0.52)           (0.71)          (0.08)          (0.07)
Observations                     30696            29928       30692          29924        30696            29928           30692           29924
R-squared                         0.66             0.47        0.66           0.47         0.58             0.41            0.58            0.40


                                                                                                                                             48 of 85
Notes: The Dependent variable is significant actions, IED incidents or Direct Fire incidents per 1000 in the population respectively. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the district level are reported in parentheses. All specifications include district and month-year fixed effect. Estimates which are
significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with ** (*, ***). Moving average estimates are 3-period (6 week) previous week linear estimate of the
moving average of the dependent variable. All regressions include the spatial lag of the DV. Spatial lags are estimated as the average dependent variable
value for all adjacent districts. Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on LandScan population estimates.
Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian Casualties Tracking Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Violent
Events based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs) against ISAF. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised explosive device explosions,
improvised explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device hoaxes, and premature detonations.




                                                                                                                                                    49 of 85
Table 6. Linear Regression Estimates of Moving Average of IEDs on Civilian Casualties in Pashtun vs. Non-Pashtun Areas (Afghanistan)
                                  (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)
DV: IED(t)                        FE             FE             FE              FE             MA             MA             MA            MA
                             In District    In District    In District    In District      In District   In District     In District    In District
                              Pashtun Non- Pashtun          Pashtun      Non- Pashtun       Pashtun     Non- Pashtun      Pashtun      Non- Pashtun
Panel A: ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t        0.134*         0.109         0.0741          -0.0736         0.0394        0.0488          0.0253        0.00871
                               (0.077)         (0.14)        (0.059)          (0.18)         (0.043)       (0.066)         (0.042)       (0.065)
Civilian casualties at t-1     0.0135          0.216         -0.0544          0.114          0.0485         -0.128         0.0426         -0.117
                               (0.044)         (0.23)        (0.033)          (0.19)         (0.043)        (0.11)         (0.040)       (0.096)
Civilian casualties at t-2      0.127*        0.0526         0.0797          -0.0674         0.0481         -0.183         0.0374         -0.179
                               (0.069)        (0.062)        (0.070)          (0.11)         (0.029)        (0.12)         (0.028)        (0.12)
Civilian casualties at t-3     0.130**        -0.0196        0.0693          -0.0589        0.106***       -0.0384        0.0900**       -0.0233
                               (0.063)        (0.044)        (0.049)         (0.058)         (0.036)       (0.050)         (0.037)       (0.049)
Civilian casualties at t-4     0.0897*        -0.0658        0.0197          -0.0982       0.0908***        0.0512        0.0716**        0.0510
                               (0.050)        (0.091)        (0.047)          (0.12)         (0.034)        (0.10)         (0.033)        (0.11)
Joint F-test of lags             0.36           0.18           0.11            -0.11           0.29          -0.30           0.24          -0.27
Significance (p-value)         (0.019)         (0.40)         (0.21)          (0.54)         (0.012)        (0.16)         (0.035)        (0.15)
Panel B: Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t       0.0309*       0.170***        0.0256*         0.167**         0.0129         0.0133         0.0102        0.00776
                               (0.017)        (0.065)        (0.014)         (0.067)        (0.0096)       (0.014)        (0.0083)        (0.014)
Civilian casualties at t-1     0.0228          0.0172         0.0141        -0.00887        0.00644       -0.00895        0.00364        -0.0154
                               (0.017)        (0.024)        (0.014)         (0.016)        (0.0067)       (0.012)        (0.0062)        (0.011)
Civilian casualties at t-2     0.0125          0.0170       0.000595        -0.00857        0.00762        -0.0117        0.00614        -0.0167
                               (0.010)        (0.016)       (0.0052)         (0.012)        (0.0052)       (0.012)        (0.0049)        (0.010)
Civilian casualties at t-3     0.0169          0.0108        0.00411         -0.0165        0.00729        -0.0152        0.00465       -0.0167**
                               (0.012)        (0.013)       (0.0060)         (0.013)        (0.0054)      (0.0099)        (0.0048)       (0.0079)
Civilian casualties at t-4     0.0109        0.00578        0.00103        -0.000388        0.00647        0.00421        0.00437       0.000549
                              (0.0100)       (0.0090)       (0.0061)        (0.0040)        (0.0050)      (0.0084)        (0.0048)       (0.0086)
Joint F-test of lags            0.063           0.05          0.020           -0.034          0.028         -0.032          0.019         -0.048
Significance (p-value)          (0.15)         (0.38)         (0.32)          (0.31)          (0.13)        (0.40)          (0.24)         (0.15)
Lagged MA                         No             No            Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Spatial Lag                       No             No             No              No             No             No             Yes            Yes
Observations                    13932          17172          13932           17172           13760         16960           13760          16936
                                                                                                                                           50 of 85
R-squared                          0.33            0.32            0.44             0.37             0.54            0.47              0.56              0.49
Notes: The dependent variable is IED incidents per 1000 in the population respectively. Robust standard errors, clustered at the district level, are reported
in parentheses. All specifications include district and month-year fixed effect. Estimates which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with
** (*, ***). Moving average estimates are 3-period (6 week) previous week linear estimate of the moving average of the dependent variable. All regressions
include the spatial lag of the DV. Spatial lags are estimated as the average dependent variable value for all adjacent districts. Estimates of Civilian Casualties
and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on LandScan population estimates. Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian
Casualties Tracking Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Violent Events based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs)
against ISAF. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised explosive device explosions, improvised explosive devices found and cleared,
improvised explosive device hoaxes, and premature detonations. District classification based on National Geospatial Agency (NGA) shape files on ethnic
areas in Afghanistan, districts classified as Pashtun if more than 50% of their area fall into areas NGA defines as Pashtun.




                                                                                                                                                         51 of 85
Table 7. Linear Regression Estimates of SIGACTs on Civilian Casualties (Iraq)
                                     (1)                 (2)             (3)                 (4)       (5)                 (6)
Dependent Variable                        SIGACTs per 1000                     IEDs per 1000              Direct Fire per 1000
(mean)                                      0.0527                              0.0230                         0.0150
Panel A: Coalition Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t         0.000149           0.000113*       0.0000269          0.0000247    0.0000721        0.0000588*
                                (0.00015)          (0.000060)       (0.000044)         (0.000018)   (0.000067)        (0.000031)
Civilian casualties at t-1       0.000103          0.00000133      0.00000386          -0.0000108   0.0000533        0.0000144*
                                (0.00015)          (0.000044)       (0.000045)         (0.000016)   (0.000050)       (0.0000078)
Civilian casualties at t-2       0.000139          0.00000407       0.0000141           -0.000043   0.000102*        0.0000461**
                                (0.00015)          (0.000045)       (0.000061)         (0.000033)   (0.000058)        (0.000022)
Civilian casualties at t-3       0.000156           0.0000342       0.0000261          0.0000114    0.0000734        0.00000620
                                (0.00018)          (0.000061)       (0.000068)         (0.000033)   (0.000060)        (0.000018)
Civilian casualties at t-4      0.0000895          -0.0000394       0.0000449          0.0000279    0.0000389         -0.0000297
                                (0.00014)          (0.000039)       (0.000060)         (0.000021)   (0.000060)        (0.000022)
Joint significance test             0.80                0.00            0.39                0.30        1.20              0.66
(p-value)                          (0.43)              (1.00)          (0.70)              (0.77)      (0.23)            (0.51)
Panel B: Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t        0.00112**            0.000406       0.000229*          0.0000428    0.000582*          0.000171
                                (0.00054)           (0.00026)        (0.00013)         (0.000057)   (0.00031)          (0.00015)
Civilian casualties at t-1       0.00100*           0.000173        0.000480*           0.000284    0.000435          -0.0000169
                                (0.00059)           (0.00025)        (0.00025)          (0.00018)   (0.00027)         (0.000076)
Civilian casualties at t-2        0.00108            0.000196       0.000386*           0.000124    0.000600           0.000173
                                (0.00068)           (0.00029)        (0.00021)         (0.000089)   (0.00039)          (0.00018)
Civilian casualties at t-3        0.00121           0.000247         0.000386          0.0000631    0.000534           0.0000867
                                 (0.0010)           (0.00053)        (0.00037)          (0.00021)   (0.00043)          (0.00020)
Civilian casualties at t-4        0.00111            0.000125        0.000478            0.000114   0.000550           0.000127
                                (0.00090)           (0.00024)        (0.00042)          (0.00020)   (0.00038)         (0.000099)
Joint significance test             1.40                0.59            1.41                0.95       1.46               0.71
(p-value)                          (0.16)              (0.56)          (0.16)              (0.34)     (0.15)             (0.48)
3-Period Moving Average              N                    Y              N                    Y         N                  Y
Spatial Lag of DV                    N                   N               N                   N          N                  N
Observations                       12896              12896            12896              12896       12896              12896
R-squared                           0.59                0.88            0.57                0.83       0.49               0.78


                                                                                                                                   52 of 85
Notes: Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on World Food Program population estimates. Scaling per
100,000 to make coefficients appropriately sized does not change results. All specifications include district and month-year fixed effect. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the district level, are reported in parentheses. Estimates which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with ** (*, ***).
Civilian casualties estimates based on data from Iraq Body Count. Violent incidents based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs) from the Multi-
National Forces Iraq (MNF-I) SIGACT-III database. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised explosive device explosions, improvised
explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device hoaxes, and premature detonations.




                                                                                                                                                          53 of 85
Table 8. Linear Regression Estimates of SIGACTs on Civilian Casualties (Iraq)
                                           (1)            (2)                (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)
DV: SIGACTs                         SIGACTs (t)    SIGACTs (t)           Lead MA      Lead MA      Lead MAD       Lead MAD
Coalition Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t               0.000149      0.000113*           0.000100      0.000100     0.0000373     0.0000371
                                      (0.00015)     (0.000060)          (0.000069)    (0.000070)    (0.000027)    (0.000028)
Civilian casualties at t-1             0.000103     0.00000133          0.0000295     0.0000315     0.0000207     0.0000216
                                      (0.00015)     (0.000044)          (0.000065)    (0.000067)    (0.000014)    (0.000014)
Civilian casualties at t-2             0.000139     0.00000407         -0.00000747   -0.00000505    0.0000336     0.0000346
                                      (0.00015)     (0.000045)          (0.000072)    (0.000073)    (0.000023)    (0.000024)
Civilian casualties at t-3             0.000156      0.0000342         0.000000169   0.00000152     0.0000298     0.0000303
                                      (0.00018)     (0.000061)          (0.000067)    (0.000067)    (0.000031)    (0.000031)
Civilian casualties at t-4            0.0000895     -0.0000394          0.00000388    0.00000625    0.0000281     0.0000292
                                      (0.00014)     (0.000039)          (0.000065)    (0.000066)    (0.000033)    (0.000033)
Joint significance test                   0.80          0.000               0.10          0.13          1.15          1.48
(p-value)                                (0.43)         (1.00)             (0.92)        (0.90)        (0.25)        (0.24)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t              0.00112**       0.000406           0.000490     0.000502        0.000232     0.000237
                                      (0.00054)      (0.00026)           (0.00057)    (0.00057)       (0.00018)    (0.00018)
Civilian casualties at t-1             0.00100*       0.000173           0.000439     0.000455        0.000149     0.000156
                                      (0.00059)      (0.00025)           (0.00063)    (0.00063)       (0.00012)    (0.00012)
Civilian casualties at t-2              0.00108       0.000196           0.000317     0.000336      -0.0000348    -0.0000269
                                      (0.00068)      (0.00029)           (0.00058)    (0.00058)      (0.000046)   (0.000046)
Civilian casualties at t-3              0.00121       0.000247           0.000204     0.000221     -0.000000570   0.00000631
                                       (0.0010)      (0.00053)           (0.00044)    (0.00044)      (0.000053)   (0.000054)
Civilian casualties at t-4              0.00111       0.000125           0.000222     0.000244        0.000143     0.000152
                                      (0.00090)      (0.00024)           (0.00021)    (0.00022)       (0.00012)    (0.00012)
Joint significance test                   1.40           0.59               0.64         0.67            1.04         1.14
(p-value)                                (0.16)         (0.56)             (0.52)       (0.50)          (0.30)       (0.26)
3-Period Moving Average                    N               Y                  Y           Y               Y            Y
Spatial Lag of DV                          N              N                  N            Y               N            Y
Observations                             12896         12896               12792        12792           12584        12584
R-squared                                 0.59           0.88               0.85         0.85            0.60         0.61


                                                                                                                               54 of 85
Notes: Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on World Food Program population estimates. All
specifications include district and month-year fixed effect. Scaling per 100,000 to make coefficients appropriately sized does not change results. Robust
standard errors, clustered at the district level, are reported in parentheses. Estimates which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with **
(*, ***). Civilian casualties estimates based on data from Iraq Body Count. Violent incidents based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs) from the
Multi-National Forces Iraq (MNF-I) SIGACT-III database. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised explosive device explosions, improvised
explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device hoaxes, and premature detonations.




                                                                                                                                                        55 of 85
Appendix Table 1. Linear Regression Estimates of IEDs on Civilian Casualties (Afghanistan)
                                                  (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)
DV: IEDs (t)                                Base Model         Lagged MA             Lead MA           Lead MA           Lead MAD           Lead MAD
ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                       0.147*              0.0727             0.0463           0.0506***            0.0290           0.0134***
                                               (0.076)            (0.058)             (0.042)           (0.0064)            (0.024)           (0.0038)
Civilian casualties at t-1                     0.0400             -0.0365             0.0484             0.0288             0.0432             0.0242
                                               (0.047)            (0.034)             (0.042)            (0.041)            (0.027)            (0.024)
Civilian casualties at t-2                     0.128*              0.0698             0.0438             0.0415             0.0226             0.0394
                                               (0.068)            (0.069)             (0.030)            (0.039)            (0.024)            (0.026)
Civilian casualties at t-3                    0.131**              0.0645            0.106***             0.0320            0.0564             0.0169
                                               (0.061)            (0.047)             (0.036)            (0.029)            (0.037)            (0.024)
Civilian casualties at t-4                    0.0994**             0.0224           0.0958***           0.0896**            0.0424             0.0522
                                               (0.048)            (0.046)             (0.035)            (0.037)            (0.036)            (0.037)
Joint F-test                                     2.57               1.34                2.56               2.13               1.41               1.25
(p-value)                                       (0.01)             (0.18)              (0.01)             (0.03)             (0.16)             (0.21)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.0551**            0.0484*             0.0147*           0.0753**           0.00387             0.0375
                                               (0.027)            (0.025)            (0.0086)            (0.034)           (0.0054)            (0.037)
Civilian casualties at t-1                     0.0242              0.0102             0.00508             0.0109           -0.00250            0.00284
                                               (0.015)            (0.013)            (0.0063)           (0.0074)           (0.0031)           (0.0052)
Civilian casualties at t-2                    0.0162*           -0.000554             0.00570            0.00114           0.00393            -0.00354
                                              (0.0094)           (0.0055)            (0.0057)           (0.0058)           (0.0045)           (0.0031)
Civilian casualties at t-3                    0.0190*             0.00103             0.00494            0.00321            0.00370            0.00328
                                               (0.011)           (0.0062)            (0.0058)           (0.0056)           (0.0047)           (0.0047)
Civilian casualties at t-4                     0.0132             0.00169            0.00744*            0.00210           0.00343             0.00297
                                              (0.0088)           (0.0052)            (0.0043)           (0.0052)           (0.0046)           (0.0047)
Joint F-test                                     1.84               0.63                1.23               0.64               0.61               0.37
(p-value)                                       (0.07)             (0.53)              (0.22)             (0.52)             (0.54)             (0.71)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                 N                  N                   N                   Y                 N                   Y
Observations                                    31104              31104               30720              30696              29952              29928
R-squared                                        0.36               0.46                0.56               0.58               0.40               0.41
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                                                                                                                   56 of 85
Appendix Table 2. Linear Regression Estimates of Direct Fire on Civilian Casualties (Afghanistan)
                                                  (1)                 (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)                 (6)
DV: Direct Fire (t)                         Base Model         Lagged MA             Lead MA           Lead MA          Lead MAD            Lead MAD
ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.0427**           -0.00571              0.0140          0.0412***          -0.00582             0.00911
                                               (0.021)            (0.013)             (0.014)            (0.015)          (0.0074)            (0.0059)
Civilian casualties at t-1                     0.0149             -0.0258            0.0346**           0.00193           0.00980             -0.00866
                                               (0.020)            (0.017)             (0.017)            (0.014)          (0.0096)            (0.0079)
Civilian casualties at t-2                    0.0464*              0.0276            0.0464**            0.0292*           0.0127              0.00744
                                               (0.025)            (0.024)             (0.021)            (0.017)          (0.0089)            (0.0099)
Civilian casualties at t-3                    0.0691**            0.0397*             0.0408*            0.0370*          0.00154              0.00906
                                               (0.029)            (0.022)             (0.024)            (0.020)          (0.0066)            (0.0094)
Civilian casualties at t-4                    0.0997**             0.0489             0.00537            0.0320           -0.0174*           -0.000251
                                               (0.045)            (0.034)             (0.020)            (0.023)          (0.0091)            (0.0069)
Joint F-test                                     0.62               -0.55               -0.41             -0.70             -0.87               -1.06
(p-value)                                       (0.53)             (0.59)              (0.68)             (0.49)            (0.39)              (0.29)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.0146**          0.00828**             0.00501           -0.00783         -0.000710           -0.0201**
                                              (0.0069)           (0.0041)            (0.0031)            (0.020)          (0.0011)            (0.0095)
Civilian casualties at t-1                    0.0110**            0.00331             0.00478            0.00173         -0.000755            -0.00147
                                              (0.0054)           (0.0027)            (0.0032)           (0.0022)          (0.0013)            (0.0011)
Civilian casualties at t-2                    0.00191           -0.00620*           0.00560**           0.00225          -0.000504            -0.00130
                                              (0.0033)           (0.0032)            (0.0028)           (0.0026)          (0.0011)            (0.0013)
Civilian casualties at t-3                    0.0113**            0.00462           0.00496**          0.00430*          -0.000154           -0.000793
                                              (0.0046)           (0.0029)            (0.0021)           (0.0023)          (0.0010)            (0.0011)
Civilian casualties at t-4                   0.0142***          0.00763**            0.00428*           0.00212           0.00195            -0.000761
                                              (0.0051)           (0.0030)            (0.0023)           (0.0021)          (0.0013)            (0.0011)
Joint F-test                                     1.68                0.93               1.56               1.30              2.21                2.19
(p-value)                                       (0.09)             (0.35)              (0.12)             (0.20)            (0.03)              (0.03)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                 N                   N                   N                  Y                N                    Y
Observations                                    31076              31076               30692              30692             29924               29924
R-squared                                        0.42                0.58                0.58              0.59              0.43                0.43
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                                   57 of 85
Appendix Table 3. Linear Regression Estimates of SIGACTs on Civilian Casualties by Gender (Afghanistan)
                                    (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)               (5)            (6)              (7)                (8)
                                                         Men                                                            Women
                                                                Out-of-       Out-of-                                                              Out-of-
                              In-District    In-District        District      District        In-District    In-District        Out-of-            District
IED per 1000                   Lead MA       Lead MAD              MA          MAD             Lead MA       Lead MAD        District MA            MAD
Panel A: ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t         0.0499         0.0134          0.00555      -0.00147            0.186        0.163***           0.0827          0.0460***
                                 (0.032)        (0.015)          (0.017)      (0.0082)           (0.13)        (0.062)          (0.063)            (0.018)
Civilian casualties at t-1      0.0818**       0.0334*          0.0388*      0.0175**            0.155         0.123**           0.0451             0.0343
                                 (0.034)        (0.018)          (0.020)      (0.0079)           (0.12)        (0.060)          (0.052)            (0.023)
Civilian casualties at t-2      0.0748*        0.00901           0.0346       0.00538            0.0131         0.0371          -0.0423            -0.0279
                                 (0.039)        (0.019)          (0.023)      (0.0093)          (0.065)        (0.047)          (0.035)            (0.020)
Civilian casualties at t-3       0.119**        0.0292         0.0491**       0.00220          0.219***        0.240**         -0.00872           -0.00766
                                 (0.055)        (0.021)          (0.023)      (0.0089)          (0.073)        (0.093)          (0.031)            (0.018)
Civilian casualties at t-4      0.0982*        0.00772          0.0388*      -0.00592          0.272***       0.254***         0.0690**          0.0392**
                                 (0.055)        (0.019)          (0.023)      (0.0074)          (0.042)        (0.093)          (0.030)            (0.019)
Joint F-test                       2.22           1.27             1.95         0.81              2.73           2.43             0.58               0.62
(p-value)                         (0.03)         (0.21)           (0.05)       (0.42)            (0.01)         (0.02)           (0.56)             (0.54)
                                                       Panel B: Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t         0.0124        0.00327        0.00529**      0.000765            0.0580        0.0272          0.0677**          0.0258**
                                (0.0083)       (0.0055)         (0.0026)      (0.0012)          (0.071)        (0.035)          (0.029)            (0.012)
Civilian casualties at t-1      0.00692       -0.00148        0.00682***     0.00174*            0.0569        0.00207         0.0473**            0.0212*
                                (0.0073)       (0.0034)         (0.0024)      (0.0011)          (0.072)        (0.032)          (0.022)            (0.011)
Civilian casualties at t-2      0.0113**       0.00630        0.00679***      0.00193            0.0686         0.0113          0.00265            0.00543
                                (0.0050)       (0.0040)         (0.0022)      (0.0014)          (0.069)        (0.028)          (0.018)            (0.012)
Civilian casualties at t-3      0.0105**       0.00590        0.00513** 0.00248***               0.0596        0.00625          0.00239             0.0120
                                (0.0048)       (0.0040)         (0.0022)     (0.00088)          (0.062)        (0.025)          (0.017)            (0.013)
Civilian casualties at t-4     0.00886**       0.00417        0.00644**     0.00388**            0.114          0.0353          0.00313           -0.00664
                                (0.0045)       (0.0043)         (0.0030)      (0.0015)          (0.079)        (0.032)          (0.021)            (0.012)
Joint F-test                       1.97           1.21             2.91         3.13              1.11           0.54             0.90               0.96
(p-value)                         (0.05)         (0.23)           (0.00)       (0.00)            (0.27)         (0.59)           (0.37)             (0.34)
Observations                      30696          29928            30692        29924             30696          29928            30692              29924
R-squared                          0.53           0.39             0.53         0.39              0.53           0.39             0.53               0.39
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects and spatial lag of IED attacks. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include district and month-year fixed effect.

                                                                                                                                                      58 of 85
Appendix Table 4: Placebo Tests for Main Tables 3 and 4, Linear Regression Estimates of All SIGACTs on Leads of Civilian Casualties (Afghanistan)
                                                  (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)
DV: SIGACTs (t)                            SIGACTs (t)        SIGACTs (t)            Lead MA           Lead MA           Lead MAD          Lead MAD
ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.317***            0.0923              0.0882           0.0427***            0.0236          0.00586**
                                                (0.11)            (0.11)              (0.093)            (0.010)            (0.031)          (0.0027)
Civilian casualties at t+1                    0.278**             0.0204              0.125*             0.0626             0.0527            0.0201
                                                (0.13)           (0.082)              (0.064)            (0.092)            (0.046)           (0.030)
Civilian casualties at t+2                     0.336*             0.0772              0.0810             0.0970            0.00903            0.0488
                                                (0.18)            (0.14)              (0.073)            (0.063)            (0.037)           (0.046)
Civilian casualties at t+3                    0.402**              0.133               0.157*            0.0450             0.0755           0.00408
                                                (0.16)            (0.11)              (0.093)            (0.074)            (0.054)           (0.037)
Civilian casualties at t+4                    0.371**             0.101                0.172              0.123             0.0210            0.0708
                                                (0.15)           (0.084)               (0.10)            (0.090)            (0.047)           (0.053)
Joint F-test                                     2.69              1.51                 1.91               1.45               1.05              0.93
(p-value)                                       (0.01)            (0.13)               (0.06)             (0.15)             (0.29)            (0.35)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.127***           0.100**              0.0659*             0.127           0.0157**            0.0149
                                               (0.047)           (0.040)              (0.037)            (0.099)           (0.0076)           (0.046)
Civilian casualties at t+1                   0.0646***         0.0443***             0.0854**            0.0577*           0.0336**           0.0145*
                                               (0.022)           (0.016)              (0.039)            (0.034)            (0.013)          (0.0075)
Civilian casualties at t+2                     0.0212           -0.00125             0.0825**           0.0773**           0.0305*           0.0325**
                                               (0.016)           (0.014)              (0.032)            (0.036)            (0.016)           (0.013)
Civilian casualties at t+3                   0.0353***            0.0112             0.0529**           0.0749**           0.0233**           0.0295*
                                               (0.012)          (0.0073)              (0.023)            (0.029)            (0.011)           (0.015)
Civilian casualties at t+4                    0.0331**            0.0143             0.0268**           0.0481**           0.00755           0.0226**
                                               (0.013)           (0.010)              (0.011)            (0.021)           (0.0050)           (0.011)
Joint F-test                                     2.92              2.42                 2.47               2.44               2.30              2.27
(p-value)                                      (0.004)            (0.02)               (0.01)             (0.02)             (0.02)            (0.02)
Lagged MA of DV                                   N                   Y                   Y                  Y                  Y                 Y
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                 N                  N                   N                   Y                 N                  Y
Observations                                    31104             30720                30720              30696              30720             30696
R-squared                                        0.51               0.65                0.68               0.69               0.47              0.47
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                                                                                                   59 of 85
Appendix Table 4: Placebo Tests for Main Tables 3 and 4: Linear Regression Estimates of IEDs on Leads of Civilian Casualties (Afghanistan)
                                                  (1)               (2)                  (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
DV: IEDs (t)                                Base Model         Lagged MA             Lead MA           Lead MA          Lead MAD           Lead MAD
ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.125**             0.0585              0.0890*         0.0469***            0.0281           0.0131***
                                               (0.052)           (0.037)              (0.047)          (0.0057)            (0.029)           (0.0035)
Civilian casualties at t+1                    0.156***           0.0777*              0.0616            0.0751*            0.0352             0.0242
                                               (0.057)           (0.044)              (0.040)           (0.044)            (0.024)            (0.028)
Civilian casualties at t+2                    0.112**             0.0339              0.0517             0.0444            0.0293             0.0303
                                               (0.056)           (0.047)              (0.038)           (0.036)            (0.020)            (0.023)
Civilian casualties at t+3                    0.126**            0.0428*              0.0808*            0.0366            0.0321             0.0250
                                               (0.056)           (0.026)              (0.045)           (0.036)            (0.025)            (0.020)
Civilian casualties at t+4                    0.173**             0.0901             0.0771**            0.0646            0.0220             0.0276
                                               (0.081)           (0.056)              (0.037)           (0.043)            (0.016)            (0.024)
Joint F-test                                     2.65              2.46                 1.89              1.57               1.63               1.41
(p-value)                                       (0.01)            (0.01)               (0.06)            (0.11)             (0.10)             (0.16)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.0564**           0.0497*              0.0164*           0.0595*           0.00345             0.0171
                                               (0.028)           (0.026)             (0.0090)           (0.033)           (0.0051)            (0.017)
Civilian casualties at t+1                     0.0152            0.00841             0.0288**            0.0126           0.0175*            0.00240
                                              (0.0099)          (0.0073)              (0.013)          (0.0079)            (0.011)           (0.0050)
Civilian casualties at t+2                    0.00917            0.00132             0.0258**          0.0246**            0.0167             0.0163
                                              (0.0063)          (0.0044)              (0.013)           (0.012)            (0.010)            (0.010)
Civilian casualties at t+3                    0.0133**           0.00507             0.0199**           0.0215*            0.0137             0.0155
                                              (0.0060)          (0.0036)             (0.0100)           (0.012)           (0.0092)            (0.010)
Civilian casualties at t+4                     0.0117            0.00356              0.00615           0.0171*           0.00121             0.0129
                                              (0.0076)          (0.0045)             (0.0038)          (0.0092)           (0.0027)           (0.0090)
Joint F-test                                     1.91              1.68                 2.17              1.97               1.65               1.57
(p-value)                                       (0.06)            (0.09)               (0.03)            (0.05)             (0.10)             (0.12)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable
Observations                                    31104             30720                30720             30696              30720              30696
R-squared                                        0.36              0.48                 0.59              0.61               0.41               0.41
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                                                                                                   60 of 85
Appendix Table 5. Placebo Tests for Main Tables 3 and 4: Linear Regression Estimates of Direct Fire on Leads of Civilian Casualties (Afghanistan)
                                                  (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
DV: Direct Fire (t)                         Base Model         Lagged MA             Lead MA           Lead MA          Lead MAD           Lead MAD
ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.164**              0.0201            -0.00412          0.0375**          -0.000974            0.00874
                                               (0.073)            (0.083)             (0.054)           (0.015)            (0.032)           (0.0054)
Civilian casualties at t+1                     0.0801             -0.0681             0.0409            -0.0144             0.0329           -0.00337
                                               (0.082)            (0.076)             (0.037)           (0.054)            (0.028)            (0.032)
Civilian casualties at t+2                      0.194              0.0523             0.0128             0.0331            -0.0397            0.0310
                                                (0.14)             (0.10)             (0.054)           (0.036)            (0.031)            (0.028)
Civilian casualties at t+3                    0.306**              0.174              0.0786           -0.00517             0.0439            -0.0439
                                                (0.14)             (0.11)             (0.055)           (0.057)            (0.045)            (0.032)
Civilian casualties at t+4                      0.125             -0.0211              0.108             0.0611             0.0366            0.0398
                                               (0.092)            (0.051)             (0.080)           (0.052)            (0.047)            (0.044)
Joint F-test                                     1.94               0.88                1.47              1.14               0.67               0.56
(p-value)                                       (0.05)             (0.38)              (0.14)            (0.03)             (0.50)             (0.58)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                     0.0518***          0.0359**              0.0353             0.0912           0.00803             0.0326
                                               (0.018)            (0.015)             (0.028)           (0.078)           (0.0060)            (0.046)
Civilian casualties at t+1                   0.0404***          0.0286***             0.0385             0.0320             0.0141            0.00725
                                              (0.0100)           (0.0076)             (0.025)           (0.026)           (0.0090)           (0.0056)
Civilian casualties at t+2                    0.00644            -0.00719            0.0368**            0.0353           0.00867             0.0133
                                              (0.0078)           (0.0089)             (0.018)           (0.024)            (0.011)           (0.0085)
Civilian casualties at t+3                   0.0240***          0.0101***            0.0229**          0.0344**           0.0107**            0.00811
                                              (0.0076)           (0.0037)             (0.010)           (0.016)           (0.0045)            (0.011)
Civilian casualties at t+4                    0.0236**            0.0148*           0.0172***          0.0213**         0.00591***           0.0104**
                                              (0.0096)           (0.0077)            (0.0052)          (0.0094)           (0.0022)           (0.0043)
Joint F-test                                     3.51               3.14                2.07              2.09               1.61               1.60
(p-value)                                       (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.04)            (0.04)             (0.11)             (0.11)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable
Observations                                    31104              30720               30720             30696              30720              30696
R-squared                                        0.42               0.59                0.61              0.61               0.43               0.43
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                                                                                                   61 of 85
Appendix Table 6. Linear Regression Estimates of SIGACTs on Civilian Casualties, Including Spatial Lags for Civilian Casualty Variables (Afghanistan)
                                                  (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
DV: SIGACTs (t)                             Base Model         Lagged MA             Lead MA           Lead MA          Lead MAD           Lead MAD
ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)        0.114**             0.0120              0.0209          0.0488***           -0.00526          0.00688**
                                               (0.045)            (0.029)             (0.030)           (0.011)            (0.011)           (0.0032)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)       0.0379           -0.0559**             0.0481           -0.00732             0.0181           -0.00939
                                               (0.033)            (0.028)             (0.031)           (0.030)            (0.015)            (0.011)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)      0.103**             0.0473              0.0557*            0.0386            0.0257*            0.0148
                                               (0.045)            (0.042)             (0.034)           (0.030)            (0.014)            (0.016)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)      0.100**             0.0325              0.0587             0.0301             0.0110            0.0194
                                               (0.045)            (0.034)             (0.038)           (0.034)            (0.011)            (0.016)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)      0.184***            0.0862*             0.0209             0.0369            -0.0170            0.00823
                                               (0.064)            (0.052)             (0.034)           (0.038)            (0.013)            (0.012)
Joint F-test                                    0.426              0.110               0.183             0.0960             0.0378            0.0216
(p-value)                                      (0.003)            (0.120)             (0.092)           (0.368)            (0.273)            (0.568)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)       0.0334***          0.0162**            0.0161***          -0.00959          0.0000395            -0.0209
                                               (0.011)           (0.0068)            (0.0056)           (0.033)           (0.0021)            (0.013)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)     0.0290***          0.00951*            0.0144***           0.00579           0.000267           -0.00148
                                              (0.0087)           (0.0052)            (0.0051)          (0.0042)           (0.0018)           (0.0021)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)      0.0165**           -0.00245           0.0119***          0.00702*           0.000232          -0.000736
                                              (0.0072)           (0.0049)            (0.0042)          (0.0041)           (0.0017)           (0.0018)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)     0.0268***          0.00899**           0.00849**         0.00752**          -0.000206          -0.000386
                                              (0.0072)           (0.0045)            (0.0034)          (0.0035)           (0.0014)           (0.0016)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)     0.0298***          0.0118***            0.00684*           0.00176            0.00345           -0.00112
                                              (0.0072)           (0.0043)            (0.0041)          (0.0032)           (0.0027)           (0.0014)
Joint F-test                                    0.102             0.0279              0.0417             0.0169            0.00375           0.000308
(p-value)                                      (0.000)            (0.004)             (0.003)           (0.104)            (0.376)            (0.942)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable
Observations                                    31076              31076               30692             30692              29924              29924
R-squared                                        0.50               0.64                0.65              0.66               0.47               0.47
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                                                                                                                   62 of 85
Appendix Table 7: Linear Regression Estimates of IEDs on Civilian Casualties, Including Spatial Lags for Civilian Casualty Variables (Afghanistan)
                                                  (1)                (2)                  (3)              (4)                 (5)               (6)
DV: IEDs (t)                                Base Model         Lagged MA             Lead MA           Lead MA          Lead MAD           Lead MAD
ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)       0.0713***            0.0319*             0.00968         0.0486***            0.00292          0.0132***
                                               (0.024)            (0.019)              (0.017)         (0.0061)            (0.0077)          (0.0035)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)      0.0314*            -0.00751              0.0129          -0.00396           0.0143**          -0.000741
                                               (0.017)            (0.015)              (0.017)          (0.017)            (0.0072)          (0.0073)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)      0.0401*             0.0114               0.0188           0.00904            0.00422            0.0120*
                                               (0.021)            (0.021)              (0.019)          (0.016)            (0.0073)          (0.0069)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)       0.0376             0.0100             0.0380**           0.00846            0.00102          -0.000710
                                               (0.024)            (0.021)              (0.019)          (0.019)            (0.0060)          (0.0080)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)     0.0788***           0.0453**            0.0361**            0.0215           0.000342           -0.00324
                                               (0.023)            (0.021)              (0.017)          (0.018)            (0.0058)          (0.0065)
Joint F-test                                    0.188             0.0593                0.106            0.0607             0.0199            0.00469
(p-value)                                      (0.002)            (0.117)              (0.084)          (0.317)             (0.241)           (0.788)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)       0.0139***          0.00611**           0.00919***           0.0217            0.00198           -0.00332
                                              (0.0043)           (0.0031)             (0.0026)          (0.016)            (0.0015)          (0.0056)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)     0.0164***         0.00862***           0.00706***         0.00390*            0.00170           0.000495
                                              (0.0042)           (0.0030)             (0.0021)         (0.0024)            (0.0012)          (0.0013)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)      0.0119**           0.00434            0.00600***        0.00394**            0.00156           0.000896
                                              (0.0048)           (0.0034)             (0.0021)         (0.0019)            (0.0015)          (0.0011)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)     0.0136***         0.00627***           0.00504***          0.00318          0.00238**           0.000798
                                              (0.0031)           (0.0022)             (0.0019)         (0.0020)           (0.00099)          (0.0014)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)     0.0113***           0.00349             0.00526*           0.00182          0.00312**           0.00154*
                                              (0.0031)           (0.0023)             (0.0027)         (0.0018)            (0.0014)         (0.00092)
Joint F-test                                   0.0531             0.0227               0.0234            0.0115            0.00875            0.00563
(p-value)                                      (0.000)            (0.000)              (0.001)          (0.079)             (0.015)           (0.072)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable
Observations                                    31076              31076                30692            30692               29924             29924
R-squared                                        0.36               0.46                 0.56             0.58                0.40              0.40
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                                                                                                                   63 of 85
Appendix Table 8: Linear Regression Estimates of Direct Fire on Civilian Casualties, Including Spatial Lags for Civilian Casualty Variables (Afghanistan)
                                                  (1)               (2)                  (3)                (4)                 (5)                 (6)
DV: Direct Fire (t)                         Base Model        Lagged MA             Lead MA             Lead MA           Lead MAD            Lead MAD
ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)        0.0427**          -0.00571              0.0140           0.0412***            -0.00582             0.00911
                                               (0.021)           (0.013)              (0.014)            (0.015)            (0.0074)            (0.0059)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)       0.0149            -0.0258             0.0346**            0.00193            0.00980             -0.00866
                                               (0.020)           (0.017)              (0.017)            (0.014)            (0.0096)            (0.0079)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)      0.0464*             0.0276             0.0464**            0.0292*             0.0127              0.00744
                                               (0.025)           (0.024)              (0.021)            (0.017)            (0.0089)            (0.0099)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)      0.0691**           0.0397*             0.0408*             0.0370*            0.00154              0.00906
                                               (0.029)           (0.022)              (0.024)            (0.020)            (0.0066)            (0.0094)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)      0.0997**            0.0489             0.00537             0.0320             -0.0174*           -0.000251
                                               (0.045)           (0.034)              (0.020)            (0.023)            (0.0091)            (0.0069)
Joint F-test                                    0.230             0.0905               0.127             0.0903             0.00657             -0.00383
(p-value)                                      (0.011)           (0.036)              (0.063)            (0.172)             (0.794)             (0.887)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)        0.0146**         0.00828**             0.00501            -0.00783           -0.000710           -0.0201**
                                              (0.0069)          (0.0041)             (0.0031)            (0.020)            (0.0011)            (0.0095)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)      0.0110**           0.00331             0.00478             0.00173           -0.000755            -0.00147
                                              (0.0054)          (0.0027)             (0.0032)           (0.0022)            (0.0013)            (0.0011)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)      0.00191          -0.00620*            0.00560**            0.00225           -0.000504            -0.00130
                                              (0.0033)          (0.0032)             (0.0028)           (0.0026)            (0.0011)            (0.0013)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)      0.0113**           0.00462            0.00496**           0.00430*           -0.000154           -0.000793
                                              (0.0046)          (0.0029)             (0.0021)           (0.0023)            (0.0010)            (0.0011)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)     0.0142***         0.00763**            0.00428*             0.00212            0.00195            -0.000761
                                              (0.0051)          (0.0030)             (0.0023)           (0.0021)            (0.0013)            (0.0011)
Joint F-test                                   0.0385            0.00935              0.0196             0.0103            0.000540             -0.00150
(p-value)                                      (0.017)           (0.139)              (0.022)            (0.134)             (0.873)             (0.670)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable
Observations                                    31076             31076                30692              30692               29924               29924
R-squared                                        0.42              0.58                 0.58               0.59                0.43                0.43
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.01.


                                                                                                                                                   64 of 85
Appendix Table 9: Matching Estimate of Impact of ISAF or Insurgent Killings in period t on lead moving average of SIGACTs/1,000 (Afghanistan)

DV = 3-period lead moving                     (1)                      (2)                     (3)                      (4)                      (5)
average, SIGACTs/1,000 from
period t                                      t-2                      t-1                      t                      t +1                     t +2


                Marginal
Panel A: Effect                             -0.019                   -0.006                   0.031                    0.083                   0.097
                Effects
of ISAF-caused
                                        [-0.04– 0.000]           [-0.02 – 0.01]           [0.01 – 0.06]            [0.05 – 0.11]            [0.06 – 0.13]
civilian
                N of Matched
casualties                                   5337                    5337                     5337                     5327                    5291
                District Weeks


                  Marginal
Panel B: Effect                             0.035                    0.052                    0.035                    0.020                   0.004
                  Effects
of insurgent-
                                         [0.02 – 0.05]            [0.04 – 0.07]           [0.02 – 0.05]            [-0.00 – 0.04]          [-0.02 – 0.03]
caused civilian
                  N of Matched
casualties                                   5337                    5337                     5337                     5327                    5291
                  District Weeks

Results significant at 95% level in two-tailed test in bold with 95% confidence intervals in brackets. Matched on SIGACTs/1,000 population in period t,
three-period lagged moving average of SIGACTs in t through t-3, ethnicity and quarter, this created 2,135 strata of which 1,723 had three or more
district/bi-months. 148 of 902 district/bi-months with civilian casualties had no matching unit without civilian casualties. Multivariate L1 distance for
match = 0.746. Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on LandScan population estimates. Strata with
greater than 200 district/bi-months dropped. Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian Casualties Tracking Cell, International Security
Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. District classification based on National Geospatial Agency (NGA) shape files on ethnic areas in Afghanistan.
Violent Events based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs) against ISAF. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised explosive device
explosions. Excludes improvised explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device hoaxes, and premature detonations.




                                                                                                                                                       65 of 85
Appendix Table 10. Linear Regression Estimates of IEDs on Civilian Casualties (Iraq)
                                                   (1)               (2)                  (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)
DV: IEDs (t)                                Base Model         Lagged MA             Lead MA           Lead MA          Lead MAD           Lead MAD
Coalition Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                     0.0000269          0.0000247           0.0000112         0.0000105          0.0000117          0.0000113
                                             (0.000044)        (0.000018)           (0.000027)        (0.000027)         (0.000010)         (0.000010)
Civilian casualties at t-1                  0.00000386         -0.0000108           0.00000935        0.00000915         0.0000123          0.0000122
                                             (0.000045)        (0.000016)           (0.000035)        (0.000035)        (0.0000085)        (0.0000088)
Civilian casualties at t-2                   0.0000141        -0.00000431           0.0000208         0.0000206          0.0000238          0.0000237
                                             (0.000061)        (0.000033)           (0.000040)        (0.000040)         (0.000023)         (0.000023)
Civilian casualties at t-3                   0.0000261          0.0000114           0.0000286         0.0000279          0.0000196          0.0000193
                                             (0.000068)        (0.000033)           (0.000033)        (0.000032)         (0.000020)         (0.000020)
Civilian casualties at t-4                   0.0000449          0.0000279           0.0000297         0.0000291          0.0000205          0.0000201
                                             (0.000060)        (0.000021)           (0.000023)        (0.000024)         (0.000015)         (0.000016)
Joint F-test                                   8.90e-05          2.43e-05             8.84e-05          8.66e-05          7.62e-05           7.53e-05
(p-value)                                       (0.696)           (0.766)              (0.498)           (0.509)           (0.246)            (0.254)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                     0.000229*         0.0000428             0.000258          0.000263          0.000141*          0.000143*
                                              (0.00013)        (0.000057)            (0.00022)         (0.00022)         (0.000082)         (0.000082)
Civilian casualties at t-1                   0.000480*          0.000284             0.000260          0.000264         0.0000977*         0.0000998*
                                              (0.00025)         (0.00018)            (0.00026)         (0.00026)         (0.000056)         (0.000057)
Civilian casualties at t-2                   0.000386*          0.000124             0.000153          0.000160         0.00000424         0.00000777
                                              (0.00021)        (0.000089)            (0.00024)         (0.00024)         (0.000035)         (0.000036)
Civilian casualties at t-3                    0.000386          0.0000631           0.0000870         0.0000962         0.00000427         0.00000850
                                              (0.00037)         (0.00021)            (0.00020)         (0.00020)         (0.000037)         (0.000037)
Civilian casualties at t-4                    0.000478           0.000114           0.0000614         0.0000731          0.0000223          0.0000278
                                              (0.00042)         (0.00020)           (0.000084)        (0.000085)         (0.000021)         (0.000021)
Joint F-test                                   0.00173          0.000585             0.000561          0.000593           0.000123           0.000144
(p-value)                                       (0.160)           (0.343)              (0.458)           (0.435)           (0.297)            (0.255)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                  N                 N                    N                  Y                N                   Y
Observations                                     12896             12896                12792             12792             12584              12584
R-squared                                         0.57              0.83                 0.83              0.83              0.60               0.61
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                                   66 of 85
Appendix Table 11. Linear Regression Estimates of Direct Fire on Civilian Casualties (Iraq)
                                                  (1)                (2)                  (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)
DV: Direct Fire (t)                         Base Model        Lagged MA              Lead MA           Lead MA          Lead MAD            Lead MAD
Coalition Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                     0.0000721         0.0000588*          0.0000657**       0.0000652**        0.0000310*          0.0000307*
                                             (0.000067)        (0.000031)           (0.000025)        (0.000026)         (0.000016)         (0.000016)
Civilian casualties at t-1                   0.0000533         0.0000144*           0.0000372         0.0000384        0.0000244***       0.0000250***
                                             (0.000050)       (0.0000078)           (0.000026)        (0.000027)        (0.0000060)        (0.0000062)
Civilian casualties at t-2                   0.000102*        0.0000461**          0.00000661        0.00000822          0.0000151          0.0000158
                                             (0.000058)        (0.000022)           (0.000034)        (0.000034)        (0.0000097)        (0.0000097)
Civilian casualties at t-3                   0.0000734         0.00000620          0.00000169        0.00000298          0.0000116          0.0000122
                                             (0.000060)        (0.000018)           (0.000042)        (0.000042)         (0.000017)         (0.000016)
Civilian casualties at t-4                   0.0000389         -0.0000297          0.00000497        0.00000687         0.00000937          0.0000103
                                             (0.000060)        (0.000022)           (0.000050)        (0.000050)         (0.000014)         (0.000014)
Joint F-test                                  0.000268           3.70e-05             5.05e-05          5.65e-05          6.04e-05           6.33e-05
(p-value)                                      (0.232)            (0.511)              (0.736)           (0.708)           (0.173)            (0.155)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                     0.000582*          0.000171             0.000212          0.000220          0.0000497          0.0000535
                                              (0.00031)         (0.00015)            (0.00027)         (0.00027)         (0.000078)         (0.000079)
Civilian casualties at t-1                    0.000435         -0.0000169            0.000223          0.000234          0.0000268          0.0000318
                                              (0.00027)        (0.000076)            (0.00029)         (0.00029)         (0.000045)         (0.000045)
Civilian casualties at t-2                    0.000600          0.000173             0.000196          0.000207         -0.0000105         -0.00000551
                                              (0.00039)         (0.00018)            (0.00027)         (0.00027)         (0.000020)         (0.000020)
Civilian casualties at t-3                    0.000534          0.0000867            0.000216          0.000225          0.0000142          0.0000184
                                              (0.00043)         (0.00020)            (0.00026)         (0.00026)         (0.000040)         (0.000040)
Civilian casualties at t-4                    0.000550           0.000127            0.000208          0.000219          0.0000649          0.0000700
                                              (0.00038)        (0.000099)            (0.00020)         (0.00021)         (0.000086)         (0.000087)
Joint F-test                                   0.00212          0.000370             0.000844          0.000885           9.54e-05           0.000115
(p-value)                                      (0.147)            (0.479)              (0.408)           (0.391)           (0.574)            (0.506)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                 N                  N                    N                  Y                N                   Y
Observations                                    12896              12896                12792             12792             12584              12584
R-squared                                        0.49               0.78                 0.72              0.72              0.57               0.58
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                                   67 of 85
Appendix Table 12. Placebo Tests for Main Table 6: Linear Regression Estimates of All SIGACTs on Leads of Civilian Casualties (Iraq)
                                                  (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
DV: SIGACTs (t)                             Base Model        Lagged MA              Lead MA           Lead MA          Lead MAD           Lead MAD
Coalition Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.000173         0.000107**           0.0000868         0.0000867          0.0000320          0.0000320
                                              (0.00015)        (0.000051)           (0.000064)        (0.000065)         (0.000027)         (0.000028)
Civilian casualties at t+1                    0.000188        0.000174***          0.000123**        0.000123**          0.0000586          0.0000586
                                              (0.00013)        (0.000035)           (0.000058)        (0.000059)         (0.000036)         (0.000037)
Civilian casualties at t+2                   0.0000343          0.0000417          0.000155***       0.000156***       0.0000424**         0.0000429**
                                              (0.00013)        (0.000034)           (0.000059)        (0.000059)         (0.000020)         (0.000021)
Civilian casualties at t+3                  -0.0000333        -0.00000905          0.000134**        0.000135**        0.0000499***       0.0000503***
                                              (0.00012)        (0.000030)           (0.000061)        (0.000062)         (0.000014)         (0.000015)
Civilian casualties at t+4                  -0.0000153          0.0000294            0.000121          0.000123         0.000113***        0.000114***
                                              (0.00013)         (0.00011)            (0.00010)         (0.00010)         (0.000012)         (0.000012)
Joint F-test                                  0.000174           0.000236            0.000534          0.000539           0.000264           0.000266
(p-value)                                      (0.733)            (0.140)             (0.043)           (0.044)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.00116*          0.000414             0.000469          0.000483           0.000198           0.000204
                                              (0.00060)         (0.00029)            (0.00059)         (0.00060)          (0.00016)          (0.00016)
Civilian casualties at t+1                  0.000809**         0.00000878            0.000403          0.000417           0.000203           0.000209
                                              (0.00039)         (0.00018)            (0.00039)         (0.00040)          (0.00016)          (0.00016)
Civilian casualties at t+2                   0.000828*          0.0000682            0.000346          0.000360           0.000187           0.000193
                                              (0.00042)         (0.00017)            (0.00033)         (0.00034)          (0.00014)          (0.00014)
Civilian casualties at t+3                   0.000895*           0.000170            0.000309          0.000323           0.000189           0.000195
                                              (0.00047)         (0.00022)            (0.00030)         (0.00030)          (0.00012)          (0.00012)
Civilian casualties at t+4                  0.000903**           0.000268            0.000239          0.000252          0.000111*          0.000117*
                                              (0.00044)         (0.00026)            (0.00027)         (0.00027)         (0.000064)         (0.000065)
Joint F-test                                   0.00344           0.000515             0.00130           0.00135           0.000690           0.000714
(p-value)                                      (0.039)            (0.417)             (0.305)           (0.290)            (0.132)            (0.122)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                 N                  N                   N                  Y                 N                   Y
Observations                                    12896              12792               12792             12792              12792              12792
R-squared                                        0.59               0.88                0.85              0.85               0.60               0.61
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                                   68 of 85
Appendix Table 13. Placebo Tests for Appendix Table 10: Linear Regression Estimates of IEDs on Leads of Civilian Casualties (Iraq)
                                                   (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
DV: IEDs (t)                                Base Model         Lagged MA             Lead MA           Lead MA           Lead MAD          Lead MAD
Coalition Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                     0.0000329          0.0000241           0.0000128         0.0000122           0.0000128         0.0000124
                                             (0.000044)         (0.000016)          (0.000027)        (0.000027)          (0.000011)        (0.000011)
Civilian casualties at t+1                   0.0000262         0.0000225**          0.0000139         0.0000130           0.0000200         0.0000196
                                             (0.000043)         (0.000010)          (0.000018)        (0.000019)          (0.000014)        (0.000015)
Civilian casualties at t+2                   0.00000153       -0.000000776          0.0000190         0.0000190           0.0000129         0.0000129
                                             (0.000047)         (0.000013)          (0.000015)        (0.000015)         (0.0000087)       (0.0000088)
Civilian casualties at t+3                 -0.000000467        0.00000448           0.0000215         0.0000220         0.0000136***      0.0000139***
                                             (0.000049)         (0.000018)          (0.000017)        (0.000017)         (0.0000050)       (0.0000050)
Civilian casualties at t+4                  -0.00000223         0.0000104           0.0000163         0.0000172         0.0000149**        0.0000153**
                                             (0.000047)         (0.000039)          (0.000039)        (0.000039)         (0.0000072)       (0.0000072)
Joint F-test                                   2.50e-05           3.65e-05            7.07e-05          7.12e-05           6.15e-05          6.17e-05
(p-value)                                       (0.892)            (0.539)             (0.355)           (0.360)            (0.057)           (0.060)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                      0.000262*         0.0000570            0.000248          0.000254            0.000126          0.000129
                                              (0.00015)         (0.000067)           (0.00023)         (0.00024)          (0.000078)        (0.000079)
Civilian casualties at t+1                    0.000194          -0.0000186           0.000201          0.000209           0.0000659         0.0000696
                                              (0.00014)          (0.00010)           (0.00014)         (0.00014)          (0.000071)        (0.000072)
Civilian casualties at t+2                    0.000266*         0.0000682            0.000144          0.000150           0.0000881         0.0000912
                                              (0.00016)         (0.000090)           (0.00012)         (0.00012)          (0.000057)        (0.000057)
Civilian casualties at t+3                   0.000283**         0.0000948           0.0000647         0.0000712         0.0000813**        0.0000845**
                                              (0.00013)         (0.000067)          (0.000093)        (0.000094)          (0.000034)        (0.000035)
Civilian casualties at t+4                    0.000191         0.00000234           0.0000529         0.0000632          0.0000368*        0.0000420*
                                              (0.00015)         (0.000099)          (0.000087)        (0.000089)          (0.000022)        (0.000024)
Joint F-test                                  0.000934           0.000147            0.000463          0.000493            0.000272          0.000287
(p-value)                                       (0.070)            (0.505)             (0.249)           (0.224)            (0.110)           (0.098)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                  N                  N                   N                  Y                 N                  Y
Observations                                     12896              12792               12792             12792              12792             12792
R-squared                                         0.57               0.83                0.83              0.83               0.60              0.61
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                                   69 of 85
Appendix Table 14. Placebo Tests for Appendix Table 11: Linear Regression Estimates of Direct Fire on Leads of Civilian Casualties (Iraq)
                                                   (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)                 (5)               (6)
Dependent Variable: Direct Fire (t)         Base Model         Lagged MA             Lead MA            Lead MA          Lead MAD          Lead MAD
Coalition Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                     0.0000835        0.0000573**          0.0000657**       0.0000623***        0.0000296*        0.0000294*
                                             (0.000066)         (0.000027)          (0.000025)         (0.000024)         (0.000016)        (0.000016)
Civilian casualties at t+1                   0.0000678        0.0000562***           0.0000372       0.0000717***         0.0000265         0.0000267
                                             (0.000053)         (0.000020)          (0.000026)         (0.000025)         (0.000018)        (0.000018)
Civilian casualties at t+2                   0.0000174          0.0000106           0.00000661       0.0000622**        0.0000167**        0.0000172**
                                             (0.000054)         (0.000019)          (0.000034)         (0.000029)        (0.0000080)       (0.0000082)
Civilian casualties at t+3                 -0.00000856         -0.0000114           0.00000169         0.0000448        0.0000180**        0.0000182**
                                             (0.000045)         (0.000011)          (0.000042)         (0.000033)        (0.0000078)       (0.0000079)
Civilian casualties at t+4                  0.00000816          0.0000229           0.00000497         0.0000386        0.0000318***      0.0000323***
                                             (0.000060)         (0.000058)          (0.000050)         (0.000053)        (0.0000079)       (0.0000080)
Joint F-test                                   8.48e-05           7.84e-05           0.000214           0.000217            9.31e-05          9.45e-05
(p-value)                                       (0.683)            (0.344)             (0.106)           (0.106)             (0.006)           (0.007)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                     0.000573*           0.000160             0.000212          0.000208          0.0000294         0.0000338
                                              (0.00032)          (0.00015)           (0.00027)          (0.00027)         (0.000071)        (0.000071)
Civilian casualties at t+1                  0.000523**           0.000108            0.000223           0.000226           0.000123          0.000127
                                              (0.00026)          (0.00012)           (0.00029)          (0.00023)          (0.00011)         (0.00011)
Civilian casualties at t+2                  0.000509**           0.000154            0.000196           0.000251           0.000121          0.000125
                                              (0.00025)          (0.00011)           (0.00027)          (0.00021)         (0.000084)        (0.000085)
Civilian casualties at t+3                  0.000455**           0.000130            0.000216           0.000300          0.0000992          0.000102
                                              (0.00022)         (0.000092)           (0.00026)          (0.00020)         (0.000066)        (0.000066)
Civilian casualties at t+4                  0.000487**          0.000229*            0.000208          0.000293*          0.0000687        0.0000705*
                                              (0.00021)          (0.00013)           (0.00020)          (0.00017)         (0.000042)        (0.000042)
Joint F-test                                   0.00197           0.000621             0.00104            0.00107           0.000412          0.000425
(p-value)                                       (0.032)            (0.117)             (0.192)           (0.183)             (0.163)           (0.151)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                  N                  N                   N                  Y                  N                  Y
Observations                                     12896              12792               12792             12792               12792             12792
R-squared                                         0.49               0.78                0.72              0.72                0.58              0.58
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                                   70 of 85
Appendix Table 15: Linear Regression Estimates of SIGACTs on Civilian Casualties, Including Spatial Lags for Civilian Casualty Variables (Iraq)
                                                  (1)                (2)                  (3)                (4)              (5)                (6)
Dependent Variable: SIGACTs (t)             Base Model         Lagged MA             Lead MA            Lead MA          Lead MAD           Lead MAD
Coalition Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)      -0.0000302         0.000102**           0.0000134          0.0000122        0.00000150          0.00000106
                                             (0.000061)        (0.000045)           (0.000022)         (0.000021)       (0.0000089)        (0.0000087)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)     -0.000110        -0.0000414**          -0.0000359        -0.0000338        0.00000122          0.00000224
                                             (0.000083)        (0.000021)           (0.000022)         (0.000021)       (0.0000072)        (0.0000067)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)    -0.0000921        -0.0000398**        -0.0000483**       -0.0000463**       -0.00000319        -0.00000222
                                             (0.000074)        (0.000020)           (0.000021)         (0.000020)       (0.0000060)        (0.0000053)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)    -0.0000902         -0.0000217         -0.0000346**       -0.0000335**       -0.00000513        -0.00000457
                                             (0.000079)        (0.000018)           (0.000017)         (0.000017)       (0.0000045)        (0.0000043)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)    -0.0000941         -0.0000167         -0.0000218**       -0.0000197**      -0.000000911        0.000000110
                                             (0.000062)        (0.000013)          (0.0000094)        (0.0000088)       (0.0000063)        (0.0000067)
Joint F-test                                 -0.000386          -0.000120            -0.000141          -0.000133         -8.01e-06          -4.44e06
(p-value)                                      (0.194)            (0.019)              (0.034)            (0.034)          (0.528)            (0.688)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)      0.000584**          0.0000534           -0.0000199        -0.0000557        -0.00000806         -0.0000241
                                              (0.00026)        (0.000047)           (0.000096)          (0.00010)        (0.000029)         (0.000037)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)    0.000453**         -0.0000457          -0.00000480        -0.0000299         0.0000189          0.00000788
                                              (0.00020)        (0.000083)            (0.00011)          (0.00012)        (0.000027)         (0.000028)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)    0.000393**         -0.0000570            0.0000117        -0.0000107         -0.0000137         -0.0000234
                                              (0.00019)         (0.00011)            (0.00011)          (0.00012)        (0.000021)         (0.000020)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)     0.000375*         -0.0000374           -0.0000148         -0.0000325        -0.0000229         -0.0000305
                                              (0.00020)        (0.000089)            (0.00013)          (0.00013)        (0.000019)         (0.000019)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)    0.000432**          0.0000809           -0.0000152        -0.0000331       -0.0000430**       -0.0000506***
                                              (0.00017)         (0.00011)            (0.00014)          (0.00014)        (0.000018)         (0.000019)
Joint F-test                                   0.00165          -5.91e-05            -2.30e-05          -0.000106         -6.07e-05          -9.66e-05
(p-value)                                      (0.023)            (0.811)              (0.958)            (0.811)          (0.265)            (0.092)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                 N                  N                    N                   Y               N                   Y
Observations                                    12896              12896                12792              12792            12584              12584
R-squared                                        0.59               0.88                 0.85               0.85             0.60               0.61
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                                   71 of 85
Appendix Table 16. Linear Regression Estimates of IEDs on Civilian Casualties, Including Spatial Lags for Civilian Casualty Variables (Iraq)
                                                  (1)                 (2)                  (3)              (4)                (5)                 (6)
Dependent Variable: IEDs (t)                Base Model         Lagged MA              Lead MA           Lead MA           Lead MAD            Lead MAD
Coalition Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)      -0.0000291          0.0000257           0.00000828        0.00000818         -0.00000201         -0.00000201
                                             (0.000037)         (0.000025)          (0.0000093)       (0.0000092)        (0.0000046)         (0.0000045)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)    -0.0000511        -0.0000200**          -0.00000481      -0.00000294          0.00000169          0.00000266
                                             (0.000040)        (0.0000096)          (0.0000067)       (0.0000064)        (0.0000034)         (0.0000034)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)    -0.0000349         -0.00000772          -0.00000373      -0.00000134        -0.000000780         0.000000448
                                             (0.000032)        (0.0000076)          (0.0000084)       (0.0000082)        (0.0000028)         (0.0000026)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)    -0.0000280         0.00000414           -0.00000275      -0.00000104         -0.00000459         -0.00000370
                                             (0.000032)        (0.0000060)          (0.0000077)       (0.0000077)        (0.0000033)         (0.0000030)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)    -0.0000239         0.00000416           -0.00000713      -0.00000682         -0.00000393         -0.00000373
                                             (0.000024)         (0.000015)          (0.0000059)       (0.0000056)        (0.0000024)         (0.0000024)
Joint F-test                                 -0.000138           -1.94e-05            -1.84e-05         -1.12e-05          -7.61e-06           -4.31e-06
(p-value)                                      (0.274)             (0.278)              (0.486)          (0.632)            (0.377)             (0.574)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)       0.000162*           0.0000146           -0.0000215       -0.0000315          -0.0000222          -0.0000271
                                             (0.000084)         (0.000027)           (0.000050)        (0.000052)         (0.000023)          (0.000025)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)     0.000125*         0.00000447            0.0000158        0.00000513         -0.00000102         -0.00000620
                                             (0.000072)         (0.000044)           (0.000057)        (0.000059)         (0.000019)          (0.000020)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)     0.0000906          -0.0000212           0.0000423         0.0000370         0.00000499           0.00000252
                                             (0.000082)         (0.000055)           (0.000058)        (0.000059)        (0.0000093)         (0.0000094)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)      0.000100          -0.0000114           0.0000172         0.0000145         0.00000244           0.00000130
                                             (0.000084)         (0.000052)           (0.000054)        (0.000054)        (0.0000088)         (0.0000085)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)    0.000162**          0.0000680            0.0000116        0.00000414          -0.0000183          -0.0000219
                                             (0.000074)         (0.000042)           (0.000050)        (0.000051)         (0.000014)          (0.000014)
Joint F-test                                  0.000478            3.99e-05             8.69e-05         6.07e-05           -1.19e-05           -2.42e-05
(p-value)                                      (0.101)             (0.764)              (0.661)          (0.763)            (0.752)             (0.538)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                 N                   N                    N                 Y                 N                    Y
Observations                                    12896               12896                12792            12792              12584               12584
R-squared                                        0.57                0.83                 0.83             0.83               0.60                0.61
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                                   72 of 85
Appendix Table 17. Linear Regression Estimates of Direct Fire on Civilian Casualties, Including Spatial Lags for Civilian Casualty Variables (Iraq)
                                                  (1)                 (2)                 (3)               (4)                 (5)                (6)
DV: Direct Fire (t)                         Base Model          Lagged MA             Lead MA           Lead MA            Lead MAD           Lead MAD
Coalition Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)       0.0000235         0.0000531***        0.000000186        -0.00000138         0.00000146        0.000000716
                                             (0.000014)          (0.000017)         (0.0000086)       (0.0000087)         (0.0000035)        (0.0000035)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)    -0.0000189           -0.0000130         -0.0000207*       -0.0000207*         -0.00000393        -0.00000388
                                             (0.000021)         (0.0000087)          (0.000012)        (0.000012)         (0.0000037)        (0.0000035)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)    -0.0000283        -0.0000297***        -0.0000287**      -0.0000292**        -0.00000616*      -0.00000635**
                                             (0.000020)         (0.0000098)          (0.000014)        (0.000014)         (0.0000034)        (0.0000032)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)    -0.0000195           -0.0000130        -0.0000269**      -0.0000271**         -0.00000394        -0.00000396
                                             (0.000023)          (0.000010)          (0.000014)        (0.000013)         (0.0000033)        (0.0000032)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)    -0.0000310          -0.0000137*        -0.0000144**      -0.0000130**         -0.00000293        -0.00000213
                                             (0.000023)         (0.0000074)         (0.0000067)       (0.0000061)         (0.0000029)        (0.0000028)
Joint F-test                                  -9.77e-05           -6.94e05            -9.08e-05         -9.00e-05           -1.70e-05          -1.63e-05
(p-value)                                      (0.258)             (0.030)             (0.049)           (0.044)             (0.163)            (0.150)
Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t (spatial lag)      0.000199**           0.0000341           0.0000270         0.00000322         0.00000924         -0.00000296
                                             (0.000088)          (0.000021)          (0.000021)        (0.000025)         (0.0000089)         (0.000011)
Civilian casualties at t-1 (spatial lag)    0.000165**           0.0000111           0.0000211         0.00000443         0.00000280         -0.00000561
                                             (0.000075)          (0.000025)          (0.000025)        (0.000026)         (0.0000088)        (0.0000088)
Civilian casualties at t-2 (spatial lag)    0.000134**          -0.00000535          0.0000177         0.00000300          -0.0000119         -0.0000192
                                             (0.000063)          (0.000041)          (0.000037)        (0.000036)          (0.000011)         (0.000012)
Civilian casualties at t-3 (spatial lag)    0.000131**          -0.00000229          0.0000124         0.00000171        -0.0000263**      -0.0000316***
                                             (0.000060)          (0.000029)          (0.000052)        (0.000050)          (0.000011)         (0.000011)
Civilian casualties at t-4 (spatial lag)     0.000113*          0.00000477           0.0000324         0.0000228           -0.0000121         -0.0000168
                                             (0.000059)          (0.000033)          (0.000066)        (0.000064)          (0.000012)         (0.000012)
Joint F-test                                  0.000543            8.20e-06            8.37e-05          3.19e-05            -4.74e-05          -7.32e-05
(p-value)                                      (0.024)             (0.886)             (0.601)           (0.835)             (0.071)            (0.011)
Spatial Lag of Dependent Variable                 N                   N                   N                  Y                  N                   Y
Observations                                    12896               12896               12792             12792               12584              12584
R-squared                                        0.48                0.78                0.72              0.72                0.57               0.58
Note: All models include district and month fixed effects. Where included, coefficients for moving average, mean absolute deviation, and spatial lag of the
dependent variable not shown. Robust standard errors, clustered on district, in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.01


                                                                                                                                                   73 of 85
Appendix Table 18. Linear Regression Estimates of Mean Absolute Deviation of IEDs on Civilian Casualties in Pashtun vs. Non-Pashtun Areas
(Afghanistan)
                                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)                         (4)
DV IED(t)                                                MAD                  MAD                  MAD                         MAD
                                                       In District          In District          In District                 In District
                                                        Pashtun            Non- Pashtun           Pashtun                   Non-Pashtun
Panel A: ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                                 0.0263                0.0299              0.0235                     0.00273
                                                         (0.025)              (0.048)              (0.025)                    (0.040)
Civilian casualties at t-1                               0.0416              0.000943              0.0394                     0.00600
                                                         (0.029)              (0.031)              (0.028)                    (0.031)
Civilian casualties at t-2                               0.0222               -0.0457              0.0186                     -0.0539
                                                         (0.025)              (0.035)              (0.025)                    (0.037)
Civilian casualties at t-3                               0.0565                0.0110              0.0538                      0.0229
                                                         (0.039)              (0.064)              (0.039)                    (0.068)
Civilian casualties at t-4                               0.0433               -0.0263              0.0400                     -0.0254
                                                         (0.037)              (0.059)              (0.038)                    (0.060)
Joint Test for                                             0.16                -0.060                0.15                      -0.050
Significance (p-value)                                    (0.18)               (0.64)               (0.22)                     (0.69)
Panel B: Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                                 0.00450             -0.00372              0.00397                    -0.00763
                                                        (0.0062)             (0.0089)             (0.0060)                     (0.010)
Civilian casualties at t-1                              -0.00128             -0.0124*             -0.00182                   -0.0168**
                                                        (0.0031)             (0.0075)             (0.0030)                    (0.0075)
Civilian casualties at t-2                               0.00619              -0.0116              0.00591                   -0.0150**
                                                        (0.0040)             (0.0080)             (0.0041)                    (0.0074)
Civilian casualties at t-3                               0.00644             -0.0138*             0.00596                    -0.0149**
                                                        (0.0043)             (0.0073)             (0.0043)                    (0.0058)
Civilian casualties at t-4                               0.00533             -0.0101*             0.00494                    -0.0128**
                                                        (0.0046)             (0.0058)             (0.0046)                    (0.0063)
Joint Test for                                            0.017                -0.048               0.015                      -0.060
Significance (p-value)                                    (0.17)              (0.084)               (0.21)                     (0.023)
Lagged MA                                                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                         Yes
Spatial Lag                                                No                    No                  Yes                         Yes
Observations                                              13416                16536                13416                       16512

                                                                                                                                            74 of 85
R-squared                                                        0.36                   0.26                  0.37                           0.28
Notes: The dependent variable is IED incidents per 1000 in the population respectively. Robust standard errors, clustered at the district level, are reported
in parentheses. All specifications include district and month-year fixed effect. Estimates which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with
** (*, ***). Moving average estimates are 3-period (6 week) previous week linear estimate of the moving average of the dependent variable. All regressions
include the spatial lag of the DV. Spatial lags are estimated as the average dependent variable value for all adjacent districts. Estimates of Civilian Casualties
and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on LandScan population estimates. Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian
Casualties Tracking Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Violent Events based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs)
against ISAF. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised explosive device explosions, improvised explosive devices found and cleared,
improvised explosive device hoaxes, and premature detonations. District classification based on National Geospatial Agency (NGA) shape files on ethnic
areas in Afghanistan, districts classified as Pashtun if more than 50% of their area fall into areas NGA defines as Pashtun.




                                                                                                                                                         75 of 85
Appendix Table 19. Linear Regression Estimates of IEDs on Interaction of Civilian Casualties with Pashtun Areas
(Afghanistan)
                                       (1)            (2)       (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)
DV: IED(t)                            FE             FE         MA            MA            MAD           MAD
                                In District In District In District In District In District In District
Panel A: ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t            0.0726         -0.148   0.00424        -0.0376         0.0223        0.0123
                                    (0.14)         (0.18)    (0.059)       (0.058)         (0.052)       (0.047)
Civilian casualties at t-1           0.177        0.0619     -0.166*       -0.144*        -0.00972      -0.00513
                                    (0.24)         (0.21)    (0.091)       (0.079)         (0.029)       (0.030)
Civilian casualties at t-2         0.00750         -0.130   -0.228**      -0.213**       -0.0585**     -0.0595**
                                   (0.059)         (0.10)     (0.10)       (0.098)         (0.028)       (0.030)
Civilian casualties at t-3         -0.0511       -0.0871*   -0.0874*       -0.0586       0.000256        0.00814
                                   (0.041)        (0.046)    (0.051)       (0.047)         (0.063)       (0.064)
Civilian casualties at t-4          -0.123         -0.141   0.00202         0.0118         -0.0386       -0.0355
                                   (0.097)         (0.13)    (0.097)        (0.10)         (0.056)       (0.057)
Joint Test for                        0.46          -0.30      -0.48         -0.40           -0.11        -0.092
Significance (p-value)              (0.97)        (0.034)    (0.005)       (0.004)          (0.35)        (0.42)
Pashtun Dummy X                     0.0786          0.229    0.0428         0.0681         0.00620       0.0116
Civilian casualties at t            (0.16)         (0.18)    (0.071)       (0.069)         (0.059)       (0.054)
Pashtun Dummy X                     -0.149         -0.110    0.222**       0.192**          0.0551        0.0465
Civilian casualties at t-1          (0.24)         (0.21)    (0.099)       (0.087)         (0.041)       (0.041)
Pashtun Dummy X                      0.132         0.215*   0.283***       0.255**       0.0837**      0.0788**
Civilian casualties at t-2         (0.092)         (0.12)     (0.11)        (0.10)         (0.037)       (0.039)
Pashtun Dummy X                    0.190**        0.159**   0.200***       0.153**         0.0581        0.0456
Civilian casualties at t-3         (0.077)        (0.066)    (0.063)       (0.060)         (0.074)       (0.075)
Pashtun Dummy X                    0.231**          0.168    0.0968        0.0649          0.0837        0.0752
Civilian casualties at t-4          (0.11)         (0.14)     (0.10)        (0.11)         (0.067)       (0.069)
Joint Test for                        0.35           0.45      0.56          0.48            0.20          0.18
Significance (p-value)              (0.29)        (0.071)    (0.001)       (0.005)          (0.33)        (0.39)
Panel B: Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t           0.164**        0.164**   0.00986       0.00383         -0.00440      -0.00594
                                   (0.067)        (0.068)    (0.013)       (0.014)        (0.0092)      (0.0093)
Civilian casualties at t-1          0.0115        -0.0196    -0.0158      -0.0225*         -0.0133      -0.0149*
                                   (0.023)        (0.021)    (0.016)       (0.013)        (0.0094)      (0.0086)
Civilian casualties at t-2         0.00995        -0.0201    -0.0191      -0.0238*         -0.0127       -0.0138
                                   (0.015)        (0.019)    (0.016)       (0.013)        (0.0100)      (0.0091)
Civilian casualties at t-3         0.00458        -0.0281    -0.0219      -0.0222*         -0.0149      -0.0149*
                                   (0.013)        (0.018)    (0.015)       (0.012)        (0.0092)      (0.0082)
Civilian casualties at t-4      -0.0000376       -0.00478   0.00104       -0.00268        -0.0106*      -0.0116*
                                  (0.0084)       (0.0043)   (0.0093)      (0.0093)        (0.0062)      (0.0061)
Joint Test for                       0.026         -0.073     -0.056        -0.071          -0.051        -0.055
Significance (p-value)              (0.63)         (0.18)     (0.31)        (0.11)         (0.066)       (0.075)
Pashtun Dummy X                    -0.128*       -0.136**   0.00560       0.00818          0.00953       0.0101
Civilian casualties at t           (0.069)        (0.069)    (0.017)       (0.016)         (0.011)       (0.011)
Pashtun Dummy X                     0.0156         0.0356     0.0246       0.0278*         0.0125        0.0132

                                                                                                        76 of 85
Civilian casualties at t-1              (0.029)        (0.026)       (0.017)         (0.014)       (0.0099)     (0.0089)
Pashtun Dummy X                         0.00750        0.0228        0.0290*       0.0315**         0.0194*    0.0199**
Civilian casualties at t-2              (0.019)        (0.020)       (0.017)         (0.014)        (0.011)     (0.0097)
Pashtun Dummy X                          0.0173       0.0343*        0.0314*       0.0283**        0.0216**    0.0209**
Civilian casualties at t-3              (0.018)        (0.019)       (0.016)         (0.012)        (0.010)     (0.0090)
Pashtun Dummy X                         0.0159        0.00782        0.00725        0.00820        0.0162**    0.0165**
Civilian casualties at t-4              (0.014)       (0.0075)       (0.011)         (0.011)       (0.0076)     (0.0075)
Joint Test for                           -0.080        -0.058         0.069           0.073          0.060        0.061
Significance (p-value)                   (0.35)         (0.23)        (0.20)          (0.12)        (0.066)      (0.043)
Pashtun Dummy                               0              0             0               0              0            0
                                           (0)            (0)           (0)             (0)            (0)          (0)
Lagged MA                                  No            Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes
Spatial Lag                                No            No            No              Yes            No           Yes
Observations                             31104          31104         30720           30696          29952        29928
R-squared                                 0.36           0.46          0.56            0.58           0.40         0.41
Notes: The dependent variable is IED incidents per 1000 in the population respectively. Robust standard errors,
clustered at the district level, are reported in parentheses. All specifications include district and month-year fixed
effect. Estimates which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with ** (*, ***). Moving average
estimates are 3-period (6 week) previous week linear estimate of the moving average of the dependent variable. All
regressions include the spatial lag of the DV. Spatial lags are estimated as the average dependent variable value for
all adjacent districts. Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on
LandScan population estimates. Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian Casualties Tracking
Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Violent Events based on data on significant
actions (SIGACTs) against ISAF. SIGACTs include direct fire, indirect fire, improvised explosive device explosions,
improvised explosive devices found and cleared, improvised explosive device hoaxes, and premature detonations.
District classification based on National Geospatial Agency (NGA) shape files on ethnic areas in Afghanistan,
districts classified as Pashtun if more than 50% of their area fall into areas NGA defines as Pashtun.




                                                                                                               77 of 85
Appendix Table 20. Linear Regression Estimates of SIGACTs* on Interaction of Civilian Casualties with Pashtun
Areas (Afghanistan)
                                         (1)          (2)       (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
DV: SIGACT(t)     *
                                        FE           FE         MA            MA          MAD            MAD
                                   In District In District In District In District In District In District
Panel A: ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t            1.457***     0.669***     0.253         0.181         0.359          0.348
                                      (0.51)       (0.25)     (0.27)        (0.25)        (0.24)         (0.24)
Civilian casualties at t-1            0.512        -0.182     -0.514        -0.467      0.00879         0.0152
                                      (0.79)       (0.68)     (0.45)        (0.44)        (0.20)         (0.20)
Civilian casualties at t-2            0.0613       -0.497     -0.187        -0.196       -0.319*        -0.324*
                                      (0.56)       (0.65)     (0.46)        (0.44)        (0.18)         (0.18)
Civilian casualties at t-3           -0.0678       -0.466      0.325         0.312       -0.0626        -0.0647
                                      (0.56)       (0.47)     (0.56)        (0.54)        (0.22)         (0.22)
Civilian casualties at t-4            0.275        0.0454     1.022         0.965         0.141          0.132
                                      (0.48)       (0.30)     (0.70)        (0.65)        (0.20)         (0.20)
Joint Test for                          0.78        -1.10      0.65          0.61          -0.23          -0.24
Significance (p-value)                (0.65)       (0.32)     (0.71)        (0.71)        (0.68)         (0.68)
Pashtun Dummy X                     -1.270**     -0.617**     -0.265        -0.210        -0.369         -0.361
Civilian casualties at t              (0.53)       (0.27)     (0.27)        (0.25)        (0.24)         (0.24)
Pashtun Dummy X                       -0.429        0.149      0.517         0.459      0.00802        -0.00172
Civilian casualties at t-1            (0.80)       (0.68)     (0.46)        (0.45)        (0.21)         (0.21)
Pashtun Dummy X                        0.129        0.606      0.144         0.126         0.293         0.292
Civilian casualties at t-2            (0.57)       (0.66)     (0.47)        (0.45)        (0.18)         (0.18)
Pashtun Dummy X                       0.0215       0.296      -0.317        -0.338       0.0403         0.0370
Civilian casualties at t-3            (0.57)       (0.48)     (0.57)        (0.55)        (0.22)         (0.22)
Pashtun Dummy X                       -0.139     -0.00681     -1.043        -1.025        -0.183         -0.180
Civilian casualties at t-4            (0.51)       (0.32)     (0.70)        (0.66)        (0.20)         (0.20)
Joint Test for                         -1.82        -0.18      -1.11         -1.11         -0.53          -0.51
Significance (p-value)                (0.31)       (0.87)     (0.48)        (0.45)        (0.32)         (0.34)
Panel B: Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t            0.408**       0.363**     0.232         0.222        0.0290         0.0275
                                      (0.16)       (0.14)     (0.23)        (0.23)       (0.043)        (0.042)
Civilian casualties at t-1            0.319         0.195     0.108         0.106        0.0146         0.0144
                                      (0.26)       (0.22)     (0.15)        (0.15)       (0.051)        (0.051)
Civilian casualties at t-2            0.240        0.0649    -0.0121      -0.00877      0.00757        0.00819
                                      (0.24)       (0.16)    (0.046)       (0.047)       (0.054)        (0.054)
Civilian casualties at t-3            0.193      -0.00899   -0.0833*      -0.0777*       -0.0163        -0.0155
                                      (0.17)      (0.046)    (0.047)       (0.044)       (0.019)        (0.020)
Civilian casualties at t-4            0.112       -0.0511    -0.0898       -0.0933       -0.0365        -0.0373
                                     (0.089)      (0.061)    (0.081)       (0.078)       (0.030)        (0.029)
Joint Test for                          0.86         0.20     -0.077        -0.073        -0.031         -0.030
Significance (p-value)                (0.26)       (0.58)     (0.46)        (0.48)        (0.76)         (0.76)
Pashtun Dummy X                     -0.347**     -0.319**     -0.204        -0.201       -0.0194        -0.0189
Civilian casualties at t              (0.16)       (0.14)     (0.23)        (0.23)       (0.043)        (0.043)
Pashtun Dummy X                       -0.270       -0.170    -0.0953       -0.0993       -0.0104        -0.0112

                                                                                                       78 of 85
Civilian casualties at t-1              (0.27)         (0.22)         (0.15)        (0.15)       (0.051)         (0.051)
Pashtun Dummy X                         -0.216       -0.0735         0.0258        0.0198       0.00191        0.000820
Civilian casualties at t-2              (0.24)         (0.16)        (0.044)       (0.045)       (0.054)         (0.055)
Pashtun Dummy X                         -0.150        0.0218        0.0951*        0.0849*       0.0218          0.0203
Civilian casualties at t-3              (0.17)        (0.046)        (0.049)       (0.045)       (0.020)         (0.020)
Pashtun Dummy X                        -0.0948        0.0420         0.0999        0.0985        0.0459          0.0459
Civilian casualties at t-4             (0.091)        (0.063)        (0.083)       (0.079)       (0.030)         (0.029)
Joint Test for                           -0.86         -0.42          -0.10         -0.12         0.038           0.036
Significance (p-value)                  (0.20)         (0.20)         (0.69)        (0.66)        (0.65)          (0.67)
Pashtun Dummy                              0              0              0             0             0               0
                                          (0)            (0)            (0)           (0)           (0)             (0)
Lagged MA                                 No            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
Spatial Lag                               No            No             No            Yes           No              Yes
Observations                            31104          31104          30720         30696         29952           29928
R-squared                                0.49           0.62           0.63          0.63          0.46            0.46
        *
Notes: The dependent variable is SIGACTs (minus IED hoaxes and IEDs found and cleared) per 1000 in the
population. Robust standard errors, clustered at the district level, are reported in parentheses. All specifications
include district and month-year fixed effect. Estimates which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked
with ** (*, ***). Moving average estimates are 3-period (6 week) previous week linear estimate of the moving
average of the dependent variable. All regressions include the spatial lag of the DV. Spatial lags are estimated as the
average dependent variable value for all adjacent districts. Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per
1000 in the population based on LandScan population estimates. Civilian casualties estimates based on data from
the Civilian Casualties Tracking Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Violent Events
based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs) against ISAF. District classification based on National Geospatial
Agency (NGA) shape files on ethnic areas in Afghanistan, districts classified as Pashtun if more than 50% of their
area fall into areas NGA defines as Pashtun.




                                                                                                                79 of 85
Appendix Table 21. Linear Regression Estimates of Moving Average of SIGACTs* on Civilian Casualties in Pashtun vs. Non-Pashtun Areas (Afghanistan)
                                (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)
DV: IED(t)                      FE             FE            FE             FE             MA             MA              MA             MA
                           In District      In District   In District    In District    In District    In District     In District    In District
                             Pashtun Non- Pashtun          Pashtun      Non- Pashtun     Pashtun      Non- Pashtun      Pashtun      Non- Pashtun
Panel A: ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t   0.166         1.503***       0.0481          0.656***       ‐0.0303        0.378          ‐0.0423         0.291
                             (0.12)       (0.51)         (0.091)        (0.24)         (0.076)        (0.29)         (0.078)         (0.24)
Civilian casualties at t-1   0.0640       0.565          ‐0.0359        ‐0.181         ‐0.0153        ‐0.385         ‐0.0215         ‐0.352
                             (0.087)      (0.80)         (0.075)        (0.67)         (0.093)        (0.44)         (0.094)         (0.43)
Civilian casualties at t-2   0.175        0.124          0.106          ‐0.485         ‐0.0563        ‐0.0711        ‐0.0776         ‐0.0956
                             (0.13)       (0.55)         (0.13)         (0.65)         (0.096)        (0.47)         (0.097)         (0.45)
Civilian casualties at t-3   ‐0.0545      ‐0.0271        ‐0.165*        ‐0.460         ‐0.00970       0.465          ‐0.0360         0.433
                             (0.12)       (0.57)         (0.093)        (0.47)         (0.098)        (0.57)         (0.10)          (0.54)
Civilian casualties at t-4   0.112        0.363          0.0332         0.0836         ‐0.0381        1.129          ‐0.0680         1.055
                             (0.16)       (0.48)         (0.11)         (0.29)         (0.069)        (0.71)         (0.074)         (0.65)
Joint Test for                 0.30            1.02         -0.062         -1.04          -0.12            1.14          -0.20            1.04
Significance (p-value)        (0.47)          (0.56)        (0.82)         (0.33)         (0.70)          (0.52)         (0.52)          (0.54)
Panel B: Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t    0.0538*** 0.417***           0.0426***      0.365**        0.0228***      0.244          0.0187**        0.232
                             (0.018)      (0.16)         (0.015)        (0.14)         (0.0087)       (0.24)         (0.0078)        (0.23)
Civilian casualties at t-1   0.0425***    0.328          0.0238         0.193          0.00772        0.131          0.00364         0.126
                             (0.015)      (0.27)         (0.017)        (0.22)         (0.010)        (0.17)         (0.0088)        (0.16)
Civilian casualties at t-2   0.0163       0.251          ‐0.0102        0.0636         0.00811        0.0192         0.00672         0.0187
                             (0.018)      (0.25)         (0.014)        (0.16)         (0.0071)       (0.067)        (0.0065)        (0.065)
Civilian casualties at t-3   0.0355**     0.202          0.0113         ‐0.0122        0.00663        ‐0.0504**      0.00363         ‐0.0485**
                             (0.014)      (0.18)         (0.0092)       (0.046)        (0.0074)       (0.020)        (0.0079)        (0.019)
Civilian casualties at t-4   0.00980      0.120          ‐0.0106        ‐0.0536        0.00599        ‐0.0629        0.00257         ‐0.0697
                             (0.015)      (0.091)        (0.012)        (0.060)        (0.0064)       (0.050)        (0.0073)        (0.053)
Joint Test for                  0.10           0.90          0.014          0.19          0.028           0.037          0.017           0.026
Significance (p-value)         (0.018)        (0.24)         (0.48)        (0.60)         (0.21)          (0.84)         (0.44)          (0.88)
Lagged MA                        No            No             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Spatial Lag                      No            No             No            No             No              No             Yes             Yes
Observations                 13932        17172          13932          17172          13760          16960          13760           16936
R-squared                    0.52         0.33           0.63           0.53           0.69           0.40           0.70            0.41

                                                                                                                                          80 of 85
Notes: *The dependent variable is SIGACTs (minus IED hoaxes and IEDs found and cleared) per 1000 in the population. Robust standard errors,
clustered at the district level, are reported in parentheses. All specifications include district and month-year fixed effect. Estimates which are significant at
the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with ** (*, ***). Moving average estimates are 3-period (6 week) previous week linear estimate of the moving average
of the dependent variable. All regressions include the spatial lag of the DV. Spatial lags are estimated as the average dependent variable value for all
adjacent districts. Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000 in the population based on LandScan population estimates. Civilian
casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian Casualties Tracking Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Violent Events
based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs) against ISAF. District classification based on National Geospatial Agency (NGA) shape files on ethnic
areas in Afghanistan, districts classified as Pashtun if more than 50% of their area fall into areas NGA defines as Pashtun.




                                                                                                                                                        81 of 85
Appendix Table 22. Linear Regression Estimates of Mean Absolute Deviation of SIGACTs* on Civilian Casualties in Pashtun vs. Non-
Pashtun Areas (Afghanistan)
                                                       (1)                  (2)                   (3)                     (4)
DV: IED(t)                                           MAD                  MAD                   MAD                     MAD
                                                 In District           In District          In District              In District
                                                   Pashtun           Non- Pashtun             Pashtun              Non-Pashtun
Panel A: ISAF Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                           -0.00846               0.341                -0.0110                  0.330
                                                    (0.029)               (0.22)               (0.028)                  (0.22)
Civilian casualties at t-1                          0.0159              0.00113                0.0133                 0.00351
                                                    (0.050)               (0.21)               (0.050)                  (0.21)
Civilian casualties at t-2                          -0.0257             -0.324*                -0.0318                -0.332*
                                                    (0.048)               (0.19)               (0.046)                  (0.19)
Civilian casualties at t-3                          -0.0203             -0.0629                -0.0252                -0.0672
                                                    (0.023)               (0.22)               (0.022)                  (0.23)
Civilian casualties at t-4                       -0.0412***               0.146             -0.0466***                  0.137
                                                    (0.015)               (0.20)               (0.016)                  (0.21)
Joint Test for                                       -0.071               -0.24                 -0.090                  -0.26
Significance (p-value)                               (0.50)               (0.68)                (0.38)                  (0.67)
Panel B: Insurgent Generated Civilian Casualties
Civilian casualties at t                          0.00955**              0.0282             0.00869**                  0.0267
                                                   (0.0037)              (0.043)              (0.0038)                 (0.042)
Civilian casualties at t-1                         0.00426               0.0122               0.00345                  0.0116
                                                   (0.0028)              (0.051)              (0.0027)                 (0.050)
Civilian casualties at t-2                       0.00971***             0.00470             0.00944***                0.00465
                                                   (0.0032)              (0.054)              (0.0032)                 (0.054)
Civilian casualties at t-3                         0.00574              -0.0197               0.00519                 -0.0197
                                                   (0.0038)              (0.018)              (0.0040)                 (0.018)
Civilian casualties at t-4                       0.00957***             -0.0395             0.00892***                -0.0406
                                                   (0.0033)              (0.031)              (0.0034)                 (0.032)
Joint Test for                                       0.029               -0.042                 0.027                  -0.044
Significance (p-value)                              (0.002)               (0.66)               (0.003)                  (0.64)
Lagged MA                                             Yes                  Yes                   Yes                     Yes
Spatial Lag                                           No                   No                    Yes                     Yes
Observations                                         13416                16536                 13416                   16512
R-squared                                             0.46                 0.35                  0.46                    0.35
                                                                                                                               82 of 85
Notes: *The dependent variable is SIGACTs (minus IED hoaxes and IEDs found and cleared) per 1000 in the population. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the district level, are reported in parentheses. All specifications include district and month-year fixed effect. Estimates
which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with ** (*, ***). Moving average estimates are 3-period (6 week) previous
week linear estimate of the moving average of the dependent variable. All regressions include the spatial lag of the DV. Spatial lags are
estimated as the average dependent variable value for all adjacent districts. Estimates of Civilian Casualties and SIGACTs scaled per 1000
in the population based on LandScan population estimates. Civilian casualties estimates based on data from the Civilian Casualties Tracking
Cell, International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) headquarters. Violent Events based on data on significant actions (SIGACTs) against
ISAF. District classification based on National Geospatial Agency (NGA) shape files on ethnic areas in Afghanistan, districts classified as
Pashtun if more than 50% of their area fall into areas NGA defines as Pashtun.




                                                                                                                                       83 of 85
Appendix Figure A1. Estimates of the effect of Civilian Casualties on Violent Incidents from Matched Sample for Pashtun Areas




                                                                                                                                84 of 85
Appendix Figure A2. Estimates of the effect of Civilian Casualties on Violent Incidents from Afghanistan Match Applied to Iraq




                                                                                                                                 85 of 85
