                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      MEDICARE PART D AND THE FINANCIAL PROTECTION OF THE ELDERLY

                                          Gary V. Engelhardt
                                           Jonathan Gruber

                                         Working Paper 16155
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16155


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2010




The research reported herein was supported by the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College
pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration funded as part of the Retirement Research
Consortium. The opinions and conclusions are solely those of the authors and should not be construed
as representing the opinions or policy of the Social Security Administration, any agency of the Federal
Government, the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, MIT, NBER, Syracuse University,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are our own. We are grateful to John Graves
for excellent research assistance. Gruber acknowledges financial support from the National Institute
on Aging.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Gary V. Engelhardt and Jonathan Gruber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Medicare Part D and the Financial Protection of the Elderly
Gary V. Engelhardt and Jonathan Gruber
NBER Working Paper No. 16155
July 2010
JEL No. H51,I18

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine the impact of the expansion of public prescription drug insurance coverage from Medicare
Part D on the elderly and find evidence of substantial crowd-out. Using detailed data from the 2002-7
waves of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), we estimate that the extension of Part D
benefits resulted in 80% crowd-out of both prescription drug insurance coverage and prescription drug
expenditures of those 65 and older. Part D is associated with only modest reductions in out-of-pocket
spending. This suggests that the welfare gain from protecting the elderly from out-of-pocket spending
risk through Part D has been small.


Gary V. Engelhardt
Center for Policy Research
423 Eggers Hall
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
gvengelh@maxwell.syr.edu

Jonathan Gruber
MIT Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
       The Medicare Modernization Act of 2003, better known as the legislation that

added the Part D prescription drug benefit to the Medicare program, represents the single

most significant expansion of public insurance programs in the U.S. in the past 40 years.

This program expanded the costs of the Medicare program by over 10% in order to

provide, for the first time, prescription drug coverage to enrollees. After some initial

difficulties in getting the program running, it has enrolled a sizeable share of elders, and

now pays for a large percentage of all prescriptions nationally.

       Despite the size of this new program, however, we know very little about its

effectiveness. One measure of program effectiveness is its success in providing financial

security to the nation’s elders. If Part D covered prescription drug spending that was

putting older Americans at financial risk previously, then there may be large welfare

gains from the associated consumption smoothing. But if Part D simply served to “crowd

out” existing insurance arrangements, then the welfare gains may be much smaller.

       In this paper, we evaluate the gain in financial protection provided by the Part D

program. We do so using the 2002-5 and 2007 waves of the Medical Expenditure Panel

Survey (MEPS), before and after the implementation of this program. These rich survey

data contain information not only on insurance coverage, but also prescription drug

expenditures by source of payment, including out-of-pocket. This allows us to carefully

model the impact of the Part D program on the distribution of expenditure risk.

       We address three separate questions. First, we examine whether the passage of

Part D was associated with increased prescription drug coverage among the elderly,

compared to the near-elderly, those just below 65. We find that elderly prescription drug

coverage increased by 10 percentage points, a dramatic rise. However, this figure




                                              2
represents only twenty percent of elders who received public coverage. This suggests that

Part D to a large extent crowded out of other forms of prescription drug coverage.

       Second, we use the MEPS data to examine the impact of Part D on the

prescription drug spending by payment source among the elderly. We find that

expenditure rose dramatically among the elderly; our central estimates suggest that there

was an overall increase of $400 per year spent on drugs as a result of Part D. Yet total

public expenditure on prescription drugs rose by $1900, so that crowd-out was once again

on the order of 80%.

       Third, we use the MEPS to examine the impact of Part D on the distribution of

out-of-pocket prescription drug spending among the elderly. We find that Part D led to

only a modest decline in out-of-pocket drug spending, and that this decline was

concentrated in the top of the expenditure distribution. There is little evidence that the

reduction in out-of-pocket drug spending was offset by increases in other out-of-pocket

medical spending. We then follow Feldstein and Gruber (1995) and Finkelstein and

McKnight (2008) and compute the certainty equivalent of the increased insurance

provided by this program. Although somewhat speculative, our estimates suggest that the

welfare gains from the increased insurance provided by Part D were relatively small.

       Our paper proceeds as follows. Part I presents some background on Part D, and

reviews the small literature that has emerged on this program. Part II discusses our data

and empirical strategy. Part III presents our results on prescription drug coverage, while

Part IV presents our results on prescription drug expenditures. Part V estimates the

welfare gain from the introduction of Part D in terms of reduced out-of-pocket spending

risk. There is a brief conclusion.




                                              3
                                       Part I: Background

The Medicare Part D Program

        From 1998 through 2003, one of the most heated topics of public policy debate in

the United States was the addition of a prescription drug benefit to the Medicare program.

Medicare, which provides universal health insurance coverage to those over age 65 and to

those on the federal disability insurance (DI) program, was established in 1965. The

original program covered most medical needs for the elderly and disabled, including

hospital and doctor costs, but it excluded coverage for prescription drugs. This omission

was not perceived as a major one in the early years of the program, but in the 1990s the

advancement of prescription-drug treatments for common illnesses among the elderly

drew attention to this gap in coverage. Medicare recipients, for example, spent an

average of $2,500 each on prescription drugs in 2003, more than twice what the average

American spent on all health care in 1965.1

        The debate in Congress over adding this benefit was a contentious one. Advocates

viewed the lack of drug coverage as an unnecessary and unfair “hole” in the supposed

universal coverage provided to our nation’s elderly and disabled. Opponents saw it as an

unwarranted expansion of the government’s role in the provision of health insurance.

Finally, in 2003, the Bush administration and Congress reached agreement on a far-

reaching prescription-drug benefit package at a projected cost to the federal government

of $40 billion per year for its first ten years.



1
 Data for prescription drug spending comes from the Congressional Budget Office (2002). Data for
average Americans’ health spending comes from the “National Health Expenditures” section of the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ National Health Accounts.


                                                   4
        This new Medicare benefit is delivered by private insurers under contract with the

government. Beneficiaries can choose from three types of insurance plans for coverage

of their drug expenditures: stand-alone plans, called Medicare Prescription Drug Plans

(PDP), that just offer prescription drug benefits; Medicare Advantage (MA) plans, which

are plans that provide all Medicare benefits (including prescription drugs) such as HMO,

PPO, or private FFS plans; or, beneficiaries could retain their current employer/union

plan, as long as coverage is “creditable” or at least as generous as (i.e., actuarially

equivalent to) the standard Part D plan, for which the plan sponsor would receive a

subsidy from the government, known as the Retiree Drug Subsidy (RDS).

        Under Part D, recipients were entitled to basic coverage of prescription drugs by a

plan with a structure actuarially equivalent to the following: no coverage of the first $250

in drug costs each year; 75% of costs for the next $2,250 of drug spending (up to $2,500

total); 0% of costs for the next $3,600 of drug spending (up to $5,100 total, the “donut

hole”); and 95% of costs above $5,100 of drug spending. Over 90% of beneficiaries in

2006, however, were not enrolled in this standard benefit design, but rather in actuarially

equivalent plans with low or no deductibles, flat payments for covered drugs following a

tiered system, or some form of coverage in the coverage gap. The main requirement for

plans is that they must have equal or greater actuarial value than the standard benefit.2

The government also placed restrictions on the structure of the formularies that plans

could use to determine which prescription medications they would insure. Overall, Part

D sponsors have great flexibility in terms of plan design.




2
 Cover Memo for Medicare Part D Benefit Parameters: Annual Adjustments for Standard Benefit in 2007
(CMS)


                                                 5
        Enrollment in Part D plans was voluntary for Medicare-eligible citizens, although

Medicare recipients not signed up by May 15, 2006, were subject to a financial penalty if

they eventually joined the program (to mitigate adverse selection in the choice of joining

the program). One group, however, was automatically enrolled: low-income elders who

had been receiving their prescription-drug coverage through state Medicaid programs (the

“dual eligibles”). These dual eligibles were enrolled in Part D plans by default if they did

not choose one on their own. The Part D plans for dual eligibles could charge

copayments of only $1 for generics/$3 for name brand drugs for those below the poverty

line, and only $2 for generics/$5 for name brand drugs for those above the poverty line,

with free coverage above the out-of-pocket threshold of $3600.3

        Despite reluctance voiced before the legislation passed, there was enormous

interest from insurers in participating in the Part D program. By November 2006, 3,032

plans were being offered to potential Part D enrollees. Every county in the nation had at

least 27 plans available; the typical county had 48 plans, while some counties featured

more than 70 choices, primarily due to high number of MA plans (in particular, in

Arizona, California, Florida, New York and Pennsylvania).4

        Table 1 shows aggregate data on Part D enrollment for selected periods since

adoption. In late 2005 and early 2006, enrollment in the program was fraught with

3
  In addition, two other groups receive substantial subsidies – those found eligible for the Low Income
Subsidy (LIS) or for the Partial Subsidy by the SSA. To qualify for LIS, beneficiaries must have income
less than 135% of the poverty line and resources less than $7,500 per individual or $12,000 per couple.
This group received benefits comparable to the dual eligibles with incomes above 100% of the poverty line.
To qualify for the Partial Subsidy, beneficiaries must have income at 135%-150% of the poverty line and
resources less than $11,500 per individual or $23,000 per couple. This group can enroll in plans with a $50
deductible, a 15% copayment up to the out-of- pocket threshold, and $2/$5 copayments above that point.
In addition, premiums are fully paid by the government up to 135% of the poverty line, and then partially
subsidized up to 150% of the poverty line.

4
 Details on number of plans in a median county obtained from Prescription Drug Plan Formulary and
Pharmacy Network Files for 2006, provided by CMS.


                                                    6
problems, but, in the months that followed, the federal government was able to iron out

many of the difficulties that had arisen during the initial transition. Moreover, surveys

showed that while only roughly 37% of seniors felt they understood the new Medicare

program in November 2005, that number had risen to almost 50% by April 2006 (Kaiser

Family Foundation, 2006).

       As columns 3-5 of the table show, as of June 2006, there were 16.5 million people

enrolled in stand-alone PDPs, of which 6.1 million were dual eligible and 10.4 million

were not dual eligible. In addition, 6 million people were enrolled in MA plans. Overall,

22.5 million or 53% of the approximately 43 million Medicare beneficiaries were

enrolled in a Part D plan. An additional 15.8 million were not enrolled in Part D, but had

some form of creditable coverage (columns 7-8). Of these, 6.8 million had

employer/union coverage that was subsidized through the Retiree Drug Subsidy (RDS)

part of the Medicare Modernization Act. In all, only 4.4 million or roughly 10% of

Medicare beneficiaries had no prescription drug coverage as of June, 2006 (column 9).

       Since then, Part D enrollment has grown, up from 53% to 59% of Medicare

beneficiaries by March, 2009. Most of this growth has come from increased participation

in Medicare Advantage drug plans. There has been a noticeable recent decline in

creditable employer/union coverage. In 2009, those with employer/union-provided RDS

coverage was 6 million, roughly similar to the number in 2006, indicating that much of

the recent decline in creditable coverage has come from unsubsidized employers/unions

and suggesting some medium-term crowd-out effects.



Other Research on Part D




                                             7
       The small literature that has emerged on the Medicare Part D program has

investigated primarily two issues. The first is the determinants, and efficacy, of decisions

to enroll in the program and which plan to choose. In Heiss, McFadden, and Winter

(2006), a team of researchers surveyed elders to assess whether enrollment intentions in

the plan were “rational” given the penalties for delay. They found that 71% of potential

enrollees made the appropriate decision (under various assumptions about discount rates,

etc.), while 10% of enrollees did not intend to enroll when it would have been in their

interests to do have done so, and 19% intended to enroll when it would have been in their

interest to have delayed. Their findings are less sanguine, however, for choice of Part D

plan. This survey offered individuals a choice of the standard plan described above

versus alternatives that provided different levels of insurance coverage (e.g. catastrophic

only, complete coverage, etc.), with corresponding actuarially fair premiums. They

found that only about 36% of enrollees chose the cost-minimizing plan, and did not place

much value on the insurance aspects of more comprehensive plans. They concluded that

“consumers are likely to have difficulty choosing among plans to fine-tune their

prescription drug coverage, and do not seem to be informed about or attuned to the

insurance feature of Part D plans.”

       Abaluck and Gruber (2009) undertook a more detailed assessment of plan choice

with data on the prescription-drug utilization and plan enrollment decisions of a large

sample of elders, for whom they have prescription claims records. They estimated a

discrete choice model that highlights three key anomalies in plan choices. First, elders

dramatically underweighted their expected out-of-pocket costs across plans relative to

their premium costs. Second, elders paid attention to plan characteristics, such as donut-




                                             8
hole coverage, in making plan choices, but only in a general sense and not really as it

applies to them. For example, the share of elders who chose donut-hole coverage was

largely invariant in the level of prescription-drug spending. Finally, there was very little

attention paid to the variance the elders faced in their drug expenditures under different

plans. As a result, Abaluck and Gruber found that the vast majority of elders were not

making cost-minimizing plan choices.

       The second set of articles on Part D evaluates the impacts of the plan on

prescription-drug utilization. These studies all suggest large utilization effects, but the

magnitudes differ considerably. Lichtenberg and Sun (2007) found that Medicare Part D

increased utilization of prescription drugs by the elderly by about 13%, and raised total

U.S. prescription drug utilization by almost 5%. Yin et al. (2008) estimated a more

modest increase in utilization of 5.9%, with a decline in out-of-pocket expenditures of

over 13%. Ketcham and Simon (2008) found a decline in out-of-pocket costs for the

elderly of 17%, and an increase of 8% in total prescription-drug spending (from all

payment sources). Duggan and Scott-Morton (2008) found a very large increase of over

50% in prescription-drug utilization among the elderly.

       We are aware of only two studies that address the issue of how Part D has

affected financial security. Lichtenberg and Sun (2007) also investigated the source of

payments for prescriptions. They found that for every seven new prescriptions paid for

by the government, there was a reduction of five prescriptions paid for by the private

sector. This implied a very large “crowd-out” of private insurance by this new program,

a topic that we explore further below.




                                              9
       Most relevant for our paper is a recent study by Levy and Weir (2009), who used

data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) to examine Part D enrollment and a

limited form of crowd-out. Their results for enrollment are consistent with our findings

below, but their definition of crowd-out differs from ours. They define dropped coverage

as crowd-out, whereas our definition is broader, encompassing the provision of public

coverage that may overlap with private coverage. In so doing, they neither investigated

in any detail the extent to which Part D coverage provides a net increase in insurance

coverage, nor the impacts on financial protection of the program. Indeed, as stated in the

conclusion to that paper, “A full evaluation of the impact of Part D must include an

evaluation of how these changes affect the health and financial security of the elderly as

well”. Our paper focuses on these financial security implications.



Other Related Literature

       Our paper also draws on two other literatures in health economics. The first is the

broader literature on the crowd-out of private health coverage by public insurance, mostly

focused on expansions of the Medicaid program for low-income families since the mid-

1980s. This literature is reviewed in Gruber and Simon (2008). While estimates vary,

there is a broad consensus that there was significant crowd-out of private insurance by the

Medicaid expansions. Gruber and Simon’s estimate, which is at the high end of the

literature, suggests that for every 100 persons gaining public coverage, 60 lost private

coverage, or a crowd-out rate of 60%.

       The second is the literature on the financial protection role of insurance. Our

central reference here is Finkelstein and McKnight (2008), who studied the impact of




                                            10
introducing the Medicare program itself in the mid-1960s on both health and out-of-

pocket medical spending. They found few impacts of this program on health, but

strikingly large impacts in terms of reducing the risk of out-of-pocket spending. They

followed earlier work by Feldstein and Gruber (1995) and undertook a welfare

calculation at the end of their paper. That calculation suggested that the reduced financial

risk facing elders alone offset more than half of the cost of the Medicare program.



                          Part II: Data and Empirical Methods

Data

       We use the 2002-5 and 2007 waves of the MEPS, which is a nationally

representative set of respondents drawn from the National Health Interview Survey

(NHIS). The MEPS is a two-year overlapping panel focused on health insurance

coverage, health care utilization, and expenditure, and is used to construct data for the

National Health Accounts. For each calendar year of the survey, the sample is a

combination of individuals in their first year of the panel and individuals in their final

year of the panel. Interviews are conducted three times per year (roughly every four

months). For our analysis, we use variables measured as of the end of each calendar year

(i.e., from the last interview of the year) taken from the Full-Year Consolidated Data

Files. We exclude 2006 since that was a transition year between private coverage and

public coverage for many, so it is harder to define crowd-out without more precise

within-year measures of coverage source.

       We begin the empirical analysis by examining the impact of the Part D expansion

on prescription-drug coverage from any source. We construct coverage by using data




                                             11
from two sources in the MEPS. The first source is from information in the health

insurance component of the survey, which asks about prescription drug coverage, and,

starting with the 2006 wave, includes a question about coverage through Medicare. The

second source is the expenditure component of the survey, in which information is

provided on prescription-drug expenditures from 12 detailed payment sources: private

group and non-group insurance plans, Medicaid, Medicare, Tricare/Champus, VA, out-

of-pocket, Worker’s Compensation, and other federal, state and local, private, public, and

unclassified sources. Because the MEPs does not attempt to reconcile differences in

coverage across these three survey components (Agency for Healthcare Research and

Quality, 2008a), we measure any coverage as having coverage denoted in either of these

two survey sources.

       Under the Medicare Modernization Act, all Medicaid-Medicare dual-eligibles

were automatically enrolled in Part D. As we do not want to treat any re-labeling of

Medicaid beneficiaries as Part D beneficiaries as crowd-out, we define the focal

explanatory variable in the empirical analysis as whether the individual has “public”

prescription-drug coverage, defined as drug coverage either through Medicare starting in

2006 or Medicaid coverage in any year.

       A key feature of our analysis is that we move beyond the crowd-out of coverage

and also examine the crowd-out of expenditures. To do so, we use data on expenditures

by payment source mentioned above. The MEPS constructed these data in a multi-stage

process. First, in the interview, respondents were asked about all prescribed medicines,

including the name of the medication, frequency of use, dosage, and the name and

address of the pharmacy at which the prescription was filled. Second, respondents were




                                            12
asked permission to release their pharmacy records. For those who consented, the MEPS

requested from the pharmacy the date the prescription was filled, the name and dosage of

the medication, payments by source, and the national drug code. Finally, MEPS

constructed expenditure measures by payment source for each respondent as follows. For

those who consented, expenditures are based on the pharmacy records; for those who did

not consent, expenditures are based on self-reported expenditures that have been adjusted

for outliers and item non-response based on imputations from the pharmacy data (Agency

for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2008b). We use these data on expenditures,

deflated into 2007 dollars using the all-items Consumer Price Index, in our analysis

below.



Empirical Methods

         Our basic empirical approach is a difference-in-difference analysis, comparing the

prescription-drug insurance coverage and expenditures of those who are Medicare

eligible to near-elderly who are not, before versus after 2006. This strategy will identify

the impact of Part D as long as there are no other reasons why coverage or expenditures

would be changing, relatively, for elders and near-elders at this time.

         This identification assumption could be violated in one of two ways. First, there

may be underlying differential trends in prescription-drug utilization across these groups,

and this change may simply be “riding the trend.” We address this concern by illustrating

graphically that coverage and drug expenditures were moving closely for both groups

before this change. Second, there may have been some other shock over this time period

that caused a relative shift in insurance coverage or drug expenditures. While this




                                             13
alternative is impossible to rule out completely, it seems highly unlikely given the

magnitude of the Part D change. For example, the change in prescription-drug coverage

we see for those 65-69 between 2005 and 2007 is more than three times the largest

change that we saw over any other two year period since 2000.

       We define the near-elderly as those aged 60-64, although our findings are not

materially different if we broaden this group to include those in their fifties. In addition,

we exclude from our analysis those under 65 who are eligible for Medicare through DI.

We employ two age definitions for Medicare-eligible individuals: 65-70 year olds, and all

individuals 65 and older. The former is a group closest in age to the comparison group of

60-64 years and provides for the cleanest analysis of the adoption of Part D as a quasi-

experiment. The latter definition yields results for all Medicare beneficiaries and allows

us to make statements about program-wide effects.

       Table 2 gives basic descriptive statistics on our outcomes and measure of public

prescription-drug coverage by time period for each of these age groups. The sample

mean public coverage rate and expenditure after Part D are 68.9% and $1,280,

respectively. When adjusted by the MEPS sampling weights, these means imply 25.8

million persons receiving public coverage and aggregate program expenditure of $43.5B

in 2007. These are quite close to the aggregate numbers on Part D tabulated

administratively by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).



Caveats

       There are two important issues with our definitions of public coverage and

expenditure. The first is the proper treatment of prescription-drug coverage through




                                             14
Medicare HMOs. Before the implementation of Part D in 2006, many, but not all,

individuals enrolled in Medicare HMO plans received prescription-drug coverage. Such

coverage was a mix of private and public coverage. On the one hand, these extra benefits

were like Medigap coverage—individuals were paying more to get extra benefits—and,

hence, were a form of private coverage. On the other hand, the cost to the individuals of

this type of coverage was artificially low because the government was cross-subsidizing

risk, just as in Part D.5 Overall, it is unclear whether such coverage should be labeled

private or public. In the analysis, we treat this source of coverage as private in the pre-

Part D period (2002-5), but public after Part D was instituted (2007). Most of our

findings are similar when we treat Medicare HMO coverage as public coverage in the

pre-Part D period. We note where there are differences.

        The second is that the Medicare Modernization Act that created Part D gives

subsidies to employers/unions to keep coverage under the RDS program. Therefore, the

federal government is also promoting “private” coverage under our definition, blurring

distinctions between public and private. Unfortunately, the MEPS data do not indicate if

employer/union coverage is subsidized under the RDS program.

        Consequently, in the empirical analysis below, we present two sets of estimates.

The first are reduced-form estimates, which are the regression-based counterparts to our

difference-in-difference analysis and measure program-wide effects, i.e., the net impact

of Part D of prescription drug coverage and expenditures as it operates through all

channels, including stand-alone PDP, MA drug plans, and RDS subsidized

employer/union coverage. The second are traditional IV estimates of crowd-out based on

5
 Of course, the same could be said for Medigap plan holders as well, since it is well known that Medigap is
artificially cheap because the costs of the moral hazard it induces are borne by the Medicare program (e.g.
Chandra et al., forthcoming).


                                                    15
our definition of public coverage given above, where we implicitly treat employer/union

coverage, even if subsidized under the RDS program, as private coverage. Because

private coverage likely would have been lower in the absence of the RDS program, our

measured crowd-out is likely to be an underestimate of true crowd-out from the Part D

expansion.



                         Part III: Insurance Coverage Results

Graphical Evidence

       We begin our analysis by showing the evidence on prescription-drug insurance

coverage over time for older Americans. Figure 1 shows the age profile of coverage from

any source for 50-80 year olds from the MEPS for before Part D (2002-2005) and after

(2007), respectively, as measured on the left-hand axis. Before Part D, prescription

drug coverage rates from any source were constant until age 65, before dropping by about

five percentage points. After Part D, the age profile is similar through the early 60s

(although noisier since we only have one year of post-Part D data) before diverging

sharply at age 65. This is a remarkable shift in only one or two years.

       Against the vertical axis on the right-hand side, the graph also illustrates the age

profile of public coverage in 2007, where, again, “public” means either through Medicare

or Medicaid. The public coverage rate was roughly 15% for those under age 65. Public

coverage then rose to 80% for those 65 and older. This age-related increase in public

coverage is much larger than the total shift in insurance coverage (a gap between the

before and after lines of roughly 15 percentage points), and suggests that there was

significant crowd-out of existing coverage by the Part D expansion.




                                             16
        To formalize this graphical evidence, Table 3 shows data on prescription-drug

coverage by age group and time periods. In the first row, there is a very large increase in

prescription drug coverage for those 65-70 years old of 13.7 percentage points, with only

a moderate corresponding increase of about 3.4 percentage points for 60-64 year olds.

The difference-in-difference estimate in the fourth row indicates that Part D was

associated with a 10.3 percentage point rise in prescription-drug coverage among the

elderly.

        The bottom panel undertakes a corresponding difference-in-difference calculation

for public coverage. Here we find a rise of over 50% for age 65-70, with no change for

the younger group. These estimates of a 50% rise in public coverage yet only a 10% rise

in total coverage imply quite large crowd-out of other insurance sources by Part D, on the

order of 80%



Regression Evidence

        Table 4 presents estimates from the following econometric specification:

(1)                     DitAnyCoverage     DitPublicCoverage  it  uit ,

where the dependent variable, D AnyCoverage , takes on a value of one if the individual had

prescription-drug coverage from any source and zero otherwise; the focal explanatory

variable is D PublicCoverage , which takes on a value of one if the individual had public

coverage;  is a vector of control variables that includes a full set of dummy variables

for single year of age and calendar year, respectively; and u is a disturbance term. In (1),

 measures the extent to which public coverage raises private coverage, and, therefore,

1   measures crowd-out. Because take-up of public prescription-drug insurance is



                                                    17
likely endogenous, we estimate the parameters in (1) by instrumental variable regression,

using DiAge65  DtYear 2007 as the instrument, where DiAge65 is a dummy variable that is one

if the individual is 65 or older and zero otherwise, and DtYear 2007 is a dummy variable that

is one if the calendar year is 2007 (after Part D) and zero otherwise. Because the sample

includes person-year observations on individuals from the same families and Medicare

eligibility is primarily determined by age, we cluster the standard errors by household and

age group (under 65, 65 and over).

       Panel A of the table presents results for 60-70 year olds; panel B for all those 60

and older. Within each panel, three sets of estimates are presented: the reduced-form,

first-stage, and IV estimates, respectively. The reduced-form is essentially a regression-

based version of the difference-in-difference analysis in panel A of Table 3. The first-

stage similarly is a regression-based version of the difference-in-difference analysis in

panel B of Table 3.

       Column 1 of Table 4 shows the estimation results from with no additional control

variables (other than the age and time dummies) in  . In panel A, the first-stage results

show that there is a 51.3% rise in public insurance coverage for those over 65-70 from

2002-5 to 2007, with a corresponding rise of 10.3% in total prescription drug coverage.

Putting the two together, the IV estimate in the third row shows that for each 100 persons

covered by public insurance, 20.1 persons gained insurance coverage. This implies very

large crowd-out of eighty percent: that is, only one fifth of those who signed up for Part




                                              18
D gained insurance coverage by doing so, while four fifths moved over from another

source of coverage.6 Panel B shows similar results for all elderly.

         The remaining columns of Table 4 assess the sensitivity of this result to additional

controls in the regression. We add to  , sequentially and cumulatively, demographic

controls in the form of dummy variables for marital status (married, divorced/separated,

widowed), race/ethnicity (black, Hispanic, other), education (high school, some college,

college degree or higher), and gender (female); dummies for census region; measures of

self-reported health status (excellent, very good, good, fair); and dummy variables for

household income quintiles (2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th quintiles).7 None of these additional

covariates have any meaningful impact on the key results, which is consistent with the

notion that there are no other underlying changes between elderly and non-elderly over

this period which might confound our analysis.

         We show the results of an additional specification test in Figure 2, which plots the

difference-in-difference estimates from a set of pseudo-experiments, which treat each

single year of age as the Part D age-eligibility cut-off and uses data from 2 years of age

below and above to calculate the difference-in-differences. If we are identifying the true

impact of Part D, the difference-in-difference impact should only appear around age 65,

the true age-eligibility cut-off, and not around other ages, especially those more than 2

years apart from 65. This is clear in the figure, in which the impact peaks around age 65.




6
  If coverage through a Medicare HMO prior to 2006 is treated as public coverage in the pre-period, then
the IV estimate rises to 0.301, suggesting 70% crowd-out.
7
  The omitted group is than never married, non-Hispanic white, male, with less than a high school
education and household income in the bottom quintile. In principle, self-reported health status could be
endogenous with respect to the law change, but, in practice, there is little correlation between the
instrument and the dummy variables for self-reported health status, as evidenced in a comparison of the
results in columns 4 and 5 in Table 4.


                                                    19
       Table 5 extends this analysis in both samples to selected subgroups of the elderly

population. Doing so, we uncover some interesting heterogeneity. First, we find that

crowd-out is much larger for those who are working than for those who are not. Second,

we find substantially higher crowd-out for the most educated and highest income groups

in our sample. Both of these findings are consistent with the notion that crowd-out will

be highest in the populations with the broadest ex-ante level of private coverage. The

first finding may also suggest that the RDS program did not do much to combat crowd-

out of employer coverage, but more work is needed to confirm that conclusion.



                              Part IV: Expenditure Results

       In this section, we extend our analysis to examine the impact of Part D on

prescription-drug spending. This analysis is interesting for two different reasons. First,

this allows us to extend our crowd-out analysis in a direction not pursued in the previous

literature: to look more specifically at the dollar reduction in spending covered by private

insurance relative to the dollar increase in public spending. The crowd-out in dollar

terms will be identical to the crowd-out in coverage terms only if (a) those who have

private coverage but switch to public coverage do not change their spending, and (b)

those who switch from uninsured to public coverage increase their spending to the ex-

ante average of those with private coverage who switch to public coverage. Therefore,

the relationship of crowd-out in dollar terms and crowd-out in coverage terms will

depend critically on the generosity of public coverage relative to the private coverage of

switchers.




                                            20
       Of course, the welfare implications of this comparison are difficult, because we

do not know which type of coverage is closer to optimal insurance. If individuals who

are crowded out of private coverage were dramatically under-insured ex ante by the

private sector, and appropriately insured ex post by the government, then crowd-out

should be smaller in dollar terms than in coverage terms—this would represent a welfare

improvement. Unfortunately, however, the exact same conclusion holds if individuals

were appropriately insured ex ante and over-insured ex post.

       The second advantage of using the spending data is that it allows us to directly

address the extent to which public insurance programs increase the financial protection of

the elderly. Those elderly who were uninsured ex ante are clearly gaining financial

protection from Part D, as are elderly who had large out-of-pocket spending burdens

despite being insured privately. As Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) emphasize, for

evaluating the welfare implications of a program such as Part D, it is critical to consider

the overall reduction in out-of-pocket spending risk.

       Theoretically, such a calculation requires data on the longitudinal risk facing each

individual. In practice, we have instead the cross-sectional distribution of spending on

prescription drugs. So, in our calculations, we use this cross-sectional distribution as a

proxy for the theoretically appropriate measure. The bias from doing so is unclear. On

the one hand, this will overstate the risk facing individuals, because we are ignoring

private information that individuals have about their own spending distribution. On the

other hand, this will understate the risk facing individuals, because we are measuring

only realized spending, not spending risk. This relates to our previous discussion. If

individuals were holding off on necessary prescriptions because of limited coverage, and




                                             21
they fill those prescriptions now that they have coverage, then there is an “access” gain

that increases welfare beyond any reduced out-of-pocket spending. On the other hand, if

individuals were spending appropriately before, and now over-spend on prescription

drugs, then the reduction in out-of-pocket spending is the right risk measure.



Aggregate Evidence

       We begin with Figure 3, which shows aggregate public and private prescription

drug expenditure (for individuals of all ages), respectively, in billions of 2007 dollars,

taken from the National Health Expenditure Accounts compiled by CMS. Prior to 2006,

the rate of growth of both was positive, but slowing. Between 2005 and 2006, private

expenditure fell 4.2%, while public expenditure rose 29.6%. In particular, out-of-pocket

spending fell 7%. Therefore, the aggregate data in this figure suggest a potentially large

role for crowd-out.



Regression Evidence

       Next, we move to a regression model for the elderly only. Given the similarity of

our previous estimates for 60-70 year olds and for the full sample over age 60, we focus

on the full sample for the rest of our analysis.

       Panel A of Table 6 shows reduced-form and IV estimates, respectively, of the

parameters of the following model:

(2)                      X itPublic     DitPublicCoverage   it  uit ,




                                                     22
where the dependent variable, X Public , is public expenditure on prescription drugs. The

reduced-form estimate shows the overall impact of Part D through all channels. We do

not repeat the first stage regressions, which are the same as in Table 4.

       We find that public spending through Medicare and Medicaid was $1000 higher

for those over age 65 relative to those 60-64 after the adoption of Part D. In addition, the

IV estimates indicate that public prescription-drug expenditures rose by $1900 per person

gaining public coverage. This is an enormous increase, about 100% of the mean

spending on prescription drugs in the pre-period. Once again, this estimate is not

sensitive to the various specifications we use across columns (1)-(5).

       We have explored the source of this sizeable increase in prescription drug

utilization in our MEPS data. We find that there is little change in the odds that

individuals fill a prescription; our IV estimate is just under a 2% rise in the odds of filling

a prescription, and it is not significant. On the other hand, the number of prescriptions

filled per enrollee goes up astronomically, by 3 scrips per new enrollee, or 11% of the

pre-period mean for those over age 65.

       In panel B, we give the IV estimate from an isomorphic specification,

(3)                      X itTotal     DitPublicCoverage   it  uit ,

where the dependent variable is total drug expenditure paid through all sources. In (3),

 measures the extent to which public coverage increases total expenditure. Our

estimates suggest that total prescription-drug spending only rises by about $400, as

shown in the first row of panel B. The final row of the panel shows IV estimates from a

related specification,

(4)                                 X itTotal     X itPublic  it   it ,



                                                      23
that directly measures expenditure crowd-out. In (4),  measures the extent to which a

one-dollar increase in public prescription-drug expenditure raises total expenditure, and,

therefore, 1   measures expenditure crowd-out. The estimates of  suggest that each

dollar of public expenditure raises total expenditure by roughly 20 cents, or that there is

about 80% crowd-out. This is strikingly similar to the coverage crowd-out estimate

above.

         The remaining panels of Tables 6 show expenditure crowd-out estimates by

source of payment. About five-eighths of our estimated expenditure crowd-out is due to

reduced privately insured prescription-drug spending, which falls by over 50 cents for

every dollar increase in public spending. The remainder is due to reduced out-of-pocket

spending by the elderly of $545 per person publicly covered, or about 30 cents per public

dollar spent.



Part V: Estimating the Welfare Gain from the Reduction in Out-of-Pocket Spending

         The IV estimates in Tables 6 suggest a fairly small reduction in out-of-pocket

spending in dollar terms due to Part D. However, as is well known, the distribution of

out-of-pocket spending is right-skewed, so that a mean estimator might not be well-suited

to assess the impact of Part D on out-of-pocket spending.

         Therefore, in Table 7, we move to quantile estimation to better assess the impact

of Part D. The table shows the change in expenditure at every tenth quantile of the

distribution of out-of-pocket spending associated with Part D expansion, by contrasting

the change for those over 65 with those under (this is akin to the exercise of Finkelstein




                                             24
and McKnight, 2008)). Formally, these are estimates of  from the following reduced-

form specification:

(5)                        X itOOP     DiAge65  DtYear 2007  it  it ,

where the dependent variable is out-of-pocket prescription-drug spending. We find that

there is a monotonically increasing reduction in out-of-pocket spending for those over

age 65, relative to those below age 65. These differential estimated effects are significant

from the 20th percentile onward. Even at the 90th percentile, however, they are still only a

minority of pre-Part D out of pocket spending.

        Figure 4 extends this analysis to a richer description of the spending risk using

quantile estimation. In particular, the solid line in the figure represents the estimates of

 , the impact of public coverage on out-of-pocket expenditure, for those 60 and older

from the following econometric specification:

(6)                         X itOOP     DitPublicCoverage   it  uit ,

in which the parameters are estimated for each quantile of the out-of-pocket spending

distribution using the instrumental variable quantile regression (IVQR) estimator of

Chernozhukov and Hansen (2005), using DiAge65  DtYear 2007 as the instrument, and 

contains the richest set of controls from column 5 of Table 6. The dashed lines in the

figure show the boundaries of the 95% confidence intervals based on 99 block-

bootstrapped (by household and D Age65 ) replications.8

        Public coverage has a very small effect at the low quantiles, but it grows

consistently with baseline spending. At the median the impact is a reduction of $164 in

8
  The estimates for the first five quantiles are centered around and not different from zero, but are very
imprecisely estimated and have wide confidence bands. For the purposes of exposition, they are not shown
in the figure, but are available upon request.


                                                       25
out of pocket spending; at the 90th quantile it has grown to $907. But this is still a fairly

modest reduction relative to the $2500 baseline value for out of pocket spending.

       To assess the importance of these reductions in out-of-pocket spending from an

insurance perspective, we follow Feldstein and Gruber (1995) and Finkelstein and

McKnight (2008) and calculate the change in the risk premium associated with out-of-

pocket spending as a measure of the welfare gain from the expansion of public

prescription-drug coverage through Part D. Specifically, we assume the individual gets

utility from consumption defined by the per-period budget constraint,

(7)                                      C  Y  X OOP ,

as income, Y, net of out-of-pocket expenditure, X OOP , where the latter is a random

variable. Hence, the individual’s expected utility is

                                 U (Y  X
                                             OOP
(8)                                                ) f ( X OOP )dX oop ,

where f is the probability density function of the out-of-pocket expenditure. The risk

premium,  , associated with out-of-pocket spending then is defined as

(9)                            U (Y   )   U (Y  X OOP ) f ( X OOP )dX oop ,

and measures the amount a risk-averse individual would be willing to pay to insure

against random variation in out-of-pocket spending. We calculate the change in the risk

premium associated with the adoption of Part D,

(10)                               WithPartD   WithoutPartD .

This change will be negative if Part D reduces the risk premium and protects the elderly

from out-of-pocket prescription-drug spending risk; the absolute value of this change

measures the welfare gain from Part D.




                                                 26
        Of course, the introduction of Part D will shift the mean level of out-of-pocket

spending as well as its risks. The shift in the mean is simply a transfer from the

government to the insured, and so should not enter these risk calculations. We, therefore,

subtract the mean reduction in out-of-pocket spending to obtain the risk premium.

Similarly, we do not include in these calculations the premiums that individuals pay

under either their private insurance or Part D. For most of the sample, these premiums

will be small relative to income and, therefore, will not enter the risk calculations.

        We measure (10) as follows. First, we use the IVQR estimates of the parameters

in (6) to calculate for each individual (i) in the sample the conditional (on that

individual’s characteristics,  ) quantiles (superscript j) of the out-of-pocket spending

distribution with Part D,

(11)                               Xˆ iOOPWithPartD , j  ˆ j  ˆ j  ˆ j i ,

and without Part D,

(12)                               Xˆ iOOPWithoutPartD , j  ˆ j  ˆ j i ,

respectively, for i  1,..., N and j  1,..., 99 . Second, we use the fact that the conditional

quantiles are the inverse of the conditional cumulative distribution function of out-of-

pocket expenditure, so that we can recover the estimated distribution of out-of-pocket

spending. Because there are 99 quantile estimates, to guarantee that the sum of the

probabilities is one, we set conditional out-of-pocket spending to zero at the very bottom

of the distribution, j=0, i.e., Xˆ iOOPWithPartD ,0  0 . This gives us 100 points (of equal

probability of occurrence) in the out-of-pocket spending distribution for each person.

Third, we draw with replacement 99 times from each person’s distribution. Fourth, we

directly calculate the risk premium under Part D for each individual by solving


                                                      27
                                                  1 99
(13)                   U (Y   iWithPartD )        U (Y  Xˆ iOOPWithPartD ,d  ˆ OOP ) ,
                                                 99 d 1

where d indexes the draw from the distribution, and ˆ OOP is the IV estimate from (6) that

adjusts for the change in the mean of the out-of-pocket expenditure distribution from Part

D. In a similar fashion, we calculate the risk premium without Part D by solving

                                                    1 99
(14)                   U (Y   iWithoutPartD )        U (Y  Xˆ iOOPWithoutPartD , d ) .
                                                    99 d 1

In calculating (10), we follow Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) and truncate predicted

out-of-pocket spending from below at zero and from above at 80% of income. We report

the calculations only for those in our sample who actually took up Part D.

       Table 8 shows selected statistics on the distribution of the change in the risk

premium (welfare gain) associated with Part D for selected levels of risk aversion

assuming a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility function using the estimates in

Figure 4 for all individuals 60 and older. For a typical estimated CRRA of 3, the mean

reduction in the risk premium, or welfare gain, for those who took up Part D is $184.

The median is comparable, and the 95th percentile is $395. The other rows of the table

recalculate the change in risk premium for CRRA of 1 (log utility) and 5, respectively.

The risk premiums are fairly similar for a CRRA of 1, and much higher for a CRRA of 5.



Implications

       Overall, our results suggest that the risk-reduction gain was likely small from the

introduction of Part D benefits. But what matters is not the absolute value of this gain but

its size relative to the inefficiencies of the program for all elderly. There are two sources

of inefficiency for Part D. The first is the deadweight loss (DWL) of raising the $44.8


                                                     28
billion in net expenditures for Part D in 2007. At a typical estimate of 30 cents of DWL

per dollar of revenue raised, and with 31.2 million program recipients, this implies a

DWL of $430/recipient, or more than twice the mean welfare gain from reduced out-of-

pocket spending risk.

       The second is the moral hazard cost of excess medical consumption due to Part D,

which is much harder to evaluate. An upper bound estimate of this cost is the increase in

expenditure on prescription drugs per recipient, $400. This is an upper bound for two

reasons. First, some of this increase may not reflect moral hazard but rather income or

“access” effects from insurance (Nyman, 1999). There is no compelling evidence that

allows us to distinguish these effects, but given the relatively modest sums at risk here

compared to income this seems unlikely to explain much of the response.

       Second, there may be offset effects to other sources of medical spending as drug

spending increases. Indeed, a study of the introduction of Part D by Zhang et al. (2009)

found that the costs of increased drug expenditure were fully offset by reduced spending

in other areas. This would suggest no aggregate moral hazard effects from the Part D

program.

       We can investigate this question as well with our MEPS data, and we do so in

Table 9. Each cell in this table shows the IV coefficient on public insurance prescription

drug expenditures in our richest model from Table 6, akin to the coefficient of 0.213 in

the fifth row of column 5. There are five rows for total of all spending, public medical

spending (Medicare and Medicaid), private medical spending in total, private spending

by insurers, and private spending out of pocket. In other words, the first row is

decomposed into the second and third rows, and the third row is decomposed into the




                                             29
fourth and fifth rows. And we divide medical spending into eight categories: inpatient

hospital, outpatient hospital, office-based care, emergency room, home health care, dental

care, other medical spending, and prescription drugs.

       For total medical spending (the first row), the estimates in Table 12 are consistent

with Zhang et al.’s conclusion that Part D did not raise total medical spending, but the

estimates are very imprecise. We find that there are increases in spending on prescription

drugs (as seen in Table 6) and on inpatient and outpatient hospital spending. However,

there are sizeable reductions in office-based spending and home-health care (although

only the latter is significant), and smaller reductions in spending in the other categories.

On net, we find that total medical spending fell, but the estimate is highly insignificant;

given our standard errors we cannot rule out a very large increase in total medical

spending.

       The next two rows (panels B and C) show an interesting decomposition of these

spending effects into public and private payers. For public payers, the offset is much

smaller; on net, reductions in other spending only offset about ten cents of each dollar of

increased drug spending. For private payers, however, there is not only the sizeable

reduction in prescription drug spending noted earlier, but also an additional sizeable drop

in other spending as well (although once again our estimates are very imprecise, with

only the reduction in office-based case being significant). Thus, the general conclusion

that Part D represented a large shift from private to public payers for prescription drugs

extends as well to the broader set of medical spending categories.

       The next two rows (panels D and E) show that almost all of the offsetting

reduction in other spending accrued to insurers. Out of pocket spending on other medical




                                             30
care did not much change; the reduction in total out of pocket spending is similar to the

reduction in prescription drug spending.

       These findings suggest two conclusions (subject to the imprecision of the

estimates in Table 9). First, the moral hazard cost of the Part D program may have been

small in aggregate. Second, the small insurance gains provided by the program are not

augmented by reductions in out-of-pocket spending risk in other areas; the estimated

welfare gains above would apply to total medical spending as well as prescription drug

spending.



                                  Part VI: Conclusion

       We examine the impact of the expansion of public prescription drug insurance

coverage on the elderly and find evidence of substantial crowd-out. In particular, there is

an estimated 80% crowd-out of both prescription drug coverage and expenditures. Part D

is associated with relatively small reductions in out-of-pocket spending, suggesting that

the welfare gain from protecting the elderly from out-of-pocket spending risk through

Part D has been small. But we also conclude that there appears to be little net impact on

total medical spending, so that the (non-revenue) efficiency costs of the program may

have been fairly low as well.

       There are a number of caveats to these findings. On the one hand, the stylized

welfare calculations may overstate the gains from the introduction of Part D if there are

other consumption-smoothing mechanisms available to the elderly, such as private

income transfers, own savings, or uncompensated medical care. On the other hand, the

gains from Part D may be understated because the calculations were based on an annual,




                                            31
rather than lifetime, measure of expenditure risk. In particular, there is some evidence

that lifetime medical spending risk is greater than annual risk, because out-of-pocket

expenditures are highly persistent over time (Feenberg and Skinner, 1994; French and

Jones, 2004).

       Finally, the welfare calculations were predicated on the assumption that

individuals do not value any improvements in health associated with increased

prescription drug spending, either out-of pocket or from other sources. Yet one of our

most important findings was that there was an enormous increase in public drug

spending, focused on the intensive margin. To the extent there are associated health

gains and they are valued, our estimates will understate the true gains from the

introduction of Part D. While an analysis of any gains in health from Part D is beyond

the scope of the current paper, this is clearly an avenue for future research.




                                             32
                                      References

Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber (2009). “Choice Inconsistencies Among the
Elderly: Evidence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program,” NBER Working
Paper #14759, February 2009.

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2008a). MEPS HC-105: Consolidated
Full-Year Household File.

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2008b). MEPS HC-102A: Prescribed
Medicines.

Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight (forthcoming). “Patient cost-
sharing, hospitalization offsets, and the design of optimal health insurance.” American
Economic Review.

Chernozhukov, Viktor, and Christian Hansen, Econometrica (2005). “An IV Model of
Quantile Treatment Effects,” Econometrica, 2005.

Congressional Budget Office (2002). Issues in Designing a Prescription Drug Benefit
for Medicare. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office

Duggan, Mark and Fiona Scott-Morton (2008). “The Impact of Medicare Part D on
Pharmaceutical Prices and Utilization,” NBER Working Paper #13917.

Feldstein, Martin, and Jonathan Gruber (1995), “A Major Risk Approach to Health
Insurance Reform.” In James Poterba (ed.) Tax Policy and the Economy 9.

Feenberg, Daniel, and Jonathan Skinner (1994). “The Risk and Duration of Catastrophic
Health Expenditures,” Review of Economics and Statistics 76: 663-647.

Finkelstein, Amy, and Robin McKnight (2008). “What did Medicare do? The Initial
Impact of Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending,” Journal of
Public Economics 92: 1644-1668.

French, Eric, and John Bailey Jones (2004). “On the Distribution and Dynamics of
Health Care Costs,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 19: 705-721.

Gruber, Jonathan and Kosali Simon (2008). “Crowd-Out Ten Years Later: Have Recent
Expansions of Public Insurance Crowded Out Private Health Insurance?,” Journal of
Health Economics 27, p. 201-217.

Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2006). "Who Failed to Enroll in Medicare Part D,
and Why? Early Results" Health Affairs, 25: 344-354.




                                           33
Kaiser Family Foundation (2006). Seniors’ Early Experiences with the Medicare
Prescription Drug Benefit”. Washington, D.C.: Kaiser Family Foundation.

Ketcham, Jonathan and Kosali Simon (2008). “Medicare Part D’s Effects on Elderly
Drug Costs and Utilization,” NBER Working Paper #14326

Levy, Helen, and David Weir (2009). “Take-up of Medicare Part D: Results from the
Health and Retirement Study,” NBER Working Paper #14692.

Lichtenberg, Frank and Shawn Sun (2007). “The Impact of Medicare Part D on
Prescription Drug Use By the Elderly,” Health Affairs, 26, 1735-1744.

Nyman, J.A. (1999). “The Value of Health Insurance: The Access Motive,” Journal of
Health Economics.

Yin, W. et al. (2008). “The Effect of the Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Benefit on
Drug Utilization and Expenditures,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 148, 169-177.

Zhang, Yuting, Julie M. Donohue, Judith R. Lave, Gerald O’Donnell, and Joseph P.
Newhouse (2009). “The Effect of Medicare Part D on Drug and Medical Spending,”
New England Journal of Medicine, 361, 52-61.




                                           34
Table 1.
Aggregate Data on Medicare Part D Enrollment in Millions for Selected Periods Since Adoption, and as a Percent of all Medicare
Beneficiaries in Parentheses
                       (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)             (7)         (8)         (9)
                                                Enrolled in a Part D Plan                         Not Enrolled in Part D
                                                                              Medicare
                   Medicare                  Stand-Alone Prescription        Advantage
                  Beneficiaries                   Drug Plan (PDP)             Drug Plan      Creditable Coverage
                                                     Non-Dual       Dual                   Employer or                   No
Month/Year           Total        Total     Total     Eligibles Eligibles       Total          Union       Other Coverage
June, 2006            43.0        22.5      16.5        10.4         6.1         6.0            10.4         5.4         4.4
                                 (53%)     (38%)       (24%)       (14%)       (14%)           (24%)       (13%)       (10%)

June, 2007           44.0            23.9       17.3       11.0        6.3           6.7             10.3         4.9        4.0
                                    (54%)      (41%)      (26%)      (15%)         (16%)            (24%)       (11%)       (9%)

February, 2008       44.2            25.4       17.4       11.2        6.2           8.0             10.2         4.0        4.6
                                    (57%)      (39%)      (25%)      (14%)         (18%)            (23%)        (9%)      (10%)

March, 2009          45.2           26.7       17.5        11.2         6.3          9.2             7.9           6.2        4.5
                                   (59%)      (39%)       (25%)       (14%)        (20%)           (18%)         (14%)      (10%)
Note: Taken from Kaiser Family Foundation’s Medicare Fact Sheet: The Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit (various months).
Column 3 includes employer/union only direct contract PDPs, which incorporate or wrap around public coverage. Column 7 includes
employer/union plans for retired workers that do and do not receive the Retiree Drug Subsidy (RDS) under Part D, as well as
TRICARE and FEHBP coverage. Column 8 includes coverage from state pharmacy assistance programs (SPAP), Indian Health
Service, Veterans Affairs (VA), Medigap, multiple sources of creditable coverage, employer/union plans for active workers, and other
sources.




                                                                35
Table 2.
Selected Sample Means by Age Group and Time Period, in the 2002-5 and 2007 MEPS, Standard Deviations in Parentheses
                                          (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                                                             Ages 65 and Ages 65 and
                                      Ages 65-70 Ages 65-70 Ages 60-64 Ages 60-64                Older         Older
Variable                             Before Part D After Part D Before Part D After Part D Before Part D After Part D

Dummy if Any Prescription                  0.722          0.859        0.750          0.784         0.777        0.870
Drug Coverage

Dummy if Public Coverage                   0.148          0.657        0.080          0.076         0.441        0.689

Dummy if Private Coverage                  0.595          0.449        0.676          0.723         0.555        0.415

Dummy if Public and Private Coverage       0.022          0.248        0.005          0.015         0.226        0.233

Dummy if Only Private Coverage             0.573          0.201        0.670          0.708         0.329        0.181

Dummy if Only Public Coverage              0.126          0.409        0.074          0.061         0.216        0.456

Total Prescription Drug Expenditure         1734          2093          1379          1443          2251          2178
($2007)                                    (2284)        (3647)        (2238)        (2195)        (2956)        (3385)

Out-of-Pocket Prescription Drug             806           538           533            458          118           581
Expenditure ($2007)                        (1258)        (1256)        (1004)         (841)        (1520)        (1060)

Public Prescription Drug Expenditure        293           1247           180           140          529           1280
($2007)                                    (1278)        (2929)         (944)         (811)        (1489)        (2691)

Private Plan Prescription Drug              635            309          666           845           603           318
Expenditure ($2007)                        (1297)         (947)        (1648)        (1618)        (2134)        (1062)

Total Medical Expenditure ($2007)           7402          7308          5428          6056          8739          9184
                                          (13,605)      (11,972)      (11,593)      (15,902)      (14,983)      (15,711)

Sample Size                                 5015        1231           4759           1237         12,262         3470
Note: Authors’calculations from the 2002-5 and 2007 MEPS for each of the table’s groups. Standard deviations for continuous
variables in parentheses.




                                                            36
Table 3.
Difference-in-Difference Estimates of Medicare Part D Law Change on Prescription Drug Coverage from
Any Source by Age Group in the 2002-2005 and 2007 MEPS, Standard Errors in Parentheses
                                          (1)                   (2)                     (3)
                                                                                  Time difference
Group/Year                           After Part D          Before Part D            for groups
                                              A. Any Coverage
Age 65-70                               0.859                 0.722                    0.137
                                       (0.0106)             (0.00798)                (0.0132)

Age 60-64                               0.784                    0.750                    0.0342
                                       (0.0124)                (0.00795)                 (0.0147)

Difference-in-difference                                                                   0.103
                                                                                         (0.0198)

                                            B. Public Coverage
Age 65-70                               0.657                 0.148                       0.509
                                       (0.0144)             (0.00647)                    (0.0158)

Age 60-64                               0.0760                   0.0796                  -0.00365
                                      (0.00781)                (0.00499)                (0.00927)

Difference-in-difference                                                                   0.513
                                                                                         (0.0183)

Note: Each cell gives the coverage rate among 60-70 year olds for prescription drug coverage from any
source for each of the table’s groups. Standard errors clustered by household and age group (under 65, and
65 and older) are shown in parentheses




                                                   37
Table 4.
Parameter Estimates of the Crowd-Out Effect of Public Prescription Drug Coverage of the Elderly in the 2002-2005 and
2007 MEPS, Standard Errors in Parentheses
                                                 (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)
Explanatory Variable
                                                                          A. 60-70 Year Olds
Reduced-Form Estimates
Dummy if 65 or older                           0.103          0.106          0.107            0.107           0.109
Dummy if Post-Law-Change                      (0.0198)       (0.0194)       (0.0193)         (0.0193)        (0.0192)

First-Stage Estimates
Dummy if 65 or older                           0.513         0.509           0.510           0.512           0.509
Dummy if Post-Law-Change                       (0.0183)      (0.0179)        (0.0179)        (0.0177)        (0.0176)

IV Estimates
Dummy if Public Coverage                         0.201         0.208           0.209           0.210           0.215
                                               (0.0368)      (0.0358)        (0.0357)        (0.0355)        (0.0353)

                                                                            B. 60 and Older
Reduced-Form Estimates
Dummy if 65 or older                           0.123         0.124           0.125           0.124           0.124
Dummy if Post-Law-Change                       (0.0167)      (0.0163)        (0.0163)        (0.0163)        (0.0161)

First-Stage Estimates
Dummy if 65 or older                           0.538         0.531           0.532           0.532           0.533
Dummy if Post-Law-Change                       (0.0133)      (0.0130)        (0.0130)        (0.0128)        (0.0126)

IV Estimates
Dummy if Public Coverage                         0.229         0.234           0.235           0.234           0.234
                                               (0.0301)      (0.0293)        (0.0292)        (0.0292)        (0.0286)

Additional Controls
Demographics                                     No            Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
Census Division                                  No            No                Yes             Yes             Yes
Self-Reported Health Status                      No            No                No              Yes             Yes
Income Quintiles                                 No            No                No              No              Yes
Note: The dependent variable is a dummy that takes on a value of one if the individual had prescription drug coverage from
any source and zero otherwise. The table shows the crowd-out parameter estimates of Medicare Part D on prescription drug
coverage based on the MEPS samples described in the text. Standard errors clustered by household and age group (under 65,
and 65 and older) are shown in parentheses.




                                                           38
Table 5.
Additional Reduced-Form and Instrumental-Variable Parameter Estimates of the Crowd-Out Effect of Public Prescription-Drug
Coverage of the Elderly, for Selected Subsamples in the 2002-5 and 2007 MEPS, Standard Errors in Parentheses
                                     (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)          (7)       (8)
                                                                    Subsample
                                                                                 High    More than Bottom 4         Top
                                               Not                     Not      School      High        Income    Income
Explanatory Variable              Working Working         Married    Married    or Less    School      Quintiles Quintile
                                                                       A. 60-70 Year Olds
Reduced-Form Estimates
Dummy if 65 or older              0.0795     0.137        0.111      0.110      0.139     0.0770        0.119    0.0765
Dummy if Post-Law-Change          (0.0303) (0.0270)      (0.0233)    (0.0338) (0.0264) (0.0271)        (0.0226)  (0.0332)

IV Estimates
Dummy if Public Coverage          0.156       0.269      0.197        0.266      0.292       0.135      0.240        0.132
                                (0.0569)    (0.0487)   (0.0390)     (0.0743)   (0.0507)    (0.0458)   (0.0424)     (0.0551)

Sample Size                       4828       7392        8008        4212        7481       4739        9801         2419

                                                                       B. 60 and Older
Reduced-Form Estimates
Dummy if 65 or older            0.111       0.141      0.120        0.125      0.143       0.114      0.119        0.139
Dummy if Post-Law-Change        (0.0260)    (0.0241)   (0.0198)     (0.0287)   (0.0229)    (0.0224)   (0.0209)     (0.0238)

IV Estimates
Dummy if Public Coverage          0.204       0.267      0.208        0.258      0.283       0.193      0.232        0.226
                                (0.0458)    (0.0427)   (0.0327)     (0.0552)   (0.0420)    (0.0368)   (0.0384)     (0.0381)

Sample Size                       5796     18696        13573       10919        16154       8338        19646        4846
Note: The dependent variable is a dummy that takes on a value of one if the individual had prescription drug coverage from any
source and zero otherwise. The table shows the crowd-out parameter estimates of public coverage on overall prescription-drug
coverage based on the 2002-5 and 2007 MEPS. Standard errors clustered by household and age group (under 65, and 65 and
older) are shown in parentheses.




                                                             39
Table 6.
Reduced-Form and IV Parameter Estimates of the Effect of Public Coverage and Expenditure on Elderly Prescription
Drug Expenditure by Source, for those 60 and Older, in the 2002-2005 and 2007 MEPS, Standard Errors in Parentheses
                                         (1)               (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)
Explanatory Variable
Reduced-Form Estimates                                   A. Public Prescription Drug Expenditure
Dummy if 65 or older                   1022              1015            1015          1015             1019
Dummy if Post-Law-Change               (56.41)           (56.02)        (56.05)        (55.06)          (54.80)

IV Estimates
Dummy if Public Coverage               1900             1911            1909            1910            1911
                                      (95.13)          (96.62)         (96.53)         (95.72)         (95.51)

Reduced-Form Estimates                                  B. Total Prescription Drug Expenditure
Dummy if 65 or older                  213.7            225.4          217.9           217.0            216.6
Dummy if Post-Law-Change              (98.66)          (98.59)        (98.75)         (94.46)          (94.51)

IV Estimates
Dummy if Public Coverage               397.4            424.7           409.8           408.2           406.4
                                      (182.2)          (184.3)         (184.3)         (176.6)         (176.2)

Public Prescription-Drug               0.209            0.222           0.215           0.214            0.213
Expenditure                          (0.0902)         (0.0904)        (0.0907)        (0.0868)         (0.0866)

Reduced-Form Estimates                   C. Private Group and Non-Group Plan Prescription Drug Expenditure
Dummy if 65 or older                 -515.3          -512.1        -515.3          -515.7         -518.5
Dummy if Post-Law-Change              (60.68)         (60.11)       (60.17)        (59.11)         (59.03)

IV Estimates
Dummy if Public Coverage              -958.1            -964.7          -968.9          -970.3          -972.9
                                      (111.9)          (113.1)         (113.0)         (110.4)         (110.1)

Public Prescription-Drug              -0.504           -0.505          -0.508          -0.508           -0.509
Expenditure                          (0.0645)         (0.0648)        (0.0649)        (0.0630)         (0.0628)

Reduced-Form Estimates                             D. Out-of-Pocket Prescription Drug Expenditure
Dummy if 65 or older                 -293.0          -277.1         -281.9          -282.3            -283.3
Dummy if Post-Law-Change              (38.34)         (38.49)        (38.50)         (37.73)           (37.71)

IV Estimates
Dummy if Public Coverage              -544.8           -522.1           -530.1          -531.1          -531.6
                                      (72.20)          (73.21)         (73.16)         (71.36)         (71.21)

Public Prescription-Drug              -0.287           -0.273          -0.278          -0.278           -0.278
Expenditure                          (0.0421)         (0.0422)        (0.0423)        (0.0410)         (0.0409)

Additional Controls
Demographics                              No              Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes
Census Division                           No              No              Yes              Yes          Yes
Self-Reported Health Status               No              No               No              Yes          Yes
Income Quintiles                          No              No               No              No           Yes
Note: The dependent variable is real annual personal prescription drug expenditure from the MEPS. The table shows
parameter estimates of Medicare Part D on prescription drug expenditure based on a sample of 25,886 person-year
observations on ages 60 and older from the 2002-2006 MEPS. Standard errors clustered by household and age group
(under 65, and 65 and older) are shown in parentheses.


                                                       40
Table 7.
Simple Estimates of the Impact of Medicare Part D at Selected Quantiles of the Distribution of
Household Out-of-Pocket Prescription Drug Expenditure, Age 60 and Older in the 2002-2005 and 2007
MEPS, Standard Errors in Parentheses
                 (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)                 (5)
                                                                             Differential Effect
          Age 65 and Older Age 65 and Older Age 60-64          Age 60-64 of being 65 and Older
Quantile    Before Part D      After Part D  Before Part D After Part D         After Part D

10th              1                 0                 0             0                  -1
                 (1)               (1)               (0)           (0)                (2)

20th             73                45                 5             5                 -28
                 (4)               (3)               (3)           (3)                (6)

30th             170              105                46            40                 -59
                 (5)              (6)                (4)           (6)               (11)

40th             290              174                115          102                -103
                 (7)              (7)                (7)          (10)               (14)

50th             453              267                210          188                -164
                 (10)             (10)               (10)         (13)               (20)

60th             679              395                340          290                -235
                 (14)             (15)               (11)         (18)               (28)

70th             990              568                505          446                -363
                 (19)             (17)               (14)         (25)               (38)

80th            1,492             846                765          648                -529
                 (26)             (27)               (24)         (34)               (55)

90th               2,494            1,415         1,350           1,178               -907
                    (55)             (49)          (54)            (70)              (117)
Note: For each quantile shown, each cell gives the real out-of-pocket prescription drug expenditure
among those 60 and older in the 2002-2005 and 2007 MEPS for each of the table’s groups. Block-
bootstrapped standard errors by household and age group (under 65, and 65 and older) based on 199
replications are shown in parentheses.




                                                41
Table 8.
Estimates of the Change in Risk Premium for those who Took up Medicare Part D for 60-70
Year Olds, in 2007 Dollars, for Selected Measures of Risk Aversion
                              (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)      (5)           (6)
Coefficient of                          25th                 75th     90th         95th
Relative Risk Aversion      Mean Percentile Median Percentile Percentile Percentile
         A. Based on IVQR Estimates from the Age 60 and Older Full Sample
1                            -108       -73       -106      -141     -176          -198

3                         -184      -107        -185     -240        -329        -395

5                         -306      -131      -219     -401       -651        -829
Note: Risk-premium calculations are based on the IVQR estimates shown in Figure 4 and
described in the text.




                                           42
Table 9:
IV Estimates of Impact of Public Prescription Drug Expenditure on Public, Non-Public, and Total Medical Spending by Type of Payor and Category of
Spending, Clustered Standard Errors in Parentheses
                                      (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)
                                                             Office- Emergency         Home                     Other   Prescription
Explanatory Variable              Inpatient     Outpatient    Based        Room        Health      Dental     Medical       Drugs       Total
                                                                     A. All Payors
Public Prescription Drug             0.168        0.0249      -0.258      -0.0325      -0.153     -0.0259      -0.0220      0.213      -0.124
Expenditure                        (0.447)       (0.0576)    (0.170)     (0.0298)     (0.0787)   (0.0411)     (0.0225)    (0.0866)     (0.549)

                                                        B. Public Payors (Medicare and Medicaid)
Public Prescription Drug             -0.0899       0.0379    0.0848     0.000527      -0.137      0.0131              -0.0172        1.000       0.892
Expenditure                          (0.388)      (0.0444)  (0.0651)     (0.0115)    (0.0639)    (0.00550)            (0.0105)      (0.000)     (0.426)

                                                                     C. Non-Public Payors
Public Prescription Drug              0.258       -0.0130         -0.342    -0.0331     -0.0159         -0.0390       -0.00480       -0.786      -1.017
Expenditure                          (0.220)      (0.0516)       (0.150)   (0.0271)    (0.0376)         (0.0404)      (0.0196)      (0.0865)    (0.333)

                                                             D. Private Group and Non-Group Plans
Public Prescription Drug              0.252       -0.0145         -0.347     -0.0340   0.00748           -0.0182       -0.0200       -0.509     -0.724
Expenditure                          (0.216)      (0.0498)       (0.146)    (0.0247)   (0.0327)         (0.0193)      (0.0131)      (0.0628)    (0.311)

                                                                         E. Out-of-Pocket
Public Prescription Drug              0.00640        0.00147      0.00425    0.000884        -0.0234       -0.0208      0.0153        -0.277     -0.293
Expenditure                          (0.0177)       (0.00946)    (0.0219)    (0.00686)      (0.0160)      (0.0299)     (0.0138)      (0.0409)   (0.0692)
Note: Estimates are for the richest specification in Table 6, which is column 5 of that table. Panel C is the sum of panels D and E.




                                                                             43
                           Figure 1. Age Profile of Prescription Drug Coverage
                                Before and After the Enactment of Part D
                                                                                      .8
                 .9




                                                                                           Public Take-Up Rate
                .85                                                                   .6
Coverage Rate




                 .8                                                                   .4


                .75                                                                   .2


                 .7                                                                   0
                      50      55        60         65        70            75    80
                                                  Age

                                          Before Enactment (2002-2005)
                                          After Enactment (2007)
                                          Public Take-Up After Enactment




                                                        44
                            Figure 2. Age-Based Pseudo-Difference-in-Difference Estimates and 95% CI
                                 of Part D on Personal Drug Coverage by Four-Year Age Groups
                     .15


                       .1
Change in Coverage




                     .05


                       0


                     -.05


                      -.1
                            60     61    62     63     64     65    66     67     68     69    70
                                                             Age




                                                            45
                                               Figure 3. National Prescription Drug Expenditure
                                   80                                                                    155




                                                                                                               Private Expenditure (in Billions)
Public Expenditure (in Billions)




                                   70                                                                    150



                                   60                                                                    145



                                   50                                                                    140



                                   40                                                                    135
                                        2002     2003         2004          2005         2006     2007
                                                                     Year

                                                                  Public Expenditures
                                                                  Private Expenditures




                                                                        46
                                              Figure 4. IVQR Estimates of Impact of Public Coverage on Out-of-Pocket
                                                  Drug Expenditure for Ages 60 and Older in 2002-2005 and 2007
                                         0

                                       -250
Impact on Out-of-Pocket Expenditure




                                       -500

                                       -750

                                      -1000

                                      -1250

                                      -1500

                                      -1750

                                      -2000

                                      -2250
                                              5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
                                                                            Quantile




                                                                             47
