NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO WAGES RISE WITH JOB SENIORITY?

Joseph Altonji

Robert Shakotko

Working Paper No. 1616

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1985

This research was funded under contract USDL-9-M-2-O].21 by the U.S.
Department of Labor, which does not necessarily subscribe to the
opinions as conclusions expressed in the paper. The estimation
technique used in the paper and the empirical analysis were presented in preliminary form in an unpublished paper entitled °Wages,
Productivity and Turrmover (November 1983). We are grateful to
Michael Klein, Daniel Friedlander and especially Christina Paxson
for outstanding research assistance, and to Kevin O'Neil for
excellent clerical support. We also thank James Brown, David Card,
John Ham, Jacob Mincer, Aloysius Siow, Andrew Weiss, and seminar
participants at Columbia, NBER, University of Pennsylvania,
Princeton, SUNY—Stony Brook, and Yale for helpful comments. Of
course, the shortcomings of the paper are our responsibility. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 111616
May 1985

Do Wages Rise With Job Seniority?

ABSTRACT

The extent to which wages rise with the accumulation of seniority
(tenure) in a firm
one controls for total labor market experience is a
fundamental question about the structure of earnings. A variety of studies
have found a large, positive partial effect of tenure on wages. This paper
re—examines the evidence using a simple instrumental variables scheme to deal
with well known estimation biases which arise from the fact that tenure is
likely to be related to unobserved individual and job characteristics
affecting the wage. We use the variation of tenure over a given job match as
the principal instrumental variable for tenure. The variation in tenure over
the job, in contrast to variation in tenure across individuals and jobs, is
uncorrelated by construction with the fixed individual specific and job match
specific components of the error term of the wage equation. Our main finding
is that the partial effect of tenure on wages is small, and that general labor
market experience and job shopping in the labor market account for most wage
growth over a career. The strong cross section relationship between tenure
and wages is due primarily to heterogeneity bias.

after

Joseph Altonji
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

Robert A. Shakotko
National Bureau of
Economic Research
269 Mercer Street
8th Floor
New York, NY 10003

—1—

Do

Wages Rise

With

Job Seniority ?

1. INTRODUCTION

This

paper measures the partial effects of labor market experience and job

seniority (tenure) on wages. Prior researchers (see Mincer and Jovanovic
(1981), Bartel and Borjas (1981), Borjas (1981), Cline (1979a) and Mellow (1981)
among others) have established that tenure has a strong positive

relationship

with wage rates in a cross section or a cross section—time series of
individuals.

Furthermore, tenure has a strong negative association with job

separation rates, quits, and layoffs (Mincer and Jovanovic, Cline (1979b),

Borjas and Rosen (1981) among others). For example, Mincer and Jovanovic obtain
coefficients of .0305 and —.0007 on tenure and tenure2 in a cross sectional
regression for the log wage over a sample of white males after controlling for
the effects of labor market experience and

schooling. They estimate the partial

effects of tenure and tenure2 on the separation probability to be —.0149 and

.0004.* The decline of separations with tenure is about equally divided into a
drop in the quit rate and a drop in layoffs.

The extent to which wages rise with tenure is important for several

reasons. First and foremost, the wage—tenure profile is a fundamental question
about the structure of earnings over careers.

Second, it is a key determinant

of the extent to which the earnings power of individuals is tied to specific
jobs and thus is important for assessment of issues such as the losses suffered

by "displaced" workers (Hamermesh (1984)). Third, evidence that wages rise with
job tenure has been used as an explanation for the decline in

quits with tenure,

since the wage growth on the current job lowers the probability that the worker
*See Mincer and Jovanovic, Tables 1.6, 1.5. The results are based
upon the
1976 cross section of white, out of school men under 64 from the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics. The authors obtain slightly lower estimates of the tenure
slope of wages when heterogeneity is controlled for using an index of prior
job changes. They also report detailed results for the NLS samples of young
and older men and obtain somewhat flatter tenure slopes for the sample of
older men. Mellow's estimates of the tenure slope of wages from a sample
based upon the Current Population Survey are also large.

—2—

will locate a superior alternative. In the theory of specific human capital (Oi
(1962), Becker (1962), Mincer (1974), Parsons (1972), Kuratani (1973), and
Hashimoto (1980)) the growth of wages with tenure (holding experience constant)
is attributed to worker financed investment in skills which are specific to the

firm. At the same time, firm financed investments in specific skills produce an
increase in productivity relative to wages with time on the job and thus provide
an explanation for the fall in the layoff probability with job tenure.
More recently, a number of alternative explanations have been offered for
the apparent growth of wages with tenure.

In Lazear's (1981) supervision model

of wage growth firms defer compensation as a means of inducing workers not to
shirk duties, given that it is difficult to measure the output of workers

directly. Freeman (1977) and Harris and Holmstrom (1982) provide an explanation

for wage growth based upon an insurance motive. Harris and Holmstr assume
that workers are equally productive in all firms, mobility costs are zero, and

the productivity of a given worker In future periods is uncertain. They show
that firms will insure workers against low productivity outcomes later in their

careers. The expected value of the wage in later periods exceeds the expected
value of marginal product, and this gap is financed by an excess of expected

marginal product over wages in early periods. Guasch and Weiss (1980, 1982)
present an adverse selection model of wage growth. They assume that individuals

The evidence that wages rise with tenure isimportant in implicit contracts
models of wages and employment. As Grossman (1977) pointed out and Rosen
(1984) emphasizes in a recent survey article, contracts which insure workers
against adverse swings in demand are feasible only if the worker cannot easily
break the contract when conditions improve. The returns to the firm and the
worker from shared investments in specific human capital would provide both
parties with an incentive to maintain the job match despite fluctuations in
marginal product and the alternative wage relative to the contract wage. It
is clear from Hall(1982) and Mincer and JovanovIc (1981) that many workers end
up in jobs which last for a long period of time. It is unclear whether this
is due to a sharing in the rents from a good job match (see Jovanovic , 1979),
a sharing in the returns from job specific training, or other barriers to
quits and layoffs.

—3—

know more about their ability than do firms at the time that they are hired, and

productivity is costly to observe. They show that in equilibrium firms may
offer wages below marginal product in the initial period, during which workers
are evaluated (at a cost), and a wage above marginal product in subsequent

periods to those who meet a performance standard. The wage structure serves to
discourage workers who know that they are relatively unproductive from
applying .

Although discussion of the link between these alternatives to the human
capital model and empirical evidence have focussed on studies relating wages to
total labor market experience, such as Mincer (1974), for the most part they
offer an explanation for the partial effect of tenure on wages when experience
is controlled for, rather than for the partial effect of total experience when

tenure is controlled for. For example, within Lazear's supervision model firms
should pay newly hired workers who have changed jobs after accumulating tenure
in another firm a wage that is closer to that for new entrants. In Harris and
Holmstrom's model, firms have no incentive to honor the wage guarantee the
worker had with another firm if the worker's productivity (the same in all

firms) turns out to be below the guarantee level. Starting wages may rise with
prior experience, but only because the decline in the number of years until
retirement and the decline in the residual uncertainty about the worker's
productivity imply that the amount of insurance that the worker "buys" in the

initial years on a job falls with experience. Presumably, this effect is
small. The upshot is that the empirical basis for these models as important
1See also the related adverse selection models of Salop and Salop (1976) and
Nickel! (1976), in which the increase of wages with time on the job serves as a
means of sorting out workers with a high propensity to quit. Parsons (1984)
provides an excellent survey of the rapidly growing theoretical literature on

of wage growth. Note

that all three of the theories mentioned predict a
decline in quits with tenure, as wages available in the firm rise above those
available outside of the firm.

—4--

explanations of earnings patterns over the lifecycle restsheavily on the
evidence that tenure has a substantial effect on wages.*

Thus, a careful re-

examination of whether wages do in fact rise with job tenure complements recent
efforts by Medoff and Abraham(1980, 1981), Brown (1983), Mincer(1984) and others
(see the conclusion) to provide more direct tests of the human capital model
against alternatives which do not Imply an increase in productivity with
experience.

In summary, job tenure is a key variable in models of earnings

determination. However, the studies of growth of wages with seniority have been
accompanied by widespread recognition that unobserved heterogeneity across
individuals and across job matches may produce large biases In estimates of the
effect of tenure on wages as well as turnover. (See for example, Mincer and

Jovanovic (1981), and Heckman (1981)). Indeed, the job matching models of
Jovanovic (1979) and Johnson (1978) have stimulated a growing theoretical
literature in which job match heterogeneity plays a central role in both

turnover and wage growth.* Since tenure is a simple function of past quit and
layoff decisions,**it will be positively correlated with characteristics of
individuals or of jobs which lead to lower quits and layoffs. These same
characteristics are likely to be positively related to worker productivity and,

*

Human capital theory and the other models mentioned are contributions to

the search for a sound economic theory for why older workers are paid more
than younger workers. The notion that they are paid more for cultural reasons
would be particularly difficult to square with a finding that most of the
increase is due to general labor market experience rather than tenure.
Provided workers stay in the same job, the nonnegative profit condition does
not tightly constrain the experience profile of wages. With mobility, it
difficult to understand why firms are willing to pay a large experience
premium to newly hired older workers (as the data indicate they routinely
if older workers are not more productive than younger workers.
Flinn (1982) implements the Jovanovic model for a sample of young men and
finds that job match heterogeneity plays an important role in wage growth and
mobility during first few years of work experience.
**See equation (2) below.

—5—

in a competitive labor market, to wages.

The chief contribution of this paper is the development and implementation
of a simple instrumental variables scheme for dealing with the problem of
"heterogeneity bias" in analysis of the effects of tenure on wages. We use the
variation of tenure over a given job match (along with the levels of the other
variables which appear in the wage equation) to form an instrument for tenure.
The variation In tenure over the job, in contrast to the variation in tenure
across individuals and jobs, is uncorrelated with the fixed individual and job
match components of the error term of the wage model. The methodology is
inspired in part by Hausman and Taylor's (1981) treatment of analysis of

covariance models in an instrumental variables framework. The approach is
implemented for a sample of male heads of household from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics.

We also experiment with an error components type GLS version of the
instrumental variables procedure to account for correlation in the wage errors
for each person arising from the individual specific and job match specific

component of the wage error. Use of the GLS versions of the instrumental
variables and least squares procedures is complicated by the fact that the
sample is unbalanced, with a large variation in the number of years of data on
each individual and on each job match, and to our knowledge has never been

implemented in such a situation. A secondary contribution of the paper is the
derivation (in Appendix 1) of a simple formula to compute these estimators in
the case of unbalanced data.

Our main finding Is that the effect of seniority on wages (with the effects
of general labor market experience and secular wage growth held constant) is

small. The estimates from the instrumental variables procedure indicate that
the first year of tenure raises wages by about 5 %, but additional years of

—6—

tenure years of tenure contribute little to wage growth. The co.€ficient on the
linear tenure term is actually slightly negative and the overall effect of the

first 10 years of job tenure is to raise wages by only 3%. In contrast, general
labor market experience results in a wage increase of 32% over the first 10

years and 87% over the first 30 years. It accounts for the lion's share of wage
growth during a career,' although these estimates combine the wage effects of
experience arising from general skill accumulation, which are stressed in human
capital theory, and the wage increases due to labor market search, which are

stressed in search and job matching models. The instrumental variables
estimates of the tenure profile of wages are much flatter and the experience
slopes are steeper than estimates based upon least squares or upon use of an
index of prior job separations to control for individual heterogeneity.
Unfortunately, the Instrumental variables estimates of the tenure slope are
probably biased downward by job heterogeneity despite the fact that variance of
tenure within a job is uncorrelated with the permanent component of the job

match. As is explained below, the bias arises indirectly through the
correlation of the job match component with labor market experience. Biases may
also arise from measurement error in the tenure variable. Much of the empirical
analysis is devoted to assessing the importance of these biases. We show that
they are probably small.

We also present separate estimates for union and nonunion workers and for

blacks as well as whites. Union—nonunion differences in the tenure profile of
wages are dramatically reduced when heterogeneity is accounted for. Finally, we
provide evidence that both the individual specific and match specific error
components of the wage have negative associations with quits, layoffs and

A time trend is used to control for secular growth in the economy, which
is also an important factor in wage growth over the life of a worker.

—7—

separations, which tends to confirm a role for heterogeneity bias in least
squares estimates of the wage equation.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 3 presents the econometric

methodology. Section 4 (and Appendix 2) discusses the data. Section 5 presents
the empirical analysis. The concluding section suniniarizes the results and their

implications for models of wage growth and turnover over the work life, and

provides an agenda for research. We begin with a brief review of why tenure is
endogenous in the wage equation.

2.

THE KNDOZNEITY OF ThNURE IN THE WAGE EQUATION

Assume that the wage of individual i

who

is job j

in period t is determined

by the following equation.
(1)

Wjj(t)t

b0x1 j(t)t + f( Tjj(t)t ) +

The variable Wjj(t)t is the log of the real wage, Xij(t)t is a vector

characteristics of the person and the job and includes labor market experience,
Tjj(t)t is the number of years of person i has held job j as of time t, the
function f(.) is the tenure profile of wages, and

cij(t)t is the error term.

In general, Cij(t)t may consist of serially correlated components that are
specific to worker i, job j(*')and the match between I and j(t).** The fact that

worker i may change jobs during the sample period has been made explicit by

writing the job subscript as j(t). For notational convenience we will often
refer to j(t) simply as j.

Least squares estimates of the tenure profile will be biased upward if
is positively correlated with Eijt. To see that this is likely to be the case,

**

Without

observations on several individuals in a given firm, it is not
possible to decompose the job effects into firm effects (received by all
workers in the firm) and job match effects. Below we use the term job match
to refer to the sum of these separate effects.

—8—

consider the following simple model for Tjjt

One may show that Tjjt is related

to labor market experience and past quits and layoffs through the identity

EXPit EXPIt
(2)

[1 —

Tjjt

k=t

where the quit indicator

(Qik + LIk)1

is 1 if the individual quit in period k and 0

otherwise, the layoff indicator Lik is 1 if the individual was laid off In
period k and 0 otherwise, and EXPIt is the labor market experience of person i
In t.

Workers quit if their best alternative is more valuable (In an

intertemporal sense) than their present job given the option of future quits and
expectations about future wages, nonpecuniary characteristics, mobility costs,

and layoff behavior. Firms base layoff decisions upon a comparison of current
and expected future wages to the current and future productivity of the worker
plus the direct and indirect costs of terminating the him, given that the firm
has the option of laying off the worker in the future and the worker has the

option of quitting. We avoid detailed structural models of these decisions
since they are not essential to our purposes and simply express the relationship
between the arguments of the wage equation and
(3)

If UIj(k)k = B0 Xjj(k)k +

Qik =
0

(4)

g(Tj(k)k)

+

Ujj(k)k < 0

otherwise

Lik = 1 if Vjj(k)k = 00 Xij(k)k +

= 0

and 4k as follows.

G(Tjj(k)k) + Vjj(k)k < 0

otherwise

Ujj(k)k is the worker's valuation of job j(k) in period k relative to the

worker's best alternative In k net of moving costs. The composite error
component ulj(k)k is a function of the unobserved characteristics of the
individual, the job match and the worker's best alternative in period k.

—9-.

Vjj(k)k is the firm's valuation of the option of keeping the worker. It depends
on the composite error component

vij(k)k.

Equations (2), (3) and (4) together imply that Tijt depends upon the
distribution of past values of the quit and layoff error components 1j(k)k and
Vij(k)k and thus will be endogenous in the wage equation if these values are
correlated with the wage error

This is likely to be the case for a number

of reasons.:

i) Unmeasured individual differences in the quit propensity (due, for
example, to differences across workers in the value of nonmarket time relative
to the mean of their wage profile or to differences in drive and perseverance)
are likely to be negatively correlated with the individual specific component in
the wage equation. One would also expect low (high) productivity workers
boh
to receive lower (higher) wages and to be more (less) susceptible to layoffs
ii) Individual differences in the value of leisure time are likely to be
positively associated with quit rates into unemployment or out of the labor
force. They are likely to be negatively related to productivity (through effort
on the job and absenteeism) and wage rates.
iii) Optimal selection of jobs by workers in the presence of firm specific
and match specific error components in the wage function will result in
biases. Jovanovic (1979) argues that differences in the complementarity of the
skills of workers with the requirements of particular jobs which are observable
only through experience on the job results in substantial variation in the
productivity and wages of workers across jobs. Noncompetitive elements in the
wage structure or differences across firms in the optimal compensation policy
(arising from differences in hiring costs, supervision costs, and other factors
(see Pencavel (1972)) may also mean that workers face a distribution of wages
for their skills. Workers who receive high wages relative to their alternatives
will not quit, inducing a positive correlation between tenure and wages in a
cross—section (see Jovanovic (1979)). Match heterogeneity in the layoff
probability is also likely to be associated with match heterogeneity in the wage
equation. On the other hand, workers will quit to take an alternative job if
and only if the alternatives are sufficiently high to compensate for the effect

*

This

would be the case if total compensation, including wages and fringe
benefitsj does not vary one for one with productivity within a particular class
of jobs.
Although we expect this to result in an overstatement of the tenure
profile due to unmeasured productivity differences, workers with a given set
of skills who enter job matches with high layoff probabilities might be
expected to receive a compensating differential for layoff risk, especially in
the presence of moving costs. This would tend to bias downward the estimates
of the tenure slope. Note that the formal matching models such as
Jovanovic(1.979a) do not distinguish between layoffs and quits.

—10—

on wages of lost tenure. This results in a downward bias in the estimated wage—
tenure profile. Use of a fixed effects or first differencing procedure to
control for individual heterogeneity may amplify this downward bias, since with
such a procedure changes in tenure associated with job changes identify the
effect of tenure on wages.
Alternative means of dealing with these problems include the use of
information on prior mobility as a control for individual heterogeneity (Mincer
and Jovanovic (1981)), instrumental variables techniques, procedures to correct
for sample selection (Borjas and Rosen (1981)), fixed effects procedures (Cline

(1979a) and differencing (Bartel and Borjas (1981)). None of the earlier
studies has simultaneously dealt with both individual heterogeneity and job

heterogeneity. Ultimately, a joint analysis of quits, layoffs and wages rates
which allows for both individual heterogeneity and job heterogeneity would be
the most satisfactory way to deal with the endogeneity of tenure in the wage

equation. However, there are many obstacles to such an analysis, including the
lack of an accepted model of layoffs, and the econometric difficulties of
estimating models based upon (3) and (4) once individual heterogeneity and job

heterogeneity are admitted. For this reason, we focus upon single equation
estimators for the wage equation.

3. USE OF VARIATION IN TENURE WITHIN THE JOB AS AN INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLE

We address the problems of both individual and job heterogeneity in the
wage equation using an instrumental variables estimator, which we refer to as

1V1. The principal instrumental variable for tenure is the deviation of tenure
around its mean for the sample observations on a given job match. The appeal of
this variable is that it is uncorrelated by construction with both the
individual specific error component of the wage equation and with the permanent
job match component.

The details of the procedure and its formal justification are as follows.

—11—

It is always possible to decompose wage error term

into the sum of a fixed

individual effect Cj, a fixed job match component €ij(t), and a transitory
disturbance

Cut

which may or may not be serially correlated, so that

Ci + Cij(t) + ujt

One may decompose the transitory component

it as

nut — Uit + Uijt + Ut
where u1 is an individual specific transitory error component that is
uncorrelated across individuals, Ui. is a transitory match component that is

uncorrelated with Uj, and u is an economy wide wage disturbance. The
individual specific component uj and the general time component u may be
freely correlated over time. However, we assume that the transitory match
component

is serially uncorrelated and/or has a small variance, an

assumption which we will discuss below. After substituting for

and writing

the tenure profile f(Tij) as the sum of terms involving Tijt, Tit2 and a dummy
variable for tenure greater than 1, the wage equation (1) may be rewritten as

(5)

=

boXijt

+ biTit + b2Tijt2 + b30LDJOBijt + Ci + Cij(t) + Ul + Uj +

where OLDJOBiJt is 1 if Tijt > 1 and 0 otherwise. The coefficient on

0LDJ0BIt

permits the first year on the job to have special importance. The variable
would be expected to have a positive coefficient if specific capital investments
associated with orientation and hiring are large and a substantial amount of
information on the quality of the job match is revealed in the initial months on
the job, or if investment in job specific skills is especially rapid at the

beginning of a job. A large positive coefficient would also be consistent with
Guasch and Weiss's emphasis on testing during the early months on the job.
Let Tij(t) be the mean of tenure for individual I over the sample

—12—

observations on the individual I in job j, where the fact that the job may

change is again made explicit by writing j as a function of t. For example, if
a person has been in a job for 3 years when the person enters the survey

(t1968) and remains on the job for 3 more years, then Tjj(t) = [3+4+5+6]/4 as t
ranges from 1968 to 1971.

Tjjt

Define Tit to be the deviation of Tjt from the job mean, with Tt =
—

Tij(t).

We now consider whether Tit Is a valid instrumental variable for

Note that Tjt sums to 0 over the sample years in which the person is in
job j. Consequently, It is orthogonal by construction to the error components
£1 and ij(t), which are constant during job j and which embody permanent
That is, Tjjt is unrelated to permanent

individual and job heterogeneity.

heterogeneity across individuals and across job matches in the determinants of

wage rates. If the transitory component

is serially uncorrelated, then it

will have only a weak relationship to Tjjt and

since Tjjt depends upon

past quit and layoff decisions, and a wage disturbance lasting only one period

should have little weight in a mobility decision. Serial correlation in the

individual specific and labor market wide subcomponents u and

should not

pose a problem either, since in this case the resulting variation in the
composite error

will not be related to movements in T1 around its mean

for a given job match. It follows that Tt is a valid instrumental variable

for Tj as well as T2j and OLDJOB1. Basically, the tenure coefficients are
estimated from the growth of tenure within each job. The same argument
—
OLDJOBIJt
as instrumental variables&. Note that this approach avoids bias in

justifies use of (Tjt)2 =

OLDJOBIj(t)

Tjjt2

—

Tij(t))2

and OLDJOBijt =

the tenure coefficients due to match heterogeneity, which would remain even

&The other variables in the wage equation are also used as instrumental
variables.

—13—

after removal of individual effects.

It is natural to compare the 1V1 estimator to estimation using a fixed

effect for each job match. This is equivalent to regressing the deviation of
from the sample mean for job match ij on the deviations of the right hand

side variables from their means for the match. The fixed job match effects
estimator removes bias due to presence of

and cj(t). However, this is not

feasible because the deviations from means of tenure and experience are

perfectly correlated. Both advance by one each year during the course of a
job. Consequently, the tenure and experience coefficients are not separately
identified.

3.1 Potential Sources of Bias in the 1V1 Estimates

In this section we discuss problems which may arise if (1) experience is

correlated with cjj(t) (2) tenure is measured with error, (3) the tenure slope
varies across people and job matches, or (4) the assumption that the transitory
part (ujjt) of the match specific component of wages is serial uncorrelated or
has a small variance is false.

Unfortunately, the fact that Tijt Ti2. and OLDJOBIt are uncorrelated
with

is not sufficient to guarantee the consistency of the estimates of the

tenure slopes given the presence of other variables in the model. Labor market

experience will be correlated with cl(). As a result, the 1V1 estimates of
the experience slope of wages, as well as least squares estimates, combine the

Our approach should be applicable to other problems in addition to the
estimation of wage functions. One example is the analysis of the effects of
time in residence and age of structure on the rental price of housing. The
estimator falls within the general class of estimators considered by Hausman
and Taylor (1981). They show how to estimate variance components models with
endogenous time invariant right hand side variables using 1) exogenous time
invariant right hand side variables and 2) the means and deviations from time
means of exogenous time varying right hand side variables as instrumental
variables. Note that they use their procedure to solve an identification
problem which arises (in estimating the effects of schooling on wages) with a
fixed effects approach.

—14—

effects of general skill accumulation on wages as well as the average change

with time in the mean of ij(t) Jovanovic's(1979) job matching model and more
conventional search models (eg. Burdett(1978)) imply that Cjj(t) is likely to be
positively correlated with time in the labor market, since more experienced

workers have had more time to locate and move to good jobs.* This positive
effect is probably offset to some extent by the fact that a substantial fraction

of job changes are layoffs (about 40% in our sample) or are motivated by
nonpecuniary considerations and thus are not the response of workers to an offer

of a job with a better match component in the wage. Nevertheless, the
instrumental variables estimate of the coefficient on experience is likely to be
upward biased as an estimate of the partial effect of experience (with Eij(t)

held constant) on wages. Unfortunately, the upward bias in experience is likely
to induce a downward bias in the estimates of the tenure slope, since Eij(t)
does not in fact increase unless the job changes.** The downward bias arises as
a partial correction for the overstatement of the effects of additional labor
market experience on wages during years in which the job remains the same.

*

Much of the rise in wages with experience that is associated with moves
through a sequence of jobs during a career is best interpreted as accumulation
of general human capital rather than information on comparative advantage
across jobs. A job may provide (worker financed) training that is more useful
in a wide variety of alternative jobs than in the present job. See Rosen
972). Apprenticeships are an extreme example of this phenomena.
One might hypothesis that total labor market experience will be correlated
with
if fixed individual characteristics which are negatively related to
productivity are positively related to the amount of time persons spend out of
the labor force or unemployed. We checked this possibility using the IV
procedure by treating the terms involving experience (EXP, EXP2, EXP2 an
EXPEDUC in Table 1) as endogenous variables along with the tenure variables
in the wage equations and substituting (age — education + 5)education and a
for the
cubic in (age — education + 5)
variables involving experience in the first stage equations. The results are
very similar to the 1V1 estimates reported in the table. We feel safe in
ignoring possible bias in the coefficient on union status, health status, and
other control variables in the wage equatiqn arisin from c becuse these
and OLDJOBi.t and
variables are approximately orthogonal to T1t '
are also only weakly related to experience.

ijt2'

—15—

present evidence on the quantitative significance of the problem in Sections 5.4
and 5.5 below.

A second potential problem with the 1V1 concerns measurement error in the

tenure variable. For the years prior to 1975 the tenure measure is bracketed.
Also, since employer tenure is not asked in all years, It has been necessary to
interpolate between some years using information on employer tenure for other
years, reasons for job changes, evidence of changes of industry, and other
variables. (See AppendIx 2.) The resulting measurement error in the tenure
variables is likely to bias downward both the least squares and the 1V1

estimates of the tenure profile. But the bias is likely to be more severe In
the case of the 1V1 procedure, since removal of Tjj(t) in the construction of
Tjjt will amplify the relative importance of measurement error in the total

variance of the instrument for Tjt used to estimate the wage equation.#
Sections 5.4 and 5.6 present evidence on the size of the bias from measurement
error.

Thus far the discussion has Ignored the possibility that the tenure profile

of wages varies across people and jobs. Such variation might arise from
differences in the amount of worker financed specific human capital which is
appropriate given the characteristics of the job and the individual (See Borjas

(1981) and Jovanovic (1979b)). This would add the component b1 Tijt to the
error term of the wage equation, where bi is the deviation of the tenure slope
for the match ij around b1, and b1 is redefined as the mean of the tenure slope
b1 over all job matches weighted by their relative frequency and duration (i.e.,

This discussion assumes that the measurement error is not strongly
serially correlated. Error in the level of tenure which is consistent from
year to year within each job match will have little effect on the 1V1 and GLS—
1V1 estimates and a potentially strong (negative) effect on the OLS
estimates. See Griliches (1984) for a recent survey on measurement error and
other data problems.

—16—

the tenure slope of an observation chosen at random from the sample.) One would
expect the level of tenure to be correlated with

as workers in jobs which

are suitable for large specific investments are more likely to stay in those

jobs. Thus, if one estimates by OLS and ignores this component, the result Is a

biased estimate of the mean of the tenure slope. Unfortunately, one may show
that the 1V1 estimate of the mean tenure slope is also likely to be upward

biased.* We have not investigated remedies for this problem, in part because
the very modest estimates of tenure slope based upon the 1V1 procedure indicate
that the upward bias is not quantitatively important.
Finally, we discuss the assumption (pg. 11) of no serial correlation in
There is reason to believe that some serial correlation will be

present. For example, wages may vary with firm specific changes in product
demand (especially with monopolistic competition in the product market) or

production technology. Or serially correlated industry—wide productivity shocks
may not affect the wages of workers in their present job (because of implicit
contracts which smooth wages) but may alter the wages available to them

*

In the simplified case in which Tjt is the only variable which enters the
wage equation, one may show that the estimate of b1 is equal to b1 plus
Z a1b1, where the summation is over ij pairs, the weights a1 are
proportional to 1j(t)t' and the latter summation is over the values of t
corresponding to the job match ij in the sample. One may show that Tjj(t)t is
approximately equal to (l112)(n11—l)3 + (lI4)(ni_l)2+(l/6)(njj_l) where n1j
is the number of sample observatons corresponding to match ij. Thus, the
weight a1 on the tenure parameter specific to match ij rises faster than the
number of observations corresponding to lj. Since n1j is positively related to
the duration of the job, and since almost any reasonable model of quits
implies (ceteris paribus) that jobs with steeper tenure slopes have lower quit
rates, we conclude that the estimate of b1 is biased upward as an estimate of
the tenure slope for an observation chosen at random from the sample. (The
expression for ETIj(t)t Is not exact because the starting date for jobs need
not correspond exactly to the time of the survey, and because the time between
surveys is not exactly one year. In deriving the above expressions one uses
the facts that

k = n(n+l)/2 and
for

any positive integer n.)

k2 = n(n+l)(2n+l)/6

—17—

elsewhere .

A decline in

increases the probability that the worker will

find a better alternative and quit, although the effect of a given change in
on the worker's valuation of his job is small unless

has a strong

positive correlation. To see the implications of this for the estimate of the
tenure profile, note first that the size of the decline in

necessary to

trigger a quit (for any given value of the alternative offer received) increases
with Tjjt if wages rise with

This implies that the expected value of

conditional on continuation of the job declines with Tijt. Consequently, over
the course of the job (i.e., conditional on no quit) Tjjt is negatively
correlated with the conditional expectation of

Least squares estimates

(with or without controls for individual heterogeneity) of the tenure slope will

be downward biased. Part of this correlation will carry over to Tjjt and bias
downward the instrumental variables estimates of the tenure slope. On the other
hand, a similar argument suggests that selection due to layoffs is likely to
produce bias in the other direction, and so the two effects are partially

offsetting. An analysis of the residuals does not provide evidence of strong
positive autocorrelation in the residuals once individual and job effects have
been taken into account, although it should be kept in mind that the residuals

are affected by the selection process.& While there is no strong theoretical or

However, Altonji, Mincer and Shakotko (1984, ch. 4) find only minor
differences by tenure level in the effect of the aggregate unemployment rate,
state employment changes, or county unemployment rates on wages.
The autocovariance function of residuals for the same individual across
years in which the job is not the same is
1
2
3
4
7
5
6
8
9
10
12
11
Lag:

Covar: .110 .085 .079 .074 .074 .072 .071 .069 .061 .069

.067 .083

Ignoring an unimportant economy wide error component, the covariance at each lag
is an estimate of var(c) + cov(iit,u.r_k) for k > 0. The autocovariance
function of residuals for the same in{vidual over years on the same job is
Lag:

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Covar: .110 .101 .094 .092 .090 .090 .088 .091 .093 .090 .085 .072
This provides an estimate of var(c1) + var(c.) + cov(uit,u.t_k) +

cov(uj,ujt_k) for k > 0. Comparison of t?ie patterns of àecay of the two

—18—

empirical presumption that this bias is important, further analysis is needed.
3.2 Treatment of Correlation of Errors Across Individuals and Jobs

Even if one assumes that ij is serially uncorrelated, the composite error
term of the model is correlated over time as a result of the individual
component and the job match components. Consequently, the 1111 procedure is
inefficient relative to a GLS (generalized least squares) version of the

procedure. The same limitations apply to the OLS estimates of the model. Use
of the GLS versions of the IV and OLS procedures is complicated by the fact
that the sample is unbalanced, with a large variation in the number of years of
data on each individual and on each job match, and to our knowledge GLS has
never been implemented in such a situation.

The necessary formulae to compute

GLS versions of the least squares and 1V1 procedures for the case of unbalanced
data are derived in Appendix

covariance functions provides information on cov(uit,ujJt_k), which plays a
role only in the covariance of residuals over the same job. In making the
comparison, one should keep in mind that the covariance of residuals across
different jobs is overstated at lag 1 because the hourly wage variable is an
average over the calendar year, and may combine information on the two jobs.
Thus, the drop in the covariance between the first and second lags (.110 to
.085) is overstated. The fact that the patterns of decay in the two
autocovariance functions are very similar after the first lag suggests that
is either white noise, a random walk, or has a very small variance. A
regression analysis of squared residuals from wage equations in columns 3, 6, 9,
and 12 of Table 1 indicates that if anything the error variance actually falls
is a
somewhat with tenure, which is inconsistent with the hypothesis that
random walk. Thus, subject to the important caveat that the residuals
themselves are affected by the job selection process discussed in the text, we
find little evidence that uj plays an important of a role in the evolution of

ages.

The key to computation of the GLS versions of the least squares and 1V1
estimators is the analytical formula for the inverse of the covariance matrix
of the wage errors for each individual in the sample, which we have derived
is serially uncorrelated over time and across
under the assumption that
people. This inverse is a function of the number of observations on the
individual in the sample, the number of jobs held, the number of years in each
across time periods on the same job
of the jobs, the covariances of the
and across different jobs for the same individual, and the variance of
Given the formula for the inverse of the covariance matrix, computation o the
GLS versions of the least squares and 1V1 procedures is straightforward. We
have ignored the effect of the common error component u on covariance

—19—

In interpreting the GLS results below, readers should keep in mind that the
standard justification for use of GLS is to improve efficiency and provide
asymptotically valid standard errors rather than to reduce bias in the

estimates. Since the calculated standard errors of the OLS estimates are very
small (and are not likely to be understated by a large amount), large changes in

the OLS results are not expected unless the wage model is misspecified. If the
failure to control for heterogeneity is an important misspecification, then
there is reason to expect substantial differences between the OLS and GLS

estimates. To see this, note that when the instruments are not used in place of
the tenure measures, the GLS estimator may be thought of as least squares
applied to the wage model after subtracting from each of the variables in the
equation: (1) a weighting factor times the average value of the variable for the
sample years in which the person is in a given job, and (2) a second weight

times the individual specific mean of the variable. The weighting factors
depend in a complicated way upon the covariances mentioned above, the length of
the job, the number of jobs held by the individual, and the number of years that

the person is in the sample. Thus the GLS procedure uses less of the variation
in the data across individuals and across jobs than does OLS. It is
intermediate between use of an individual or job fixed effects procedure and

OLS.* Consequently, the GLS estimates of the model may differ sharply from the
OLS estimates if heterogeneity produces important biases in the OLS results. At
the same time, one would expect the 1V1 and 1V1—GLS to give similar answers,

structure given that a time trend is added to the model and year dummies
xplain very little of the wage variance.
We were unable to derive an explicit formula relating the GLS procedure to
these procedures. Our argument is by analogy to Maddala (1971), who provides
an exact formula relating the GLS estimator to the OLS and fixed effect
estimators for case of a fixed individual specific error component that is
uncorrelated across people and a person specific serially uncorrelated
transitory component, and the same number of observations per person.

—20—

since the 1V1 procedure is not sensitive to individual heterogeneity or job

heterogeneity. The bottom line of this discussion is that we use the GLS

version

of the various estimators both to provide an informal specification test

for heterogeneity bias and to improve efficiency.

4.

TA
The sample is based upon the 1968—1981 waves of the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics. Most of the results below are for white male heads of households,
although some findings for a corresponding sample of blacks are also

presented. For a given year the sample contains individuals who were between
the ages 18—60 iclusive, who were employed, temporarily laid off, or unemployed
at the time of the survey, and who were not retired, permanently disabled, self
employed, employed by the government in the current or past year, or from Alaska

or

Hawaii. Observations with missing data on the variables in wage equation are

excluded for the particular sample year. The effective sample for whites covers
the calendar years 1968—1980 and contains 15138 observations m 2163 individuals
and 4334 job matches.

Most of the variables are standard. However, it is important to point out
that there are ambiguities in the quit and job tenure measures, especially in

the early years of the sample. This is because the questions about job changes
in the early years do not distinguish clearly between promotions and quits, the
tenure variable is bracketed in the early years, and in some years the tenure
variable does not distinguish clearly between tenure with an employer and tenure

in a position. We have used a number of cross checks to try to solve these
problems, but some measurement error undoubtedly remains. The possibility that
measurement error in the tenure variables has a serious effect on the results is
investigated (and rejected) in Section 5.4 below.

—21—

The real wage measure is the log of labor earnings during the year divided
by annual hours and is converted to real terms using the GNP implicit price

deflator for consumption. The variables T, T2 and OLDJOB and union status refer
to the time of the survey in the corresponding year (typically in March or
April).

The variable N/EXP is a measure of the number of jobs held by an

individual up to the current year (N) divided by labor market experience (EXP).
Table A.l presents descriptive statistics on most of the variables used in the

analysis. Appendix 2 provides additional discussion of the data.
5. RESULTS

The results are organized as follows. Section 5.1 presents the least

*

Since the earnings and hours questions refer to the previous calendar year,
this data was matched to information on union status and tenure from the prior
survey. The quit, layoff, and separation indicators refer to the 12 months
prior to the current survey and are matched to data on union status and tenure
om the previous survey.
Note that for those who change jobs during the year the wage is presumably
an average of the wage on each of the jobs weighted by the portion of the year
spent in each. Thus, use tenure at the time of the survey rather than the
average of tenure over the calendar year may lead to an understatement of the
effect of the first year of tenure on wages. One alternative is to construct
a weighted average from tenure in adjacent survey years. Preliminary analysis
using such a measure lead to results very similar to those reported below.
The second alternative is to use the reported hourly wage for the job held at
the time of the survey as the wage measure. The main disadvantages of this
variable are (1) it only available for hourly workers prior to tFE 1976 survey
(2) it is truncated at $9.98 prior to 1978, and (3) it underestimates wage
growth to the extent that paid vacations and holidays rise with tenure and
experience. The truncation of the data and the fact that the mean of the
average hourly earnings of hourly workers is 25.7% below the corresponding
figure for salary workers will bias to some extent the experience and tenure
coefficients. When these factors are taken into account the results using the
reported wage are very similar to those using the average hourly wage. For
example, when the sample is restricted to the years 1978—1981 (when neither of
the first two problems are present), the parameter estimates (with uncorrected
standard errors) corresponding to column 6 of Table 1 are
W = —.0012 T + .00021 T2 + .0363 OLDJOB + .0393 EXP —.0140 EXP2/10
(.011)

(.0005)

(.0273)

+ .0013 EXP3/100 + .0005 EDIJC
(.005)

(.0003)

(.0096)

EXP

+ other

(.004)

variables.

—22—

squares and 1V1 estimates of the wage equation for white males. Section 5.2
examines whether both individual heterogeneity and job heterogeneity are

present. Section 5.3 discusses the GLS versions of the least squares and IV
estimators. Section 5.4 compares the OLS and IV methods from the standpoint of
predictive accuracy. Sections 5.5 and 5.6 assessApossibility of biases in our
estimates. Section 5.7 compares results for blacks and whites and union and

nonunion workers. Section 5.8 shows that both

and

have a strong

positive association with the quit and separation probabilities. Our main
conclusion is that job tenure plays only a small role in the wage equation, and
that heterogeneity bias dominates the cross—sectional relationship between
tenure and wages.

5.1 Basic OLS and 1V1 Estimates of the Wage Equation for White Males
Table 1 reports various estimates of the coefficients on years of

education, experience, and tenure. To reduce the possibility of bias in the
tenure and experience profiles from an overly restrictive specification of the

education—experience polynomial, we include education, educatkn2, EXP, EXP2,
and EXP3, and the product of education and EXP. The equations also contain
controls for marital status, union membership, health status, city size and
residence in an SMSA, time, and region, although the parameter estimates for

these variables are not displayed.* Most previous studies have used either T or
T and T2 as the specification of the tenure profile. We report results for
these specifications but focus the discussion on the results with T, T2 and the
dummy variable OLDJOB,

7s

defined to be 1 If T > 1 and 0 otherwise, all

included in the equation.

The OLS estimates (columns 1—3) and the 1V1 es timates (columns 4—6) of the

*

The full set of estimates for columns 3 and 6 of Tab 1 and columns 3 and 6
of Table 2 are reported in Table A3.

—23—

wage parameters tell very different stories about the tenure profile of

vages.* The OLS estimates indicate that OLDJOB has a large positive effect on
wages, with a point estimate of .111 (Col. 3) and a standard error of .012. In
contrast, the 1V1 estimate of the OLDJOB coefficient is only .050 with a

standard error of .009. The 1V1 coefficient estimates for T and T2 are —.0041

and .002 with small standard errors. (See col. 6; note that T has a
coefficient of .0016 with a t—value of 1.14 when It is entered by itself.) The
corresponding OLS estimates are .0178 and —.0003 with tiny standard errors.
In general, the OLS estimates are typical of those obtained from cross

sectional analyses of the wage equation. They Indicate a substantial growth of
wages with tenure, with much of the growth occurring in the first year on the

job. By constrast, the 1V1 estimates indicate substantially smaller first year

growth and a virtually flat tenure profile thereafter. The relationship between
tenure and wages is usefully summarized by calculating the effect of the first

10 years of tenure on the wage. This Is reported at the bottom of the columns
of Table 1. The 1111 e timates Imply that the accumulation of the first 10 years
of tenure (including the first year effect) results in a wage increase of .0268

(with a standard error of .016). Since the wage is in logs this corresponds to

a percentage increase of 2.7%. This is only 1/11th of the corresponding OLS
estimate of the contribution of 10 years of tenure to wages (30%). These
results indicate that the strong correlation between wages and tenure observed

in previous studies is primarily due to heterogeneity bias. Evidently, the
permanent individual component of wages is positively correlated with the

*

The first stage equation for the tenure variables are reported in Table
A2,columns 1—3. The standard errors in Tables 1, 5 and 6 have been corrected
for the effects of correlation across observations on the same individual and
on the same job match arising from the error components c and Ejj().TheY are
asymptotically correct under the assumption that
is serially
uncorrelated.

—24—

propensity to quit or suffer layoffs, and/or individuals who enter into job
matches which are at the low end of the wage distribution (for the individual)

quickly move on to other positions. The findings are consistent with
Jovanovic's matching model as well as with a potentially large role for
individual heterogeneity.
Accompanying the much smaller lV1 as timates of the tenure slope is an

increase in the estimated experience profile. This is expected since the strong
positive correlation between experience and tenure implies that the upward bias
in the tenure profile resulting from heterogeneity will result in a downward

bias in the experience profile. The OLS estimates indicate that total labor
market experience raises wages by 31.7% during the first ten years of work and
48.2% during the first 30 years. (Note that these estimates are very precise.)
The corresponding figures based upon the 1V1 estimates are 53.7% and 86.6%.

Since the tenure effects on wages must be multiplied by approximately .25 or .3

(the derivative of the mean of tenure with respect to experience) to estima
the contribution of tenure to growth in wages over a career, the 1V1 estimates
indicate that the role of tenure is trivial relative to labor market experience
in explaining the gross increase in wages with labor market experience.
It is useful to compare the 1V1 results with those based upon the addition
of N/EXP, the ratio of prior separations to experience, to the wage equation as

a control for individual heterogeneity. The results for this approach to the
problem of heterogeneity bias, which is due to Mincer and Jovanovic (1981), are
reported in columns 10—13 and are similar to the OLS results discussed above.*

columns 10—12 with 1—3. The variable makes less of difference in our
results than in Mincer and Jovanovic's, who used th 1976 panel from the PSID,
as the number of separations between 1968 and 1975, and work with N
measure
directly or with the product of N and experience. This is not surprising,
since the link between curren.t tenure and number of separations in the
previous 8 years is closer to being definitional than the link between tenure
and our estimates of the total number of prior separations divided by
*C

—25—

The estimated tenure profile over the first 10 years is about 10 times steeper

than that using 1V1. The prior separation index does not appear to be an
adequate control for heterogeneity bias. One possible reason is that N/EXP
variable does not control for job match heterogeneity. A second reason is that
N/EXP the variable is a noisy control for individual heterogeneity. In part,
this may be due to problems with the measure of N, and in part it is due to the
fact that for any given true separation probability the observed separation rate

has a considerable variance when EXP is low. The noise in NIEXP may have a
complicated effect on the results because of the presence of EXP, EXP2 and EXP3
in the model and the fact that EXP is correlated with T.

5.2 Extensions: Individual Heterogeneity Versus Job Heterogeneity
An interesting alternative estimator is obtained by adding the deviation of
Tij(t) from the individual mean

(1V2). TjJ(t) —

will

to the list of instrumental variables

be uncorrelated

with the wage disturbance if the job effects

separations. Note that since TjjtTj =

Tj

are 0 or are not related to

+ Tjj(t) —

Ti,

use of both Tt

and Tjj(t) — T1 in the first stage equations is similar to estimation using Tj
—

T1.

Similarly, one may add Tjj(t)2 —

Ti2

and OLDJOBiJ(t) — OLDJOBi to the

experience. They report a reduction in the tenure profile of about 15% when
N EXP is added. They find virtually no reduction for the NLS sample of
young men lnria 40% reduction for the NLS sample of older men. Note that the
experience coefficients in columns 10—12 are not comparable with those in 1—3
because N/EXP falls over the lifetime for a typical worker. See Mincer and
Jovanovic and Mincer(1984) for a detailed analysis of this variable.

—26—

first stage equations for the tenure variables. (The first stage equations for
the 1V2 e stimator are reported in columns 4—6 of Table A2.)

The 1V2 parameter estimates are displayed in columr 7—9 of Tabl3 1.
predicted values. The use of the variation in the tenure means across jobs
leads to a modest changes in the estimates of the tenure slopes when

Tt

and h_i)Jbiit are all present in the wage equation (compare columns 6 and 9).
The extra effect of the first year of tenure rises to .073, and the overall

effect of 10 years of tenure is about 7.5%. This exceeds the 1V1 estimate of
2.7 by about 3 standard errors, but is far below the OLS estimate of 30%. A
formal Hausman type test of the null hypothesis of exogeneity of

Tjj(t)2 —

Ti

ij(t) —

1,

and OLDJOBij(t) — 0LDJOBi lead to rejection the hypothesis at the

.001% level .

In

summary, both the 1V1 and 1V2 results indicate that tenure plays only a

modest role in wage growth, with general labor market experience accounting for

most of the growth. The tenure estimates lie considerably below estimates based
upon least squares and use of a prior mobility index as a control for individual

*

Following Newey (19811, pg.6) we performed the exogeneity test by testing
for the joint significance in the wage equation of the residuals from
regressions of the three additional instrumental variables against the
maintained set of instrumental variables. The covariance matrix of the
parameter estimates of the wage equation used in forming the test statistic
was calculated using the 1V2 (Tab1 1, column 9) estimate of the residual ari nce
and with the correlation in the error
across observations on the same
individual and the same job match taken into account.
The fact that the 1V2 a stimates of the tenure profiles are much closer to
the 1V1 results than to the OLS results does not provide clear evidence on the
relative Importance of individual heterogeneity and job match heterogeneity in
biasing the OLS results. To see this, note that about 1/2 of the observations
come from individuals who held only one job during the years in which they are
in the sample. For these observations, the additional instrumental variables
-

T

,Tjj(t)2 — T12 , NewJobi.() —NewJob1l used in the 1V2 procedure
[Tij(t) —
are identically 0 and add nothing to te instruments for the tenure
variables. Adding the deviations from individual means has little impact on
the R2's of the first stage equations for the T and T2 but does make a
substantial difference in the equation for OLOJOB. See Table A2.

—27—

heterogeneity.

5.3 GLS Estimates

The columns of Table 2 report GLS estimates which correspond to the OLS
results in columns 1—3 and 10—13 of Tabla 1 as well as 1V1—GLS and 1V2—CLS
estimates which correspond to the 1V1 and 1V2 e stimates of columns 4—6 and 7—

9. The estimates of the covariance matrix of the residuals for each individual

used in the GLS calculations are based upon the correlation of the wage
residuals for a given individual across different jobs and upon the correlation

for a given individual in the same job. These estimates equal 0.46 and 0.59
respectively and were calculated from the IV1 equation estimate in column 6 of

Table 1. Wry similar estimates were obtained using the residuals from the OLS
estimates,* and so we have employed the same residual correlation matrix in
computing all of the results in Table 2.

Comparison of columns 3 and 12 of the two tables indicates that GLS
produces a dramatic reduction in the least squares estimates of the wage—tenure

profile, regardless of whether one controls for prior job mobility. For
example, OLS estimates of the model with T, T2, and OLDJOB imply that 10 years
of tenure are associated with an increase in wages of about 30%, while the

*

Using the 1V1 equation from Table 1 (Col. 6), the corresponding correlation

estimates are 0.42, 0.57). Using the 1V2 equation (Col. 9), the correlation
estimates are (0.45, 0.59). Using the N/EXP equation (Col. 12), the
correlation estimates are (0.42, 0.58).For the 1V1 equation, the estimates of
the variances of ijt' Cj and
are .069, .077, and .022.
(The estimate of the variance of
is exaggerated by the presence of
serially uncorrelated measurement error in the wage, although this has no
bearing on estimation of the wage of equation.)
Thus, the job match
component accounts for substantial fraction of the error variance. This is
consistent with Cline(1979a). Note that the estimates above as well as the
estimates for nonunion workers and blacks used in correcting the standard
errors of tabl 5 and 6 are based upon the residual variance, the average of
the cross products of residuals between periods in which the individual held
different jobs, and the average of the cross products between periods in which
the individual held the same job. The variance decomposition is based upon
is serially uncorrelated.
the assumption that

—28—

correspondirg GLS

estimate

is only 13.1%. The GLS estimates of the coefficients

on T and OLDJOB are .0044 and .074 (respectively), which are well below the OLS

estimates of .0178 and .111. The reduction in the estimated tenure slope is
accompanied by a large offsetting increase in the experience slope.
The impact of GLS is far too large to be explained by sampling error.
As was explained earlier, it is fully consistent with the presence of strong

heterogeneity bias in the OLS estimates. This interpretation is strongly
supported by comparison of the 1V1 e stimates in columns 4—6 of Table 1 with the

1v1—GLS results in columns 4—6 of the TabIr 2. The GLS

transformation

has only

a small effect on the 1V1 estimates, although the point estimates of the
coefficients on individual coefficients in the education—experience polynomial

change somewhat. The tenure coefficients are virtually unchanged. The 1V1—GLS
estimate in column 6 implies that 10 years of tenure produces a wage increase of

2.2%, while the corresponding 1v1 estimate is 2.7%. The experience profiles are
also very close. Since the 1V1 procedure does not use variation in tenure
across jobs and across individuals to identify the tenure effect, it is less

sensitive to CLS. The 1V2 estimates using deviations from individual means as
well as deviations from job means as instrumental variables also change by only
a small amount.

5.4 Evaluating the Performance of OLS and 1V1 in Predicting Wage Changes.
The most natural check on the OLS and 1V1 e stimates of the tenure slope is

to compare their performance in predicting the change in the wage across years
in which the job does not change (stayers) and for observations with a job

change (movers). If the 1V1 tenure slope is correct, then one would expect the
predicted wage changes based on the OLS coefficients to be greater than the
actual wage changes for stayers, and to be less than the actual wage changes for

job changers. The 1V1 estimates should be accurate for both groups.

—29—

Furthermore, the OLS prediction errors should be systematically related with the

change in tenure from year to year. Roughly speaking, this is what we find.
Tabi 3 reports the difference between the actual and predicted values of
as a function of tenure in period t—l. For purposes of comparison, Table
3 also reports OLS and 1V1 estimates (based upon the tenure coefficients in
Table 1) of the contribution of the change in tenure between t—l ciivri t to the

expected value of

given tenure in period t—i. On average, the OLS

equation predicts that

will equal .046, while the mean of

is .026,

an overprediction of .020. Furthermore, a comparison of columrs 3 and 4 reveals
that the prediction errors are systematically related to the estimated

contribution of tenure to the wage change. On the other hand the 1V1 procedure
slightly overestimates wage growth for stayers. The 1V1 prediction errors are
small at all tenure levels.

For movers, OLS dramatically underpredicts
error is .095, which compares to the average value of

The average prediction

is .058. Since the

tenure coefficients have little effect on the average of the predicted wage

change for persons with T1jt_i between 0 and 1, ituseful to compute the average
prediction error for persons with Tjjt_l greater than 1. For this group, OLS

underpredicts W1j by .169. Comparison of columtE 3 and 4 reveals that the
prediction error is systematically related to the OLS estimate of the

contribution of the change in tenure to the wage growth. In contrast, the 1V1
prediction errors average only .029 and are not systematically related to tenure
level.

Table 3 also reports separate results for quits and layoffs. They show
that the OLS equation performs very poorly for both groups, and that the
prediction errors are systematically related to the OLS estimate of the

contribution of the change in tenurthe wage change. The 1V1 estimates perform

—30—

much better than the OLS estimates for both quits and layoffs, although the 1V1

estimates

underpredict by .058 and .015 for quits and layoffs respectively.

(The latter figure is not significantly different from zero.) The prediction

errors are not systematically related to Tt_i.
In summary, the results of the prediction tests are basically favorable to
the 1V1 e stimates and indicate that the OLS estimates of the tenure slope are

seriously overstated. These tests cast serious doubt on the view that
measurement error in the tenure variable is responsible for the difference

between the OLS and 1V1 results. The sample means of the changes in tenure for
each initial tenure level underly the predictions. Random measurement error in
the tenure variables should have little effect on these. However, the fact that
1V1 e stimator tends to underpredict for quits by a constant amount is consistent

with the notion that the job shopping process leads to an increase in ej()
with experience. As was explained earlier, the resulting correlation of Cij(t)
with experience would produce a downward bias in the tenure slope which offsets

an upward bias in the experience slope. It seems unlikely that these biases are
large given the poor performance of the OLS equation, the fact that the 1V1
prediction errors are not related to tenure level and are very small for
layoffs, and the fact that the the 1V1 procedure actually overpredicts wage

growth (slightly) for stayers. In any event, we provide additional analysis of
the possible biases which arise from job shopping and from measurement error in
the next two sections.

5.5 Analysis of Bias from Qnission of Eij(t)

Let the 1V1 instruments for

Tjt and 0LDJ0B1 be denoted by T1t

and OLDJOBjJt respectively, and let L.i' denote

the vector [Tj Tjt

0LDJJ0Bt]. jt' is determined by the system of first stage equations
=

Xijti +

[Tit,

jt'

0LDJoB1]rr2

—31—

whei 1I and

are the matrices of coefficients of the first, stage equations for

Tjjt, 'ft and OLDJOBj reported in Table A2. From the Theil—Griliches
formula for the analysis of bias due to an omitted variable (See Theil (1971),
Ch. 12), the bias Bblas in the coefficients of the wage equation which arises

from the presence of ejJ()

in

the error term of the model, is equal to the

column vector

(6) 3bias =

where Zjj

[Xjjt, Lijtl

In most niultivariate contexts, one cannot even sign the elements of Bbias,

let alone assess them quantitatively. Since the omitted variable ij(t) is not
observed, it cannot be used directly to estimate jI

tr' Jt[XijtTijt]'ij(t1

which is the cross product of the included regressors with the omitted variable
and is required to evaluate the bias formula.
In the present case, however, one may infer a great deal about these cross

and OLDJOBjjt are orthogonal to

products. First, and most important,
Elj(t) by construction. Consequently,

!ijtl'EiJ(t) reduces to [xijt Lhh1]'eiJ(). Second, many of the
elements of

such as schooling, region, SMSA are not likely to directly

influence tlj(t), given that ij(t) is defined to be net of the fixed individual
characteristics such schooling. The problem of bias arises primarily because
£jj(t) is correlated with experience as a result of job shopping over the course

of a career. For this reason, we assume that correlations of £ij(t) with the
other variables in the model arise only to the extent that they are correlated

with experience. In this case, one can estimate the crossproducts between
and the explanatory variables in the model if one can estimate the

conditional expectation of €ij(t) given experience, which we denote by

[cjj(t)IEXPit]. If [E1j(t)EXPjt]

is

known, one may then compute Bbias as

—32—

(7) Bbias = P

m[.[(Zjjt ij)1]1

We obtain a set of estimates of [rj3(t)EXPit] by combining information on
the experience profile of quits with a range of assumptions about the expected

value of the wage change resulting from a quit. The very small errors of the
1V1 estimator in predicting wage growth for 'those who quit, and evidence on the
total growth in wages arising labor market experience over a career provide a

check on the plausibility of the assumptions about wage gains per quit. We
ignore layoffs under the conservative assumption that on average they result in

a zero change in cjj(t). If they are associated with negative changes, then
consideration of layoffs would result in even smaller estimates of the bias than
those reported below.

Let Jobsit equal the expected number of times a typical worker has quit

conditional on the experience EXPIt of the worker in time t. Jobsit may be
approximated as

Jobsit it PQ(X)
where PQ(X) is the probability that a worker with experience X will quit during

the year. We estimate PQ(X) from a logit model relating the quit probability to
a constant, EXP, EXP2, and gp3•* Finally, we estimate [ejj(t)EXPjt] as the

product of Jobs1t and an assumed value for the average change in tjj(t) per
quit and use (6) to compute Bbias

The assumed value for the change in

ranges from .025 to .100. We consider .100 to be an upper bound for the change
in tij(t) per quit for two reasons. First, if one assumes that the average
change in tlj(t) associated with layoffs is less than or equal to zero, then the

difference .046 (with a standard error of .023) between the means of the actual
change in tW1j for quits and for layoffs provides an upper bound on the average

*

The implied probability of a quit in the first, 5th, 10th, 20th, and 30th
years in the labor market are .394, .191, .120, .056 and .035 respectively.

—33—

gain in rl(t) associated with a quit. (This comparison requires the assumption
that the sample distributions of quits and layoffs by experience and tenure

levels are the same, which is approximately true.) In view of this figure, our
preferred estimate of the gain per quit is .05. Second, as we shall see
momentarily, the assumption that the average gain per quit is .100

implies

that,

for the average worker, 55.9 % of the gain in wages associated with labor market
experience is due to increases in Eij(t) resulting from job shopping and 44.1 %
is due to the direct effect of experience.

The upper panel of Table 4 reports estimates of Bbias under the various
assumptions about the average gain per

quit.

If the gain is .05 , then the bias

in the estimate of the returns to 10 years of tenure on the log wage is biased

downward by .0375. The "corrected" coefficients on T, T2 and ULDJOB are .0005,
.0012, and .0435 respectively, and the "corrected" estimates of the effects of
10 years of tenure and 30 years of experience on the log wage are .0643 and

.4405. The implied average growth in cij(t) over 30 years of experience is

.1835. When

the

gain per quit is assumed to be .100, the "corrected" estimates

of the effect of 10 years of tenure and 30 years of experience are .1019 and
.2570 respectively, and the average growth in cij(t) over 30 years is .325.*

In summary, the analysis of bias in the 1V1

arising

from the correlation of

experience with ejj(t) suggests that the percentage gain in the wage from 10

years

of tenure might

be

as large as 10.7 %,

although

our preferred estimate is

6.6 %.

An

alternative

way to analyze the important of bias arising froa failure to

control for Cij(t) is to compare the 1V1
*

estimates

to estimates obtained using a

If one

were to assume the gain is .150 per quit, the revised estituate of
the effects of 10 years of tenure is only .139, which is still only half of
the OLS estimate in in Table 1, column
text in part because the it implies a corrected estimate for the direct effect
of 30 years of experience and growth in cij(t) equal to only .074.

3. e do not consider this case in the

—34—

fixed effect for each job to control for both cij(t) and r. As was noted
earlier, only the sum of the coefficients on EXP, T, and the time trend are

identified when the "job effects' estimator is used. However, one may use the
test procedure suggested by Hausman and Taylor (1981) to compare the subset of
experience and tenure parameters which are identified using the job effects

estimator with the corresponding 1V1 estimates. In practice, we use the 1V1—GLS
estimates in place of the 1111 estimates in performing the test, since we were
unable to find a way to adopt 1-lausman and Taylor's test to the case in which

neither estimator is efficient under the null hypothesis. The relevant subset
of the coefficient estimates from the 1V1—GLS and the job effects procedures are
displayed below.

Coefficient on

JOB EFFECTS.

1V1—GLS

EXP

EXP+T+Time

T2

OLDJOB

Ed

.0642
(.0052)

.00004

.0461

—.00026

Estimators

.0633

(.0045)

(.00003) (.0072) (.00025)
.00018

.0470

.00016

(.00007) (.0088) (.00018)

EXP2/10
—.0153
(.0020)
—. 0185

(.0019)

EXP3/100
.00153
(.00031)
.00187
(.00028)

The point estimates are very close relative to the standard errors, and a formal

test of equality of the coefficient vectors passes.# It should be noted that

The standard errors of the job effects estimates reported in the text are
based upon an estimate of the variance of the transitory error component
which equals .047. (The loss of degrees of freedom which arises from additon
of the job constants to the model was taken into account in calculating this
figure.) This estimate is well below the corresponding estimate based upon
the 1V1 and 1V1—GLS procedures. We do not have a good explanation for why the
variance estimates differ. It may be related to the fact jobs lasting only
one period have no effect on the job effects estimator of the residual
variance. As a result, two of the diagonal elements in the difference betieen
the covariance matrices of the job effects estimator and the 1V1—GLS estimator
are actually negative if one uses the .047 figure to compute the covariance
matrix of the subset of job effects parameter estimates used in the test.
Unfortunately, the specification test is based upon
c1, where c1 is the difference in the job effects and 1V1—GLS
C1' [E1 — Z2]1
and E2 are the covariance
parameter estimates reported in the text and
matrices of the lob effects and 1V1—GLS parameter estimates (respectively ).
estimate [S1 — Si] of the covariance of c (a problem which frequently arises
in computing H?usman test statistics) and computes the test statistic, one
level. We used the IV1_GL
obtains 6.8, which is not significant at tl-e 10
estimate of the variance of hut in computing S1. In this case, all diagona
elements of [S1—S2] are positive and the test statistic is 2.99.

—35—

this test may not be sufficiently powerful to detect a small degree of bias in
the 1V1—GLS estimates, especially since the downward bias in the linear tenure
term is likely to be offset by an upward bias in the linear experience term.
Also, the point estimates from the Job Effects and the 1V1

estimators

do not

match up quite as closely. Nevertheless, Job Effects estimates are additional
evidence that the 1V1 and 1V1—GLS results are in the right ballpark.
5.6 Analysis of Effects of Measurement Error in Tenure
As was explained earlier, a second potentially important source of bias in

the 1V1 estimates is measurement error in the tenure variables. The fact that
the GLS estimates are based on partial differencing of the wage equation is
likely to make them more sensitive than the OLS estimates to the problem of
measurement error for the same reasons that they are less sensitive to upward
bias due to heterogeneity.

The results of the prediction tests in Table 3 are strong evidence against
the hypothesis that measurement error offers an alternative to heterogeneity
bias as the main explanation for the large reduction In tenure slopes when 11,71

is used and when GLS Is substituted for OLS. However, we have performed a
additional checks on the measurement error problem in an attempt to improve upon

the 1V1 estimates. First, the wage equations were re—estimated with
observations for years prior to 1975 (the years in which tenure was bracketed)
excluded. The results for both OLS and the IV procedure are very close to those

In Table 1*. Second, an analysis of the frequency of the first difference of
*

For example, the estimates of the effect of 10 years of tenure on the log
wage data implied by the OLS, 1V1 and 1V2 results for post 1974 sample are
.2654, —.0252 and .0392 respectively. The corresponding values for the full
sample (from Table 1, col. 3, , and 9) are .2627, .0268, and .0741.

—36—

indicates that most of the observations lie in a plausible range. Third,
when the sample is restricted to observations over the post 1975 sample for

which the change in Tt is between .9 and 1.1 (unless a separation took place
between surveys)**, the coefficients on T, T2 and OLDJOB are —.0083, .00013, and

.0439. These are very close to the corresponding 1V1 estimates on the full
sample in Table 1, col 6, as are the implied estimates of the effects of 10

years of tenure and 10 years of experience. These results suggest that the
effects of measurement error are small.

In addition, an attempt was made to construct T1 using information only
on the number of sample observations corresponding to a particular match the
number of years between observations, and that fact tenure on a continuing job
should rise by one each year.

It is not necessary to know the level of tenure

in a given year to construct Tjjt, since displacement of the tenure values in

all of the years by a constant makes no difference in Tjj. For the most part,
this information is based on whether or not an individual indicated that he had
been on his current job for less than a year.

It does not depend directly on

the specific number of years reported for tenure, although some dependence will
arise as a result of the procedures used to impute tenure values (see Appendix

2). Hopefully, measureiiient error in the alternative Tj measure will be weakly
related to measurement error in

Unfortunately, it is necessary to know

the tenure level to construct (T13)2 and 0LDJUB. We used OLDJOBIJt as is,
since measurement error in OLDJOBIjt should not be much more of a problem for

the 1V1 procedure than for OLS. To construct (T1)2 we took the tenure
observations corresponding to a given job and fit a least squares regression of

**This excludes some good observations on individuals who started jobs
less than .9 years before the survey and who were unemployed at the time of
the prior survey.

—37—

tenure against an intercept and time, with the time slope constrained to 1.

Separate regressions were run for each job match in the sample. The squares of
the predicted values of tenure from the reqressions were used as measures of

for purposes of constructing (T3t)2. The 1V1 procedure was implemented
using the new measures of

and (Ti)2 and the old measure of 0LDJ01t as

instrumental variables for the tenure variables. The coefficients on T, T2, and
OLDJOB for the specification corresponding to Table 1, Col 6 are —.0024, .00017,

and —.046. These estimates imply that wages rise by 4% after 10 years of
tenure, which is slightly above the earlier estimate of 2.7%.

Finally, it is important to keep in mind that even if the 1V1 estimates are
biased downward by a. factor of 3, (with measurement error accounting for 2/3 of

the variance in the 1V1 instrument for tenure), most of the difference between

the 1V1 and OLS estimates of the tenure profile would remain. The evidence
above suggests that the bias from measurement error is small.

5.7 Differences between Blacks and Whites and Union and Nonunion Workers
Columns 1 and 2 of Table A4 report OLS estimates of the wage equation for
samples of white men and black men respectively, and Column 3 reports the

difference between the two groups in the coefficients. Corresponding 1V1
estimates are reported in columns 3—6. The OLS results suggest that the tenure
profile of wages is about a 15% less steep for blacks than for whites. The
growth of wages with experience in the labor market is less than half as steep
for blacks than for whites.

The small racial differential in the tenure profile disappears when the 1V1
is used to correct for heterogeneity, and both groups have very flat tenure

profiles. Thirty years of experience results in a wage increase of

for

If one triples the 1V1 estimate of the effect of 10 years of tenure on the
log of the wage, one oStains .084. This compares to the OLS estiuate of
.263.

—38—

whites and 35.5% for blacks.

In summary, the evidence is that the effects of

tenure are relatively small for both groups and are much less important than
differences in wage growth with labor market experience in explaining racial
differences in wages.

Table 6 compares estimates of the wage equation for the samples of union

and nonunion white workers. The OLS results indicate that the OLDJOB effect on
wages is smaller for union than nonunion workers (.03 eid .09 respectively).
The tenure slope for union workers Is also significantly flatter, which confirms

earlier studies. As shown in the Table 6 these estimates imply that during
the first ten years on the job wages rise by about 24% for nonunion workers and

10% for union workers, and this difference is highly significant. The
experience profiles are very similar.

Once again, the 1V1 results tell a different story. The estimates of the
tenure profile decline sharply for both groups, but the decline is much larger

for nonunion workers than for union workers. No significant difference in the
effects of tenure on wages remains once heterogeneity is controlled for using

the 1V1 procedure. The decline in the estimated difference in the tenure
profile is accompanied by a substantial increase in the experience profile for

both groups. The effect of 10 years of experience on wages is very similar for
the two groups, but 30 years of experience is associated with a 89.7 % increase

for nonunion workers and a 70.2% increase for union workers. It reflects an
increase in the estimated experience profile for nonunion workers when IV is

—39—

used.

The differential impact of 1V1

on the union and nonunion samples is

consistent with the notion that union jobs and union workers are more

heterogenous than nonunion jobs and workers. The mean squared errors of the 1V1

wage equations in Tables 4 are about .109 for the union sample and .185 for t
nonunion sample. It may also be attributed to the fact that union jobs are more
desirable than alternative jobs for broad classes of workers, which reduces
heterogeneity bias resulting from quits in the first few years on the job by

workers for whom the job is a poor match. Finally, it is consistent with the
notion that union contracts (1) restrict the extent to which wages received by
individual workers reflect the quality of the job match and (2) restrict the
extent to which employers may selectively layoff workers who are below average
in productivity.*

5.8 Effects of Individual Specific and Match Specific Wage Components on Quits,
Layoffs and Separations

Note that the effect of education on the wage for union workers is much
smaller than for nonunion, which is consistent with many previous studies.
The coefficient on the interaction of education and experience is positive for
nonunion members and negative for union members. The overall similarity of
the OLS estimates of the experience profiles for union and nonunion workers is
somewhat surprising, since other studies (for example Freeman (1980, Table 3)
using CPS data on blue collar workers without controls for tenure, Mincer
(1983, Table 12) using the 1968—1978 PSID data with controls for tenure) have
obtained a flatter experience slope for union workers. The difference between
our results and Mincer's are related to the fact that Mincer obtains a flatter
tenure slope for nonunion workers than for union workers, while we obtain a
much steeper nonunion slope when OLS is used. Most prior studies (See Mellow
(1981) and Block and Kushkin) obtain flatter tenure profiles for union than
for nonunion workers. There are many differences between Mincer's study and
ours, but we do not have a good explanation the difference in these results.
When we exclude tenure from the model and estimate by OLS, the nonunion
experience slope is indeed steeper than the union slope. As is discussed in
the text, the 1V1 results indicate that the experience slope is steeper for
onunion than union workers.
Freeman (1980) provides evidence that unions reduce wage dispersion
associated with both observed and unobserved characteristics of jobs and
workers.

—40—

Table 7 provides some direct evidence on the role of unobserved

heterogeneity in the job mobility equations. The fact that consistent estimates
of the wage parameters may be obtained using the 1V1 procedure permits

estimation of the individual component c as the mean

of the wage residuals

for a given individual and estimation of cij(t) as the deviation of the wage

residuals over a given job match from the individual mean c. The estimates c1
and Cjj(t) are then added to logit models for quits, layoffs and separations to
see if the individual components and job components are in fact related to job

mobility, both with and without controls for tenure. The table reports the
implied estimates of the partial derivatives of the quit, layoff and separation
probabilities with respect to these variables (evaluated at the mean quit,

layoff, and separation probabilities). The point estimates should be treated
with caution for a number of reasons. Both

and dI() are subject to

sampling error from the averages of the transitory wage component

Since

relatively few job spells are observed for most individuals, the estimate of

is subject to sampling error due to the match components ci(). Finally, the
tenure coefficients may be biased by heterogeneity which is not control for by
individual specific and job specific wage components.

Despite these problems, the qualitative results are quite interesting.

has a negative coefficient in the quit, layoff and separation equations. A one
standard deviation (0.33) increase in this variable is associated with a fall of
0.05 in the separation rate when tenure is not controlled for .032 when it is

controlled for. Cjj(t) has a large negative coefficient in the quit and
separation equations, a smaller negative coefficient in the layoff equation.
Overall, the results indicate that the individual component and job match

on layoffs reflects variation across matches
Note that the effect of
in wages relative to produc.ivity since unobserved productivity differences
are not controlled.

—41—

components are both negatively related to the separation rate and thus

positively correlated with job tenure. These findings support our earlier
conclusion that the OLS estimates of the tenure profile suffer from a
substantial upward bias.

6. CONCLUDING REMARKS
The instrumental variables estimates of the wage equation indicate that
tenure has a modest effect on wage growth, with total labor market experience

accounting for most of the growth during a career. Holding the effect of total
experience constant, wages rise by slightly under 5 percent in the first year on

the job and decline slightly thereafter. The accumulation of 10 years of tenure
is responsible for a wage increase of 2.7 ¼. Our analysis indicates that this
estimate is probably downward biased as a result of correlation between
experience and the job match error component and as a result of measurement

error in tenure. We would not rule out the possibility that the true effect of
10 years of tenure is 2 or 3 time as large as tIm 2.7% figure and would use

choose 6.6% as our preferred estimate. However, it is clear that heterogeneity
bias is responsible for the much larger least squares estimates of the tenure

profile discussed in the introduction. The evidence indicates that positive
bias in the least squares estimates arises from individual heterogeneity and job

match heterogeneity. The large change in the least squares estimates when CLS
is used, the fact that the results for nonunion workers (presumed to be more
heterogenous and in more heterogenous jobs) are more sensitive to the estimation
procedure, and the fact that the estimates of the individual specific and job
match specific error components are negatively related to mobility is further

evidence that heterogeneity is important. Our findings are fully consistence
with the fact that estimates of the tenure slope based upon the relationship

—42—

regressions with fixed effects for each individual and regresssions of the
change in the wage upon the change in tenure and the usual controls are almost
always well below those obtained by regressing the level of the wage against
tenure, although the individual fixed effects and first difference methods do
not deal adequately with job heterogeneity.

Our results have important implications for models of wage growth and job

mobility. First, they suggest that worker specific financed investments in
human capital may be too small to explain the decline.

in quits

with tenure that is observed in simple least squares or logit estimates of the

quit function. However, they leave open the possibility that most of the
returns to the investments are received as fringe benefits rather than wages,*
and that the tenure slope of total compensation is sufficiently steep to explain

most of the drop in quits. The results also leave open the possibility that
firm

financed

specific human capital investments are large, since such

investments would not show up in wage growth, and thus the small tenure effect
on wages does not speak directly to the issue of whether the strong negative

partial correlation of tenure and layoffs is due to heterogeneity bias. A drop
in the layoff probability is likely to increase the value a worker places on his

job and thus to reduce the quit probability as well. Conclusions about the role
of specific capital accumulation in the layoff and quit profiles will require
further research.

Second, the estimates of the effects of total labor market experience are

consistent with the view that worker financed investments in general training

Studies by Mitchell (1984) and Bartel(1982) indicate that fringe benefits
rise with time on the job and that these play a role In the quit decision. We
This is an
have not consider these factors, in part, for lack of data.
important research question. Note that in assessing the links among tenure,
fringe benefits, and mobility it will be necessary to deal with the problems
of individual heterogeneity and job heterogeneity which have been the focus of
this study.

—43—

are important.

Third, our finding that most wage growth is associated with total labor
market experience rather than seniority contradicts the supervision, sorting,

and risk aversion models of wage growth discussed in the introduction. This is
because these theories are primarily explanations for an increase in
compensation for the current job relative to the worker's alternatives.
Consequently, the results tend to support growth in productivity with
experience, as emphasized in human capital theory, as the dominant explanation
for overall effect of experience on earnings, although they are consistent with
an important role for job matching and labor market search.

A long research agenda remains. A number of limitations of the present
study have been mentioned in the text. It would be desireable to attempt to
encorporate unobserved differences in experience and tenure slopes (this will
not be easy) and to implement the procedures using an alternative data set.
Recent studies by Brown (1983), Duncan and Hoffman (1979) and Mincer (1984) have
used information on the occurrence of training on the job to study directly the

links among training, experience, and wages. The results indicate that growth
in wages on a given job is much higher during the training period than after,

lending support to the human capital hypothesis. The findings of the present
study are consistent with these training effects only if most of the wage growth

carries over to other jobs (the training Is general).* This remains to be
determined.** It is also unclear whether our results or those of the above

*Duncan and Hoffman's(1979) finding that black men are less likely to be
receiving training than white men is consistent with the finding that the
perience profile for these workers is flatter than that of white workers.
Mincer finds a negative association between the training measure and
mobility. Taken at face value, this result suggests that some of the training
is firm specific. However, it is possible that it Is due to heterogeneity
bias may explain it. Reference should also be made to the work of
Bishop(1979).

—44—

studies can be reconciled with the work of Medoff and Abraham (1980, 1981), who
find that wages of workers within the same grade level improve with seniority

and prior experience while performance evaluations do not. Techniques similar
to the instrumental variables procedures of the present study may provide a
useful way to address possible biases due to Individual heterogeneity and job
heterogeneity in sorting out the effects of training on the current and
subsequent jobs.

Finally, It would be usefulgo beyond the limited evidence presented In

Tab 3 of the paper and decompose our estimates of the returns to total
experience for the average worker into the direct effects of experience and the

gains from job matching and search. Our results are consistent with a
substantial role for both. However, a full solution to this problem would seem
to require joint estimation of the wage model, a quit model, and a layoff

model. This will be a difficult undertaken given the complexity of the quit and
layoff decisions and the severe econometric problems arising from job
heterogeneity and Individual heterogeneity.

Al-i

Inversion of the Error Covariance Matrix

Appendix 1 :

A standard result in matrix algebra is that for

(A.1) H=A+BDC,
H, A, and D all being square, non-singular matrices, then

H' = A' - A1B(D

(A.2)

+

A1B)1CA1

It is apparent that this forrtula for the analytic inverse of a sum of
matrices is rrost useful when the inverse of A is known (or easily calculated),
and when D is of sufficiently small dinension to make

evaluation

of the

second term in (A.2) relatively easy. Indeed, this formula is a cornerstone
by

of traditional variance components analysis, such as that

developed

Wallace and Hussein (1969), for example. In its absence, the computational

requireirents

for

GLS in these rrde1s would be too

onerous

to be generally

practical.

Henderson and Searle (1981) investigate special cases and
of (A. 1) in terms

of

identifying the inverse, and

extensions

particularly those

special

cases which have statistical applications, Our purpose in this appendix is
to derive the inverse for one of the cases not considered by Henderson and
Searle, but one which has wide applicability in analyses of panel data.

Suppose a particular

individual

i in. a panel is observed to hold J different

jobs over a period of T years. Suppose

further

that the residual in a

wage equation can be written as the sum of three mutually independent com-

ponents

ijt =
where

ci

+
cii

+ dit

,

is an individual effect,

j=1,2,...,J

,

is a job—specific effect, and Lit is

a white noise error. Let the variances of the components be denoted by

a2

and

Then it is easily verified that the DT covariance matrix

A1-2

of

residuals for each individual can

t

21 +

be written

+

1

J

where Q is a co1unni vector (of length T) of units, and

matrix

such that a typical elerrent g=l if job j

g=O otherwise. The corresponding
rtultiple of , is given by
= (i—p —p
)I +
2

(A.3)

and

where p

due to

p

1

2

29' +

the job effect and

the

over, that the structure of

of

was held

is a DcJ

in year t, and

correlation matrix, which

is a scalar

p GG'
1.

are respectively

p

G

the interterroral

residual correlations

individual effect. It should be noted, ircreis individual-specific, because, first of all,

the different numbers of jobs and tenure length in each job, and second,

because of ragged panels (i.e. different T for each individual). This
it all the rrore imperative to compute an analytic inverse for .
The key to the inversion of

sequentially to (A. 3).
A1

(A.4)

rrkes

is to note that (A.2) can be applied

Rewriting (A. 3), let Q = A1 + A2 + A3

, where

E

22

p

A2

ApGG'
)

and

1

(i—p —p
2

1

Define

AE

A1

+

(A.6)

=A+
=

then, it

follows directly from (A.2) and (A.4) that

II - ____

(A 5) A' =
Now,

;

A3

, so

that again from (A.2) and (A.4)

A' - A1G 1p1 i

+ GA1G

1G'A1

Al-3

first the matrix G'A1G, whose elerrents, because of the structure

Consider

of G, consist of sums of elerrents of A'. Define Y.J to be the number of
years that the individual is observed to be in job j, and define ' G'AG.
Then, typical

are

elenEnts of '

1
____
=_(y_J
jj
j 4)+Tp2)

and

4)

=
jk
NCM

_jk2
4)

define S

+

diirension is JxJ, and whose typical

, whose

elenEnts can be written

s=
s
jk
Note

=

1

- (Y

2
Y.p

+

and

-Tp

_Ijk2
4)

that S can be written as the sum of a diagonal matrix and a matrix

of rank one. Defining y'
= 1

(A.7)

= [

Y1 Y2 ... Y.

, then

c

4))

i

PiJjg

4) 4)-fTp2

+

I

Now using (A. 2) to invert (A. 7),

(A.8 )

—1 —

S

Ii

1 'I

—

1jJdiag

diag

where

P

is a scalar

defined

p

as
-1

f

Therefore,

5Jj

4)(4)+Tp 2 )

+

4)p1Y.2

j1

typical eleitents of 5' can be written
=

____ —

sJ = -p

4)pY.

PiY
4)pY

2

j

k

ijdiag

A1-4

from (A.6)

But

A'

=

(A.6)'

and the definition of S,

A1G S'G'A1

—

With A' given by (A. 5), and S1 by (A. 8), the exact analytic inverse

is

of c

simple to calculate from (A.6)'.

ccordingly, the GLS estimator, given a random sample of N individuals

observed for T years,

each

1

1

where E[ 11
E. '1

.

for a linear rtvdel

of

the form

ijt

1 (of

dinension T.
is
1
1 x T.),

—1 1N
(EX'c2 x.) (LX.
N

=

(A.9)

If consistent

estimates of p
-

1

c2

and

from OLS, for

example), an estimate of

calculate the

GLS

X.
X.

is

estimates.

If

p

2

are

available (as might be obtained

can be derived and used in (A.9) to

an instrumental variables

replaced in (A.9) by Z, where Z. is the matrix

of

procedure is used,

predicted values of

obtained from projection of Z. on the set of instrumental variables.
Finally,

it should

be pointed out that

there is no readily apparent or

simple data transformation consistent with 1 which will
calculations
—1

(X1' c2

*
in (A. 9), i.e. a matrix 0. such that X. =
1
1
* *

simplify

the

X. and
0.11

X) = (X'X). This feature has been frequently noted in similar

variance

components contexts.

A2 -1

Data
The data are from the 1968—1981 Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics
individuals tape. A few variables are based upon other sources, which are
identified below. Two working data sets were constructed, one for white male
heads of households and one for black male heads of households. The data sets
contain one observation for each person in each year the person was in the
sample. Although the survey starts in 1968, many individuals entered the
survey in later years. Individuals were excluded entirely if they were not
household heads in 1979, 1980 and 1981. Data for an individual were included
for a given year only if the following criteria were met:
1) The individual was employed, temporarily laid off, or unemployed in
that year, and had been employed, temporarily laid off, unemployed, a
student, or not in the survey in the previous year;

Appendix

2) The individual was not soley self—employed, a government worker, or
from Alaska or Hawaii in the current year or in the previous year;
3) The individual was between the ages of 18 and 60, inclusive.
Persons with missing data on the variables in the wage equation were excluded
from the wage equation for that year.
NOTES ON THE VARIABLES
1) Education: Number of grades completed. This variable can take on
values from 0 to 17. Due to a programming error, education in 1975 was left
out of the data set. For this year it was assigned the mean of education in
1974 and 1976. Education was bracketed in the Michigan survey prior to
1975. Consequently, an individual's value of education in 1976 was assigned
to all earlier years if the individual was over 28 years old in 1976.

2) Experience: Number of years worked since age 18. The Michigan Survey
asked this question only from 1974 to 1981, and asked it only of new heads of
households in 1975 and 1977—1981. Experience was imputed for years in which
it was missing in the following way. First, an individual was imputed to have
a year of work experience if hours worked in that year was greater than 100.
Then, years worked since age 18 was computed by counting backwards or foriards
from a year in which the experience question was actually asked. For example,
if an individual reported 20 years of experience in 1974, and reported 500
hours of work in 1973, experience tn 1973 was given a value of 19. Also,
experience was set to missing if it was greater than (age—education—5).
3) Union Membership: The variable is equal to 1 if the individual is a
member of a labor union, and 0 if not. This variable is missing from the data
in 1973; it was imputed for this year by averaging the 1972 and 1974 values,
or by assigning the non—missing value if either the 1972 or 1974 value was
missing.

4) Marital Status: 1=Married, 0=Single, Widowed or Divorced.
5) Health Limitation: This variable is equal to 1 if the individual
indicates that he has a health problem which affects his ability to work, and
is equal to 0 if not.
6) Wage Measure: This variable is the log of annual earnings divided by

A2 -2

annual hours on the person's main job. The measure is deflated by the
personal consumption fix—weight price index (Source: 1983 Economic Report of
the president) and put into log form.

7) Quit, Layoff, and Separation Indicators: The PSID contains information
on tenure and separations for the years 1968—1981. However, the questions
relating to these items and the coding of the responses are not consistent
over the years, making it necessary to re—construct accurate measures of
employer tenure, quits and layoffs. Three major problems with the data
required attention. First, tenure levels are bracketed from 1968—1974. This
presents a problem for individuals with higher tenure levels, since the
bracketing at higher levels is coarse. Second, in the years 1969—1974, quits
are not distinguished from promotions. Third, the tenure question refers to
tenure with employer only in 1968, 1976, 1977, 1978 (for individuals under the
age of 45), and 1981. In the other years, the tenure question relates to
tenure "on the job" (1969—1975) or tenure in position (1978 for individuals 45
or older, 1979—1980).
A lengthy computer program was written to handle these problems. The
program, which will be provided upon request, filled in missing tenure data,
separated quits form promotions by cross—checking against other variables, and
constructed measures of employer tenure in years when this information was not
available. The following comments summarize the more important sections of
the program:

I. Tenure levels in 1968—1974 are set to the midpoints of the brackets.
A response of "over 19—1/2 years" is set to 23.

II. Tenure levels in 1978 (for individuals over 45 years and older),
1979, and 1980 are imputed by adding 1 to the previous year's tenure if no
separation between years was indicated, and setting tenure to .5 if a
separation was indicated. This process is performed sequentially, using
1977 tenure to impute 1978 tenure, then 1978 tenure to impute 1979 tenure,
etc.

[II. For individuals who reported quits/promotions in 1969—1974, the
following method is used to determine whether a quit or promotion had
occurred. A promotion is inferred if no unemployment had occurred in the
previous year, if there had been no change in the major industry group
reported by the individual, and if at least one of the following
conditions was true:
1) Employer tenure reported in 1976 is greater than 2 plus the number
of years between the survey year and 1976. For example, if an
individual reported a quit/promotion in 1973, but reported in 1976
that tenure with employer was greater than 5, it is assumed that the
individual had been promoted in 1973.
2) Employer tenure reported in 1977 is greater than 2 plus the number
of years between the survey year and 1977.
3) The tenure reported in the year following the survey year is
greater than 3.
4) The tenure reported two years after the survey year is greater
than 4.

A2 -3

IV. Next,

any missing data for tenure is filled in. First, if the missing
value for tenure occurred in a year in which the person was employed, and
if tenure reported in the following yar is greater than 1, current tenure
Second, if last year's tenure was
is set to next year's tenure minus 1.
not missing and if the individual was in the labor force in the current
year, had experienced no unemployment in the previous year, and did not
indicate that a separation had taken place between the last and current
year, current tenure is set to last period's tenure plus 1. If a
separation had been indicated, or if the individual had been out of the
labor force or experienced unemployment in the previous year, current
tenure is set to,5.
V. Next, for years in which "tenure with employer" is not specifically
asked, a check Is made to see whether reported tenure represents time in
position or time with employer. An imputed value for tenure is created
for the years in which tenure with employer was not asked by extrapolating
backwards from years in which tenure with employer was asked. The imputed
tenure value is created simply by letting current imputed tenure equal
next year's imputed tenure minus 1. For example, since 1976 tenure
represents years with employer, tenure in 1975 is set to tenure in 1976
minus 1, and imputed tenure in 1974 is set to imputed tenure in 1975 minus
1. Since tenure with employer must be greater than or equal to tenure in
position, a value of imputed tenure which is greater than reported tenure
in any "non—employer tenure" year serves as an indication that reported
tenure represents time in position rather than time with employer. If
imputed tenure is greater than current tenure plus 2, current tenure is
set to imputed tenure. If a separation had occurred between the current
year and the next year in which an employer tenure question was asked,
imputed tenure would lie below reported tenure and so reported tenure
would not be changed.
This procedure also partially takes care of the problems created by
the bracketing of tenure in 1968—1974. Individuals with higher tenure
levels in these years will have large jumps in tenure as they move from
one bracket to the next. These jumps in tenure will be smoothed out.
However, the procedure does not compeletely smooth out tenure when an
individual stays in the same bracket for several years; tenure will be
smoothed only when it lies more than two years below imputed tenure.

VI. The last step of the program creates the separation, quit and layoff
variables. The separation variable is given a value of 1 if the
individual worked at least 200 hours in the previous year, and if one of
the following conditions is true:

*

tenure is set to next year's tenure minus one only if next
A?lly,
year's tenure is greater than 1, and either no separation occurred in the
between the current and last year or next year's tenure was less than 2.
If a separation occurred between the last and current year, the missing
value for tenure would get filled in by the next step of the procedure.
Likewise, a tenure value of less than 2 in the next year indicates that
the individual is in a new job in the current year, and so the missing
value would get filled in the second step of the procedure.

A2-4

1) Tenure is less than 2 and the question "what happened to your last
job?"1 has a non—missing response which is other than "promoted"
(including "inferred promotion" created in step III of the program)
or "no previous job".
2) The individual is currently unemployed or out of the labor force
and the question "what happened to your last job?" has a non—missing
response other than "no previous job".
3) Tenure is between 0 and 1 and the question "what happened to your
last job"2 has a missing value.
Finally, for those who report that their job ended due to a quit or a
layoff and who are unemployed at the time of the survey there is some
ambiguity as to whether the separation occurred within the previous 12
month. For example, an individual may have been laid off 2 years ago and
suffered a long spell of unemployment, which raises the possibility that the
same layoff may be counted in two consecutive surveys. To minimize this
possibility, we employ a variety of checks using separations, unemployment,
and hours worked in prior years.
The quit variable is given a value of 1 if the separation variable is
equal to 1 and the reason for the separation is either "quit" or "was self—
employed before this". The layoff variable is given a value of 1 if a
separation is indicated and the reason for the separation is given as
"business failure", "strike, lockout", "laid off, fired", "other, incuding
military" or "seasonal or temporary job". Finally, if tenure was greater than
experience, it was set to missing.

8) Area Dummy Variables: The area indicators refer to residence in the 9
Census regions. Areal is the Pacific region. Area2 is the Mountain region.
Area3 is the West North Central region. Area4 is the East North Central
region. Area5 is the West South Central region. Area6 is the East South
Central region. Area7 is the South Atlantic region. Area8 is the Mid
Atlantic region. The omitted category is New England.

1

This question is asked of currently employed individuals with raw tenure
of less than 1. Possible responses are: 1) business failure, 2) strike,
lockout, 3) laid off, fired, 4) quit, was self—employed before (1975—
1981), 5) no previous job, 6) was self—employed before (1968—1974), 7)
other, including military, 8) seasonal or temporary job, 9) don't know,
10) promoted (1975—1981), 11) inferred promotion (1968—1974, created in
step III of program).

2

This question was asked of individuals currently unemployed or out of the
labor force. The coding is the same as given in footnote 1, except codes
10 and 11 are not possible.

. (1016

(.0005)

. 0019

(.ooos )

.366

.405

(.0012)

.0137

(. (1003)

gh

.3938

.6282

(.0335)

.3935

(.0327)

.4123
(.0327)

(.0308)

(.0349)

.6332

(.0335)

.4008

(.0159)

.0074

.342

.411

(.0349)

.6240

(.0340)

.4300

(.0162)

.0268

.343

.410

(.0094)

.0501

(.0001)

.0002

(.0003)
- .0041
(.0022)

.0005

(.0005)

((012

(.0031)

—.0(35

(.1)07))

.0019
(.01)07)
0449

(.0381)

.5846

(.0308)

.381,2

(.0110)

.0500

.346

.408

.00 50
(.0(111)

(.0)10)'

.0004

.111)15
(.11)1(15)

(.1)1)31)

—.0156

(.01)6,)

.04 74

(.1)1)1)7)

.0010

.0171
( .0197)

.0155
( .0l'1)

Wage

F)

(.0133)

.5872

(.0336)

.3813

(.0136)

.0565

.346

.408

(.0001)

.0001

.0062
(.0019)

(.000))

0(104

(.00))',)

I)))))

(.001.')

—.1)132

.041,4
(.1)070)

.0002

.0o21)

.0014

(.1)332)

.5773

(.0339)

.3635

(.0137)

.0741

.348

.407

(.oo).

.0729

(.oool)

—

())1)))l)

.1)1)05

.1)1)1)5)

1)1)12

(.11)1)2)

—. 1)132

(.0070)

.0427

.0007)

.0158
.01 97)
.001')

9

.0935

(.0371)

.4041

(.0356)

.3037

(.0121)

.1300

.31,8

.404

(.0242)

—

(.00!?)

.0130

(.000))

0103

.01)1/,

)fl19

(.0,.')

(.0o71)

.031)7

(.noo7

.1)01')

.0l',7

11)

(0)')))

in Parenthese)

White Males

(.11)1(17)

1)01))

.1)1)7)

.017)

Iv?

Errors

.03.1)

.1)1)1)7)

.0171
.1)19')
. (Ill)

.1)1)1)',)

''III.'

.00)')

.0'S))

.01)1))

.0747

)

(.0374)

.3621

.2610
(.0162)

(.0182)

.2127

.403
.372

(.0242)

—

(.0001

(.0027)

- .0005

.0174

(.n71.)

.3592

(.0362)

.2468

.0l78)

.2522

.402
.376

(.0245)

—.0501

.0l26)

(.0001)
.1037

- .0003

(.003!)

.

.
.1)21,4

.0)))),)
.0004

b/Calculated from the regression coefficients. The estimates of the percentage effects of 10 years of tenure and 10 and 30 years experience
on the wage reported in the text are based on the antilogs of the figures in the tables for the effects on the loq wage.

T,

3.')

(((9)')

(.oo

)000

(.0)1.')

1

.0163
(.1)192)

12

(.1)))))))

.00)14

1

—.1)119

(.00/.')

1

(

11

OLS

In
4 — 6 the instrumental variables include all variables in wage equation (except
c9lumns
the deviations of T, T and OLUJob from their respective
over the sample observations on the worker's
current lob. In columns 6
9 the diflere.nce between the individual means of T, mans
T
and 0I,[>Job and the job neans of these variables
are also added to the inntrumental variables list. The first stage equations are reported in TableA2.
C.servations = 15138
Other variables in the equations are a time trend and dummy variables for 8 Census regions, union membership, disability, residence
in an SMSA, and residence in a city with more than 500.000 people.

.4736
(.0319'

.2756
(.0319)

.3069

(.0318)

(.0138)

.0163

.2627

(.0176)

.2419

(.0380)

.342

.411

.376

26)

(.0001)

.0001

(.oo2I

.0001

(.0001)

.0016
(.110) 4)

(.0003)

(.ooos)

0(11 4

(.0032)

—. 0)50

.0005

.402

(.01

.1113

.0480

(.0070)

.0005

(.01)1)5)

1)014

—. 0146
(.0032)

.371

as endogenous in columns 4 — 9.
a/Treaed
T and New Job) and

of 30 years
of experience on
log wage for
school grads.—

Effect

Effect of 10 years .3666
of experience on
(.0305)
log wage for
hyh
—
school grads.

.0003

(.oooi)

—

(.0031)

.0)78

(.000))

.0004

(.0005)

—. 0119

.0468

.0019

(.0007)

.0019
(.1)1)1)7)

.0113

'V1

(.019')

(.0066)

tg

ESTIMIITION MET000C(standar,l

(.o99)

.0164

4

.403

(.oooi)

(.0026)

- .0006

.0280

(.01)1)3)

.0004

. 0012

(.0030)

.0003

(.01)10)

—.0150

(.0030)

(.0066)

.0335

.0017
(.oooj

-. 0180

Effect of 10 years .1366
of T
the log
(.0119)
wage.—

R2

S.E.

Exper

3ob"

"

.

01,0

T2

T'

Ed

Experience3/l00

Experience2/lO

.0491

Experience

.0017
(.0007)

.0179
(.0191)

3

.0397
(.0065)

.0018
(.0007)

Education2

(.0191)

.0198

2

Table I
of Education, Experience and Tenure on the

(.0066)

.0160
01 92)

Education

1

DI'S

Effects

.0001
(.0001)
.0084
(.0007)

Ed. Exper

T!/

oi

.5608
(.0224)

hgh

.0735

.5546
(.0224)

.3880
(.0189)

.1233
(.0100)

.410
.349

(.0077)

—

.0001
(.0001)

.0044
(.0016)

(.0001)

—.0000

.0017
(.0003)

.6660
(.0241)

.4524
(.0180)

.0142
(.0105)

.418
.323

.00 14
(.0011)

.0002
(.000 1)

.0022
(.0003)

(.0018)

—.0202

.0613
(.0035)

.0008
(.0003)

.0484
(.0058)

4

5

.6750
(.0250)

.4637
(.0201)

.0045
(.0129)

.418
.323

.000 1
(.000 1)

—.0003
(.00 17)

.0001
(.0001)

.0022
(.0003)

—.0207
(.00 18)

.0632
(.0038)

.0008
(.0003)

.04 75
(.0058)

1V1-CLS

10

.6674
(.0250)

.4448
(.0204)

.0222
(.0134)

.417
.326

(.0088)

.6305
(.0233)

(.0180)

.4478

(.0092)

.0427

.416
.332

.0000

—.0715

(.0007)

.0080

(.0001)

—

.0000

—.0685
(.0 150)

(.0001)

—.000 1

(.0014)

.0111

(.0001)

—

.0700

.000 1
(.0001)

(.00 16)

.004 2

(.0001)

—.000 1

.6229
(.0238)

.4214
(.0201)

.0623

.415
.335

.5273
(.0243)

(.0206)

.3780

(.0072)

.5243
(.0249)

.3530
(.0204)

(.0099)

.0978

.347

.346

.0801

.411

.411

(.0 150)

.5235
(.0245)

.3581
(.0211)

(.0102)

.1183

.410
.350

(.0152)

—.0487

(.0078)

(.0116)

.6265
(.0238)

.0015

.0018

(.0003) (.0003)

.0018

—

.0456

.4440
(.0200)

—.0151

(.0080)

(.0115)

.415
.332

.050 3

(.0038)
(.0018) (.0018)

—.0168

.0000

(.0003)

—

(.0062)

.0696

12

(.0003)

(.0018)

—.0172

.0518

(.0038)

.0537

(.0037)

.0002

(.0003)

.0003

(.0003)

(.0062)

.0634

11

—.0645

.0002

(.0001)

(.0001)

(.0018)

—.0017

.0000
(.0001)

.0018
(.0003)

—.0180
(.0018)

.0578
(.0038)

.0004
(.0003)

—.0000

(.0016)

(.0009)

(.00 19)
.0002
(.000 1)
— .0465

.0048

.0001
(.0001)

.0023
(.0003)

—.0210
(.0018)

.0618
(.0038)

.0007
(.0003)

.0043

.0001
(.0001)

.0023
(.0003)

—.0217
(.0017)

.0624
(.0035)

.0007
(.0003)

—.0043

(.000 1)

.0001

.0019
(.0003)

(.0019)

—.0186

.0601
(.0038)

.0006
(.0003)

.0629

(.0059)

9

(.0062)

(.0058)

8

.054 1
(.0058)

7

(.0059)

6

1V2- CLS

ESTIMATION METHODgtafldard errors in Parentheses

discussion of the GLS procedures, see the text,and Appendix 2.

See Table 1.

C/ For a

aM!

school grads

hgh
school grads._

log wage for

Effect of 30 years
.5749
of experience on
(.0219)
for
log wage

.1035
(.0099)

.4095
(.0188)

.0e37
(.0072)

.411
.345

—.0002
(.0001)

.0119
(.0014)

.0001
(.0001)

.0022
(.0003)

.4255
(.0180)

Effect of 10 years
of experience on

wac

Effect of 10 ycars
of T
the lop

S E.
R2

N/Exp

New Job Fl

.411
.343

.0022
(.0003)

Experience3/ 100

T2 !!

—.0171
(.0017)

—.0198

—.0204
(.0017)

Experience2/1O
(.0017)

.0543
(.0035)

.0577
(.0035)

.0602
(.0034)

Experience

.0002
(.0003)

.0006
(.0003)

.0007
(.0003)

.0624
(.0058)

Education2

.0524
(.0057)

3

Education

2

.0514
(.0057)

1

GLS

TABLE 2
Effects of Education, Experience and Tenure on the Log Wage: White Males

TABLE 3
Comparison of Actual and Predicted Wage Changes for Movers and Stayers

lvi

OLS

Mean of

Initial

Tenure

(Tj1_1)

Sample

Sizeb
(1)

Mean of
Actual

AWij
(2)

Actual ijt
— Predicted

AW1
(3)

Eetimateda
Contribution
of t Tenure
to
(4)

Mean of

Actual W1
—

Predicted
8Wij
(5)

Estimated
Contribution
of

Tenure

to

(6)

STATUS
Average

10804

.026

(.003)

0—1

1—2

2—3

3—5

5—7

1779

878

1307

746

1760

7—10

807

10—15

1509

.065

25+

1530

488

—.081

—.006
(.003)
.129

—.011

.046

(.008)

(.008)

(.008)

.034
(.010)

—.016
(.010)

.017

.016

—.00 2

—.004

(.0 10)
—.011

.021

—.029

(.007)

(.007)

.030
(.011)

—.007

.028
(.006)

.000
(.006)

.014

—.002
(.009)

.030
(.009)

.013

—.023
(.009)

.007

—.007
(.007)

.010

—.009

.006

(.007)
15—25

—.020
(.003)

—.003

(.007)
.015

.001

— .003

(.012)

(.012)

.001

—.002

(.006)
—.00 1

.001

(.007)

.004

.015

.008

(.006)

(.006)

.009
(.011)

(.011)

(.011)

.058
(.011)

.095
(.011)

(.011)

.085
(.014)

.040
(.014)

0

.009
(.032)

.105
(.032)

—.129

.053
(.029)

.163

—.150

(.030)

.004

(.006)
— .006

.001

OVUS
Average

2169

0—1

1253

1—2

2—3

268

263

.029
.031

0

(.0 14)

.011

—.046

(.032)
.051

—.043

(.030)

3—5

95

.050
(.049)

.189
(.048)

—.178

.042
(.048)

—.039

5—7

170

—.030
(.037)

.156

—.207

—.022

—.035

(.036)

.190
(.080)

(.082)

.019
(.066)

(.069)

7—10

10—15

15—25

27

64

24

—.044
(.094)

25+

5

———

.393

.319

.325
(.092)
———

(.036)
—.24 1

—.2 87

.182
(.082)

—.0 30

.049

—.033

(.069)
—.3 39

.011

(.092)

—.0 50

TABLE 3
(Continued)

lvi

0LS
Estimated5
Contribution

Mean of
Initial
Tenure
CT

Sample

Sizeb

AW

Actual AW
—

Predicted
AIJ

i_It

)

i_It—I

Mean of
Actual

(1)

(2)

of A Tenure
to AW
i_It

i_It

(4)

(3)

Mean of
Actual AWjjt

— Predicted
AW
i_It

(5)

Estimated
Contribution

of A Tenure
to Aw
ijt
(6)

QUITS
Average

1094

602

0-i.

1—2

147

139

2—3

56

3—5

93

5—7

16

7—10

31

10—15

9

15—25

.079
(.013)

.058
(.013)

.126
(.013)

.116

.078

(.018)

(.018)

.038
(.035)

(.035)

.068
(.038)

(.038)

.136

.194

0

0

.068
(.019)

—.129

.043
(.035)

—.046

—.150

.081
(.038)

—.043

—.178

—.018

—.039

—.024

.127

(.066)

(.067)

—.023
(.034)

.170
(.035)

—.207

.163

.404

—.241

(.104)

.188
(.105)

—.030

(.096)

—.287

.036
(.065)

—.033

—.339

—.050

.022

.306

(.065)

(.065)

(.066)

—.008

—.035

(.035)

.189

.537

(.184)

(.182)

.222
(.182)

.033

.074
(.019)

.015
(.019)

1

25+

i-a-Tons
759

Average

(.019)
486

0-1

1—2

80

2—3

78

3—5

25

5—7

42

8

7—10

.036
(.023)

0

.029
(.023)

0

(.023)
—.019
(.076)

.092
(.075)

—.129

—.000

—.046

—.044
(.054)

.072
(.056)

—.150

.092

.240
(.075)

—.178

.088
(.075)

—.039

(.079)
—.024
(.087)

.180
(.086)

—.207

—.001

—.035

—.014
(.124)

.208
(.131)

—.241

.067

(.024)

—.043

—.043

(.056)

(.086)

—.007

—.030

(.135)

10—15

22

—.008
(.123)

.333
(.130)

—.287

.070
(.130)

—.033

15—25

14

—.178

.207
(.093)

—.339

—.106

—.050

(.094)

25+

(.094)

4

5The estimated contribution of ATenure to AW1

is calculated from the tenure coefficients in

Table 1, column 3. for OLS and Table 1, column 6, for 1V1 .

The tenure contribution is evaluated

at the midpoint of all initial tenure categories eccept 25+. For this group, Tij1 is Set to 28.
For movers,
tenure.

Tjj

is set to .5 and 0LDJ0Bij

0 in calculating the contribution of the change In

bsaiipie sizes for quits and layoffs do not sum to the totals for all Movers because reason for separa-

tion is unavailable in so cases.

.1388

b/

at

.3939
(.0327)

.1462
(.0528)

.0058

.2473
(.ns'i)

.1510
(.0569)

.0301
(.0319)

(.0235)

_.0275

.0000
( .00025

(0059)

.6244
(.0349)

.3851
(.0340)

.3045
(.0576)

.2212
(.0450)

.0281
(.0266)

.0268
(.0161)

.ot)

.0002

.0001)
(

(

(.0095)

.0501

(.0001)

(.0039)
—.0001

.0002

.0035

—.0017
(.0004)

( .0010)

.0003

.0429

( ui u)
-.0073
( .0047)

.0011)

.0035

—.0041
(.0022)

(.0003)

(.0005)

.0016

.0012
( .0005)
.0005

-.0135
( .0033)

.0071)

.0012
( .0008)

( .0054)

(

.0449

.0019
(.0007)

.0091
( .0276)

.0155
.0198)

(

(5)

Blacks

(4)

Whites

.0l9l)

.0499

.3199
(.06Th)

(.0564)

.1639

(.0311)

—.001)

(

.0003
( .0002)

(.0045)

(.0005)
-.0076

.0006

.0009
.00093

( uI 28)
-.0062
( .0057)

.0020

-.0016
(.0013)

.0058
( .0340)

(6)

J)ilferentjal

White—Black

T,

aa
Treaed
T

endogenous in columns 3 and 4. 7h instrumental variables include all variables in wage equation (except
and New Job) and the deviations of T, I and New Job from their respective means over the sample observations
on the worker's current job. Other variables in the equations are a time trend, dummy variable for 8 Census regions,
The
is for columns
disability, residence in an SKSA, and residence in a city with more than 500,000 people.
1, 2, 4, and 5 are .38, .35, .34 and .33. The standard errors are .40, .43, .41 and .44. The White and black
samples contain 15138 and 6551 observations respectively. The coefficient standard errors have been calculated under
the assumption that the error structure consists of a fixed job component, a fixed indiv1dual component, and a serially
uncorrelated component.
See Table 1, footnote b.

for high school graduates.

of 30 years of
experience on log wage

Effect

.2756
).0319)

Effect of 10 years of
experience on log wage
for high school graduates.

.12i6
(.0471)

.2326

.o266)

.0116)

(.0199)

.2627

.1113
.0126)

.0002)

—.0003

—.0003
.000 1)
(

.0120

(.0058)

—.0012
.0004)

(.0031)

(.0007)

(.0005)
.0004
(.0003)
.0178

.0000

.0012

Effect of 10 years of 1
on the log wage.

OLDJOB

T'

Ed. Exper.

Experience3/100

(.0030)

—.0119

—.0082

( .1)120)

( .0100)
-.0037
( .0045)

Experience2,'iO

.0034

.0301

.0067.)

.0335

Experience

—.0016
(.0013)

.0050
(.0329)

(3)

.0033
(.0011)

.0129
(.0267)

(2)

Blacks

.0017
(.0007)

(.0191)

.0179

(1)

Whites

Education2

Education

Variable

MChOda

White—Black
Differential

Estimation

lvi

and Tenure on the Log Hourly Wage
(Standard errors in parentheses)

in the effects of Experience

OLS

Differences between White and Black Males

TABLE S

.0223
(.0040)

.0015
(.0011)
.0453
.0103)
—.0133
(.0045)
.0014
(.0007)
—.0005
(.0004)
.0117
(.0042)

Education2

Experience

Experience2! 10

Experience3/100

Ed. Exper.

I,!

a!

—.0094
p.0631)

.062)

.0037

See Table 1, footnote b.

were calculated from the residuals for the nonunion
sample.

job specific component was obtained for the union sample.

.0387)

.3809
(

.0253)

—.1348
(.0329)

(

—.0473

.0002
(.0002)

—.0106
(.0058)

—.0011
(.0005)

(0009)

.0002

—.0010
(.0058)

.0147
(.0130)

(.0014)

.0002

(.0380)

—.0223

(3)

.0247)

.0525)

(

.0567)

.5321

(

.3693

.0053
(.0265)

(

.0287

.0002
(.0001)

—.0046
(.0034)

—.0005
(.0004)

.0016
(.0007)

—.0161
(.0047)

.0578
(.0109)

(.ooit)

.0015

.0128
(.0313)

(4)

Union

.0121)

(

.0429)

.6408

.040E)

.3822

.0216)

.0303

(

.0549

.0001
(.0001)

.00J0)

—.0035

.0009
(.0003)

(.0006)

.0011

i..0040)

—.0129

.0396
(.0086)

(.0008)

.0016

(.0235)

.0250

(5)

Nonunion

.0139)

.0062)

.0045)

.0202

.0342)

.0665)

(

.0711)

—.1087

(

—.0129

(

—.0250

(

—.0262

(.0002)

.0001

(

.0011

.0005
(.0010)
—.0014
(.0005)

(

—.0032

(

.0182

—.0001
(.0014)

—.0122
(.0391)

(6)

(Unionl_(NonuniOfl I

The estimates of the variances for the nonunion
sample

[Unionj—[Nonunion.)

(Standard Errors in parentheses)

as endogenous in columns 3 and 4.
Treaed
Th instrumental variables include all variables in wage equation (excePt
T, T and New Job) and the deviations of
T, T nd New Job from their respective means over the
on the worker's current job. Other variables in the
sample observations
equations are a time trend, dummy
for 8 Census regions,
disability, residence in an SMSA, and residence in a
variab1e
with more than 500,000
city
The
R
For columns
people.
1, 2, 4, and 5 are .23, .42, .21 and .38.
The standard errors are .33,
The union sample contains
.42, .33 and .43.
4649 observations and the non union sample contains
The standard errors of the coefficients have
10,364.
been corrected
for correlation arising from fixed individual
specific and job specific error components. The estimates of the
variances of tue, individual specific,
and transitory error components used in
job
specific,
the
standard errors
for the union sample are based tçsIn the
pooled union—nonunion sample, since
a negative estimate
correctin1$
o the variance of
the

.0498)

.3715

(.0387)

(.0492)

Effect of 30 years of
experience on log wage
for high school graduates.

.2116

2753

Effect of 10 years of
experience on log wage
for high school graduates.

.2989
(.0219)

.0155)

(.0200).

.1641
(.0246)

.1122

.0649
(

—.0004
(.0001)

.0013
(.0006)

—.0123
(.0038)

.0306
(.0079)

.0013
(.0008)

.0318
(.0227)

Effect of 10 years of T
on the log wage.

OLCJ'J&

—.0002
(.0001)

.0006
(.0003)

.0095
(.0304)

(2)

Nonunion

Education

(I)

Union

OLS

Estimation Method

Variable

T2!1

Table 6

Union—NonUnion Differences in Effects of Experience and Tenure on the
log hourly wage

(.0073)

—.0660

(.0069)

—.0898
(.0121)

—.0128
(.0088)

(.0017)

(.0021)

—.0372
(.0063)

—.0259
(.0074)

OLDJOB

1587

—.1471
(.0174)

.0098

—.

—.0743
(.0096)

.00061
(.00010)

—.0314
(.0025)

—.0991
(.0158)

—.0984
(.0101)

SEPARATION EQUATION

a
The equations also include educatiQn, education2 eduaticn x experience a cvbic inin
experience,
a city
marital stutus,
the lag of union membership, health status, dummies for SMSA an residence
15133.
of more than 500,000, and a time trend. Observation8
is the mean of the residuals from the wage equation (Table 1, column 6) for each individual
in the sample.
was calculated as the difference between the residuals from the wage equation
for a particular job match and the individual mean
The partial derivatives of the quit, layoff, and separation probabilities are based upon the
logistic regression parameters. They were evaluated at the mean quit, layoff and separation probabilities
respectively. The point estimates should be treated very cautiously given the measurement problems
mentioned in the text and the endogeneity of tenure. The detailed logit results are available from the
authors.

(.000059)

.00015
(.00010)

.00038

—.0166

(.0102)

—.0303

—. 0298
(.0062)

Oi65

(.0058)

—.

LAYOFF EQUATIOFI

—.0135

(.0110)

—.

—. 0787

0527

QUIT EQUATION

(standard errors in parentheses)

T2

T

c

Partial Derivatives
of the QUIT, LAYOFF and
SEPARATION Probabilities
with Respect to:

c1J

7

Partial Derivatives of the Quit, Layoff and Separation Probabilities with
Respect to Individual Specific and Match Specific Wage Components

TABLE

5307
5133

15. 0556
- 17. 7536
430.9070

12.

1,

MEAN

0. 9000
0. 3112
0. 0823
0. 2694
0. 6513
8. 7471
0. 1231
0. 0419
0. 1096
0. 2085
0. 0815
0. 0775
0. 1423
0. 1639

1566
0000

0635

0.

15138

0000
0,0000

0.
0.
0.

7.

6580
123. 1904
0. 7778
0. 3694
0. 0874

NUMBER OF
OBSERVATIONS

OLJôj1t

(..)2

SEPARATION

LAYOFF

QUIT

OLDJOB
N/EXP

AREAB
T
T2

AREA4
AREAS
AREA6
AREA7

AREA3

HEALTH
CITY>500000
SMSA
TIME
AREAI
AREA2

MARRIED
UNION

12296. 6807
EDUC. EXP
214. 0318

EXP3

EXP2

EXP

EDUC2

EDUC

EARNINQS

VARIABLE

0970
7576

5079
9107

4766

2748
4437

2990
4608

389

0343

3702

0.

80.

0.
2.

0.
0.
0.
0.

3766
2686

8307

3161
2824
2438
3635

4222

215. 6SSR

0.
8.

6916
0. 3286
0. 2005
0. 3124
0. 4062
0. 2736
0. 2674
0. 3494

0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
3;

133.

445. 4148
16905. 5969

70.
10.

0.
2.

STANDARD
DEVIATION

ALL WHITES

TABLE Al

502

5251
3188

6279

9307

0.

0.

0.
0.
0.
0.

0.
0.

161.

0.

0.

0000

4649

0000
0000

2575
2110

3620

3071

9369
0943
0 2215
99.

0.
2.

0 2310

0.

242. 3478

0467
0566
1054

7082
2539

0. 2939
0. 4523
0. 4631
3, 7333
0. 3370
0. 1592
0. 3360
0. 4382
0. 1767
0. 2823
0. 2730
0. 4042
8. 5417

0.

122.

18002.

3160

3718
5482
8205
10.8832
466. 5806
2.
58.

0.

STANDARD
DEVIATION

3126
8449
3323

0. 0955
0. 2867
0. 6885
8. 6059
0. 1306
0. 0260
0. 1297
0. 2592
0. 0323
0. 0873
0. 0811
0. 2056
9. 4004

0.

500. 6300
14727. 8514
216. 6425

19.

11.
139.

1.

MEAN

WHITE
UNION MEMBERS

6003

9768

16.

8875

0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.

106.

9233

3160

2709

10364

7218

3048

4754

0.
0.
0.

6551

0000

0000
0000

0.

93.

6.

0. 3270
0. 1027
0. 4430
0. 7311
9. 13S5
0. 0601
0. 0043
0. 0253
0. 1210
0. 1614
0. 1169
0. 4464
0. 0610

23

61

44

49

46
30

53

0

-7-)

0.
0
0.

4

C.

27:
31
39:
77'

0 441

176.

0. 32
0. 36
0. 32
0. 49
0. 23'
7. 161

0 15

0.06

0.
0.
0.
0.
3.
0.

11. 12
431. 2129
472. 93
12154. 6030 16312. 680
157. 6524
97 91
0. 78S8
0. 41

6525
0000

0.

16
59. 31

3.

0. 56
1061

0.0816
0. 1089
0. 1970
2486
3821

STANDARD
DEVIATIO,"

0842
111.7350
17. 5346

10.

1.

MEAN

ALL BLACRS

3058

4412
3359

73. 4594

0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
2.

200. 7767

0. 2651
0. 4395
0. 4814
3. 6861
0. 3244
0. 2157
0. 3011
0. 3891
0. 3045
0. 2608
0. 3757
0. 3523
7. 6809

0.

137.

0000

1775
0000

0662

7284
7352
3844
1044

0. 6353
8. 8314
0. 1195
0. 0489
0. 1008
0. 1859
0. 1034
0. 0734
0. 1700
0. 1452
6. 9093

0760
0.2615
0.

0.

432. 0215
16276. 9627

10.

2.

5529
9570
71. 7095
0.

STANDARD
DEVIATION

1.4887
9555
176. 5865
12.

MEAN

WHITE
NONUNION MEMBERS

400. 5607
11233. 2433
213. 2216

MEANS AND STANDARD ERRORS

TABLE A2

ThSTRUTAL RZGRZSS IONS FOB TIUR2 VARIABL
WRITE

FL

(t—statistics
in parens.)
D'D(DNT VARIABLE
T
(1)

T2

**

Old Job

T

T2

Old Job

T

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(2)

T

Old

Job

(9)

(8)

-1.1786

3.4969

63.7267

—.8861

3.5118

61.2299

—.8154

(3.73.)

(2.41)

(18.62)

(3.86)

(2.35)

(27.74)

—.0569

2.8870

.0116

—.0710

2.2458

.0138
(2.97)

—.2053
(1.64)

(1.04)

(.96)

1875

0001

—.0178

.0004

(.49)

(.88)

(1.98)

(.63)

(.70)

.0017

—.2010

.0002

.0017

—.

—.1562
(.15)

29.5679
(1.05)

(18.50)

—3.6472

.0076

(.41)

(1.78)

(.85)

(.45)

(1.69)

(.39)

.0066
(1.53)

—.2637

—20.0356

.0639

—21.1659

—. 1973
(3.61)

—22.1964

(14.91)

.0469
(22.93)

(14.50)

(27.38)

1.3333

—.0013

1.2610

—.0035

(5.14)

(13.94)

(24.73)

-. 3703
(7.47)

.0315

1.3024

—.0021

.0359

.15)

(1.45)

.0945

(12.81)

(18.88)

(17.05)

(15.08)

(19.56)

(12.85)

.0280
(10.66)

(17.12)

(21.10)

—.0005

—.0184

—.0006

-.0184

.0000

-.0004

-.0159

(13.40)

(16.97)

.ooOO2.
{12.28)

(15:10)

(17.25)

(7.77)

(10.77)

(13.79)

.0000
(16.58)

.0133

.3821

—.0002

.0139

.3997

—.0002

.0157

.5195

—.0002

(7.83)

(8.05)

(1.89)

(8.54)

(8.57)

(2.33)

(8.63)

(10. 23)

(1.61)

.8374

16.4776

.0724

.8519

16.6861

.8703

18.1008

.0718

(5.37)

(3.77)

(9.21)

(5.67)

(3.88)

.0741
(11.96)

(5.20)

(3.36)

)6.79

1.4408

28.2501

1.3183

26.4995

(12.98)

(9.12)

(12.76)

28.0567
(8.35)

.0878

(9.56)

.0690
(16.47)

1.4438

(13.67)

.0826
(15.54)

HEALT

—.9652

—18.4859

—.0852

—.9611

—.0818

—.8477

—15.0470

—.0777

(5.89)

(3.94)

CITT50O,000

—.0618
(.50)

—.1976
(.06)

(1.51)

.7841

24.1788

.0032

(7.17)

(7.88)

—.3372

—6. (062

EXP2

UNII

—18.22

(10.10)

(5.96)

(3.95)

(12.30)

(4.72)

(3.00)

(6.84)

.0094

—.0850

—.0118

—.0360

(2.42)

(.27)

.6173
(.17)

-.0101

(.72)

—. 6562
(.19)

.7845

24.45

.0029

.7755

.0041

(.58)

(7.44)

(8.12)

(.68)

(6.60)

23.4181
(7.11)

—.0132

—.2657

—5.0421

—.0122

.0698

2.7501

.0013

)7.

.—

3)

(22.32)

(.5.31)

(17.30)

)IR.01)

)11.)

(23.13)

)5.1P)

I

—1.010

—27.9043

—.0131

—2P.45

-.7036
(3.27)

(3.).(

AREA 2

—.9732

AREA 4

'9 01

(1.21)

(.55)
(1.13)

-.011

(4.10)

(1.09)

-1.0470
(4.55)

(4.32)

—.0119
1.(2)

23.9743
(2.83)

—.0001

—.9675

—24.2949

.0017

-1.079

—28.3470

.0034

(.01>

(3.33)

(2.92>

(.14)

(3.33)

(3. 12>

(.17)

.0418

.0370

.0421

(5.33)

(3.81)

1.3618
(5.18)

37.1923

(3.39)

1.3022
(5.53)

35.9326

(5.37)

35.9967
(5.25)

(5.05)

(2.54)

1.6323

42.8739

.0537

1.6058

42.6438

.0470

42.2834

.0556

(6.25)

(3.65)

8.3412

.0057

('.26)
(3.22)

AREA 3 /

(12. 29)

1.3137

(.70)

(7.26)

(6.80)

(4.73)

(7.42)

(6.88)

(5.26)

1.6191
(6.71)

AREA 5

.2004

.0038

.1599

9.6834

—.0028

.1552

(.77)

10.2026
(1.41)

(.29)

(.64)

(1.36)

(.27)

(.56)

(1.07)

(.32)

AREA 6

1.8346

46.3140

.0744

1.8072

45.8322

.0714

44.4421

.0726

(6.94)

(6.25)

(5.58)

(7.10)

(6.29)

(6.79)

1.7856
(6.29)

(5.59)

(4.05)

.3955
(1.67)

4.0687

.0448

4.0613

7.3351

.0450

(3.75)

(.62)

.0407
(4.32)

.5137

(.61)

.3940
(1.73)

2.02)

(1.33)

(2.80)

.0868

3.0491

.0154

.0978

3.2282

.0141

.1100

4.1108

.0144

(.37)

(.47)

(1.32)

(.44>

(.51)

(1.53)

(.44)

(.59)

(.91>

AREA 7

AREA 0
014

—.1843

Job1 j t)_Old Job1

014 Jobjj
Tjjt

(4)

.9915
(60.39)

1.0894

4.4302

-.0066

(9.67)

(1.37)

(1.43>

—.0024

.0001

(.46)

Tj(t)_ti

—4.6915

(.44)

.9121
(5.84)

.1846

6.9634

.9863

.1d06

6.4363

(.95)

(1.28)

(100.81)

(.96)

(1.20)

9920
(128.66)

.9059
(23.54)

—1.4363

.8709

—2.1574

—.0061

(1.33)

(3.32)

(23.49)

(2.03)

(4.03)

.0019

.9415

.0004

.9217

(1.52)

(26.64)

(5.92)

.0009
(.76)

—.0064

(.57)

0003

(26.52)

(657)

P2

.52

.47

.55

.55

.49

.72

.45

.41

.16

SE

5.59

156.83

.28

5.39

154.16

.22

6.33

187.01

.33

•Co1a 1—3 ax. the first

.taq. equation.s for Table 1 col. 4—6. Co1i.s 4—6
Obs.rvation.s — 15,138.

**

ax. the

first stage

equat.ons for Table 1 ccl. 6—9.

Cluimis 7—9 exclude the deviations from tenure means and are provided for the sake
of reference.

**

*

154398

-0.

0.

0.

215382

178917
113230

009)

039685

539)

777)

013215

(0.

—0.

(1.893)

(2. 026)
-0. 032952

—0.

321)

086267

(4.

—0.

(4.

(0. 666)
0. 072068

012032

(0.

000206222

(9. 819)
0. 041136
(2. 336)

-0.

0.

0.

0.

8886)

009156271

(18.

270)

2507)

(12. 4631

9773)
3790)
0849)

4553)

(1. 4766)
0. 033042
(1. 1554)

044953
(1. 3653)
—0. 042791
—0.

038478
(1. 3212)
0. 035757
(1. 2444)

-0.

1139)

036906
(1.

-0.

(3.

—0. 105740

4602)
(3.

—0.

105387

008764124

(0.

003059989

(2.

0.069915

(9.

008645422

(3. 2339)
0. 082947
(7. 9572)

00989434
(0. 9331)
0. 038038

(0. 2873)
0. 094767
(3. 3941)

0.

0.

0.

—0.

0. 096346
(0. 8555)
0. 040430
(3. 5508)
0. 109247

(4)

(0. 0966)
0. 085552
(3. 0833)

002929507

(0.

008989408

0. 073531
(2. 5147)

007554073
(8. 9621)

(7.

0.

342)

1613)

2974
012208

(1.

—0.

(12.

0. 041401
(3. 6676)
0. 105642

149108

(9.
0.

135084

(3)

2.

(1.2083)

0.

AND

*

035998
(3. 0747)
0.081553

(9. 163)
0. 083463

—0.

(22. 201)

0.

313)

130359

047)

(11.

0.

(3.

(2)

1

COLUMNS 1 AND 2 CONTAIN THE COEFFICIENTS NOT REPORTED
IN TABLE 1 COLUMNS3
AND 6.
COLUMNS 3 AND 4 CONTAIN THE COEFFICIENTS NOT REPORTED
IN TABLE 2
COLUMNS 3 AND 6.

(0.

881)

014672

—0.

AREA8

(3.

338)
043701
(2. 568)

063452

—0.

—0.

640)

AREA7

AREA6

(4.

-0.

086292

027874

AREA5

—0.

(9. 723)
0. 051049
(2. 971)
0. 010597
(0. 488)

008775501

084)

142306

(18.

0,

(8. 028)
0. 085146
(9. 660)

(20. 246)
—0. 096599

0.

(1. 585)
0. 052027
(3. 219)

0.

448)
0. 114956
(10. 254)

0. 304124

(4.

AREA4

AREA3

AREA2

AREA1

TIME

SMSA

CI TV>500000

HEALTH

UNION

MARRIED

INTERCEPT

-

(1)

UNREPORTED COEFFICIENTS FROM TABLES

TABLE A3

— Ri

—

REFER.ENCIES

Altonji,

Joseph C. , Mincer, Jacob., and Shakotko, Robert H. TrployerI
Employee Attachments, Final Report to the U.S.D.L., Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Policy (March 1984).

Bartel, Ann P. and Borjas, George J. "Wage Growth and Job Turnover: An
Empirical Analysis." in S. Rosen (Ed.) Studies in Labor Markets.
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, (1981).
Bartel, Ann P. "Wages, Nonwage Job Characteristics and Labor Mobility,"
Working Paper No. 552. National Bureau of Economic Research
September (1980).
Becker, Gery S. "Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis,"
Journal of Political Economy 70 No. 5 part 2 (October 1962): 9—49.
Block, Farrell, and. Kushkin, S. "Wage Determination in the Union and Nonunion
Sectors", Industrial and Labor Relations Review 31 No. 2 (January
1978): 153—192.

Borjas, George, J. "Mobility and Lifetime Wages," Industrial and Labor
Relations Review (1981).
Borjas, George J. and Rosen, Sherwin. "Income Prospects and Job Mobility of
Younger Men," in Research in Labor Economics 3 (1980):159—181.
Brown, James N. "Are Those Paid More Really No More Productive? Measuring the
Relative Importance of Tenure Versus On—the—Job Training in Explaining
Wage Growth," Working Paper No. 169, Industrial Relations Section,
Princeton University (October 1983).
Burdett, Kenneth. "A Theory of Employee Job Search and Quit Rates,"
American Economic Review 68 No. 1 (March 1978): 212—220.

Cline, H. "The Effect of the Job and Job Mobility on the Wage,"
Discussion Paper 79—8, Dept. of Economics, University of
Rochester (December 1979).
Cline, H. "To Quit or Not to Quit," unpublished paper (1979b).
Duncan, Greg J., and Hoffman, Saul. "On-the—Job Training and Earnings
Differences by Race and Sex." Review of Economics and Statistics
61 (November 1979): 594—603.
Flinn, C. J. "Wages and Job Mobility of Young Workers," Draft,
(November 1982).
Freeman, Richard B. "Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 34, No. 1 (October 1980): 3—23.

Freeman, Smith, "Wage Trends as Performance Displays Productivity: A Model
and Application to Academic Early Retirement". Bell Journal of
Economics 8 (Autumn 1977):419—443.

— R2 —

Guasch, J. Luis, and Weiss, Andrew, "An Equilibrium Analysis of
Wage—Productivity caps", The Review of Economic Studies 49

158 (October 1982): 485—498.

(4) No.

"Wages as Sorting Mechanisms in Competitive
Markets with Asymmetric Information: A Theory of Testing,"
Review of Economic Studies 49 (1980): 653—664.
Hall, Robert E., "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy"
American Economic Review (September 1982): 716—721
Hamerniesh, Daniel, "The Costs of Worker
Displacement", Working Paper No. 1495,
National Bureau of Economic Research (November
1984).

Harris and Holmstrom, Bengt. "Ability, Performance, and Wage Differentials."
Review of Economic Studies 49 No. 3 (July 1982): 315—333.

Hashimoto, Masanori. "Firm—Specific Human Capital as a Shared Investment,"
American Economic Review 71 (June 1981): 475—482.
Hausman, J. A. "Specification Tests in Econometrics", Econometrica
46 (1977):125].—1271.

Hausman, J. A. and Taylor, W. E. "Panel Data and Unobservable Individual
Effects," Econometrica 49 (November, 1981).
Heckman, James. "Heterogeneity and State Dependence," in Studies in Labor
Markets, S. Rosen ed. Chicago University Press (1981).
Henderson, H.V., and Searle, S. R., "On Deriving the Inverse of a Sum of
Matrices.", Siam Review (1981): 53—60.
Johnson, William R. "A Theory of Job Shopping", Quarterly Journal of
Economics 92 (May 1978): 261—277.

Jovanovic, Boyan. "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover," Journal of
Political Economy 87 (October. 1979)

"Firm—Specific Capital and Turnover", Journal of
Political Economy 87, No. 6 (December 1979b): 1246—60.

Kuratani, M. "Schooling, Human Capital and Labor Turnover," Ph. D. Dissertation, Columbia University (1973).

Lazear, Edward. "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours
Restrictions," American Economic Review 71, no. 4 (September 1981):
606—620.

Maddala, G. S., "The Use of Variance Components Models in
Pooling Cross—
Section and Time—Series Data," Econometrica (March 1971): 341—358.

— R3 —

Medoff, James L. and Abraham, Katherine G. "Are Those Paid More Really
More Productive?," The Journal of Human Resources 41, No. 2
(1981): 186—216.

__________________________________________."Experience, Performance, and
Earnings." Quarterly Journal of Economics 95 (December 1980):703—736.
Mellow, Wesley. "Employer Size, Unionism, and Wages," Office of Research
and Evaluation", U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (October 1981).
Mincer, Jacob. "Labor Mobility, Wages and Job Training" (March 1984)

______________ "Union Effects: Wages, Turnover, and Training," in
Research in Labor Economics, (1983)

Schooling, Experience, and Earnings, Columbia U. Press
______________
New York. (1974).
and Jovanovic, Boyan. "Labor Nobility and Wages." in
Studies in Labor Markets. New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research (1981): 21—64.

Mitchell, Olivia S. "Fringe Benefits and Job Mobility," Journal of Human
Resources, 17 No. 2 (Spring 1982): 286—298.

__________________ "Fringe Benefits and the Costs of Changing Jobs,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review (1984)

Mortensen, Dale T. "Specific Capital and Labor Turnover."
The Bell Journal of Economics 9 (Autumn 1978): 572—586.
Newey, Whitney, "Generalized Method of Moments Specification Testing"
(1984) (forthcoming in Journal of Econometrics)
Nickell, Stephen J. "Wage Structures and Quit Rates." International
Economic Review 17 No. 1 (1976): 191—203.
Oi, Walter Y. "Labor as a Quasi—Fixed Factor." Journal of Political
Economy 70 (1962): 538—555.
Parsons, Donald 0. "The Employment Relationship: Job Attachment, Work
Effort, and the Nature of Contracts" September 1984 (forthcoming in
0. Ashenfelter and R. Layard (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics ).

_____________, "Models of Labor Market Turnover: A Theoretical and
Empirical Survey," in R. Ehrenberg (Ed.) Research in Labor Economics
Greenwich, CT: J.A.I. Press, (1977).

"Specific Human Capital: An Application to Quit Rates and
Layoff Rates." Journal of Political Economy 80 (November 1972):
1120—1143.

_____________

Pencavel, John H. "Wages, Specific Training, and Labor Turnover in U. S.

— R4 -

Manufacturing Industries." International Economic
(February 1972): 53—64.

Review 13

Rosen, Sherwin, "Implicit Contract Models: A Survey" unpublished
paper
(September 1984).

Rosen, Sherwin. "Learning and Experience in the Labor Market."
Journal of
Human Resources 7 No. 3
(Sunmier 1972): 326—342.

Salop, S. C. and Salop J. "Self—Selection

and Turnover in the Labor
Market," 1arterly Journal of Economics 90 (November 1976):
619—628

Wallace, T. D. and Hussian, A.
The Use of Error Components Models in
Combining Cross Section with Time Series Data,"
Econometrica, Vol 37,
No. 1 (January 1969): 55—68.

Wu, D. "Alternative Tests of
Independence Between Stochastic Regressors
and Disturbances," Econometrica. 41 (1973):733—750.

</ref_section>

