                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        ON GRADUATION FROM DEFAULT, INFLATION AND BANKING CRISIS:
                         ELUSIVE OR ILLUSION?

                                              Rong Qian
                                          Carmen M. Reinhart
                                           Kenneth S. Rogoff

                                         Working Paper 16168
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16168


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2010




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the NBER Twenty-fifth Annual Conference on Macroeconomics,
April 9, 2010. The authors are grateful to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the National Science
Foundation Grant No. 0849224 for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Rong Qian, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On Graduation from Default, Inflation and Banking Crisis: Elusive or Illusion?
Rong Qian, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff
NBER Working Paper No. 16168
July 2010
JEL No. E6,F3,N0

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper uses a data set of over two hundred years of sovereign debt, banking and inflation crises
to explore the question of how long it takes a country to “graduate” from the typical pattern of serial
crisis that most emerging markets experience. We find that for default and inflation crises, twenty\HDUV
is a significant market, but the distribution of recidivism has extremely fat tails. In the case ofEDQNLQJ
crises, it is unclear whether countries ever graduate. We also examine the more recent phenomenon
of IMF programs, which sometimes result in “near misses” but sometimes end in default even after
a program is instituted. The paper raises the important theoretical question of why countries experience
serial default, and how they might graduate.


Rong Qian                                            Kenneth S. Rogoff
University of Maryland                               Thomas D Cabot Professor of Public Policy
Department of Economics                              Economics Department
Tydings Hall                                         Harvard University
College Park, MD 20742                               Littauer Center 216
qian@econ.umd.edu                                    Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
                                                     and NBER
Carmen M. Reinhart                                   krogoff@harvard.edu
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
4118D Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
creinhar@umd.edu
                                                I. Introduction

        This paper addresses the concept of “graduation” from external default, banking and

inflation crises.1     Employing a vast data set cataloging more than two centuries of financial

crises for over sixty countries developed in Reinhart and Rogoff, (2009), we explore the risk of

recidivism across advanced economies versus middle and low income countries. We show that

two decades without a relapse (falling into crisis) is an important marker. Post 1800, roughly two

thirds of recurrences of external default on sovereign debt, and three quarters of recurrence of

inflation crisis, occur within twenty years.2 However, crisis recidivism distributions have very

fat tails, so that it takes at least fifty and perhaps a hundred years to meaningfully speak of

“graduation”. Indeed, in the case of banking crises in particular, it is hard to argue that any

country in the world has truly graduated.

        Given that graduation (with its companion question—will this ever happen again) is

arguably one of the most important issues in macroeconomics and development, there has been

remarkably little theoretical or empirical investigation of the subject. For example, the large

theory literature on sovereign lending and default, while producing many important insights on

the fundamental distinction between willingness to pay and ability to pay, largely treats a

country’s basic developmental and political characteristics as parametric. There is very little on

explaining the political, social, economic and financial dynamics that ultimately lead a country to

be less prone to certain types of crises.


1
  The notion of “graduation” was introduced in Reinhart, Rogoff, and Savastano (2003). An inflation crisis is
defined as an annual inflation rate of twenty percent or higher. Given the very large correlation between exchange
rate and inflation crises over this period (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2004, 2010), we do not to treat exchange rate crises
separately in this paper.
2
  Pre-1800, the twenty-year marker only subsumes about half of external default relapses.



                                                         3
         We acknowledge that the concept of graduation is a hard nut to crack. Many advanced

countries had enjoyed a long hiatus from systemic banking crises after World War II, and yet had

huge problems during the recent global financial crisis. After ninety years of serial default

running from 1557 to 1647, Spain did not default again until 1809. Even the advanced countries

had high inflation as recently as the 1970s and early 1980s, while many emerging markets had

hyperinflation less than two decades ago. Is the advent of modern independent central banks

sufficient to guarantee that fiscal dominance never again reasserts itself? Have the rich countries

that have supposedly “graduated” from serial default on external debt, shifted the locus of risk to

de jure or de facto (via inflation or financial repression) default on domestic debt? Does the

theory of sovereign default or of financial development tell us that we should expect richer and

more advanced countries to be immune? Or is graduation a mirage, with the “graduates” really

being at best “star pupils”, and can graduates be distinguished from patients in remission?

         Our goals in this paper are fairly narrowly circumscribed. Most of our analysis is based

on data on the dates and duration of the crises themselves. We speculate on underlying causal

factors but do not approach them empirically here.3 Although the various types of crises often

occur in clusters, our quantitative analysis mainly treats individual crises separately.

         We begin the paper by defining the crises that we will catalogue. In the next section of

the paper, we present a summary timeline of crisis, followed by a brief overview of the early

history of serial default on external debt. An interesting case is France, which defaulted on its

external debt no less than nine times from the middle of the sixteenth century through the end of

the Napoleonic War, but has not defaulted on external debt since. France is a canonical case of



3
 Reinhart and Rogoff (2010) formally investigate the predictive power of past banking and sovereign default crises
and future ones. Among their results is the finding that banking crises do help predict sovereign default crises, that
private debt levels help predict banking crises and public debt sovereign default.



                                                          4
what we define as an “external default graduate.” (This did not stop France from having

numerous severe banking crises in the past two centuries.)

           In the main body of the paper, we provide a broad aggregative historical overview of the

data across different types of crises, distinguishing between advanced countries and emerging

markets, also taking into account the advent of IMF programs after World War II as another

marker of a debt crisis.

           In the final section of the paper before the conclusions, we speculate on links between

graduation and development, and the possibility for recidivism among richer countries. The fact

that the canonical theory of sovereign default does not strongly predict smaller problems in

richer countries (it does not strongly predict graduation) might be considered a flaw in theory.

But it might also be taken as warning sign that graduation can be more difficult and take even

more time, than our data of “just” a few centuries can reveal. On banking crises, the theory

needs to better explain why countries never seem to graduate.

           The main empirical results from our long-dated historical time series on financial crises

may be described as follows:

           First, the process of “graduation”, that is emergence from frequent crisis suffering status,

is a long process. False starts are common and recurrent. This is especially true in the case of

banking crises, for both high and middle and low income countries.

           Second, the vulnerability to crisis in high income countries versus middle and low

income countries differs mostly in external default crises, to a lesser extent in inflation crises,

and differs surprisingly little in banking crises.4

           Third, the sequence of graduation for most of countries is first to graduate from external

default crisis, then from inflation crisis, and eventually from banking. The last stage of
4
    Reinhart and Rogoff (2008, 2009) emphasize that banking crises are an “equal opportunity menace.”



                                                          5
graduation is extremely difficult, even for high income countries. Among high income countries,

even though most of them have graduated from external default crisis and inflation crisis, more

than 20 percent recently experienced a banking crisis, and far more when weighted by size.

Schularick and Taylor (2009) speculate that advanced countries continue to experience credit

busts despite arguably advancing regulation and institutions, because as risks moderate, financial

systems grow and restore them.

       Finally, the role of IMF programs in crises in the modern period is important. The

availability of IMF bridge loans certainly has certainly increased countries’ resilience to “sudden

stops” but, even setting aside moral hazard problems, is by no means a cure-all. Countries

entering IMF programs are still forced to undergo painful macroeconomic adjustments in an

attempt to regain sound fiscal footing and regain access to private capital markets.           The

challenges of successfully implementing IMF programs are underscored by the fact that there are

many significant cases where countries default within three years of an IMF bailout. IMF

programs may help facilitate orderly debt workouts but do not guarantee them. We also note that

in its early history, many of today’s rich countries regularly drew on IMF resources, although

there has been a three-decade hiatus.



                                     II. Definition of Crises

       External debt crisis: We distinguish between external and internal debt based on the legal

jurisdiction where the debt contracts are enforced. This is a convenient construct given the

history and evolution of sovereign debt. Obviously it may be useful to parse the data in other

ways for some exercises, and in principle our data set allows that.




                                                 6
       Although there are exceptions and there has been some evolution in recent years,

typically in our long-dated historical dataset, external debt is denominated in foreign currency

and held by foreign creditors. There are certainly important examples, such as Mexico’s short-

term Tesobono bonds in the mid 1990s, where the debt is domestic yet denominated in foreign

currency and held primarily by foreign creditors. Although we regard the US abrogation of the

gold clause in the early 1930s – when gold was revalued from $21 to $35 per ounce – to be a

default on domestic debt, many non-US residents were also holding the debt at the time. In

general, following standard practice, we define an external debt crisis as any failure to meet

contractual repayment obligations on foreign debts, including both rescheduling or repayments

and outright default. (As both of these examples make clear however, one ultimately needs to

think carefully about whether graduation from external default may sometimes just mean a shift

to episodic de facto and de jure internal default.)

       In practice, most defaults on external debt end up being partial, with creditors typically

(but not always) repaying thirty to seventy cents or more on the dollar, admittedly not adjusting

for risk. The rationale for lumping together defaults regardless of the ultimate haircuts creditors

are forced to absorb is that in practice, the fixed costs of external debt default (which include

difficulties in obtaining trade credits and loss of reputation) tend to be large relative to the

variable costs. In principle, one could parse episodes more finely here according to, say, output

or tax revenue loss depending on data availability, although we do not undertake that exercise

here. See, however, Tomz (2007), and Tomz and Wright (2007).

       Inflation crises: Following Reinhart and Rogoff, we define inflation crises as episodes

where annual inflation exceeds 20%. This threshold is lower than the 40% we and others have

used in related studies on post war data (e.g., Reinhart and Rogoff, 2004), but is a compromise




                                                  7
reflecting that prior to World War I, average inflation rates were much lower, and 20% inflation

generally represented a significant level of dysfunction.                 Indeed, since we are particularly

interested here in inflation as vehicle for partial default, one clearly would also want to consider

lower levels of sustained unanticipated inflation such as many advanced countries experienced in

the 1970. Depending on the maturity structure of debt, sustained ten percent inflation can

certainly be tantamount to de facto default. A proper calibration, however, would require

detailed data on the maturity structure of debt (as in Missale and Blanchard, 1994) and, ideally,

also on the evolution of inflation expectations. We do not attempt this here, though again, this is

an important caveat to interpreting the concept of “graduation” from external debt crises.

        Banking crises: Our definition of banking crises follows standard practice (e.g., Caprio

and Klingebiel (2003) or Kaminsky and Reinhart (1998).) Following our own earlier work,

“We mark a banking crises by two types of events: (1) bank runs that lead to the closure,

merging or takeover by the public sector of one or more financial institutions and (2) if there are

no runs, the closure, merging, takeover, or large-scale government assistance of an important

financial institution (or group of institutions) that marks the start of a string of similar outcomes

for other financial institutions.” (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009, p. 11)

        We recognize that our listing of systemic (on a national scale) banking crises may be

incomplete, especially prior to 1970, especially for crises outside the large money centers that

attract the attention of the world financial press. 5


5
  We do not include domestic debt crises or exchange rate crises in this study, but some comment is warranted to put
the overall exercise in perspective. Although overt de jure defaults on domestic debt have been received very little
attention in the literature, Reinhart and Rogoff (2008, 2009) show that they were once surprisingly common,
cataloging over 70 cases of domestic default. We do not explore exchange rate crises here, in part because inflation
and exchange rate crises are highly correlated (see Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009, 2010). Also, it is clear that standard
definitions of exchange rate crises (emphasizing very large short term exchange rate movements) would show very
few potential “graduates”.




                                                         8
           Having set out basic definitions, we are now ready to view some basic characteristics of

the data. To provide context and motivation for the concept of graduation, we begin with a

summary time line of financial crises since 1550, followed by a brief overview of the early

history of sovereign defaults.



            III. A time line of financial crises and the early history of sovereign defaults

           Table 1 provides a summary historical perspective that helps show how the three

different varieties of financial crisis have spread over time and across country groups. Between

1550 and 1800, sovereign defaults on external were relatively common in Europe, but they were

relatively rare elsewhere if only because (a) there were few other independent nations in a

position to default and (b) given the crude state of global capital markets, relatively few countries

were wealthy enough to attract international capital flows.          Thus defaults were relatively

insignificant in the regions that constitute today’s emerging markets. Systemic banking crises,

on the other hand, were relatively rare everywhere. The legal and technological underpinnings

of modern private banking simply had not reached a stage of maturity and depth sufficient to

cause systemic crises in most instances. (Of course, there are exceptions. Following Cipolla

(1982) and MacDonald (2006), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) discuss how England’s 1340 default

to Florentine bankers triggered a financial crisis in Italy.)      Similarly, inflation crises were

relatively rare, although again there are many exceptions.6 Prior to the widespread adoption of

paper currency, bouts of very high inflation were relatively difficult to engineer.

           The end of Napoleonic War in the early 1800s marks a significant transition. The largest

advanced countries were increasingly able to avoid external default, albeit partly by their ability

to issue an increasing share of their debt domestically. Default, however, became common on
6
    See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), ch 12



                                                   9
“peripheral” advanced countries such as Spain and Portugal, while newly independent emerging

markets such as Greece and Latin America entered a long period of serial default. Over the same

period, as advanced countries developed more sophisticated banking systems, banking crises

became far more common. Emerging markets were certainly affected by advanced country

banking crisis but did not have so many of their own, if only because their financial systems

were dominated by foreign banks.

       By the turn of the twentieth century, emerging market financial institutions had

developed to the point where domestic banking crises became more common. By the time of the

Great Depression of the 1930s, banking crises were a worldwide phenomenon. Due in no small

part to the financial repression that followed in reaction to the Great Depression, banking crises

were relatively rare during the period from the end of World War II until the early 1970s. As

financial repression thawed, banking crises became more frequent in the advanced economies

and serial in many emerging markets, bringing us to the recent financial crisis episode.

       Finally, table 1 gives a timeline of inflation crises, which of course were quite common in

all countries in the 1970s and remained a problem in emerging markets until the past decade.




                                                10
                             Table 1- Timeline of crises 1550-2010


                                         External              Banking                  Inflation
                                           debt                 crises                    crises
                                          crises
                           1550 frequent in
                                advanced economies
                                (including the "world             rare                    rare
                                powers" of the time)
     Napoleonic                 Serial in some cases
     wars end              1815
                           1826 frequent in             serial in advanced/ rare
                           1850 "peripheral' advanced   in emerging
                           1900 economies and most      serial in advanced/ more
     WWI begins            1913 emerging markets        frequent in emerging     frequent in advanced
     WWII ends             1945                         rare in advanced and     and emerging
                    post-1945                           emerging
                           1964                                                             rare
                           1973                                                  frequent in advanced
                    early 1980s                         more frequent in         and emerging
                    early 1990s                         advanced/serial          frequent in emerging
                           2000 Serial in some          in emerging
                           2009 emerging markets                                            rare
                           2010             ??



       We thus focus our early history on sovereign external defaults. As Reinhart, Rogoff and

Savastano (2003) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) emphasize, many of today’s advanced

economies had recurrent problems with default on sovereign debt during the period when they

might arguably have been characterized as emerging markets. Table 2 illustrates the case of

Europe for the three century period 1550-1850, with the years listed marking the beginning of a

sovereign default episode.




                                                  11
                           Table 2- External defaults: Europe, 1550-1850


 Country                                        Years of default                    Number of defaults

 Austria-Hungary                         1796, 1802, 1805, 1811, 1816                        5

 England                                             1594*                                  1*

 France                                         1558, 1624, 1648

                                                1661, 1701, 1715                             9

                                                1770, 1788, 1812

 Germany (Prussia)                              1683, 1807, 1813                             3

 Germany (Hesse)                                      1814                                   1

 Germany (Schleswig-Holstein)                         1850                                   1

 Germany (Westphalia)                                 1812                                   1

 Netherlands                                          1814                                   1

 Portugal                                1560, 1828, 1837, 1841, 1845                        5

 Russia                                               1839                                   1

 Spain                                         1557, 1575, 1596,                            10

                                                1607, 1627, 1647

                                             1809, 1820, 1831, 1843

 Sweden                                               1812                                   1


Sources: Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and sources cited therein. The “*” for
England denotes our uncertainty at this time about whether its default involved external (as opposed to purely
domestic) debt. The table excludes Greece (which gained independence in 1829). Note that for some countries,
even if there was default on external debt, there may have been a default on domestic debt, as was the case for
Denmark (1813).



As one can see clearly from the table, serial default was quite common among the major

European powers during the sixteenth through nineteenth centuries, with France defaulting on its

external debt nine time and Spain defaulting ten times (with three more to follow in the second

half of the nineteenth century). One important observation, immediately apparent from the table,

is that there is typically a substantial interval between defaults, typically decades, but sometimes



                                                       12
centuries. (Note that we require at least two years between default episodes to regard them as

independent events.) After defaulting in 1683, Prussia’s next default episode did not follow for

more than a century in 1807. Portugal, after defaulting in 1560, did not default again until 1828,

when the country lapsed into a period of serial default that did not end until 1890. At this

writing, Portugal has not defaulted again since. (Importantly, during a significant portion of

Portugal’s quiescent period, it had effectively lost its independence.)

       Figure 1 gives a measure of the duration of periods of recidivism during the pre-

Napoleonic era for the independent (relatively) high income countries our sample.




                                                 13
                                               Figure 1
                         External default crises: Duration of “tranquil time”
                           Frequency distribution (in percent): 1300-1799
                                       High income countries
                50
                           44
                45
                40
                35
                30
                25
                                           19                              19
                20
                15                                                                         13
                10                                            6
                 5
                 0
                           <20            21-39          40-59            >60          no reversal
Note: Duration of tranquil time is calculated as number of years between two consecutive external defaults starting
years. We first count the number of external default episodes; then calculate the duration of tranquil time if it was
reversed and finally we calculate the frequency distribution.
Sample coverage: 14 episodes of default crisis with reversal and 2 episodes with no reversal, six countries (United
Kingdom, Spain, Germany (Prussia), Portugal, Austria and France)
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.


          The figure captures the length of time between default episodes (including cases where

there was no recidivism) As one can see from the figure, fully half of all default recurrences

occurred after a more than 20 year hiatus, with a significant percentage occurring even after a

sixty year hiatus.

          Advanced country external sovereign debt defaults have become much rarer events in the

modern era. Germany’s most recent default occurred in 1939, Austria’s in 1940 and Hungary’s

in 1941 (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). Especially interesting are the cases of Sweden and

France.     France, despite a near record level of defaults in its pre-Napoleonic era, has not

defaulted on external debt since. Sweden, too, has not defaulted on external debt since its default




                                                         14
at the end of the Napoleonic War in 1812. It would be interesting to explore whether war time

defaults are less damaging to reputation than peacetime defaults, though of course over many

episodes, it is precisely the propensity to wage war that motivates many countries to build up

large debts (as in the tax smoothing model of Barro, 1979).          Later, we will consider the

robustness of our recidivism results to exclusion of wartime.

        Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) also show that the kind of long cycles illustrated in Table 2

to be quite characteristic of some of today’s emerging markets, many of whom have defaulted at

least once during the past two to three decades. The number of emerging markets that have

experienced external debt crises expands considerably if one includes “near default” episodes in

which country’s averted technical default thanks to IMF bridge loans. In virtually of all these

cases, the countries still suffered massive recessions as governments were forced to tighten fiscal

policy as borrowing options dried up. Importantly, we do not include these in our calculations

below, although arguably from the point of view of understanding macroeconomic volatility and

the dangers of excessive debt accumulation, they are equally important. We return to this issue

later when we study IMF programs.



               IV. The Duration and Prevalence of Crises: The Post 1800 Experience

       We now proceed to focus on the more “recent” period, 1800-present, at the same time

expanding the analysis to include banking and inflation crises, which, as shown in table 2,

emerged as important in this era. The past two centuries also give a much broader sample of

independent nations to study, as various regions of the world threw off the yoke of

colonialization.   In table 3 below, we present measures of crisis probability.     Each measure




                                                15
takes the number of years a country experienced each kind of crisis (including all years and not

just the initial one) divided by the number of years since independence (or since 1800).

        Table 3 shows that the biggest difference between high income countries and the rest of

the world lies in exposure to external default crisis. The average external default crisis

probability of high income group is less than half of middle and low income countries and almost

one fifth of Latin America countries. The difference would be even larger if we included only

20th and 21st century defaults. Inflation crisis probabilities are also higher in the rest of the world

than in high income countries although the gap is smaller. Interestingly, the average probability

of banking crises in high income countries and the rest of the world is similar.7 The results in

Table 3 are, of course, complete consistent with the time line in table 1.




                          Table 3- Summary statistics of crisis probabilities

                                 External Default                 Inflation                   Banking
                               Average       Std Dev       Average       Std Dev       Average       Std Dev
       World                      0.19          0.18          0.12         0.12          0.08          0.07
       High income                0.07          0.13          0.06         0.05          0.07          0.04
       Middle and low*            0.19          0.17          0.17         0.17          0.11          0.09
       Latin America              0.34          0.13          0.12         0.07          0.04          0.03
       Notes: crisis probability is calculated as the number of years in crisis divided by number of years
       since independence. Probabilities were calculated for each country since 1800 or country’s
       independence year
       * Excluding Latin America
       Sample coverage: 66 countries for external default crisis; 67 countries for inflation and banking crisis.
       Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.



7
 The similarity of banking crises across countries was first noted in Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009, ch 10, who also
show that the macroeconomic effects of banking crises are remarkably similar as well across advanced economies
and emerging markets.



                                                         16
         Note that inflation and banking crisis probabilities are lower in part because the average

duration of these crises tends to be much shorter compared to external default crises. (Note also

that we are counting years in crisis, as opposed to the number of independent events.) 8

         Appendix Table A1, which gives the average duration of crises, shows the striking

difference between the mean and median duration of external default crises versus inflation and

banking crises. The median duration of banking crises is less than 3 years or less across all

income classes, where the world median for default crises is 8 years. For inflation crises, the

median is only 1 year across all income classes. Presumably this implies that a country can find

ways to trudge on a state of sovereign default far more easily than it can continue any semblance

of business as usual during a banking or inflation crisis.

         Given the long duration of external default crises, and their frequency, it is not surprising

that large portions of the world have been in default over much of the last 200 years, as

illustrated by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, p. 72). Some of the major default episodes include the

Napoleonic Wars in the early 19th century, and then Latin America countries once independent,

Greece, Spain and Portugal in the first quarter of the century. The biggest default spike occurs

during the era bridged the Great Depression and World War II, when at the peak more than 40%

of the world, weighted by GDP, was in default on external debt.

         Figure 2 gives the share of countries in inflation crisis over the same period. Note the

huge rise in inflation crises starting after World Wars I and II, again in the 1980s and early

1990s. The very recent history of low inflation throughout most of the world indeed represents

a major shift from the preceding 80 years. It remains to be seen whether inflation is a scourge


8
  Interestingly, as we showed in the appendix to the conference version of this paper, inflation crisis probabilities are
higher among middle-low income countries (excluding Latin America) than in Latin America, while their default
crisis probability is lower. This is partly due to the fact that low income countries are often excluded from
international capital markets, therefore external default crises are less common.



                                                          17
that has been slain. As Rogoff (2003) has argued, institutional changes, including especially the

advent of independent central banks with a strong anti-inflation commitment has been an

important factor in this dramatic fall in inflation, but so too was the pre-crisis boom which

alleviated political pressures on central banks to engage in unanticipated inflation. It remains to

be seen whether the current period will prove merely another lull (one sees many in Figure 2) as

opposed to permanent structural shift towards universal low and stable inflation.

       Indeed, if one truly believes that fiscal dominance will never again assert itself in most

countries, and then arguably, historical measures of outright default may underestimate the true

probabilities (if the option of default via surprise inflation has been effectively erased). The

recent explosion of public debt globally underscores this concern.




                                                18
                                                             Figure 2
                                         Share of countries in inflation crisis: 1800-2008
                                                              World
                          50

                          45

                          40

                          35
   Percent of countries




                          30

                          25

                          20

                          15

                          10

                          5

                          0


                                                                     Year
Sample coverage: 66 countries that were independent in the given year.
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.



                          Figure 3 gives the share of the world experiencing banking crises since 1800. Note the

remarkably small number of banking crises during the years of financial repression that began

during World War II and continued in many countries well into the 1970s. By historical

standards, this was a uniquely quiescent period. It is clear also from the figure that this era has

been long but seems coming to an end.




                                                                19
                                                              Figure 3
                                          Share of countries in banking crisis: 1800-2008
                                                               World

                           50

                           45

                           40

                           35
    Percent of countries




                           30

                           25

                           20

                           15

                           10

                            5

                            0


                                                                       Year

Sample coverage: 66 countries that were independent in the given year.
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.



                           The next three figures contrast the experiences of high income countries with middle and

low income countries (including Latin America). They corroborate what we have already seen

in Table 3, but give more detail. Figure 4 on external debt crises, for example, illustrates two

points. First, as already noted, middle and low income countries are in technical default on

external debt a significantly higher percentage of the time than high income countries. Second,

the high income countries had a dramatic drop of external defaults starting in the late 1960s with

none (as of this writing!) since the advent of floating exchange rates in the 1970s. Later we shall




                                                                  20
look at evidence on distance since the last default crisis. (Note: We exclude from our middle and

low income countries very low income countries who do not have external default by virtue of

the fact they are not able to borrow at all on private markets.)



                                                              Figure 4
                                      Share of countries in external default crisis: 1800-2008
                                            High income vs. Middle and Low income
                           100
                                                        High          Middle and Low
                            90
                            80
                            70
    Percent of countries




                            60
                            50
                            40
                            30
                            20
                            10
                             0


                                                                   Year
Sample coverage: 66 countries (23 high income and 43 middle and low income countries) that were independent in
the given year.
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.


                           High income countries seem to have graduated from default crisis, or at least gone into

deep remission. But most middle and low income countries have not yet graduated.

                           Figure 5 shows inflation crises frequencies in middle and low income countries versus

high income countries. High income countries have had inflation crises more recently than

external default crises, but the frequency has dropped to zero since the early 1990s. For middle




                                                                 21
and low income countries, a spike in the 1990s has been followed by a sharp tapering during the

2000s.

                                                              Figure 5
                                          Share of countries in inflation crisis: 1800-2008
                                            High income vs. Middle and Low income
                          100
                                                        High          Middle and Low
                           90
                           80
                           70
   Percent of countries




                           60
                           50
                           40
                           30
                           20
                           10
                            0

                                                                   Year
Sample coverage: 67 countries (23 high income and 44 middle and low income countries) that were independent in
the given year.
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.



                          Whereas figure 5 is illustrative of the frequency of very high inflation episodes, we note

that it does not capture episodes of sustained high inflation below 20% that, if significantly

unanticipated and depending on the maturity structure of government debt, may represent a

substantial de facto default on domestic debt.

                          Figure 6 on banking crises tells a very different story (our data for developing countries

begins more recently; hence the dashed line for middle and low income only begin in the 1860s;

of course, many of today’s developing countries did not gain their independence until later.)




                                                                 22
One can see that in sharp contrast to external default and inflation crises, banking crises are “an

equal opportunity menace” (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009, chapter 10). Although banking crises

have picked up dramatically in emerging markets since 1980, they have recently picked up in

rich countries as well. Again, note the hiatus in banking crises across both groups of countries

during the years of financial repression from World War II until the 1970s.



                                                     Figure 6
                                 Share of countries in banking crisis: 1800-2008
                                   High income vs. Middle and Low income
                           100
                                              High          Middle and Low
                            90
                            80
                            70
    Percent of countries




                            60
                            50
                            40
                            30
                            20
                            10
                             0


                                                            Year

Sample coverage: 67 countries (23 high income and 44 middle and low income countries) that were independent in
the given year.
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.



Clearly, neither high nor middle and low income countries are in imminent danger of graduating

from banking crises.




                                                       23
                              V. The interval between consecutive crises

        Having presented evidence on the incidence of crises, we next examine the duration of

tranquil times or the interval between crises.

        In our first pass here, we do not make any attempt to deal with the possible non-

stationarity of the time series, and take simple averages. In particular, we do not deal with the

possible structural breaks that occur at World War II, when default and banking crises

frequencies sharply increased; in the early 1970s, when they rose again; and in the 1990s when

inflation crises frequencies fell dramatically. From the broader sweep of history, it is not easy to

determine what constitutes a structural break, but clearly further analysis is needed. It should

also be noted that in the main text, we present only unconditional measures of lulls between

crises; institutions and political stability are no doubt extremely important. Yet, many of these

factors, too, are highly persistent and difficult to measure, which is precisely why previous

experience with crises is such a powerful predictor of future ones. 9 (We do present hazard

analysis results in the Appendix, which in principle allow for conditioning on a broader range of

variables.)

        In figure 7, we look at the frequency distribution of “tranquil” periods, how long before

one crisis episode stops and the next crisis starts. The figure gives the statistics separately for

external default, inflation and banking crises. The frequencies shown are conditional on having

had at least one crisis of a particular type over 1800-2008. Of the 66 countries in our sample, 65

had at least one systemic banking crisis; 64 had at least one inflation crisis; and 50 had at least



9
  Again, Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2010) provide concrete empirical
measures of how past crises experience measures a country’s vulnerability to future crisis, an exercise we do not
take up here.



                                                       24
one sovereign default on external debt. 10 The conditional frequency distributions are similar,

with a significant share of distribution falling between ten and twenty years.


Crisis reversal and duration

                                           Figure 7
           Duration of “tranquil times” conditional on having had at least one crisis
                        Frequency distribution (in percent): 1800-2008




Note: Duration of tranquil time is calculated as number of years between end year of a crisis and start of a new
crisis. For example: Argentina had defaulted in 1982 and it didn’t resolve it until 1994. In 2001 Argentina entered
into default crisis again. In this case the tranquil time for Argentina was between 1994 and 2001. In other words,
Argentina had default reversal in 7 years.
The main figure shows the frequency distribution of years between two crises (or number of years reversals took
place). The inset smaller figure shows the frequency distribution of crises that have not reversed (for a period of
more than 50 years)
For each type of crisis, we count the number of crisis episodes that have reversed and those that haven’t for more
than 50 years; then we calculate the duration of tranquil time when crisis was reversed and finally we calculate the
frequency distribution. For example: 77% of inflation crises were reversed within 20 years; 4% of inflation crises
were not reversed.
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.


10Mauritius is the only country to have avoided a systemic banking crisis altogether; New Zealand and Panama
managed to escape inflation crises.



                                                        25
        The conditional frequency of recidivism (conditional on a crisis recurring) is broadly

similar across different types of crises. Twenty years without a default, banking or inflation crisis

is hardly evidence of “graduation”. But it does appear to be a notable break, where the odds of

recidivism over any medium term period, drop notably.                  As already mentioned and as

documented in Table A1 as well as figure A1, the duration of default crises is much longer than

of inflation or banking crises.

        As the inset highlights, conditional on having had at least one crisis, the percent of no

reversal cases is significantly higher for default (7 percent) than for banking or inflation crises. If

the 16 countries that never had an external default in the first place were counted in this tally the

“graduation” or no reversal percentage gap between external default and banking and inflation

crises would be far greater.

        Figures 8-10 illustrate the distribution of time between crises using a histogram, and

distinguishing between high and middle and low income countries. The charts give a more

nuanced picture of the differences between crises than the world aggregates do. The “no

reversal” bars denote cases where at least 50 years has passed without a crisis reversal; using a

cutoff of 20 years does not lead to dramatically different results.11 For external defaults, figure

8 illustrates that whereas most emerging market recurrences happen within twenty years (two

decades is an important marker), only few countries that have once defaulted have avoided any

further defaults, at least not long enough to pass the 50-year filter we use. For inflation and

banking crises, the twenty year mark contains an even larger percentage of reversals and, at the

same time, the cases of no reversal are scarce.



11
  The bars in figures 7-9 add to less than 100% because they excludes episodes where there has not yet been
recidivism, but where the 50 year cut-off for “no reversal” has not yet been reached.



                                                    26
                                                                          Figure 8
                                                    External default crises: Duration of “tranquil time”
                                                        conditional on having had at least one crisis
                                                      Frequency distribution (in percent): 1800-2008
                                                             High vs. Middle and low income
                                               80
                                                                      High   Middle and Low
                                                         70
                                               70
         Frequency distribution (in percent)




                                               60

                                               50
                                                    40
                                               40
                                                                                                            30
                                               30

                                               20                      16
                                                                 10
                                               10                                 7   6
                                                                                                3    3            2
                                                0
                                                     <20         21-39            40-59           >60      no reversal
                                                                  Number of years between two defaults

Note: Duration of tranquil time is calculated as number of years between two consecutive default episodes. The end
of a default episode is considered as the year the country regains access to the capital market. In other words, as long
as the country is excluded from the international capital market, it is not considered as having resolved its default
crisis. The start of a new default episode is the year the country declares default on its external debt.
For each income group, we count the number of external default episodes that have reversed and those that haven’t
for more than 50 years; then we calculate the duration of tranquil time when default was reversed and finally we
calculate the frequency distribution. For example: for high income group, 40% of default crises were reversed within
20 years and 30% of default crises were not reversed. The bars do not sum to 100% because the cutoff excludes
cases where the last default occurred within 50 years but there has been no second default.)
Sample coverage: 167 episodes of default crisis with reversal and 12 episodes with no reversal.
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.




                                                                             27
                                                                            Figure 9
                                                         Inflation crises: Duration of “tranquil time”
                                                         conditional on having had at least one crisis
                                                        Frequency distribution (in percent): 1800-2008
                                                               High vs. Middle and Low income
                                              90
                                                        82           High     Middle and Low
                                              80
        Frequency distribution (in percent)




                                              70   68

                                              60
                                              50
                                              40
                                              30
                                              20
                                                                  11 12
                                              10                                    6                7            8
                                                                                        2                 3            2
                                               0
                                                    <20            21-39            40-59             >60       no reversal
                                                                 Number of years between two inflation crises
Note: Duration of tranquil time is calculated as number of years between two consecutive inflation crises.
For each income group, we count the number of inflation crisis episodes that have reversed and those that haven’t
for more than 50 years; then we calculate the duration of tranquil time when inflation crisis was reversed and finally
we calculate the frequency distribution. For example: for high income group, 68% of inflation crises were reversed
within 20 years and 8% of inflation crises were not reversed.
Sample coverage: 404 episodes of inflation crisis with reversals and 17 episodes with no reversal.
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.




                                                                               28
                                                                           Figure 10
                                                          Banking crises: Duration of “tranquil time”
                                                          conditional on having had at least one crisis
                                                         Frequency distribution (in percent): 1800-2008
                                                               High vs. Middle and Low income
                                               90
                                                                       High    Middle and Low
                                               80        77
                                                    70
         Frequency distribution (in percent)




                                               70
                                               60
                                               50
                                               40
                                               30
                                               20                                       13
                                                                                  10              10
                                               10                  6                                   6        5
                                                                        3                                            1
                                                0
                                                     <20           21-39             40-59         >60        no reversal
                                                                 Number of years between two banking crises
Note: Duration of tranquil time is calculated as number of years between two consecutive banking crisis episodes.
For each income group, we count the number of banking crisis episodes that have reversed and those that haven’t for
more than 50 years; then we calculate the duration of tranquil time when banking crisis was reversed and finally we
calculate the frequency distribution. For example: for high income group, 70% of banking crises were reversed
within 20 years and 5% of banking crises were not reversed.
Sample coverage: 195 episodes of banking crisis with reversals and 7 episodes with no reversal.
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.



        Since many crises happen during and episodes of war and civil unrest, one might

reasonably ask whether excluding these events dramatically affects recidivism rates or the

difference between advanced and middle and low income economies. In the appendix, we

reproduce figures 7 and 8 excluding episodes surrounding severe wars (deaths greater than 0.8%

of population). The results are little affected, as is the case for the other figures. We also

checked a milder war filter (deaths greater than 0.29% of the population), again without

substantially changing the results.                                    In any event, given the risk of war is a major factor

surrounding default risk, and that propensity to wage war is an important risk to creditors, it is


                                                                                29
not entirely clear that this measure is more meaningful than the simpler one of the text; further

study is needed.



                                  VI.    Time since last crisis

         To gain a deeper insight into recidivism – or its complement, graduation -- we look at

measures of distance since the last crisis. In figure 11, three countries, the United States,

Denmark and the United Kingdom have been independent the entire post-1800 period and never

defaulted on external debt. (Although as we have already noted, the US and UK did effectively

default on domestic debt by going off the gold standard in the early 1930s; Denmark also

defaulted on domestic debt in 1813 at the end of the Napoleonic Wars). At the other extreme, a

number of African countries remain in default today.

         Stunningly, the median time since last default is just over a century for the advance

countries (105 years) versus only 14 years for the developing countries. The world median is 23

years.




                                               30
                                          Figure 11
    Time elapsed since last external default crisis, 1800 or year of independence in 2010:
                                  High vs. Middle and Low




Note: distance calculated as 2010 minus either the last year that the country was in external default crisis, 1800 or
year of independence.
Sample coverage: 66 countries (23 high income and 43 middle and low income countries).
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.




                                                         31
       Figure 12 on inflation crises tells a similar story with the median again being only fifteen

years for the middle and low income countries, but 59 years for high income countries. Many

high income countries, of course, had high inflation in the years after World War II, so the

average time is lower than for default.




                                               32
                                            Figure 12
         Time elapsed since last inflation crisis, 1800 or year of independence in 2010:
                                   High vs. Middle and Low




Note: distance calculated as 2010 minus either the last year that the country was in inflation crisis, 1800 or year of
independence.
Sample coverage: 66 countries (23 high income and 43 middle and low income countries).
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.




                                                          33
       Finally, for banking crises, the difference between income groups is even smaller. The

interesting point is that even prior to the crisis, the distinction between high income countries and

the rest of the world was not nearly as large as for other crises.




                                                  34
                                          Figure 13
       Time elapsed since the last banking crisis, 1800 or year of independence in 2010:
                                   High vs. Middle and Low




Note: distance is calculated as 2010 minus either the last year that the country was in banking crisis, 1800 or year of
independence.
Sample coverage: 66 countries (23 high income and 43 middle and low income countries).
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.




                                                         35
Table 4- Medians of distance (in years) to last crisis in 2010
                                                                                           Middle and low
      Type of crisis               World                     High income
                                                                                              income
      External default               23                           105                            14
      Inflation                      19                            59                             15
      Banking                        12                             9                             12
      Notes: distance to last crisis is calculated as 2010 minus either the last year that the country was in
      crisis, 1800 or year of independence. Medians are calculated for each income group and each type of
      crisis.
      Sample coverage: 66 countries (23 high income and 43 middle and low income countries) for external
      default, inflation and banking crisis.
      Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.




Memo to table 4: Asian countries’ median distance to external default crisis is 24, to inflation

crisis is 21, and to banking crisis is 9. Latin America countries’ median distance to external

default crisis is 13, to inflation crisis is 15 and to banking crisis is 10.



                                      VII. Macroeconomic volatility

        What are the reasons why, at least until the recent global financial meltdown, financial

crises have become less prevalent, especially in high income countries? Certainly, one possible

reason was the general drop in macroeconomic volatility that took place particularly in the rich

countries, that is the great moderation, as figure 14 illustrates, particularly the drop in volatility

from the 1980s in advanced countries and from the 1990s in emerging markets. The table also

illustrates, however, that our warnings about “early celebrations” for declaring countries to have

graduated from financial crises may also apply to the Great Moderation. The decline in volatility

from the 1970s may be as much due to a spike in the 1970s as due to great moderation after. The

1950s were also a period of relatively low volatility. In any event, it is clear that emerging

markets face higher volatility than advanced countries.

        Acemoglu et al. (2003) “Institutional causes, macroeconomic symptoms: volatility,



                                                        36
crises and growth” argue that countries that inherited more ‘‘extractive’’ institutions from their

colonial past were more likely to experience high volatility, lower growth rate and more

economic crises during the postwar period. This is an interesting hypothesis that merits further

research, also on the difficulties of graduation. We note that countries with extractive resources

are more likely to face very high terms of trade volatility and face higher risk of default for this

reason as well, see Catao (2009).) Aguiar, Amador and Gopinath (2010) argue that credibility

problems may endogenously create greater persistence in productivity shocks in emerging

markets, while one can also make the case that the countries with abundant natural resources are

more likely to experience a generalized tragedy of the commons problem in governance, as

emphasized in the voracity model of Tornell and Lane (1999). The institutional failure of

coordinating interests of different power groups might be another reason why some countries,

facing similar external shocks, are more prone to default than others, as it is modeled in Qian

(2010). Figure 15 suggests that indeed, higher volatility in emerging market growth is not

simply due to terms of trade volatility, as advanced country commodity exporters have

experienced dramatically greater drops in volatility than emerging markets over the recent

period.




                                                37
                                                                   Figure 14
                                                Evolution of GDP growth rate volatility: 1950-2006
                                                        High vs. Middle and Low income
                                                               High      Middle and Low
                                    6

                                    5
    Standard deviation in percent




                                    4

                                    3

                                    2

                                    1

                                    0
                                        1950s         1960s           1970s       1980s     1990s    2000s
Notes: For each country the volatility is calculated as the standard deviation of its growth rate during the 10 years
interval.
Sample coverage: 66 countries (23 high income and 43 middle and low income countries) that were independent in
the given year.
Source: Maddison (2004), Total Economy Database (2008).




                                                                          38
                                                                    Figure 15
                                                Evolution of GDP growth rate volatility: 1950-2006
                                             Commodities exporting countries: Emerging vs. Benchmark
                                     6                      Benchmark    Emerging economies


                                     5
     Standard deviation in percent




                                     4


                                     3


                                     2


                                     1


                                     0
                                           1950s         1960s       1970s       1980s        1990s     2000s

Notes: For each country the volatility is calculated as the standard deviation of its growth rate during the 10 years
interval.
Benchmark: Australia and New Zealand. Emerging economies: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Cote
d’Ivoire, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, Uruguay
and Venezuela.
Source: Maddison (2004), Total Economy Database (2008).



Similar patterns to those illustrated in figures 14 and 15 emerge using swing12 of GDP growth

rate instead of volatilities.



                                                   VIII. Crisis and Role of IMF programs: 1952-2007

                                     We next turn to look at IMF programs. The presence of the IMF constitutes a major

structural change. As emphasized by Bordo and Eichengreen (1999), crises have been more


12
  Calculated as the average swing of each group. For each country the swing is calculated as the difference between
the maximum growth rate and the minimum growth rate during the 10 years interval.



                                                                         39
frequent but shorter since the advent of the IMF. What is interesting is how often the

introduction of the IMF program does not necessarily halt the ultimate crisis. A famous example

is Argentina, which received large (as a share of GDP) bailout packages in 2000 and again in

2001, but nevertheless went ahead and defaulted in 2002. But the case of Argentina is hardly

exceptional as Table 5 illustrates.

                                     Table 5
  Examples of cases where IMF programs are introduced but there is subsequent default
                                                               IMF program
                                                                        Expiration      Amount in
                   Default starting                                    /cancelation     millions of
                        year          Program year     Approved date       date           SDRs
  India                       1958             1957          3/11/57         3/10/58             72.5
  Chile                       1961             1959           4/1/59        12/31/59               8.1
                                               1961          2/16/61         2/15/62                75
                             1963              1963          1/15/63         1/14/64                40
                             1966              1964          2/14/64         1/15/65                25
  Costa Rica                 1962              1961          10/4/61         10/3/62                15
                             1981              1980          3/12/80         6/16/81             60.5
  Paraguay                   1968              1966           9/1/66         8/31/67               7.5
  Peru                       1969              1967          8/18/67         8/17/68             42.5
                             1978              1977         11/18/77         9/14/78                90
                             1980              1978          9/15/78           8/9/79            32.2
                                               1979          8/10/79        12/31/80              285
                             1983              1982           6/7/82         4/26/84              650
  Turkey                     1982              1980          6/18/80         6/17/83             1250
  Panama                     1983              1982          4/28/82         4/27/83             29.7
  Uruguay                    1983              1983          4/22/83         4/21/85              378
                             1987              1985          9/27/85         3/26/87            122.9
                             2003              2002           4/1/02         3/18/03           1988.3
  Guatemala                  1989              1988         10/26/88         2/28/90                54
  Venezuela                  1990              1989          6/23/89         3/22/93           3703.1
  Indonesia                  1998              1997          11/5/97         8/25/98           8338.2
                             2002              2000           2/4/00         1/29/02             3638
  Argentina                  2001              2000          3/10/00         1/23/03          16936.8
  Dom Republic               2005              2003          8/29/03         1/30/05              438




                                                  40
          During 1952-2008, there were in total 85 default episodes and 538 IMF programs. If one

restricts attention to cases where IMF programs were implemented 1-2 years before the crisis, we

have 36 cases, or 42% of all default episodes.

          Finally, in figure 16, we graph the incidence of IMF programs across advanced and

emerging economies. The United Kingdom famously called repeatedly on IMF help, but so too

did many other advanced economies until the early 1980s. So it is important to recognize that

even though countries “graduated” from external default, there can be a further transition period

of calling on outside help in “near default” incidents.



                                     Figure 16
The Incidence of IMF Programs in Advanced and Emerging Economies: 1952-2007


               Share of advanced economies
   18                                                                                             40
                    with IMF programs
                      (bars, left scale)
   16                                                                                             35

   14
                                                                                                  30

   12
                                                                                                  25
   10
                                                                                                  20
    8
                                                                                                  15
    6
                                                               Share of emerging markets          10
    4
                                                                  with IMF programs
                                                                   (line, right scale)            5
    2

    0                                                                                             0
        1952     1957    1962   1967    1972   1977   1982   1987   1992    1997    2002   2007




Source: Reinhart (2010).




                                                       41
                     IX. Graduation and the Theory of Sovereign Default

       Having now given a quantitative overview of the remarkable serial nature of sovereign

default, banking and inflation crises, what does theory about graduation? Since by far the most

striking empirical differences between advanced economies and middle and low income

countries are for sovereign debt, we will focus mainly on this question.

       At one level, the inferior performance of middle and low income countries is easy to

explain. Emerging market countries face deeper and more permanent shocks (as Aguiar and

Gopinath, 2006, emphasize), at the same time, tend to engage in procyclical macroeconomic

policy, as Kaminsky, Reinhart and Vegh (2004) document. During periods of surges in global

capital flows, emerging markets rush in with a plethora of supposedly high return projects, at the

risk of being stuck with incomplete, illiquid investments if capital flows reverse or capital

evaporates.   Corruption and the influence of interest groups is another important factor in

developing countries that can undermine fiscal stability and potentially over borrowing as it is

showed in Qian (2010). France’s status as a centuries long serial defaulter during its years of

monarchy has often been blamed on the government’s failure to establish a rationale and orderly

system of centralized tax collection (see MacDonald, 2006). Clearly, “graduation” if it can be

achieved is also linked to a country’s institutions and not just its level of wealth.

       At another level, explaining graduation is quite difficult, because standard models of

default (following Eaton and Gersovitz, 1981) do not necessarily suggest that richer countries

should be able to borrow less (as a percent of their income) or that they should necessarily be

more prone to default. As detailed in Obstfeld and Rogoff, the key penalty to default in the

canonical model is a cutoff from international capital markets and an inability to smooth national

consumption through international markets. As Obsteld and Rogoff show, the calibration of the




                                                  42
costs to default is quite similar to that of Lucas (1988) on the gains to smoothing out business

cycles. Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996, p. 369) find that, in fact, the empirical cost of exclusion from

international markets is considerably greater for emerging markets than for rich countries.

Admittedly, the canonical models illustrate model implicit contracts, so the issue of actual

default is left in the background. Bulow and Rogoff (1989a) and Grossman and Van Huyck

(1988) argue that if shocks are observable but not verifiable, then optimal contracts may call for

a premium in good states of nature, and negotiate partial default in bad states of nature,

depending on the two sides’ relative bargaining power. In any event, the fact that actual

insolvency is seldom an issue in sovereign debt contracts, and that willingness to pay is

invariably the binding constraint, underscores the point that countries cannot be expected to

graduate simply by virtue of growing richer.

       Of course, one way countries can graduate from default on external debt is by borrowing

entirely (or almost entirely) through domestically administered markets. As Reinhart and Rogoff

(2009) show, domestic debt has long been a quite important source of debt for most countries in

the world, even though this fact has not been widely recognized. Also contrary to conventional

belief, there are many cases of outright default on domestic debt (Reinhart and Rogoff document

over seventy). Some of these defaults involved breaking indexation clauses (to inflation, gold,

etc.), but in some cases, countries prefer outright default on domestic debt to achieve the same

end through inflation.

       In general, the fact that rich countries tend to have far fewer problems with serial default,

most likely traces to collateral outside the usual type considered in the literature (see Cole and

Kehoe, 1995 or Bulow and Rogoff, 1989b, for discussions of possible collateral outside the

direct risk sharing gains from financial integration. For example, a breakdown in debt payments




                                                43
can spill over into reputation in trade relationships.) Another factor, of course, is that richer

countries with better developed domestic credit markets are in position to rely far less on

external financing, which in turn plausibly lowers the risk of external default.

        At the other extreme are models of banking and financial crises that certainly do not

suggest any reason why richer countries should be less prone. As already noted, Schularick and

Taylor (2009) argue that even where greater macroeconomic and policy stability ought to ensure

a more stable environment and fewer crisis, the financial system may expand to become crisis

prone, offsetting the benefits of greater stability.

        Thus, in addition to needing a better theory of serial default on sovereign external debt

and a country’s ultimate “graduation,” it is also important to better understand the transitions

countries experience as they develop, as illustrated in table 1 earlier.



                                           X. Conclusions

        In this paper, we have taken at trying to quantify and better understand countries ‘risks of

recidivism for different types of financial crises, and the duration of time that must pass before

one can consider a country to have “graduated.” Twenty years without a crisis is an important

marker, but the tails of the recidivism distribution are very large. Countries do seem to graduate

from external default crises, although further study is required to understand how much this is

due to greater institutional and macroeconomic stability, and how much is due to enhanced

ability to partially default in other ways (eg, inflation and financial repression), especially as

advanced countries are typically able to finance a far larger share of their debt under domestic

law and in domestic currency. Of course, if one also includes borrowing under duress from the

International Monetary Fund as a measure of debt crisis recidivism, the evidence on “graduation”




                                                   44
for advanced countries from external default crisis is less convincing. Graduation from inflation

crises is a relatively recent phenomenon, and here the evidence on graduation is suggestive but

less decisive. Banking crises are a completely different animal, there is no compelling evidence

that any country has outgrown them. However, the very low rate of banking crises that occurred

between the end of World War II and the break-up of Bretton Woods at the beginning of the

1970s is a notable phenomenon that requires further study.




                                               45
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson and Yunyong Thaicharoen. 2003.
    “Institutional causes, macroeconomic symptoms: volatility, crises and growth.” Journal of
    Monetary Economics 50 (2003) 49-123.

Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath.”Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the Trend,”
     Journal of Political Economy 115 (February), pp. 69=102.

Aguiar, Mark, Manuel Amador and Gita Gopinath, Investment Cycles and Sovereign Debt
     Overhang, Review of Economic Studies, January 2009, Volume 76(1).

Bordo, Michael, and Barry Eichengreen, 1999. “Is our Current International Economic
     Environment Unusually Crisis Prone?” in Capital Flows and the International Financial
     System. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia Annual Conference Volume.

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff (1989a), “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
     Debt,” Journal of Political Economy 97 (February): 155-78

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff (1989ab), “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?”
     American Economic Review 79 (March) 43-50.

Caprio, Gerard Jr., and Daniela Klingebiel. 2003. “Episodes of Systemic and Borderline
     Financial Crises.” Mimeo. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Available at
     http://go.worldbank.org/5DYGICS7B0 (Dataset 1). January.

Catão, Luis A.V. & Fostel, Ana & Kapur, Sandeep, 2009. "Persistent gaps and default traps,"
     Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 89(2), pages 271-284.

Ciopolla, Carlo, 1982. The Monetary Policy of Fourteenth Century Florence. Berkeley:
     University of California Press.

Cole, Harold L., and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Reputational Spillover across Relationships: Reviving
      Reputation Models of Debt,” NBER working paper 5486, March 1996.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz (1981), “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theory and
     Estimation.” Review of Economic Studies 48 (April), 289-309.

Gopinath, Gita, and Mark Aguiar, Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the Current Account,
     Journal of International Economics, June 2006, Volume 69(1), pp. 64-83.




                                             46
Grossman, Herschel and John Van Huyck, 1988. “Sovereign Debt as a Contingent Claim:
     Excusable Default, Repudiation and Reputation,” American Economic Review 78,
     December, 1088-1097.

Institutional Investor. Various years. Institutional Investor.

Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
    Banking and Balance of Payments Problems.” American Economic Review 89 (3): 473–
    500.

Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen M Reinhart and Carlos A Vegh,” When it Rains, it Pours:
    Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies.” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth
    Rogoff, eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004.

Maddison, Angus. 2004. Historical Statistics for the World Economy: 1–2003 AD. Paris:
    Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. Available at
    http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/.

MacDonald, James, 2006. A Free Nation Deep in Debt: The Financial Roots of Democracy.
    New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Missale, Alessandro and Olivier Blanchard, “The Debt Burden and Debt Maturity,” The
     American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 1 (Mar., 1994), pp. 309-319.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, Foundations of International Macroeconomics, MIT
     Press, 1996.

Qian, Rong, 2010, “Why do some countries default more often than others? The role of
     institutions.”, University of Maryland, mimeo.

Reinhart, Carmen M, This Time is Different Chartbook: Country Histories on Debt, Default, and
     Financial Crises, NBER working paper 15815, March 2010.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2004. “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
     Arrangements: A Reinterpretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1): February.
     Pp. 1–48.

_____, 2008, “Banking Crises: An Equal Opportunity Menace,” NBER working paper 14587,
     December 2008.

______, 2009, This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton University
     Press: Princeton NJ.




                                                 47
_____, 2010, From Financial Crash to Sovereign Debt Crisis, NBER Working Paper 5795,
     March 2010

Reinhart, Carmen M, Kenneth S Rogoff and Miguel A. Savastano, “Debt Intolerance” in
     William Brainard and George Perry (eds.), Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:
     2003, 1-74.

Rogoff, Kenneth, “Globalization and Global Disinflation” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
     City, Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, 2004.

Schularick, Moritz, and Alan Taylor, “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage
     Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870-2008.” NBER working paper 15512, November 2009

Tomz, Michael, 2007. Reputation and International Cooperation: Sovereign Debt Across Three
    Centuries. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Tomz, Michael, and Mark Wright, “Do Countries Default in Bad Times?” Journal of the
    European Economic Association, Vol. 5 (April-May 2007), pp. 352-60.

Tornell, Aaron and Philip Lane, “The Voracity Effect,” The American Economic Review, Vol.
     89, No. 1 (Mar., 1999), pp. 22-46

Total Economy Database. Available at http://www.conferenceboard.org/economics/database.cfm




                                            48
Appendix

                                    Table A1- Average duration of crises

                              External Default                     Inflation                      Banking
                            Median        Average         Median          Average         Median         Average
  World                         8            15.1              1               2.3            1              2.5
  High income                   9            20.7              1               1.6            1              1.7
  Middle and low*               4            14.1              1               2.4            3              4.0
  Latin America                 9            14.6              1               3.2            2              2.7
  * Excluding Latin America
  Note: Duration of a default crisis is calculated as number of years between the starting year and end year of
  the crisis. For example: Argentina had defaulted in 1982 and it didn’t resolve it until 1993. In this case, the
  duration of this episode of default crisis is 12. Inflation crisis dating is straightforward per definition in text.
  As Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) note, dating the end of banking crises is very difficult, though in any event,
  they are typically relatively short.
  Sample coverage: 198 episodes of default crisis (high income: 28, middle and low: 170); 462 episodes of
  inflation crisis (high income: 166, middle and low: 296); 201 episodes of banking crisis (high income: 108,
  middle and low: 93).
  Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2008), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.




                                                          49
                                                                      Figure A1
                                                          Duration of external default crises
                                                     Frequency distribution (in percent): 1800-2008
                                                           High vs. Middle and low income
                                                                  High      Middle and Low
                                           80
                                                                         72
                                           70
     Frequency distribution (in percent)




                                           60                      56

                                           50

                                           40
                                                31
                                                         28
                                           30

                                           20
                                                                                         13
                                           10                                                   8
                                                                                                      0         2
                                           0
                                                     1               2-19                  20-39          +40
                                                                   Duration of defaults (in years)

Note: Duration of defaults is calculated as number of years between start of a default crisis and the year that is
resolved. The end of a default episode is considered as the year the country regains access to the capital market. In
other words, as long as the country is excluded from the international capital market, it is not considered as having
resolved its default crisis.
Sample coverage: 218 episodes of default crisis (high income: 32, middle and low: 186).
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) and authors’ calculations.




                                                                              50
            Table A2 Default episodes which began after and during severe wars
               War     War                                   death_pop       Default 1st
Country                       War name
               Start   End                                   (%)             year
Angola          1975   1991 Angolan Civil.War                      5.57          1985
Colombia        1899   1903 .Colombia.vs.Liberals.of.1899          2.60          1900
Germany         1939   1945 WorldWar II                            4.39          1939
Guatemala       1961   1996 Guatemalan.Civil.War                   1.14      1986, 1989
Hungary         1941   1945 WorldWar II                            1.46      1941-1967
Japan           1941   1945 WorldWar II                            2.41          1942
Mexico          1910   1914 .Mexico.vs.Liberals&.Radicals          1.65          1914
Nicaragua       1978   1979 .Nicaragua.vs.Sandinistas              1.45          1979
Paraguay        1932   1935 Chaco                                  3.91          1932
Turkey          1914   1918 World.War.I                            1.75          1915
Venezuela       1859   1863 .Venezuela.vs.Liberals                 1.35          1860




                                           51
                                              Figure A2
                                    Duration of “tranquil times”
                            conditional on having had at least one crisis
                           Frequency distribution (in percent): 1800-2008
                       Excluding defaults started after and during severe wars.




Note: See figure 7 in text.




                                                 52
                                                                           Figure A3
                                                     External default crises*: Duration of “tranquil times”
                                                          conditional on having had at least one crisis
                                                        Frequency distribution (in percent): 1800-2008
                                                               High vs. Middle and Low income
                                           80         73                 High     Middle and Low
                                           70
     Frequency distribution (in percent)




                                           60

                                           50
                                                42
                                           40                                                                     33
                                           30

                                           20                           17
                                                                 13
                                                                                     8
                                           10                                            5           4       2          2
                                           0
                                                 <20              21-39              40-59            >60        no reversal
                                                                      Number of years between two defaults

* Excluding default episodes started after and during severe wars.
Note: See corresponding figure 8 in text
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), sources cited therein and authors’ calculations.




                                                                                  53
                     Default reversal: Note on hazard rate analysis

Definition

The hazard rate is the probability of a country having a crisis at time t+1 given that it has not had

a crisis at time t. The hazard rate is calculated conditioned on the length of time since the last

crisis. Thus we are looking at the subset of countries that had at least one crisis event (default in

this particular calculation). For example: Country A had a default crisis in 2001 and it ended in

2003. The hazard rate of crisis in 2010 for country A indicates the probability of having a crisis

in 2010 conditioned on it being crisis free for 7 years.

The nonparametric analysis makes no assumptions about the shape of the hazard function or

about how variables affect it. Instead, the hazard function is estimated based on the data, using

the Kaplan-Meier (1958) method. (KM is a descriptive procedure for time-to-event variables,

commonly used when time is considered the only salient variable).

                                              Figure A4
                             Hazard rate of default reversal: Full sample

                             Smoothed hazard estimate KM (default reversal)
                  .035




                   .03




                  .025




                   .02




                  .015
                         0            20            40           60            80
                                                 analysis time




                                                  54
Figure A4 shows the hazard rate of default reversal for the entire sample (167 episodes). The

vertical axis indicates the probability of having a default crisis and the horizontal axis indicates

years since the end of the last default episode. For less than 60 years, the hazard rate declines

with the length of the crisis-free spell. That is, the longer the country remains crisis-free, the

lower the probability of it having another default crisis. But there is a break in year 60. After 60

years of being crisis-free, the hazard rate increases with the length of time. This suggests that

there might be a default crisis cycle every 60 years or it might be an artifact of the sparseness of

the sample if countries that go 60 years without a crisis

Figure A5 separates the sample by income level. For high income countries, the hazard function

monotonically decreases with respect to the length of tranquil time, approaching zero when the

country has been crisis-free for more than 60 years. However, for middle and low income

countries, the hazard function slightly declines in the first 60 years of tranquil time, but it starts

to increase after year 60. This means, for countries that had been crisis-free for more than 60

years, the hazard rate of having another crisis increases every year, indicating a default cycle is

highly probable for this income group. One explanation for such a pattern in the middle and low

income group is that once a long period of time has passed since the last crisis, countries become

more vulnerability to a “This Time is Different Syndrome”, with policymakers and investors not

paying sufficient attention to indicators of crisis vulnerability.




                                                  55
                                          Figure A5
                  Hazard rate of default reversal: High vs. Middle and Low

                            Smoothed hazard estimates KM (default reversal)

                  .06




                  .04




                  .02




                    0
                        0           20           40             60            80
                                               analysis time

                                           Middle and Low            High




Parametric analysis specifies the shape of the baseline hazard function as well as how the

covariates affect the hazard function. We assume proportional hazard models. Covariates are

assumed to raise or lower the hazard function in a multiplicative way.

The baseline hazard function is Weibull, which encompasses a baseline hazard function that may

be flat like exponential models, monotonically increasing or decreasing.

We use as covariates: Lag world share of countries in default crisis and three dummy variables:

i) being in a severe war the year of crisis reversal; ii) pre 1914 and iii) income level equals 1 for

all high income countries and 0 for rest of the world.




                                                 56
                  Table A3- Parametric analysis: hazard rate of default reversal
                   Variable                                        Weibull model
                                                             Coefficient   Hazard ratio
                   Lag share of countries in                   2.04           7.68
                   default
                                                                (0.02)
                   Severe war                                    0.05                1.05
                                                                (0.87)
                   Pre-War I                                     0.09                1.10
                                                                (0.61)
                   High income                                  -0.23                0.79
                                                                (0.29)
                   cons                                         -2.79
                   alpha                                        -0.11
                   p                                             0.90
Note: Lag share of countries in default is the percentage of countries in default crisis the year before the default
reversal; severe war is a dummy variable that equals to 1 if the country that had default reversal was in severe war
(defined as death to population larger than 0.8%); High income is a dummy variable that equals to 1 if the country
that had default reversal is a high income country. In parenthesis we report the p-value.



Table A3 reports the results of the parametric analysis. The coefficients have the usual

interpretation: an increase of 1 percent in share of countries in default crisis during the previous

year increases the hazard of default reversal by roughly 2 percent. Both severe war and pre-War I

have coefficients close to zero and are not significant. Being a high income country decreases the

hazard of default reversal by 0.23 percent point, however, this change is too small to be

significant. The hazard ratio shows the qualitative effect of covariates to hazard rates. When it is

greater than 1, it increases the hazard rate, when it is less than 1, it decreases the hazard rate and

when it equals 1, it does not affect the hazard rate. Alpha measures the rate of change over time

of the hazard rate. In this case, alpha equals to -0.11 indicating a decline of hazard of about 11%

per year.     Finally p measures time dependence. For p less than 1, there is negative time

dependence, meaning the longer the country stay in tranquil time (crisis-free), the lower the

hazard of default reversal may occur.



                                                        57
