NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AMERICA'S SETTLING DOWN:
HOW BETTER JOBS AND FALLING IMMIGRATION LED TO A RISE IN MARRIAGE, 1880 – 1930
Tomas Cvrcek
Working Paper 16161
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16161

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

I thank Jeremy Atack, Howard Bodenhorn, William Collins, Robert Margo, Charles Thomas, participants
at the Clemson public policy workshop, at the seminars at CERGE-EI and University of Tennessee
and at the Social Science History Association Conference, 2009 in Long Beach, CA for their valuable
feedback. All errors are mine. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Tomas Cvrcek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

America's settling down: How Better Jobs and Falling Immigration led to a Rise in Marriage,
1880 – 1930
Tomas Cvrcek
NBER Working Paper No. 16161
July 2010
JEL No. J12,J62,N3
ABSTRACT
The growing education and employment of women are usually cited as crucial forces behind the decline
of marriage since 1960. However, both trends were already present between 1900 and 1960, during
which time marriage became increasingly widespread. This early period differed from the post-1960
decades due to two factors primarily affecting men, one economic and one demographic. First, men’s
improving labor market prospects made them more attractive as marriage partners to women. Second,
immigration had a dynamic effect on partner search costs. Its short-run effect was to fragment the
marriage market, making it harder to find a partner of one’s preferred ethnic and cultural background.
The high search costs led to less marriage and later marriage in the 1890s and 1900s. As immigration
declined, the long-run effect was for immigrants and their descendants to gradually integrate with
American society. This reduced search costs and increased the marriage rate. The immigration primarily
affected the whites’ marriage market which is why the changes in marital behavior are much more
pronounced among this group than among blacks.

Tomas Cvrcek
Department of Economics
Clemson University
213 Sirrine Hall
Clemson, SC 29634
and NBER
tcvrcek@clemson.edu

1. Introduction
The decline of marriage since the 1950s has attracted, and continues to attract, considerable
attention of social scientists (Becker, 1993; Sussmann et al. 1999; Oppenheimer, 2000; Blau et al.,
2000; Cherlin, 2005; Greenwood and Guner, 2005; Stevenson and Wolfers, 2007; Lundberg and
Pollak, 2007). What frequently escapes the analysis, however, is that the trends of the second half of
the 20th century were, in many respects, a reversal of the movements of the first half. For example, the
men’s estimated median age at first marriage declined from 1890 to 1950 but had increased back to
1890 levels by 1990 (Cherlin, 2005: Figure 1). The same pattern applies to the age at first childbirth or
the rates of lifetime singlehood (Fitch and Ruggles, 2000). Far from representing new heights, the
1990s marriage statistics have merely returned to where they had been in the 1890s.1 It was the 1950s,
with their early and near-universal marriage, that were the exceptional times and a turning point, not
the late 20th century.
What led the American marriage to that exceptional state? What were the forces behind those six
decades of spreading marriage ending around 1960? Existing research into the post-1960 marriage
looks for, and finds, considerable explanatory power in the changes that occurred in women’ lives.2
The secular increase in their educational attainment and labor market involvement over the course of
the 20th century regularly feature as the underlying forces behind the diminishing gains from marriage,
whether it be through falling fertility, evaporating economies of scale in household operation, or
reduced scope for specialization. But women’s fortunes did not start turning in the 1950s. Their
schooling and job prospects had already been changing in the first half of the 20th century when

1

It should be stressed that, similarities aside, there remain many important differences between the demographics of
marriage in the 1890s and 1990s. The late 20th century has seen an increase in cohabitation (Raley, 2000) which is perhaps
more prevalent than common-law marriage was a hundred years before. Divorce has been continuously getting easier at
least since the 1920s (Jacobson, 1959) and certainly more prevalent (Preston and McDonald, 1979).
2
See Stevenson and Wolfers (2007) for an overview of the changes in late 20th century American marriage and the
potential causes.

marriage age was falling and marriage rate rising. Why did the same forces lead to such divergent
developments in the two halves of the 20th century?
A potential answer lies in the changes occurring to men. First, their career prospects (as measured
by their occupational score) gradually improved in the early 20th century. This made them more
attractive as marriage partners to women who were, simultaneously, becoming more selective in their
partner choice thanks to their growing economic independence both in and out of marriage. 3 The
second big effect was the dynamic of immigration which peaked in the opening decades of the century
and which was significantly skewed towards men (Haines, 1996). Immigration’s immediate effect was
to fragment the marriage market as the diversity of immigrants clashed with their (and their
descendants’) preference for ethnic endogamy. The resulting high costs of finding a desirable partner
led to the high ages at marriage and high non-marriage in the 1890s and 1900s. In the long run,
however, as the stream of newcomers dried up and the second- and third-generation immigrants
integrated into the American society, the search costs declined which contributed to the downward
trend in marriage age lasting until 1950s.
2. Historical overview
A wide range of evidence points to the 1890s and early 1900s as a period of change in American
marriage. Figure 1 shows that a gradual post-Civil War spread of lifetime singlehood was reversed
right before the turn of the century and the proportion never married subsequently fell. At the same
time, marriage rate increased by early 1920s, in fits and starts, from about 65 to above 80 marriages
per 1000 eligible women (Jacobson, 1959).4 Similar pattern is visible in other statistics, such as the
indirect median age at marriage which peaked in 1900 at 26.0 for white men and at 22.1 for white
women, and declined for both thereafter. In fact, Fitch and Ruggles (2000: Table 4.1) show that the
3

For example, the employment during singlehood allowed even poor women, who otherwise would have no dowry, to
accumulate at least some meager savings before setting up their own household after marriage and starting a family.
4
By “eligible women”, I mean those who were unmarried and of age. The marriage rate is very similar when calculated per
1000 eligible men.

1

whole marriage age distribution shifted, not just the median. The changing marriage behavior had a
strong cohort component: lifetime-singlehood rate (among whites) was the highest for the birth cohort
born around 1870 (who would be getting married in the 1890s and early 1900s), reaching 12.4% for
men and 10% for women (Haines, 1996). Both preceding and subsequent generations had lower rates
of lifetime non-marriage. The first half of the 20th century was therefore a time of a renewed interest in
marriage, starting a trend that would last until the 1960s (albeit with some variation during the years of
the Great Depression and the Second World War). Comparing figures 1 and 2 shows that the trends
were somewhat different for whites and for blacks in the early part of the 20th century. First, blacks had
lower rate of lifetime celibacy in all decades before 1960. Second, while black and white men’s
marriage seemed to move roughly in parallel (with the exception of the 1940 readings), black women
followed a pattern contrary to what we see among white women.
Apparently, some forces affected both black and white marriage markets equally while others
asserted themselves only in one market, and not the other. The more universal forces include rising
educational attainment, high and increasing labor force participation of single women (Goldin, 1990)
or growing ease of geographic mobility. Figures 3 and 4 suggest that improving men’s labor market
situation was also among them.5 Even though black men’s OCCSCORE means were lower and more
variable than white men’s, both groups shared in the gradual steepening of the age-OCCSCORE
profile from census to census and the values they reached by their late 20s also increased across census
years. In other words, men were climbing the occupational ladder faster in 1930 than they had in 1880

5

The OCCSCORE is a constructed variable in the Integrated Public Use Micro Sample (Ruggles et al, 2008). It assigns to
each occupation recorded in the 1880 – 1930 censuses the value of median annual income (in $1000s) earned in that
occupation in 1950. As a direct measure, or even a proxy, of actual income earned in various occupations in 1880 – 1930,
the variable is inevitably afflicted by a good deal of measurement error but then the burdens placed on it in the present
analysis are much more modest: it is employed here, and its values in the pre-1950 period are interpreted, as a signal of a
man’s potential life time earnings and of his ‘economic rank’ (in term of his job) relative to other men. It is, for example,
not likely that a black man and a white man in the same occupation would earn the same amount but note that the purpose
of the comparison here is not to compare white men to black men but to compare each group across years. Note that,
throughout the period, information on a person’s occupation (on which OCCSCORE is based) was recorded even for those
currently unemployed at the time of census. It is therefore not a measure of current labor market status but more of a career
indicator. It also allowed several non-occupational responses, such as “student”.

2

and reached higher. Both changes are consistent with spreading education: not only did a growing (if
still small) proportion of men stay longer in school to earn a high school diploma, entering the labor
market at a later age (and depressing the OCCSCORE values in ages 16 – 18), but they also entered it
with greater skills which brought them faster advance.
The force most obviously affecting only the white marriage market but not black is immigration.
Some 10.1 million Europeans arrived in the U.S. in the peak decade of 1905 – 1914, with six out of
those ten years witnessing an influx exceeding 1 million (U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service,
2000: Table 1).6 The First World War brought an abrupt end to immigration and, with the exception of
a brief spurt in 1921, the annual inflow stayed well below half a million through most of the 1920s,
declining continually. The immigrants were overwhelmingly white with over 90% of them coming
from Europe or Canada. They were also predominantly male. Haines (1996: Table 2) reports that there
were 140 men per 100 women among immigrants aged 20-29 arriving in 1900 – 1910.
The hypothesis suggests itself that the labor market forces produced the similarities between black
and white marriage markets while immigration drove for the differences. Tables 1 and 2 corroborate
this impression. Using a simple logit model, the probability of being ever married in a given census
year is estimated on the 1% census sample of men under 31 and women under 26.7 The explanatory
variables include age and indicators of literacy and nativity.8 Several patterns emerge from the tables.
First, the coefficient and the mean marginal effect of age increase from 1900 onwards for white men
and women. This reflects the decline in age at first marriage mentioned previously. The right-most
column of Table 1 shows the χ2-test of equality of each variable’s coefficients across years. For age,
the test overwhelmingly rejects equality: the age gradient was indeed getting steeper. A marginal effect
of 0.051 (as appears for white men in 1900) implies that one year of age would increase the probability

6

For comparison, the total US population was 76.2 million in 1900 (US Census Office, 1901).
This way the models are estimated from data on those men and women who either still are on the marriage market or have
been there recently
8
Fixed effects for individual states and population size of one’s location were also included (not reported).
7

3

of a person being married by about 5.1%. So, assuming linearity over the relevant age range, a man’s
likelihood of being married would increase between age 20 and age 25 by 25.5% in 1900 but by 27.5%
in 1930, ceteris paribus. The difference of two percentage points is equivalent to the average 25-year
old white man getting married about 5 months sooner in 1930 than he would have in 1900.9 Since,
during the same three decades, the median age at marriage for white men declined from 26 to about
24.6 years (Fitch and Ruggles, 2000, Table 4.1), the age variable in this bare-bones logit model
captures about a third of that decline. For white women, the situation is very similar. For black men
and women, however, this pattern is considerably weaker. The mean marginal effect of age for black
women increases from 0.72 to 0.75 and for black men from 0.56 to 0.58. This means that we see a
slight steepening of the age gradient for black men while for black women, the χ2-test of equality
cannot reject the null that the coefficients are in fact equal across years.
Second, the fixed effects for the second generation immigrants among the whites is negative,
meaning that this group seemed to get married at a slower pace. First-generation immigrants, however,
show a negative coefficient for men and positive for women, potentially reflecting the skewed sex ratio
in this particular demographic in favor of women. The blacks, again, are distinct from whites in that
the coefficients on immigrants of either generation are not statistically significant, reflecting the fact
that there was generally very little black immigration from which these effects could be precisely
estimated.
Naturally, this bare-bones model does not quantify the relative importance of the labor market
trends vis-à-vis immigration, nor does it specify the causal mechanism. In case of the men’s job
prospects, the causality is perhaps relatively straightforward: better-earning men are more attractive
marriage partners, ceteris paribus. The impact of immigration, however, is more complicated because
it is not limited to just how many men and women crossed the Atlantic but it also must account also for

9

The calculation is that if one year adds about 5% to the probability of getting married, then 2% represents about 2/5 = 0.4
of a year which is a few days short of five months.

4

what kind of people arrive (e.g. in terms of ethnicity, age composition etc.). Many women discovered
that the trans-oceanic ships brought over a disproportionate number of suitable potential matches – but
also scores of other people among whom the suitable matches were somewhat harder to find. In other
words, the influx of immigrants affected not only the intensity of competition through the changing sex
ratio but also the costs of partner search.
3. Theoretical considerations
Becker et al. (1977) distinguish between extensive and intensive search costs, corresponding to
how difficult it is to meet new people and how hard it is to get to know them well. Extensive search
costs will be high if it is difficult to encounter the suitable partners (for example, due to high
segregation by gender). They will also be high if a person looks for a spouse with a particular trait that
is rare in a population, such as finding a high-earner in a poor neighborhood. In such instances, a
person will be willing to accept a match with a suitor farther away from the “optimal” trait, entering a
marriage with a lower expected benefit. The extensive search cost therefore affects the mean (the
expectation) of gains from marriage.
Intensive search costs, on the other hand, affect the variance of potential marriage outcome (as well
as the mean). Even a partner who is currently a high earner may not turn out to be such in the future.
For example, marrying a medical student may carry the prospect of potentially high earnings but, of
course, the actual outcome will depend on how good or bad a doctor the medical student turns out to be
eventually. While it may be easy to meet and become acquainted many medical students in a brief
period of time (low extensive search costs), it will likely be harder to establish how well remunerated
they will eventually be (high intensive search costs). Another example, perhaps even more relevant for
marriage, is physical attraction: finding a person with attractive features is a matter of extensive search
because physical features (such as face, height and bodily constitution) are relatively easy to observe.
However, finding out whether a couple is mutually sexually compatible is not immediately observable
5

and is a matter of intensive search. The costs of such search (along both the extensive and the intensive
margin) change through time, for example as clothing becomes more revealing and the costs associated
with premarital sex (risk of pregnancy, STDs or loss of reputation etc.) decline.
Both extensive and intensive search are important because the quality of a match is an ‘input’ into
the overall utility from marriage. This in turn determines how valuable a marriage is relative to the
outside options.
How do these theoretical considerations bear on the question at hand? The declining age at
marriage in early 20th century suggests that men and women were done searching at ever younger ages.
The increase in marriage rate implies that the expected gains from marriage relative to alternatives
must have increased. Such a development is possible if the extensive search costs fall and men and
women are better able to find a partner who is close to their “ideal”. Earlier marriage is also consistent
with an increase in intensive search costs. If intensive search becomes more costly, less of it will be
undertaken. Since a major component of intensive search is time (or more precisely the duration of a
relationship before marriage),10 the result will be shorter courtship and earlier marriage.11 If the
expected gain from marriage is positive but the variance around the expectation cannot be reduced
much through further intensive search (due to its high cost), then any postponement of marriage would
be a net loss. In short, the hypothesized link between partner search and age at marriage was that,
throughout the early 20th century, it was either getting ever easier to match with a partner on the
observables or ever harder to get a reliable reading (even after a time of courtship) on the
unobservables (or both).
10

A decline in age at marriage may also reflect a greater frequency of dating: if that was the case, then of course, short
duration from first date to marriage would not represent a decline in intensive search. However, with the exception of a
(small) increase in pre-marital sex, I am not aware of any evidence that the dating practice of the early century grew any
more intensive. Moreover, some aspects of a prospective partner’s personality, such as one’s susceptibility to alcoholism,
may just require time, regardless of how often the partners date.
11
Koller (1951: Table 2) shows that the number of suitors seriously considered by women as potential husbands did not
change significantly between the 1890s and the 1940s, with 80-90% of women across all generations in his sample
claiming to have seriously considered no more than two men. At the same time, however, in all three generations he
studies, the women’s first date with their future husband occurred at about the same age (19) but in each generation, the
marriages occurred, on average, earlier than in the previous one.

6

Naturally, none of this should be taken to imply that search costs are the whole story. The
discussion of the marriage market in terms of search costs should not obscure the importance of labor
market factors in marriage behavior. The above example with the future earning power of a medical
student is a good illustration that the partner search factors and the labor market factors may, in fact,
overlap to some degree. The combined importance of the labor market factors and the partner search
factors is a reflection of marriage serving a ‘double duty’ both as an economic institution and as an
arrangement for human companionship. Its changes are unlikely to be adequately explained by only
one set of determinants while ignoring the other.
4. Measures of the marriage market

4.1. Defining the marriage market
Constructing a good measure of a person’s search costs requires defining, as accurately as possible,
one’s relevant marriage market. For although the law may allow marriages across races, nationalities,
education levels or wide geographic areas, the partner search in reality takes place within a
considerably narrower pool of potential suitors. Tables 3 and 4 show that a vast majority of men and
women search for and find a partner that is an exact match to them along several dimensions. A clear
example is race.12 In Table 3, the rows denoted “actual” show that 99.9% of all marriages of 5 years or
less in duration had spouses of the same race.13 High rate of homogamy is also achieved on the
dimension of literacy. That this is not a product of random chance but a result of a conscious effort to
match on these characteristics is clear from the contrast between the values in the “actual” rows and the
“random cf.” rows just below them. The random comparison values show what rate of matching would
prevail if the same populations of men and women who together formed the observed marriages were
12

The high rate of race homogamy was doubtless somewhat affected also by the existing miscegenation laws in some states
but even in states which did not have such laws, interracial marriages were rare.
13
The reason why only recent marriages were included in the calculation is that heterogamous marriages have a greater
probability of disruption and this negative selection eventually produces greater homogamy among those who remained
marriage than was the case at the time of marriage. This is also the reason why the table includes only values for 1900,
1910 and 1930 – these were the only censuses (in the relevant period) which provided any information about the duration of
marriage.

7

randomly matched with each other. In all cells, the actual values are higher than the random values – a
clear evidence of active matching on each of the characteristic individually and on all of them together.
The relative values of the random and actual match rates provide a rough gauge on the changing
extensive search costs. For example, the spreading and, by 1930, near-universal literacy implied that
with each decade it was getting easier to find a partner who was also literate – hence the convergence
of the actual and random matching on literacy between 1900 and 1930. The extensive search costs on
literacy were therefore falling. For other characteristics, however, the situation was different. The
search on age seems to have been about equally costly across the three decades while random match
rates on nativity fell first from 1900 to 1910 before they increased again to 1930.
Let us establish more precisely what constitutes, for the purposes of this paper, a match on age and
nativity. An age match is defined to occur when the husband is between 0 and 10 years older than his
wife. Table 3 shows that this definition easily captures over 80% of all marriages in any year. What
constitutes a match on nativity is more difficult to establish because the immigration of the early 20th
century produced a lot of variation in the US population’s nativity. The definition used here is
graphically illustrated in Figure 5. An analysis of marriages recorded in the census reveals that USborn Americans of American parentage (which includes those whose at least one parent was US-born)
were mostly marrying other US-born, US-bred Americans but were also willing to look for partners
among second-generation immigrants, regardless of the latters’ exact ancestry. The Americans
however, rarely chose partners from among recent immigrants. The marriage market of the secondgeneration immigrants consisted not only of Americans but also of other first- and second-generation
immigrants from the same ‘old country’.14 Finally, the fresh immigrants, being mostly shunned from
marriages with pedigreed Americans, married either compatriots among immigrants or second
generation Americans from their own country of origin. In Figure 5, marriages falling into the shaded

14

In other words, for example, Italian-Americans appear to be willing to marry into an American family, into another
Italian-American family and into a family of Italian immigrants. Similarly for Irish-Americans, Polish-Americans etc.

8

areas would constitute a match on nativity according to the definition provided above. Table 4 shows
that when this definition is applied to marriages recorded in the census, it produces a fairly high rate of
matching, in spite of it being quite narrow along ethnic lines.15 Immigrants were clearly the most
willing to cross ethnic lines but even among them the match rate exceeds 80%. An overall match rate
on nativity for all three groups combined is reported in the second column of Table 3. Note that the
rate of matching on nativity (as defined here) increased continuously from 1900 to 1930 even though
the large inflow of immigrants in early 20th century fragmented the marriage market so much so that
random matching would have produced a lower match rates in 1910 than in 1900.
The final and most important lesson from Table 3, however, is that men and women sought to
match on all of these characteristics simultaneously. Random assignment would have produced
matches on race, nativity, literacy and age in only about 22 – 27% of marriages. The fact that 70% of
marriages were matches along all of these dimensions shows that a person’s marriage market was to a
considerable degree defined and delimited by these characteristics. In light of this, my measures of
partner search costs are based on marriage markets defined in this way. For race, nativity, literacy, I
assume people wish to match perfectly: e.g. a black man wants a black woman, a literate woman seeks
a literate man, etc. With respect to age, I apply the ten year interval mentioned above. Only rarely,
however, does one’s search for a partner encompass the whole country; more realistically, the marriage
market is relatively local and so I limit it to the size of a county.

4.2. Partner search variables
To characterize each person’s marriage market, I construct several variables. The variable trait is
an indicator of the rarity of a given set of personal traits (race, literacy, nativity and age, as discussed in
the previous section): it is computed as the proportion of all suitable matches in the total population of
the county. The greater the value of trait, the greater are the chances of encountering a suitable match
15

Note that Table 4 is not limited to recent marriages of under 5 years of duration and so the match rates may be inflated
compared to what they would have been at the time of marriage due to selection.

9

in daily intercourse, all else equal.16 The concept behind this variable comes directly from Becker et al.
(1977) who argue that matching on a rarer trait constitutes a higher extensive search cost.
Mathematically,
10

for women trait 

M
i 0

Pop

10

i

for men trait 

;

W
i 0

i

Pop

where Mi represents the number of suitable men (properly weighed by sampling weights) in the county
who are i years older than the relevant woman; W-i represents the number of suitable women who are i
years younger than the relevant man, and Pop stands for the total population of the county. Table 5
provides a summary of how this variable changed between 1880 and 1930 for black and white men and
women. For white women, the mean values of trait increased continuously from decade to decade. For
white men, it increased only after 1910. The black marriage market, on the other hand, saw an increase
in extensive search costs for both men and women, as the trait values by and large declined through
the years.17 Black trait values are naturally lower than white ones because, on average, the black
population constituted a minority that was relatively dispersed, especially in the North. The standard
deviation did not vary much across years, so Table 5 only reports one overall value across all years.
Figures 6 and 7 show that the changes in the value of trait across years were not an artifact of changing
age composition: the 1930 values for white men and for white women were higher than for earlier
years across all ages. The fact that trait increases for men up to age 26 while it declines continuously
for women is due to the constraint on age difference between spouses: a 16-year old man’s marriage

16

Ceteris paribus is an important qualifier here because, as a measure of rarity, trait is only one component of the extensive
search cost. The mere presence of potential suitable matches in a population is not the same as being able to meet them. For
example, in sparsely populated areas or in areas that lack the necessary infrastructure that facilitates such encounters (e.g.
entertainment venues or outlets with personal ads) the same value of trait will be associated with higher extensive search
costs and lower probability of being married than in densely settled areas. Thus, extensive search costs can decline in two
ways: either the values of trait increase from year to year or the improving infrastructure makes meeting potential mates
easier at any given level of trait. In the latter case, a decline in extensive search costs would imply a higher probability of
getting married across the board, i.e. at any level of trait.
17
The white immigration diluted the black population, increasing the denominator (but not the numerator) of trait for
blacks.

10

market consists of only 16-year old women while a 26-year old man can search for a spouse among all
the women aged 16-26.18
Another constructed variable is sex ratio which measures the intensity of competition. It is defined
as a ratio of potential spouses over potential competitors. For example, a man of certain traits, aged 26,
competes for women aged 16-26. But for women who are at the lower end of this range, say 16, he
must compete against other men who are of his age and younger (i.e. aged 16 – 26) while for women
who are at the upper end of the range (say 26), his competition will come from men who are his age
and older (i.e. aged 26 – 36). The sex ratio reflects these shifting overlaps, being defined as

1
iM # suitors

sexratio  

where the summation is performed across the set M of all potential partners and #suitors is the number
of all suitors (including himself) who too might potentially marry a given women in his set M. By this
construction, the ratio captures local variation in the size of birth cohorts and racial and nativity
groups. It can realistically reflect the different situation of, for example, two men who are otherwise
the same but are five years apart in age but who would for that reason face very different marriage
markets and command very different bargaining power with respect to potential spouses – even though
they seem to compete over a pool of women that overlaps to a great degree. Note that the variable is
defined as a ratio of the numbers of opposite sex to the numbers of one’s own sex. Thus, both men and
women consider higher ratios to be more favorable. Hence, the variable is expected to be positively
correlated with marriage: the more eligible brides per prospective groom there are, the more likely a
man will be to marry (and vice versa).
Table 5 suggests that the mean sex ratio moved very differently for white men compared to white
women. White men’s sex ratio deteriorated between 1880 and 1910 and improved thereafter – no
doubt in response to the immigration flows with their highly skewed sex ratios. White women’s sex
18

Age 16 is here used as the age at which men and women have their debut and thus enter the marriage market.

11

ratio exhibits the opposite development, rising first and then falling after 1910 – likely due to the same
causes. For blacks, the sex ratio does not exhibit any consistent long-term trend but it seems generally
to be higher for men than for women. Moreover, men’s and women’s sex ratios are farther apart for
blacks than for whites. This must have been a result of differential mortality between black men and
women over their childhood and adolescent years because a simple analysis of sex composition of the
black population reveals that women comprise 52% and men only 48% of blacks throughout this
period. For whites, the shares are practically 50:50.
The remaining variables in Table 5 are intended to capture intensive search costs. They are based
on the assumption that more in-depth knowledge of one’s potential partner (which is the purpose of
intensive search) is more relevant in circumstances when there exists greater a priori uncertainty about
how one’s marriage will operate. If, for example, a couple has a high probability that, once married,
they will follow the traditional model of male bread-winner and female home-maker, then the woman
will seek to get a better idea about her future mate’s labor market potential while the man will want to
gauge the woman’s home-making skills. If, on the other hand, the couple’s options are open in that the
traditional model is just as likely as an arrangement with two breadwinners, then their pre-marital
intensive search will also need to be broader in scope and its focus will not be on just one characteristic
but on many. In short, the greater is the variance in potential household arrangements the costlier is the
intensive search because the more characteristics it has to encompass. The variance in the number of
breadwinners in Table 5 is constructed in this way. It is calculated from all the married couples of a
given race in a given county where the wife is over 25 and the husband over 30 but both are younger
than 40, i.e. from couples who are outside the analyzed sample but close to it in age.19 The rising
values of this variable in Table 5 therefore indicate rising intensive search costs as the traditional
19

The implicit assumption is that for the young women under the age of 25 and men under 30 who are looking to get
married, the marital arrangements of the closest older generation serve as an indication of what they themselves can expect
in marriage. Note also, that since the variable is calculated on a county level (with a distinction by race), it will have the
same value for all white women under 25 in a given county and another value for all black women in the county. Similarly
for men.

12

model of complete specialization was gradually coming under pressure between 1880 and 1930 and
getting an accurate reading on whether a person will be a good spouse was thus getting harder.
The other measure of intensive search costs, variance in family size, captures the variance in
fertility arrangements by race and county. David and Sanderson (1987) document the spread of the
two-child norm which accompanied the decline of traditional marital arrangements among Americans.
Building on this idea, I divide families into ‘modern’ and ‘traditional’ based on whether they have two
children or under (‘modern’) or more (‘traditional’). The variable variance in family size is then
calculated as the variance in this dichotomous indicator of modern vs traditional fertility by race and
county. For whites, the value of this variable first increases and then, after 1910, declines again, as the
proportion of families following the two-child norm increases from about 40% nationwide to about
60%. For blacks, the value monotonically increases reflecting the high prevalence of high fertility
among black couples.
Since higher intensive search costs should lead to earlier marriage, the coefficients on both
variance in the number of breadwinners and variance in family size are expected to be positive.

4.3. Labor market variables
The labor market variables are relatively straightforward. The variable single women’s labor force
participation is defined by county and race but does not vary with nativity, literacy and age of women
(see Table 6). It is an indicator of the local labor market opportunities of never married women and
therefore an index of their relative bargaining power vis-à-vis their suitors. It is arguably a better
measure of this bargaining power than an individual-level employment status because even a nonworking single woman can have a high threat-point in bargaining with a man, if she can credibly claim
that employment is a viable alternative to marriage. The values in the white and black men’s panels of
Table 6 indicate the level of single women’s employment the men faced on the marriage market where
they searched for a wife.

13

Men’s labor force participation and married women’s labor force participation are defined
similarly.20 While men’s labor market success can be expected to be positively related with marriage,
the case is not as clear in case of married women. Their employment affects not only the size of the
overall marital gains but also its distribution between spouses which may produce conflicting
incentives for men regarding marriage.
One further measure of the labor market is the quality of men’s job, measured by the IPUMS
variable OCCSCORE and summarized in Figures 3 and 4. For women, the values are the average
OCCSCORE of the pool of men that a woman of given traits may consider for marriage. Since older
women choose husbands from among older men (who generally have a higher OCCSCORE than
younger men), the values are higher for older women. Since men with better quality jobs are more
attractive marriage partners, ceteris paribus, the expected effect of this variable on the probability of
being married is positive.
All the defined and constructed explanatory variables have their share of shortcomings. The
variable trait ignores many aspects on which men and women may match, such as physical
attractiveness. The sex ratio implicitly imposes identical preferences on all men and women regarding
the desired age difference between spouses. All variables ignore any migration, taking simply those
individuals recorded in the census at a particular place as being or having been participants in the local
marriage market. The variables are calculated from all men and women regardless of their current
marital status. In my analysis which seeks to get at marriage formation, I naturally concentrate on
young men and women who, even if they were married as of the time of census, must have married
fairly recently and so the ratios and proportions calculated even with their inclusion should to some
degree reflect what the marriage market had been when they were actually choosing their partners.

20

The married women’s labor force participation is, again, calculated for the age group 25 – 40, i.e. not the women in the
estimation sample.

14

5. Results
The partner search and the labor market variables are now used to enrich the bare-bones logit
model presented in Tables 1 and 2. The dependent variable is 0 if a person is never married/single and
1 otherwise (i.e. ever married).21 As further individual characteristics I add age and dummy variables
for nativity and literacy. Fixed effects for individual states are also included, as well as those for the
size of township a person resides in, a categorical variable based on the IPUMS variable SIZEPL,
controlling for the separate effect of urban environment. All the variables, except state fixed effects
and size-of-place fixed effects are interacted with year of census so that the model can be estimated
across years, but still allow variation in most coefficients between years.22
The coefficients and mean marginal effects of the relevant independent variables are reported in
Tables 7 to 10. Generally speaking, the marginal effects have the expected signs: the probability of
marriage increases with sex ratio (with the sole exception of white women in 1930), with trait, with
men’s labor force participation and their OCCSCORE, and with age but declines with single women’s
labor force participation (again, with a few exceptions). These results are mostly consistent across all
four race-sex categories. Judging by the likelihood ratio index in the four tables, the independent
variables have greater success explaining men’s marital behavior than women’s but both the labor
market variables and the partner search variables are jointly significant in all the models (see the
bottom two rows in each table). The coefficients are also relatively precisely estimated. The standard
errors are consistently low across decades for both men and women. The marginal effects are also

21

Preston et al. (1992) show that marital status, like many other census variables, was misreported. In particular, many
deserted African-American women reported to be “widowed” when in fact they had been deserted (it is likely that many
white women did the same). While this would be a problem if one wished to study marital disruption directly, note that the
dependent variable is constructed such that this sort of misreporting has no effect: whether a deserted woman reported
herself to be widowed or deserted, she is here correctly coded as “ever married”. More problematic would be if young
deserted women misreported themselves to be “single/never married” – how prevalent such misreporting was is anyone’s
guess.
22
Running a separate estimation for each census year would also be possible but comparing logit coefficients and marginal
effects across separately run estimations could be treacherous due to the arbitrary normalization in estimation of these
models (Mroz and Zayats, 2008).

15

structurally quite stable from one decade to the next. This suggests that the variables are capturing
some of the underlying mechanisms of the marriage market of the time.
How important are the constructed partner search and labor market variables in accounting for the
declining age at marriage and rising incidence of marriage after 1900? Having a separate estimation for
each of the four race-sex group (white and black men and women) allows us to compare to what extent
the marriage markets were similar and along which lines they differed. Both the similarities and the
differences are instructive and they reveal a great deal about the underlying forces that exerted their
influence on American marriage during this time.
Let us start with the similarities. All four tables (7-10) suggest that the partner search and labor
market variables are crucial in explaining the declining age at marriage. Recall that the stripped-down
specifications presented in Tables 1 and 2 showed that the probability of getting married was
increasing ever faster with age, decade after decade. In Tables 7 – 10, however, the inclusion of the
explanatory variables led to a significant decline in the marginal effects of age which became
practically flat across years.23 In short, the root of the declining age at marriage lies in the joint effect
of sex ratio, trait and the labor market variables.
One variable, OCCSCORE, emerges as a particularly strong determinant of marriage for both
blacks and whites, and for men and women alike. It is clearly the most pervasive factor and one with
considerable explanatory power in the cross-section. For white men (Table 7), an increase in the value
of OCCSCORE by one standard deviation (1.19) increased the probability of getting married by 6.2
percentage points in 1930. Considering that the mean marginal effect of age was 0.039 (i.e. an extra
year of age made marriage about 3.9% more likely), one standard deviation increased in OCCSCORE
speeded up a young white man’s marriage by 1.6 years in 1930. Moreover, the importance of the
quality of men’s job increased through time, as evidenced by its growing marginal effect in all four
tables 7 – 10. Clearly, it made ever more of a difference for a man’s marital success not just that he had
23

This is most obvious in case of white men but other race-sex groups share in this, too.

16

a job but also what kind of job he had.24 The estimation leaves little doubt that men’s improving labor
market outcomes throughout the late 19th and early 20th centuries acted powerfully towards
encouraging early marriage.25 It is quite intuitive that women will be more willing to marry when their
potential husband’s economic prospects look good. In that sense, the early 20th century provides the
inverse of the explanation provided by Oppenheimer (2000) for the decline of marriage in late 20th
century.
In contrast to that, however, the intensive search variables turn out to be practically weak and
largely statistically insignificant across the board. The marginal effects of the variance in the number
of breadwinners are rather small, so its explanatory power is limited. This is even more the case with
the variance in family size whose coefficients are small (and of the wrong sign). The intensive search
variables therefore fail to make an impact (and this is the case for all race-sex categories). This does
not contradict the earlier assertion that the intensive search was in fact getting more difficult, as family
arrangements grew more complicated and varied; but it suggests that intensive search was perhaps not
the binding constraint when it came to marriage formation.
Next to the forces which were universal in their influence, there operated also those which had
differential impact on men and women, regardless of race. Note that the likelihood ratio indexes (LRI)
for men (0.302 for whites in Table 7 and 0.311 for blacks in Table 9) are appreciably higher than for
women (0.207 for white women and 0.196 for black women). The model clearly has more success
explaining the cross-sectional variation in marital outcomes for men than for women. The sexes also
differ in that some variables, such as single women’s labor force participation, make much more of an
impact on women’s probability of being married while others, e.g. sex ratio, are more influential for
men. A summary of these cross-sectional effects (calculated, by way of example, for 1930) in Table 11
24

There is a detectable difference in the relative importance of these two between the white and black marriage market: for
whites, the increased importance of OCCSCORE is accompanied by a decline in the importance of men’s labor force
participation. Among blacks, this variable remains relatively important even as OCCSCORE becomes ever more powerful.
25
Note that this is not equivalent to saying that marriage positively responded to economic growth. The variable
OCCSCORE does not capture any change in income due to economic growth: each occupation is associated with the same,
fixed value of 1950 median annual income, whether the occupation is recorded in 1880 or 1930.

17

highlights these gender differences. The table reports the changes in the imputed probability of being
married by each race-sex group’s median age at marriage26 as one varies each explanatory variable
between its 10th and 90th percentile while keeping all other variables at their means.27 Variables sex
ratio, trait, single women’s labor force participation and men’s job quality are the most powerful
factors. Put together, they account for much more of the total cross-sectional variance for men than
they do for women. While, in any given census year, the proportion of women ever married goes from
virtually zero to about two thirds between ages 16 and 25, the cross-sectional variation accounted for
by moving all the partner search and labor market variables from 10th to 90th percentile (an unlikely
real-life scenario in itself) reaches 5.5 percentage points for white women and 4.1 for black women. In
contrast, for men, of whom about two thirds get married by age 30, the same numerical exercise yields
30.9 percentage points for whites and 41.4 points for blacks. The main reason why the variables have
such an impact for black men is that the explanatory variables display a much wider variance than is
the case for white men (see Table 5). There is also a difference between men and women in the relative
strength of the partner search variables and the labor market variables as a whole. For men, the partner
search variables make much more of a splash.28 This is because the impact of average men’s job
quality is offset by the single women’s labor force participation for women while, for men,
OCCSCORE dominates the labor market factors. For women, the labor market variables generate
conflicting incentives regarding marriage.
Apart from the forces with a gender-specific effect, there are also some which produce
differences across races. One noticeable difference from Table 1 in Tables 7 and 8 is that the
coefficients for both second and first generation immigrants have increased; for the first-generation
immigrant men they even flip from negative to positive. This suggests that the reason why immigrants
26

The median age at marriage used for the calculations in the table is 25 years of white men, 22 for white women, 23 for
black men and 20 for black women.
27
The statistics are calculated for US-born, US-bred and literate persons, so nativity and literacy are fixed for all the
calculations in Table 11.
28
The values for individual variables do not add up when calculating the totals for groups of variables due to the nonlinearity of the model.

18

and their immediate descendants married later and in smaller numbers than natives lay in the marriage
market that they faced.29 Their marriage markets were smaller and more constrained. Had it not been
for that, their marriage rate would have been closer to that of natives (i.e. the marginal effects of
nativity would be closer to zero). For example, in 1930, the mean marginal effect of being a secondgeneration white man on the probability of being married is -6.6% in Table 1 but only -2.1% in Table 7
where the other explanatory variables are included.
What is crucial to stress is that the changes in coefficients across time are significant for the white
population but not for blacks. Whereas for white women, the partner search coefficients get bigger
from year to year and become statistically different from each other, for black women only the
coefficient on average men’s job quality changes significantly.30 The same distinction, by and large,
applies to results for black versus white men. All genders and races equally share the increasing
importance of men’s occupation across the years and all except black men witness a growing
(negative) impact of single women’s labor force participation. But where the difference between white
and blacks is most pronounced are the results for the partner search variables, trait and sex ratio.
Clearly, the marriage markets of whites and blacks, while structurally similar, nevertheless worked
with different demographic inputs which produced the differences between races. The obvious
candidate for the differential input is the dynamic of immigration.
Immigration had a two-fold impact. The short-term impact was one of fragmenting the marriage
market as the diversity of immigrants made it harder for everybody to find their match (see Table 3).
This was particularly the case for immigrants and for the second-generation immigrants who had still
relatively specific ethnic preferences regarding their partner. Table 12 shows that both the trait and sex
ratio deteriorated with time for first and second generation immigrant men. Note that for women of

29

The labor market variables are only race-county specific, not nativity specific (in line with the assumption that the labor
market was probably less “segregated” than the marriage market along nativity divides), so they do not capture differences
between various ethnic groups in the labor market conditions.
30
Evaluated at α = 5% level of significance.

19

these categories, only the trait declined while the sex ratio actually became somewhat more favorable
in the first decade of the 20th century – no doubt a result of the highly skewed sex ratio among the
immigrants. The US-born of US parentage were able to hold their own, partly because their marriage
market only partly overlaps with that of immigrants but the presence of immigrants in the first decade
of the 20th century was so strong that they were able to bring down the all-white men’s average both
for the trait and for sex ratio. The short-term impact of immigration was therefore to increase the
extensive search cost and intensify the competition for white men in the form of higher sex ratio on the
marriage market. These trends are mostly absent for blacks who saw no black immigration of
comparable scale during this time.
The long-term effect of immigration, after it came to a halt with the beginning of the First World
War, was one of integration. The children of the early 20th century immigrants became secondgeneration immigrants and the children of those, US-born Americans of American parentage. With the
drying up of immigration, the fragmentation of the marriage markets was reversed. US-born men’s
trait and sex ratio increased again by 1930, signaling an improving situation on their marriage market
and declining search costs.31 While the values of immigrants kept on declining after 1910, they
constituted an ever smaller fraction of the US marriageable population. Notice, again, that these trends
are mostly absent among blacks, perhaps with the exception of a slight decline in trait for blacks which
is a result of the dilution of the black population by the previous white immigration.
Compounding this effect of integration was the increasing impact which high values of trait had on
the probability of being married (as documented by the increasing coefficient and marginal effect of
this variable in Tables 7 and 8). Not only was the integration increasing the values of trait but marriage
was also becoming ever more likely at high values of trait. The extensive search costs were therefore
falling in two ways: the integration of immigrant families made suitable matches more frequent in the

31

Other integration forces were clearly also at work, for example literacy became practically universal which would also
lead to increase the value of trait, as defined here.

20

general population (raising trait) and at the same time the changing ‘matching technology’ (perhaps
through the rise of dating or greater daily intercourse among adolescents thanks to the spreading highschool movement) made matches more likely at any given level of trait.
How strong were these changes in partner search costs relative to labor market factors in ushering
in the decline in age at marriage and an increase in marriage rate? The shifts across time are harder to
evaluate than cross-sectional variation because non-linear models do not lend themselves to the kind of
decomposition often applied to linear models. A crude analogy is to evaluate the imputed probability
of marriage at the means in each decade and then see how much of the change can be attributed to
changes in means of explanatory variables and how much to changes in the coefficients. In Table 13,
this exercise is attempted for white literate men aged 25. The top left value of 0.352 is obtained by
predicting the probability of being married at the means of the explanatory variables in 1900. These
means summarize the average marriage market and labor market conditions the 25-year old literate
white man would face in 1900. As one moves across the table to the right, the means are kept
unchanged but the coefficients are changed first for the partner search variables, then for the labor
market variables and finally for all remaining variables (age, literacy, nativity and state and size-ofplace fixed effects). The values show that simply switching the coefficients on the partner search
variables to their 1930 values would increase the imputed probability by about 3.9 percentage points
or, expressed multiplicatively, would raise the probability by a factor of 1.11. Switching the labor
market coefficients to their 1930 values decreases the imputed probability by 1.2 percentage points.
Bringing in the 1930 coefficients on all other variables raises the probability to 0.493. This implies that
the impact is positive for the partner search variables and negative for the labor market variables but
they are both relatively small compared to the effect of changing all coefficients at the same time.32
Not surprisingly, the same result obtains if one follows the bottom line of Table 13 where the same
exercise is applied to the 1930 means of the explanatory variables.
32

This is the change from 0.352 to 0.493, or an increase by a factor of 1.40.

21

Moving vertically along the left-most column keeps the coefficient fixed at the 1900 values but
changes the means in the evaluation. From the top cell to the one below it, the means on partner search
variables are changed first which leads to an increase in imputed probability of 0.01. Changing also the
means on labor market variables increases the imputed probability slightly to 0.364. Adjusting the
remaining means reduces the probability to 0.350. So, over the 30-year period, the partner search
variables were moving overall in a direction that favored marriage while the combined effect of labor
market variables was negligible. This is doubtless the result of the offsetting pressures of single
women’s labor force participation on the one hand and rising OCCSCORE on the other.
Finally, along the diagonal, the coefficients and the means of a given set of variables are changed
at the same time. For the partner search variables, this implies an increase in imputed probability of
being married by over five percentage points because the shifts in means and the changes in
coefficients complement each other. On the other hand, changes in coefficients and means of the labor
market variables leads to a small decline in the imputed probability and this is clearly because the
negative effect of the change in coefficient strongly dominates the slight positive effect of change in
the means of variables. In other words, over the three decades the marriage market ‘penalty’ associated
with single women’s labor force participation increased faster than the premium of men’s good job
prospects. The remaining variables then bring the imputed value from 0.396 to 0.490. The tentative
conclusion from this exercise is that, for white men, changes in partner search over the thirty years
were much more important than labor market changes and that they possibly accounted for about one
third of the overall change: the imputed probability went up by a factor of 1.39 (from 0.352 to 0.490)
between 1900 and 1930, with the partner search alone pushing it up by a factor of 1.15 (from 0.352 to
0.404).
For white literate women of about median age at marriage (22), the same computations are
repeated in Table 14. Many of the patterns observed in case of white men reappear here: changes in the
labor market means bring the imputed probability down but changes in coefficients increase it both for
22

the partner search variables and for the labor market variables. The movement along the diagonal
indicates that changes in both partner search and labor market contributed to the overall increase in the
likelihood of marriage but that the labor market variables contributed the lion’s share. Together, the
partner search and labor market variables can account for practically the whole difference in imputed
probability of ever being married that occurred for 22-year old literate white women between 1900 and
1930. With this overall probability increasing by a factor of 1.22, the labor market factors alone would
multiply it by 1.14 and partner search factors by 1.08. So, again, the partner search contributes about a
third of the overall change but, unlike in the case of white men, the labor market factors make up the
remaining two thirds.
The conclusion about what caused the change in marriage behavior across the first three decades of
the 20th century is therefore exactly opposite to what turned out to be crucial in the cross-sectional
analysis (see Table 11). While the labor market variables cancelled out for women in the cross section,
they were the prime movers in the change across time, and vice versa for men. For women, the partner
search and labor market variables could only explain a small portion of the cross-sectional variation
but they go a long way towards explaining the differences from 1900 to 1930. For men, the variables
have more success cross-sectionally but prove much weaker in Table 13. The contradiction is more
apparent than real, however. In the cross-sectional analysis, a fixed coefficient interacts with the
relatively wide distribution of the explanatory variable: for example, a move from the 10th to 90th
percentile of men’s OCCSCORE in 1930 represents a change from 0.9 to 3.6, for single women’s labor
force participation the values are 20% and 74%. In the time-change analysis, however, it is the
averages that change relatively little (e.g. mean OCCSCORE of men in Table 13 goes from 2.1 in 1900
to 2.3 in 1930; mean single women’s LFP goes from 43% to 54%) but it is the changing coefficients
that do most of the work (see Tables 7 and 8). If one may use a production function analogy with the
explanatory variables such as trait, sex ratio etc as inputs and the coefficients and the functional form
of the logit specifying the technology, then one could say that, over the period 1880 to 1930, men saw
23

greater changes in their values of inputs while for women the marriage market changed more through a
change of technology.
6. Conclusion
The rising marriage rate after 1900 was the net result of several conflicting forces. While women’s
labor market involvement would have made marriage relatively less attractive, ceteris paribus,
improving young men’s job prospects apparently outweighed this negative influence and the falling
extensive search costs produced a net effect in favor of earlier marriage. The intensive search costs,
although they did increase during the period, did not make as much impact on the decision whether or
not to get married. The declining extensive search made it easier to match with someone relatively
close to one’s ideal on the observable characteristics and to the extent that this increased the expected
gains from marriage relative to remaining single, the opportunity cost of further intensive search (i.e.
more dating before marriage) increased, leading to earlier marriage.
Ultimately, it is perhaps quite straightforward that, over time, labor market factors played relatively
greater role in women’s marital behavior while search factors in men’s. After all, the early 20th century
marriage market could still perhaps be characterized as one where men did the searching and women
did the choosing – and there is no doubt that the economic prospects of their potential husbands
weighed heavily in their decision-making. The changes in American society at the beginning of the
20th century were such that both men and women found their part of the process of courtship getting
easier from decade to decade. Men could find a suitable match among women faster and, with their
standing in the labor market improving, women found the option of marriage more acceptable. These
new trends were set to continue, until they were yet again upset in the 1960s.
What is not so straightforward is to detect the influence of search costs on secular trends in
marriage. Becker et al. (1977) make a persuasive theoretical case that they matter but their empirical
identification requires fairly detailed data and careful analysis because the demographic forces which
24

determine these costs change slowly and in subtle ways.33 The present results show, however, that the
search aspect is an important part of the story. It may hold the key to other historical issues such as
why the early 20th century grew not only more eager to get married but also more eager to get
divorced. Could it have been that easier extensive search on the observables and harder (and shorter)
intensive search on unobservables made lifelong marriage more attractive and at the same time less
attainable?

33

This is also the main reason why the present analysis stops in 1930: the 1940 census (and subsequent censuses) do not
provide detailed information on the level of counties and the definition of several variables changes (e.g. labor force
participation, education etc.).

25

References:
Becker, Gary S., Landes, Elisabeth M. and Michael, Robert T. “An Economic Analysis of Marital
Instability”, Journal of Political Economy 85 (6), 1977, pp. 1141 – 1187
Becker , Gary S. A Treatise on the Family: Enlarged Edition, Harvard University Press, 1993
Blau F.D., Kahn L.M. & Waldfogel J. “Understanding Young Women’s Marriage Decisions: The Role
of Labor and Marriage Market Conditions”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 53 (4), Jul
2000, pp. 624 – 647
Cherlin, Andrew J. “American Marriage in the Early Twenty-first Century,” The Future of Children 15
(2) – Marriage and Child Wellbeing, Autumn 2005, pp. 33 – 55
David, Paul A. and Sanderson, Warren C. “The Emergence of a Two Child Norm among American
Birth-Controllers,” Population and Development Review 13 (1), March 1987, pp. 1 – 41.
Fitch, Catherine A. and Ruggles Steven. “Historical Trends in Marriage Formation: The United States,
1850 – 1990”. In: Waite, Linda J., Bachrach, C., Hindin, M., Thomson, E., Thornton A., The Ties
That Bind: Perspective on Marriage and Cohabitation, Hawthorne: Aldin de Gruyter, New York,
2000: pp. 59 – 90
Greenwood, Jeremy and Guner, Nezih. “Marriage and Divorce since World War II: Analyzing the
Role of Technological Progress on the Formation of Households”, Economie d’avant garde,
Research report No. 8, 2005.
Goldin, Claudia. Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women, Oxford
University Press, 1990
Haines, Michael R. “Long-Term Marriage Paterns in the United States from Colonial Times to the
Present”, The History of the Family 1 (1), 1996, pp. 15 – 39
Jacobson, Paul H. American marriage and Divorce, Rinehart & Co., New York, 1959
Koller, Marvin R. “Some Changes in Courtship Behavior in Three Generations of Ohio Women”,
American Sociological Review 16 (3), June 1951, pp. 366 – 370.
Lundberg, Shelly and Pollak, Robert A. “The American Family and Family Economics,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 21 (2), Spring 200, pp. 3 – 26
Mroz, Thomas A. and Zayats, Yaraslau V. “Arbitrarily normalized coefficients, information sets, and
false reports of ‘biases’ in binary outcome models”, Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (3),
Aug 2008, pp. 406 – 413
Oppenheimer V. K. “The Continuing Importance of Men’s Economic Position in Marriage
Formation”, in Waite, Linda. The Ties that Bind: perspectives on Marriage and Cohabitation,
Aldine de Gruyter, New York, 2000, pp. 283 – 301
Preston, Samuel H., Lim, Suet and Morgan, S. Phillip. “African-American Marriage in 1910: Beneath
The Surface of Census data,” Demography 29 (1), February 1992: pp. 1 – 15
Raley, R. Kelly. “Recent Trends and Differentials in Marriage and Cohabitation: the United States” in
Waite, Linda. The Ties that Bind: perspectives on Marriage and Cohabitation, Aldine de Gruyter,
New York, 2000, pp. 19 – 39

26

Ruggles, Steven, Sobek, Matthew, Alexander, Trent, Fitch, Catherine A., Goeken, Ronald, Hall,
Patricia K., King, Miriam, and Ronnander, Chad. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:
Version 4.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center
[producer and distributor], 2008.
Stevenson B., Wolfers J., “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce Laws and family Distress”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, pp. 267 – 288
Stevenson, Betsey and Wolfers, Justin. “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their Driving Forces,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2), Spring 2007, pp. 27 – 52
Sussman M.B., Steinmetz S.K. and Peterson G.W. (eds.) Handbook of Marriage and the Family – 2nd
ed., New York: Plenum Press, 1999
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Marriage and Divorce, 1867 – 1906, Parts I and II. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office, 1909
U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service. Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and
Naturalization Service, 1998, U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, D.C., 2000
U.S. Census Office. Twelfth Census of the United States, Taken in the Year 1900 – Population, Part I,
Washington, D.C. 1901

27

Figure 1 - Proportion never married/single by age 45 – 54; by census year (birth decade)
%

13
12
11

White men
White women

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
(1826-35) (1836-45) (1846-55) (1856-65) (1866-75) (1876-85) (1886-95)

1950
(18961905)

1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2008
(1906-15) (1916-25) (1926-35) (1936-45) (1946-55) (1954-63)

Source: The year 1890 is interpolated from 1880 and 1900. Calculated from
IPUMS. See Ruggles et al. (2008)
Figure 2 - Percentage never married at age 45-54 by census year (birth decade)
25

20

Black men
Black women

15

10

5

0
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
(1826-35) (1836-45) (1846-55) (1856-65) (1866-75) (1876-85) (1886-95)

1950
(18961905)

1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2008
(1906-15) (1916-25) (1926-35) (1936-45) (1946-55) (1954-63)

Source: The year 1890 is interpolated from 1880 and 1900.Calculated from
IPUMS. See Ruggles et al. (2008)
28

Figure 3 - Mean OCCSCORE of white men by age
25.0

20.0

1880
1900
1910
1920
1930

15.0

10.0

5.0

age

0.0
16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Source: IPUMS

Figure 4 - Mean OCCSCORE of black men by age
20.0
18.0
16.0
14.0
1880
1900
1910
1920
1930

12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0

age

0.0
16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

Source: IPUMS

29

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Figure 5 – Graphical illustration of matching on nativity

Note: Not drawn exactly to scale. Marriages falling in the shaded areas
constitute a match on nativity.

30

Figure 6 - Mean trait by age and year for men
white 1880
white 1900
white 1910
white 1920
white 1930
black 1800
black 1900
black 1910
black 1920
black 1930

0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

age

0
16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Note: see text for definition of trait

Figure 7 - Mean trait by age and year for women
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04

white 1880

white 1900

white 1910

white 1920

white 1930

black 1800

black 1900

black 1910

black 1920

black 1930

0.03
0.02
0.01
age

0
16

17

18

19

20

Note: see text for definition of trait

31

21

22

23

24

25

Table 1 - A logit model: how the probability of being ever married depends on certain personal characteristics
1880
1900
1910
1920
1930
H0:β1880=…=β1930
2
χ (4)
Variable
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
p-value
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
White men
0.391
0.360
0.353
0.348
0.379
233.667
Age
0.053
0.051
0.052
0.054
0.055
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.000
-0.603
-0.336
-0.214
-0.213
-0.145
79.192
Literate
-0.082
-0.047
-0.031
-0.033
-0.021
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.034)
(0.042)
(0.054)
0.000
-0.420
-0.422
-0.115
-0.357
-0.186
15.504
2nd
-0.057
-0.059
-0.052
-0.056
-0.066
generation
(0.032)
(0.026)
(0.048)
(0.024)
(0.045)
0.004
-0.429
-0.373
-0.274
-0.468
-0.424
114.040
Immigrant
-0.059
-0.018
-0.029
-0.042
-0.061
(0.032)
(0.046)
(0.022)
(0.046)
(0.025)
0.000
-9.013
-8.627
-8.402
-8.083
-8.776
109.166
Constant
(0.083)
(0.071)
(0.064)
(0.068)
(0.074)
0.000
White women
0.408
0.385
0.399
0.400
0.412
37.069
Age
0.071
0.067
0.070
0.072
0.073
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.000
-0.320
-0.840
-0.961
-0.633
-0.407
130.698
Literate
-0.056
-0.147
-0.168
-0.113
-0.072
(0.044)
(0.049)
(0.046)
(0.057)
(0.071)
0.000
-0.410
-0.328
-0.107
-0.259
0.124
29.332
2nd
-0.071
-0.057
-0.045
-0.041
-0.043
generation
(0.030)
(0.027)
(0.053)
(0.025)
(0.051)
0.000
-0.107
0.072
0.608
0.058
0.159
299.478
Immigrant
-0.019
0.034
0.075
0.109
0.028
(0.038)
(0.050)
(0.028)
(0.049)
(0.031)
0.000
-8.090
-7.226
-7.295
-7.514
-7.901
69.953
Constant
(0.102)
(0.090)
(0.083)
(0.090)
(0.096)
0.000
Note: The dependent variable is 1 if a person has ever married by the year of census, zero otherwise. Fixed effects for states and population size of one’s
place of abode (SIZEPL) have been included but are not reported. All the coefficients are based on an estimation of a single model where the explanatory
nd
variables (except for the state and size-of-place fixed effects) have been interacted with census years. The variable “2 generation” is 1 for persons who
were native born but whose both parents were foreign-born, zero otherwise. Variable “Immigrant” is one for first-generation immigrants, zero otherwise.
The right-most column gives the results of a linear restrictions test that the coefficients on a variable are constant across all census years. The sample is
restricted to men of age 30 or less and women of age 30 and less. Source of data: IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2008)

32

Table 2 - A logit model: how the probability of being ever married depends on certain personal characteristics
1880
1900
1910
1920
1930
H0:β1880=…=β1930
Variable
χ2(4)
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
p-value
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
Black men
0.406
0.365
0.368
0.341
0.356
46.116
Age
0.060
0.056
0.058
0.057
0.058
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.005)
0.000
-0.268
-0.103
-0.133
-0.091
-0.068
7.746
Literate
-0.039
-0.016
-0.021
-0.015
-0.011
(0.059)
(0.047)
(0.048)
(0.050)
(0.056)
0.101
-0.018
-1.531
0.383
0.551
0.558
15.255
2nd
-0.003
-0.234
0.086
-0.369
-0.176
generation
(0.790)
(2.041)
(1.012)
(0.396)
(0.968)
0.004
-0.655
-2.839
-0.641
-1.720
-0.427
5.335
Immigrant
-0.097
-0.039
-0.012
-0.107
-0.069
(0.533)
(1.175)
(0.183)
(1.060)
(0.185)
0.255
-9.434
-8.728
-8.534
-7.773
-8.046
69.057
Constant
(0.186)
(0.145)
(0.138)
(0.133)
(0.130)
0.000
Black women
0.382
0.375
0.386
0.393
0.392
3.057
Age
0.072
0.072
0.074
0.075
0.075
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
0.548
-0.263
-0.306
-0.248
-0.062
-0.236
9.783
Literate
-0.050
-0.058
-0.047
-0.012
-0.045
(0.058)
(0.048)
(0.053)
(0.064)
(0.078)
0.044
0.695
-0.807
1.684
-0.500
1.028
4.704
2nd
0.132
-0.154
-0.095
0.046
-0.070
generation
(0.605)
(0.527)
(0.897)
(0.409)
(0.815)
0.319
-0.622
-1.073
-0.056
-1.682
-0.188
2.690
Immigrant
-0.118
0.070
-0.055
-0.011
-0.036
(0.478)
(0.973)
(0.235)
(0.867)
(0.216)
0.611
-7.531
-7.462
-7.528
-7.585
-7.479
0.298
Constant
(0.212)
(0.179)
(0.174)
(0.182)
(0.177)
0.990
Note: The dependent variable is 1 if a person has ever married by the year of census, zero otherwise. Fixed effects for states and population size of
one’s place of abode (SIZEPL) have been included but are not reported. All the coefficients are based on an estimation of a single model where the
nd
explanatory variables (except for the state and size-of-place fixed effects) have been interacted with census years. The variable “2 generation” is 1 for
persons who were native born but whose both parents were foreign-born, zero otherwise. Variable “Immigrant” is one for first-generation immigrants,
zero otherwise. The right-most column gives the results of a linear restrictions test that the coefficients on a variable are constant across all census
years. The sample is restricted to men of age 30 or less and women of age 30 and less. Source of data: IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2008)

33

Table 3 – Marriage homogamy (in %) of recently married young couples by:
Census year
race
nativity
literacy
all three
age
all four
actual
99.9
94.2
91.1
85.3
80.7
69.4
1900
random cf.
78.1
74.3
83.8
51.1
44.4
22.7
actual
99.9
94.8
92.1
86.9
81.2
71.0
1910
random cf.
79.5
70.0
86.8
50.3
44.5
22.4
actual
99.9
95.1
96.9
92.0
82.9
76.6
1930
random cf.
80.1
82.3
94.7
62.6
43.2
27.0
Note: “Recently married young couples” are couples married for 5 years or less and under 30
years of age. The rows denoted “actual” show the percentage of couples matched on each
characteristic in each year. Rows denoted “random cf” show the rate of matching in each
year and column that would result if the same populations of men and women were matched
randomly.

Table 4 - Marriage homogamy (in%) among recently married couples by nativity and census year
Census year
1880
1900
1910
1920
White men
US-born with at least one US-born parent
97.1
96.8
96.6
96.8
2nd generation immigrant
93.4
94.0
94.1
94.2
Immigrant
84.7
83.4
84.0
82.9
White women
US-born with at least one US-born parent
94.9
95.0
95.4
95.5
2nd generation immigrant
88.9
91.2
91.7
91.1
Immigrant
90.6
88.2
87.5
87.1
Note: “Recently married couples” are couples married for 5 years or less.

34

1930
97.1
94.6
82.2
96.0
92.0
86.0

Means

Means

Means

Means

Table 5 - Partner search variables by census year, race and sex
variance in number variance in number
White men
sex ratio
trait
of breadwinners
of children
1880
1.000
0.061
0.111
0.202
1900
0.959
0.060
0.151
0.218
1910
0.895
0.055
0.212
0.222
1920
0.938
0.059
0.215
0.221
1930
0.996
0.064
0.278
0.216
StDev
0.443
0.034
0.143
0.051
variance in number variance in number
White women
sex ratio
trait
of breadwinners
of children
1880
0.840
0.048
0.124
0.207
1900
0.898
0.053
0.155
0.220
1910
0.960
0.053
0.214
0.223
1920
0.958
0.054
0.215
0.222
1930
0.912
0.057
0.281
0.216
StDev
0.4233
0.028
0.141
0.048
variance in number variance in number
Black men
sex ratio
trait
of breadwinners
of children
1880
1.144
0.034
0.282
0.140
1900
1.163
0.029
0.279
0.151
1910
1.126
0.030
0.392
0.166
1920
1.084
0.027
0.369
0.166
1930
1.104
0.028
0.396
0.172
StDev
0.6642
0.024
0.234
0.093
variance in number variance in number
Black women
sex ratio
trait
of breadwinners
of children
1880
0.715
0.025
0.308
0.149
1900
0.700
0.020
0.306
0.160
1910
0.760
0.021
0.407
0.170
1920
0.753
0.018
0.385
0.171
1930
0.776
0.019
0.402
0.174
StDev
0.5117
0.016
0.228
0.089
Note: calculated at age 25 for each, the standard deviations in last row of each panel is across all
census years

35

Means

Means

Means

Means

Table 6 - Labor market variables by census year, race and sex
Single women’s
Married women’s
Men’s labor
White men
labor force participation
labor force participation
force participation
1880
0.312
0.025
0.905
1900
0.431
0.033
0.908
1910
0.523
0.066
0.921
1920
0.561
0.070
0.903
1930
0.537
0.109
0.866
StDev
0.230
0.065
0.060
Single women’s
Married women’s
Men’s labor
White women
labor force participation
labor force participation
force participation
1880
0.326
0.026
0.906
1900
0.443
0.034
0.908
1910
0.527
0.067
0.922
1920
0.572
0.072
0.904
1930
0.543
0.110
0.865
StDev
0.226
0.064
0.058
Single women’s
Married women’s
Men’s labor
Black men
labor force participation
labor force participation
force participation
1880
0.658
0.308
0.940
1900
0.641
0.246
0.928
1910
0.704
0.511
0.939
1920
0.562
0.343
0.914
1930
0.567
0.360
0.893
StDev
0.270
0.245
0.100
Single women’s
Married women’s
Men’s labor
Black women
labor force participation
labor force participation
force participation
1880
0.662
0.313
0.939
1900
0.656
0.268
0.926
1910
0.724
0.507
0.946
1920
0.598
0.345
0.918
1930
0.573
0.371
0.907
StDev
0.259
0.236
0.085
Note: The values are calculated at age 25 with standard deviations calculated across all census years.

36

Table 7 - Logit results for white men
1880
1900
1910
1920
1930
H0:β1880=…=β1930
2
χ (4)
Variable
coefficient mean coefficient mean coefficient mean coefficient mean coefficient mean
p-value
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
0.537
0.598
0.738
0.594
0.397
72.083
Sex ratio
0.072
0.082
0.106
0.089
0.056
(0.033)
(0.030)
(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.030)
0.000
6.040
5.133
4.972
6.141
10.346
83.952
Trait
0.805
0.707
0.711
0.922
1.448
(0.548)
(0.478)
(0.448)
(0.472)
(0.502)
0.000
0.107
0.013
0.063
0.144
6.134
-0.141
variance in number of
0.015
0.002
0.010
0.020
-0.019
breadwinners
(0.095)
(0.081)
(0.075)
(0.083)
(0.082)
0.189
-0.477
-0.503
-0.268
-0.352
1.374
-0.507
-0.066
-0.072
-0.040
-0.049
variance in family size
-0.068
(0.167)
(0.166)
(0.173)
(0.189)
(0.193)
0.849
-0.281
-0.117
-0.224
-0.423
-0.540
54.759
Single women's LFP
-0.037
-0.016
-0.032
-0.064
-0.076
(0.063)
(0.053)
(0.045)
(0.044)
(0.044)
0.000
-0.596
0.049
0.311
0.344
0.221
10.862
Married women's LFP
-0.079
0.007
0.044
0.052
0.031
(0.259)
(0.246)
(0.157)
(0.183)
(0.162)
0.028
0.601
0.664
0.754
0.439
0.444
3.378
Men's LFP
0.080
0.092
0.108
0.066
0.062
(0.171)
(0.162)
(0.168)
(0.137)
(0.134)
0.497
0.234
0.217
0.259
0.339
0.372
257.379
OCCSCORE
0.031
0.030
0.037
0.051
0.052
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
0.000
0.325
0.291
0.275
0.262
0.279
199.687
Age
0.043
0.040
0.039
0.039
0.039
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.000
-0.718
-0.502
-0.589
-0.864
74.364
-0.917
-0.099
-0.072
-0.089
-0.121
Literate
-0.122
(0.044)
(0.041)
(0.034)
(0.043)
(0.052)
0.000
-0.335
-0.324
-0.244
-0.170
-0.148
42.458
2nd generation
-0.045
-0.045
-0.035
-0.026
-0.021
(0.034)
(0.027)
(0.025)
(0.023)
(0.022)
0.000
0.265
0.541
0.583
0.540
0.600
50.017
Immigrant
0.035
0.075
0.083
0.081
0.084
(0.041)
(0.034)
(0.030)
(0.032)
(0.035)
0.000
-8.680
-8.262
-8.131
-7.283
-7.442
56.087
Constant
(0.179)
(0.167)
(0.173)
(0.142)
(0.148)
0.000
811.759
1035.219
1499.965
1194.638
1342.860
lnL = -233906.9
H0: search vars = 0
2
χ (4) p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
lnL0 = -335240.06
399.476
608.941
1080.013
1966.013
2415.210
LRI = 0.302
H0: lab vars = 0
2
χ (4) p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
N = 537577
Note: The dependent variable is evermar = 1 if a person is ever married, zero otherwise. The two hypotheses of joint significance at the bottom of each
2
column are tested using Wald test with critical values from χ (4) and they are rejected at α = 0.05 in all cases. The right-most column reports the Wald
test for the equality of each coefficient across years. Fixed effects for state and town size are not reported.

37

Table 8 - Logit results for white women
1880
1900
1910
1920
1930
H0:β1880=…=β1930
2
χ (4)
Variable
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
p-value
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
0.070
0.068
0.125
0.060
-0.078
118.072
Sex ratio
0.012
0.012
0.022
0.011
-0.014
(0.018)
(0.014)
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.015)
0.000
5.794
4.472
3.840
5.476
7.082
32.473
Trait
0.997
0.779
0.663
0.972
1.244
(0.510)
(0.466)
(0.416)
(0.435)
(0.472)
0.000
-0.295
-0.086
-0.021
0.106
0.098
10.926
variance in number
-0.051
-0.015
-0.004
0.019
0.017
of breadwinners
(0.106)
(0.087)
(0.082)
(0.091)
(0.090)
0.027
-0.604
-0.562
-0.648
0.056
-0.212
9.602
variance in family
-0.104
-0.098
-0.112
0.010
-0.037
size
(0.189)
(0.179)
(0.188)
(0.203)
(0.205)
0.048
-0.144
-0.394
-0.617
-0.836
-0.919
104.120
Single women's LFP
-0.025
-0.069
-0.107
-0.148
-0.161
(0.074)
(0.062)
(0.054)
(0.055)
(0.055)
0.000
0.131
0.323
0.210
0.026
0.064
1.153
Married women's
0.023
0.056
0.036
0.005
0.011
LFP
(0.335)
(0.261)
(0.168)
(0.210)
(0.181)
0.886
1.611
1.555
1.764
1.405
1.391
3.308
Men's LFP
0.277
0.271
0.304
0.250
0.244
(0.195)
(0.178)
(0.188)
(0.158)
(0.144)
0.508
0.007
0.092
0.110
0.280
0.424
164.340
OCCSCORE
0.001
0.016
0.019
0.050
0.075
(0.034)
(0.027)
(0.024)
(0.025)
(0.025)
0.000
0.435
0.398
0.421
0.400
0.377
95.387
Age
0.075
0.069
0.073
0.071
0.066
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
0.000
-0.584
-1.014
-1.070
-0.817
-0.744
58.904
Literate
-0.100
-0.177
-0.185
-0.145
-0.131
(0.052)
(0.053)
(0.049)
(0.060)
(0.076)
0.000
-0.336
-0.271
-0.199
-0.137
0.137
37.934
2nd generation
-0.058
-0.047
-0.034
-0.024
-0.024
(0.032)
(0.028)
(0.026)
(0.025)
(0.024)
0.000
0.211
0.462
0.681
0.942
0.522
175.973
Immigrant
0.036
0.081
0.118
0.167
0.092
(0.046)
(0.039)
(0.036)
(0.038)
(0.041)
0.000
-10.148
-9.033
-9.501
-9.225
-8.860
24.370
Constant
(0.220)
(0.198)
(0.205)
(0.179)
(0.180)
0.000
219.788
171.500
305.579
258.416
228.675
lnL = -192711.3
H0: search vars = 0
2
χ (4) p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
lnL0 = -242908.8
76.952
130.126
210.260
369.832
523.220
LRI = 0.207
H0: lab vars = 0
2
χ (4) p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
N = 367668
Note: The dependent variable is evermar = 1 if a person is ever married, zero otherwise. The two hypotheses of joint significance at the bottom of each
2
column are tested using Wald test with critical values from χ (4) and they are rejected at α = 0.05 in all cases. The right-most column reports the Wald test for
the equality of each coefficient across years. Fixed effects for state and town size are not reported.

38

Table 9 - Logit results for black men
1880
1900
1910
1920
1930
H0:β1880=…=β1930
2
χ (4)
Variable
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
p-value
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
0.507
0.532
0.608
0.500
0.447
4.811
Sex ratio
0.072
0.078
0.092
0.081
0.070
(0.064)
(0.051)
(0.053)
(0.051)
(0.055)
0.307
7.219
6.998
3.429
2.789
5.923
6.415
Trait
1.022
1.026
0.517
0.453
0.925
(2.000)
(1.721)
(1.538)
(1.545)
(1.495)
0.170
-0.150
0.348
-0.010
0.334
-0.099
14.261
variance in number
-0.021
0.051
-0.002
0.054
-0.015
of breadwinners
(0.144)
(0.122)
(0.116)
(0.130)
(0.119)
0.007
-0.388
-0.679
0.118
-0.581
0.142
7.811
variance in family
-0.055
-0.100
0.018
-0.094
0.022
size
(0.305)
(0.269)
(0.285)
(0.288)
(0.274)
0.099
0.067
-0.096
-0.123
-0.136
0.043
4.994
Single women's
0.010
-0.014
-0.019
-0.022
0.007
LFP
(0.096)
(0.087)
(0.085)
(0.081)
(0.083)
0.288
0.253
0.218
0.111
-0.109
0.046
5.221
Married women's
0.036
0.032
0.017
-0.018
0.007
LFP
(0.139)
(0.134)
(0.097)
(0.120)
(0.118)
0.265
0.685
0.671
0.860
0.967
0.283
6.774
Men's LFP
0.097
0.098
0.130
0.157
0.044
(0.321)
(0.248)
(0.261)
(0.218)
(0.185)
0.148
0.473
0.364
0.418
0.466
0.554
19.545
OCCSCORE
0.067
0.053
0.063
0.076
0.086
(0.047)
(0.036)
(0.034)
(0.032)
(0.029)
0.001
0.339
0.299
0.299
0.270
0.282
41.845
Age
0.048
0.044
0.045
0.044
0.044
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
0.000
-0.101
-0.259
-0.439
-0.448
-0.528
30.535
Literate
-0.014
-0.038
-0.066
-0.073
-0.083
(0.067)
(0.050)
(0.054)
(0.057)
(0.063)
0.000
-0.140
-1.415
0.471
-2.632
-1.085
12.642
2nd generation
-0.020
-0.208
0.071
-0.428
-0.169
(0.577)
(1.364)
(0.361)
(1.049)
(0.510)
0.013
-0.319
0.245
0.152
-0.463
-0.120
7.123
Immigrant
-0.045
0.036
0.023
-0.075
-0.019
(0.408)
(0.337)
(0.187)
(0.186)
(0.187)
0.130
-9.924
-8.934
-8.779
-7.858
-7.599
7.123
Constant
(0.374)
(0.287)
(0.306)
(0.250)
(0.236)
0.130
138.733
233.148
216.391
163.235
163.002
lnL = -31512
H0: search vars = 0
2
χ (4) p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
lnL0 = -45728.69
113.261
122.774
171.071
265.921
367.564
LRI = 0.311
H0: lab vars = 0
2
χ (4) p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
N = 67265
Note: The dependent variable is evermar = 1 if a person is ever married, zero otherwise. The two hypotheses of joint significance at the bottom of each
2
column are tested using Wald test with critical values from χ (4) and they are rejected at α = 0.05 in all cases. The right-most column reports the Wald test
for the equality of each coefficient across years. Fixed effects for state and town size are not reported.

39

Table 10 - Logit results for black women
1880
1900
1910
1920
1930
H0:β1880=…=β1930
2
χ (4)
Variable
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
coefficient
mean
p-value
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
(s.e.)
mfx
0.038
0.043
0.073
0.063
0.094
2.198
Sex ratio
0.007
0.008
0.014
0.012
0.018
(0.036)
(0.031)
(0.032)
(0.030)
(0.029)
0.699
8.817
8.247
7.019
7.822
6.634
1.376
Trait
1.638
1.548
1.316
1.467
1.255
(1.782)
(1.514)
(1.422)
(1.455)
(1.415)
0.848
-0.116
0.202
-0.135
-0.033
-0.072
4.956
variance in number
-0.022
0.038
-0.025
-0.006
-0.014
of breadwinners
(0.146)
(0.120)
(0.121)
(0.142)
(0.125)
0.292
-0.229
-0.354
-0.309
-0.998
-0.267
4.329
variance in family
-0.043
-0.067
-0.058
-0.187
-0.051
size
(0.305)
(0.272)
(0.293)
(0.313)
(0.285)
0.363
-0.500
-0.627
-0.799
-0.543
-0.414
9.714
-0.093
-0.118
-0.150
-0.102
-0.078
Single women's LFP
(0.103)
(0.094)
(0.095)
(0.090)
(0.091)
0.046
0.077
-0.034
0.094
-0.161
-0.145
3.636
Married women's
0.014
-0.006
0.018
-0.030
-0.027
LFP
(0.152)
(0.132)
(0.104)
(0.135)
(0.127)
0.457
1.584
1.052
1.346
1.854
0.862
9.185
Men's LFP
0.294
0.198
0.252
0.348
0.163
(0.351)
(0.274)
(0.313)
(0.272)
(0.233)
0.057
-0.027
0.045
0.222
0.364
0.416
31.689
OCCSCORE
-0.005
0.008
0.042
0.068
0.079
(0.088)
(0.067)
(0.062)
(0.062)
(0.061)
0.000
0.407
0.399
0.399
0.394
0.396
0.719
Age
0.076
0.075
0.075
0.074
0.075
(0.012)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.010)
0.949
-0.063
-0.324
-0.320
-0.187
-0.324
12.653
Literate
-0.012
-0.061
-0.060
-0.035
-0.061
(0.069)
(0.049)
(0.058)
(0.070)
(0.085)
0.013
0.785
-0.181
-0.631
0.079
-0.427
4.642
2nd generation
0.146
-0.034
-0.118
0.015
-0.081
(0.561)
(0.590)
(0.428)
(0.601)
(0.391)
0.326
-0.928
0.714
-0.302
-0.053
-0.149
5.255
Immigrant
-0.172
0.134
-0.057
-0.010
-0.028
(0.557)
(0.515)
(0.286)
(0.236)
(0.224)
0.262
-9.436
-8.810
-8.937
-9.433
-8.775
5.255
Constant
(0.426)
(0.334)
(0.377)
(0.340)
(0.314)
0.262
35.769
49.038
44.830
51.802
41.688
lnL = -28948.9
H0: search vars = 0
2
χ (4) p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
lnL0 = -36002.5
37.215
58.602
107.767
137.992
88.271
LRI = 0.196
H0: lab vars = 0
2
χ (4) p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
N = 51952
Note: The dependent variable is evermar = 1 if a person is ever married, zero otherwise. The two hypotheses of joint significance at the bottom of each
2
column are tested using Wald test with critical values from χ (4) and they are rejected at α = 0.05 in all cases. The right-most column reports the Wald test for
the equality of each coefficient across years. Fixed effects for state and town size are not reported.

40

Table 11 - Effect of explanatory variables on imputed probability of marriage
White
Black
Men Women Men Women
Sex ratio
5.4
-0.9
12.6
2.6
Trait
8.5
6.4
7.5
6.9
Variance in number of breadwinners
1.2
0.9
-1.3
-1.0
Variance in number of children
-0.5
-0.3
0.9
-1.6
All partner search variables
14.5
3.1
17.2
2.5
Single women's LFP
-6.0
-10.4
0.9
-7.0
Married women's LFP
0.9
0.3
0.6
-2.1
Men's LFP
1.2
3.7
1.6
4.2
Own OCCSCORE
20.8
25.7
Average men's job quality
11.0
9.3
All labor market variables
16.9
2.2
26.1
1.6
All marriage market variables
30.9
5.5
41.4
4.1
Note: The reported values are percentage point changes in the probability
of being ever married by each race-sex groups median age (25 for white
men, 22 for white women, 23 for black men, 20 for black women) as each
th
th
variable is varied between its 10 and 90 percentile.

41

Whites

Whites

Whites

Whites

Table 12 - Changes in mean trait and sex ratio by nativity and race
1880
1900
1910
1920
1930
Panel A - sex ratio
Men
US-born of US parents
1.106
1.071
1.071
1.072
1.113
2nd generation
1.099
1.041
1.019
0.942
0.930
Immigrants
0.519
0.500
0.430
0.396
0.390
All whites
1.000
0.959
0.895
0.938
0.996
Blacks
0.853
0.860
0.903
0.839
0.889
Women
US-born of US parents
0.968
1.007
0.992
1.037
1.009
2nd generation
1.109
1.165
1.271
1.135
1.067
Immigrants
0.731
0.825
1.103
0.871
0.663
All whites
0.968
1.005
1.056
1.034
0.992
Blacks
1.038
1.021
1.004
1.022
1.008
Panel B - trait
Men
US-born of US parents
0.073
0.074
0.075
0.073
0.076
2nd generation
0.064
0.061
0.061
0.054
0.053
Immigrants
0.015
0.009
0.007
0.005
0.006
All whites
0.061
0.060
0.055
0.059
0.064
Blacks
0.024
0.023
0.025
0.023
0.022
Women
US-born of US parents
0.064
0.069
0.069
0.070
0.069
2nd generation
0.058
0.060
0.057
0.053
0.051
Immigrants
0.015
0.012
0.010
0.007
0.007
All whites
0.057
0.059
0.057
0.059
0.061
Blacks
0.031
0.028
0.028
0.026
0.025
Note: Means are calculated at roughly the median age at marriage for each race-sex
group. This is 25 for white men, 22 for white women, 23 for black men and 20 for black
women.

42

Table 13 – Imputed probabilities of marriage for white men evaluated at means of variables in 1900 and 1930
(β(PS)1900, β (LM)1900, β 1900) (β(PS)1930, β (LM)1900, β 1900) (β(PS)1930, β (LM)1930, β 1900) (β(PS)1930, β (LM)1930, β 1930)
Means\Coefficients
(μ(PS)1900,μ(LM)1900,μ1900)
0.352
0.391
0.379
0.493
(μ(PS)1930,μ(LM)1900,μ1900)
0.362
0.404
0.506
(μ(PS)1930,μ(LM)1930,μ1900)
0.364
0.396
0.510
(μ(PS)1930,μ(LM)1930,μ1930)
0.350
0.390
0.381
0.490
Note: μ(PS)1900 stands for the 1900 mean of partner search variables; μ(LM)1900 stands for the 1900 mean of labor market variables; μ1900 stands for the 1900 means of
all other explanatory variables. Analogically, β(PS)1900 stands for the coefficients on partner search variables from the 1900 logit model etc. The table reports the
imputed probabilities of being ever married for a literate white man aged 25, evaluated at different variable means using various vectors of estimated coefficients.

Table 14 – Imputed probabilities of marriage for white women evaluated at means of variables in 1900 and 1930
(β(PS)1900, β (LM)1900, β 1900) (β(PS)1930, β (LM)1900, β 1900) (β(PS)1930, β (LM)1930, β 1900) (β(PS)1930, β (LM)1930, β 1930)
Means\Coefficients
(μ(PS)1900,μ(LM)1900,μ1900)
0.426
0.455
0.534
0.549
(μ(PS)1930,μ(LM)1900,μ1900)
0.424
0.459
0.553
(μ(PS)1930,μ(LM)1930,μ1900)
0.408
0.523
0.538
(μ(PS)1930,μ(LM)1930,μ1930)
0.389
0.424
0.504
0.519
Note: μ(PS)1900 stands for the 1900 mean of partner search variables; μ(LM)1900 stands for the 1900 mean of labor market variables; μ1900 stands for the 1900 means of
all other explanatory variables. Analogically, β(PS)1900 stands for the coefficients on partner search variables from the 1900 logit model etc. The table reports the
imputed probabilities of being ever married for a literate white women aged 22, evaluated at different variable means using various vectors of estimated coefficients.

43

