                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ACTIVE LABOR MARKET POLICY EVALUATIONS:
                                A META-ANALYSIS

                                            David Card
                                           Jochen Kluve
                                           Andrea Weber

                                       Working Paper 16173
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16173


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2010




We thank the authors who responded to our survey for their co-operation and assistance. We also
thank four anonymous referees for helpful suggestions, and participants of an IZA/World Bank workshop,
participants of LAMES 2009 Buenos Aires, and seminar participants at the University of Chile and
the Inter-America Development Bank for comments on earlier versions of the paper. Our research
was funded by the Center for Labor Economics at UC Berkeley and by the German Science Foundation
(DRG, SFB475). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by David Card, Jochen Kluve, and Andrea Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Active Labor Market Policy Evaluations: A Meta-Analysis
David Card, Jochen Kluve, and Andrea Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 16173
July 2010
JEL No. J24

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper presents a meta-analysis of recent microeconometric evaluations of active labor market
policies. Our sample contains 199 separate “program estimates” – estimates of the impact of a particular
program on a specific subgroup of participants – drawn from 97 studies conducted between 1995 and
2007. For about one-half of the sample we have both a short-term program estimate (for a one-year
post-program horizon) and a medium- or long-term estimate (for 2 or 3 year horizons). We categorize
the estimated post-program impacts as significantly positive, insignificant, or significantly negative.
 By this criterion we find that job search assistance programs are more likely to yield positive impacts,
whereas public sector employment programs are less likely. Classroom and on-the-job training programs
yield relatively positive impacts in the medium term, although in the short-term these programs often
have insignificant or negative impacts. We also find that the outcome variable used to measure program
impact matters. In particular, studies based on registered unemployment are more likely to yield positive
program impacts than those based on other outcomes (like employment or earnings). On the other
hand, neither the publication status of a study nor the use of a randomized design is related to the sign
or significance of the corresponding program estimate. Finally, we use a subset of studies that focus
on post-program employment to compare meta-analytic models for the “effect size” of a program estimate
with models for the sign and significance of the estimated program effect. We find that the two approaches
lead to very similar conclusions about the determinants of program impact.


David Card                                          Andrea Weber
Department of Economics                             University of Mannheim
549 Evans Hall, #3880                               Economics Department
University of California, Berkeley                  L7, 3-4
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                             68131 Mannheim
and NBER                                            Germany
card@econ.berkeley.edu                              a.weber@uni-mannheim.de

Jochen Kluve
RWI Essen Berlin Office
Hessische Str. 10
D-10115 Berlin, GERMANY
jochen.kluve@rwi-essen.de
       The effectiveness of active labor market policies – including subsidized employment,

training, and job search assistance – has been a matter of vigorous debate over the past half

century.1 While many aspects of the debate remain unsettled, some progress has been made on

the key question of how participation in an active labor market program (ALMP) affects the

labor market outcomes of the participants themselves.2 Progress has been facilitated by rapid

advances in methodology and data quality, and by a growing institutional commitment to

evaluation in many countries, and has resulted in an explosion of professionally authored

microeconometric evaluations. In their influential review Heckman, Lalonde and Smith (1999)

summarize approximately 75 microeconometric evaluation studies from the U.S. and other

countries. A more recent review by Kluve (2010) includes nearly 100 separate studies from

Europe alone, while Greenberg, Michalopoulos and Robins (2003) survey 31 evaluations of

government-funded programs for the disadvantaged in the U.S.

       In this paper we synthesize some of the main lessons in the recent microeconometric

evaluation literature, using a new and comprehensive sample of program estimates from the

latest generation of studies. Our sample is derived from responses to a survey of 358 academic

researchers affiliated with the Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) and the National Bureau of

Economic Research (NBER) in spring 2007. These researchers and their colleagues authored a


1
 In the U.S., for example, the direct public sector employment programs initiated by the Works
Progress Administration in 1935 were immediately controversial.
2
 A key unsettled question is whether ALMP’s affect the outcomes of those who do not
participate, via displacement or other general equilibrium effects. See Johnson (1976) for an
early but informative general equilibrium analysis of public sector employment programs, and
Calmfors (1994) for a more recent critique, focusing on the European experience of the 1980s

                                                 1
total of 97 studies of active labor market policies between 1995 and 2007 that meet our inclusion

criteria.3 We conduct a meta-analysis using a sample of 199 “program estimates” – estimated

effects for a particular program on a specific group of participants – extracted from these studies.

        Importantly, for about one-half of the sample we have both a short-term impact estimate

– measuring the effect on participant outcomes approximately one year after the completion of

the program – and a medium-term estimate giving the effect approximately 2 years after

completion. We also have longer-term (3 year) impacts for one-quarter of the programs. These

estimates allow us to compare shorter- and longer-term effects of different types of programs,

and test whether certain program features are associated with either a larger or smaller program

impact in the short-run than in the longer run.

        In our main analysis we classify the estimates by whether the post-program impact on the

participants is found to be significantly positive, statistically insignificant, or significantly

negative. This simple classification of sign and significance allows us to draw comparisons

across studies that use very different dependent variables – ranging from the duration of time in

registered unemployment to average quarterly earnings – and very different econometric

modeling strategies. As a check we also examine the estimated “effect sizes” from the largest

subgroup of studies that focus on participants’ employment probabilities, and compare meta-

analytic models for the estimated effect size with those that use only the sign and significance of

the program effects. We find that the two approaches yield very similar conclusions about the



and early 1990s.
3
 Of these 97 studies, 37 were included in the evaluation by Kluve (2010). Most of the others are
very recent – see below.

                                                   2
role of program type, participant characteristics, and the evaluation methodology on the

measured impact of active labor market programs.

       Consistent with earlier summaries, our analysis suggests that job search assistance (JSA)

and related programs have generally positive impacts, especially in the short run, whereas

subsidized public sector employment programs are less likely to yield positive impacts.

Classroom and on-the-job training programs are not particularly likely to yield positive impacts

in the short-run, but yield more positive impacts after two years. Comparing across different

participant groups, we find that programs for youths are less likely to yield positive impacts than

untargeted programs, although in contrast to some earlier reviews we find no large or systematic

differences by gender (Bergemann and van den Berg, 2010). We also find that evaluations based

on the duration of time in registered unemployment are more likely to show favorable short-term

impacts than those based on direct labor market outcomes (i.e., employment or earnings).

       An important issue in the ALMP evaluation literature is the difficulty of controlling for

selection biases that may lead to specious positive or negative program effects.4 This concern

led observers in the 1980s to call for randomized program evaluations (e.g., Ashenfelter, 1987).

In recent years a significant number of randomized trials have been conducted, and randomized

designs account nearly 10% of the estimates in our sample. This feature allows us to compare the

results of experimental and non-experimental evaluations, while controlling for the nature of the

program and its participants. We find that the mean differences between the experimental and


4
 See, e.g., Ashenfelter (1978), Ashenfelter and Card (1985), Heckman and Robb (1985), Lalonde
(1986), Heckman, Ichimura, Smith and Todd (1998), and Heckman, Lalonde and Smith (1999).
Imbens and Wooldridge (2008) present a survey of the most recent methodological advances in

                                                 3
non-experimental impact estimates are small and statistically insignificant (t<0.5). We also test

for potential “publication bias” (Easterbrook et al., 1991) by examining whether published

studies are more or less likely to find a positive effect, but find no indication of such a pattern.

       The next section of the paper describes our sample of recent microeconometric evaluation

studies, and the criteria we used for including a study in our analysis sample. Section III

presents a descriptive overview of the program estimates we extracted from the included studies.

Section IV presents our main meta-analysis results. Section V concludes the paper.



II. Assembling a New Sample of ALMP Program Estimates

a. Initial Survey of Researchers

       To develop a comprehensive sample of recent ALMP evaluations we conducted a survey

of academic researchers affiliated with two leading research networks: the Institute for the Study

of Labor (IZA) and the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).5 We obtained the

email list for IZA research fellows who had indicated an interest in the program area "Evaluation

of labor market programs", and the list of associates of the NBER Labor Studies program. We

sent each network member a personally addressed email with a cover letter explaining that we

were trying to collect all the recent (post-1990) microeconometric program evaluation studies



program evaluation.
5
 The formal meta-analysis literature stresses the importance of collecting a comprehensive
sample of studies (e.g., Higgins and Green, 2008). Much of that literature is concerned with the
problem of collecting unpublished studies or studies published in non-journal outlets (so-called
“grey literature”). We believe that by surveying the producers of relevant studies we have
largely avoided this problem. In fact, only 64% of the program estimates in our sample are
derived from published studies.

                                                   4
that they or their students or colleagues had written. In addition, we attached a questionnaire that

we asked them to complete for each study they had produced.6

          Our list of IZA fellows was extracted on January 25, 2007, and contained a total of 231

names and valid email addresses (excluding the three of us). We emailed the survey on February

21st, 2007. We followed a similar procedure for affiliates of the NBER Labor Studies Program,

extracting names and email addresses on March 20, 2007, and emailing the survey to 113 NBER

affiliates who were not on the IZA list on March 22, 2007. In our email we asked respondents to

identify colleagues and students working on microeconometric ALMP evaluations. We were

forwarded a total of 14 additional names that constitute a third subgroup in our sample.

          Table 1 summarizes the responses to our survey. The overall response rate across the 358

researchers we ultimately contacted was 55%. The response rate was somewhat higher for IZA

fellows than NBER Associates, and was quite high among the small group of 14 additional

researchers referred to us by the original sample members.7 Among the respondents, 57%

reported that they had no relevant studies to contribute. The remaining group of 84 researchers

returned a total of 156 separate studies that form the basis for our sample.



b. Selection of Studies

          The next step in our process was to define the types of active labor market programs and

the types of evaluation methods that we would consider “in scope” for our meta-analysis. We

imposed four restrictions on the kinds of programs to be included. First, the ALMP had to be


6
    The questionnaire is available on request.
7
    The response rate for the 17 NBER members who are also part of IZA was 47%.

                                                  5
one of the following types:

       -classroom or on-the-job training

        -job search assistance or sanctions for failing to search8

       -subsidized private sector employment

       -subsidized public sector employment

or a combination of these types. Second, we narrowed the definition of private or public

employment subsidies to include only individual-level subsidies. That is, we excluded firm-level

subsidy programs that allow employers to select the individuals whose jobs are subsidized.

Third, we restricted attention to time-limited programs, eliminating open-ended entitlements like

education grants and child care programs. Fourth, we decided to focus on programs with an

explicit “active” component. Thus, we excluded purely financial programs, such as

manipulations of the benefits available to participants in unemployment insurance, welfare or

disability programs.

       Methodologically, we decided to limit our attention to well-documented empirical

evaluation studies based on individual micro data.    We also excluded a few studies that lacked

an explicit comparison group of people who were not subject to the program (or who entered the

program at a later date).

       Applying these rules, we eliminated 33 of the originally submitted studies that did not

meet our ALMP program requirements and 18 that did not meet our methodological criteria. We


8
 A couple of programs are actually based on the threat of assignment to a program, which we
interpret as a form of sanction: see e.g., Hagglund (2007). Sanctions, threats, and JSA programs
are all short-term programs with little (or no) “lock-in” or “incapacitation” effect – so
participants can enter the labor market very soon after entering the program.

                                                 6
also eliminated 8 studies that were written in a language other than English9, or had substantial

overlap with other studies included in the sample (e.g., earlier versions of the same study), or

were otherwise incomplete. The remaining 97 studies (=156−33−18−8) form the basis for our

empirical analysis. A complete list of the studies included in our analysis sample is contained in

the online Appendix.



c. Extraction of Program Estimates and Other Information

       The third step in our data collection process was to extract information about the program

and participants analyzed in each study and the estimated program impact(s). Although we

initially intended to collect these data from the questionnaires distributed in our email survey, we

were unable to do so because only 38% of authors returned a questionnaire (and many of these

were only partially complete). Ultimately, we decided to extract the information ourselves.10

       Some variables were relatively straightforward to collect, including the type of program,

the age and gender of the participant population, the type of dependent variable used to measure

the impact of the program, and the econometric methodology. It proved more difficult to find

information on the comparability of the treatment and control groups, and to gauge the

plausibility of the econometric methodology. Despite the emphasis that prominent

methodologists have placed on documenting the degree of “overlap” between the characteristics

of the participants and the comparison group, for example, relatively few studies present detailed

9
  We included studies in other languages if the author(s) returned a completed questionnaire.
10
  We found that even graduate-level research assistants had difficulty understanding the studies
in detail, so we each read and classified about one-third of the studies. We acknowledge that
there are likely to be measurement errors and errors of interpretation in the extraction of

                                                 7
information on the pre-program characteristics of the participants and the comparison group.11

Another (surprising) fact is that very few studies provide information on program costs. We

decided to use average program duration as a rough proxy for the size of the investment

represented by the program.

       The most difficult task, however, proved to be the development of a standardized

measure of program impact that could be compared across studies. This is mainly due to the

wide variation in methodological approaches in the literature. For example, about one-third of

the studies in our sample report treatment effects on the exit rate from registered unemployment.

Very rarely do these studies include enough information to infer the cumulated effect of the

program on the probability of employment at some date after the completion of the program.

       Faced with such a diverse set of outcome measures and modeling strategies we

abandoned the preferred meta-analytic approach of extracting a standardized “effect size”

estimate from each study.12 Instead, we classified the estimates based on “sign and significance”

into three categories: significantly positive, insignificantly different from zero, and significantly

negative.13 Whenever possible, we extracted the sign and significance of the program impact at

three points: a short-term impact at approximately one year after completion of the program, a

medium-term impact roughly two years after program completion, and a long-term impact


information from the studies.
11
   See e.g., Heckman, Ichimura, Smith and Todd (1998), and Heckman, Ichimura and Todd
(1998).
12
   The effect size is usually defined as the ratio of the treatment effect on the treated population to
the standard deviation of the outcome variable. See Hedges and Olkin (1985).
13
   This is slightly different than the so-called “vote count” approach of classifying estimates by
whether they are significantly positive or not because estimates in our context can be
significantly negative. Vote counting is problematic when individual studies have low power (so

                                                  8
roughly three years after program completion.

       While we were unable to extract standardized effect sizes from our full sample of studies,

for a subset of 35 studies that measure program effects on the probability of employment we

were able to extract an estimated program effect, and the associated employment rate of the

comparison group. For these studies we define the estimated “effect size” as the ratio of the

estimated program effect to the standard deviation of employment among the comparison group.

In section IV, below, we compare meta-analytic models fit to the program estimates from this

subset of studies using our “sign and significance” measure and the estimated effect size of the

program.

       Many studies in our sample report separate impacts for different program types (e.g., job

training versus private sector employment) and/or for different participant subgroups. Whenever

possible, we extracted separate estimates for each program type and participant subgroup

combination, classifying participant groups by gender (male, female, or mixed) and age (under

25, 25 and older, or mixed). Overall, we extracted a total of 199 “program estimates” (estimates

for a specific program and participant group) from the 97 studies in our sample.14 For many of

the program/subgroup combinations we have a short-term impact estimate and a medium- and/or

long-term impact. Specifically, for 54% of the program/subgroup combinations we have a short-

term and medium term program impact, while for 24% we have a short-term and a long-term

impact estimate.




an insignificant outcome is likely, even when the true effect is non-zero).
14
   A total of 56 studies contribute a single program estimate, 17 studies contribute 2 estimates,

                                                 9
d. Sample Overview

       Table 2 shows the distribution of our sample of program estimates by the latest

publication date of the study (panel a) and by country (panel b).15 The studies included in our

sample are all relatively recent: 90% of the program estimates come from articles or working

papers dated 2000 or later and 50% from papers dated 2006 or later. Just under two-thirds of the

estimates are taken from published studies (measuring publication status as of January 2010).

The estimates cover a total of 26 countries, with the largest numbers from Germany (45

estimates), Denmark (26 estimates), Sweden (19 estimates) and France (14 estimates).



III. Descriptive Analysis

a. Program Types, Participant Characteristics, and Evaluation Methodology

       Table 3 presents a summary of the program types and participant characteristics

represented in our sample of 199 program estimates. To facilitate discussion we have defined

three broad “country groups” that together account for about 70% of the program estimates.

Countries in each group share many important institutional features and also tend to have similar

design features in their active labor market programs. The largest group of estimates is from

Austria, Germany, and Switzerland (AGS) with 67 program estimates (column 2 of Table 3).

The second largest group is from the Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden)

with 53 program estimates (column 3). A third distinct group is the “Anglo” countries

(Australia, Canada, New Zealand, U.K. and U.S.). For this group - summarized in column 4 of


and 24 studies contribute 3 or more estimates.
15
   Note that 46% of the estimates are from unpublished studies. By “publication date” we mean

                                                10
Table 3 – we have 20 program estimates.

       The entries in rows 2a-2c of Table 3 illustrate one of the most important dimensions of

heterogeneity between the three main country groups, which is the intake source of ALMP

participants. In Austria, Germany and Switzerland, most active labor market programs are

provided to people in registered unemployment, and participation is generally mandatory. Some

94% of the program estimates for AGS are for such programs. In the Anglo countries, by

comparison, many programs are targeted to long-term disadvantaged individuals who voluntarily

enroll though community outreach programs. Nearly 60% of the program estimates for these

countries are for these types of participants. The Nordic countries are closer to AGS: about two-

thirds of program estimates are for programs provided to the registered unemployed and just

under one-third are for other disadvantaged groups.

       The entries in rows 3a-3f show the types of active labor market programs in our sample.

Classroom and work experience training programs are the most common, particularly in AGS,

where 63% of the program estimates are for classroom or on-the-job training programs. Job

search assistance and sanction programs are relatively uncommon in AGS and the Nordic

countries but are more widespread in the Anglo countries.16 Subsidized public and private

employment programs together account for about 30% of our sample of program estimates, and

are relatively evenly distributed across the three main country groups. Finally, combination

programs are particularly common in the Nordic countries, where people who remain in


the date on the study, whether published or not.
16
   In most countries people receiving unemployment benefits are eligible for some form of job
search assistance, which we would not consider in scope for our review. The job search
assistance programs included in our sample are special programs outside of these usual services

                                               11
registered unemployment often are automatically assigned to some form of “active” program

(see, e.g., Sianesi, 2004).

        Rows 4a-4d show the distribution of program durations. In general, most active labor

market programs are short, with a typical duration of 4-6 months. Programs tend to be somewhat

longer in AGS and shorter in the Anglo countries. The short duration of the programs suggests

that at best they might be expected to have relatively modest effects on the participants –

comparable, perhaps to the impact of an additional year of formal schooling. Given the modest

investment (and opportunity cost) of a 4-6 month program, an impact on the order of a 5-10%

permanent increase in labor market earnings might be large enough to justify the program on a

cost-benefit basis.17

        Rows 5a-c and 6a-c of Table 3 present data on the gender and age composition of the

participant groups associated with the program estimates. Our reading of the program

descriptions leads us to believe that few of the programs are targeted by gender: rather, in cases

where gender-specific estimates are available it is because the authors have estimated separate

impacts for the same programs on men and women. The situation with respect to age is

somewhat different. Sometimes the programs are specifically targeted to younger workers (i.e.,

those under 21 or 25), whereas sometimes programs are available to all age groups but the

analysts have limited their study to participants over the age of 24, or stratified by age.18 In any



(or in some cases provided to people who are not in registered unemployment).
17
   Jespersen, Munch, and Skipper (2007) present a detailed cost-benefit analysis for various
Danish programs, and conclude that subsidized public and private sector employment programs
have a positive net social benefit, whereas classroom training programs do not.
18
   Sometimes the age restriction is imposed because the evaluation method requires 3-5 years of
pre-program data, which is only available for older workers. Austria, Germany and Switzerland

                                                 12
case, most of the program estimates in our sample are for pooled age and gender groups.

       Table 4 describes the features of the evaluation methods used in our sample. Apart from

the randomized designs, there are two main methodological approaches in the recent literature.

One, which is widely adopted in AGS and the Anglo countries, uses longitudinal administrative

data on employment and/or earnings for the participants and a comparison group (who are

assigned to a simulated starting date for a potential program). Typically, the data set includes

several years of pre-program labor market history, and propensity-score matching is used to

narrow the comparison group to a sample whose observed characteristics and pre-program

outcomes closely match those of the participants (see e.g., Gerfin and Lechner, 2002; Biewen,

Fitzenberger, Osikominu, and Waller, 2007; Jespersen, Munch, and Skipper, 2007). In this type

of study, the program effect is usually measured in terms of the probability of employment at

some date after the completion of the program, although earnings can also be used. Over two-

thirds of the evaluations from AGS and the Anglo countries fit this mold, as do a minority (about

30%) of the evaluations from the Nordic countries.

       The main alternative approach, widely used in the Nordic countries, is a duration model

of the time to exit from registered unemployment – see e.g. Sianesi (2004). The popularity of

this approach is due in part to the fact that in many countries all the necessary data can be drawn

from the benefit system itself (i.e., without having access to employment records). The program

effect is parameterized as the difference in the exit rate from registered unemployment between

participants who entered a specific program at a certain date and the exit rate of a comparison



have programs for younger workers that are incorporated into their general apprenticeship
systems and are not typically identified as “active labor market programs.”

                                                13
group who did not. In some studies the outcome variable is defined as the exit rate to a new job

while in others the exit event includes all causes.19 Even in the former case, however, the

program effect cannot be easily translated into an impact on employment rates.20 Nevertheless,

the sign of the treatment effect is interpretable, since a program that speeds the entry to a new job

presumably increases the likelihood of employment and expected earnings at all future dates. As

shown in Table 4, about one-third of the program estimates in our sample, and nearly 60% of the

estimates for the Nordic countries, are derived from models of this form.



b. Summary of Estimated Impacts

       As discussed above, our main analysis focuses on the “sign and significance” of the

program estimates. Table 5 presents a tabular summary of program estimates in our overall

sample and the three broad country groups, classified by whether the estimate is significantly

positive, insignificant, or significantly negative. The entries in row 1a show that on average the

short-term impacts (measured roughly one year after program completion) are slightly more

likely to be significantly positive (39% of estimates) than significantly negative (25% of

estimates). Thus, there appears to be considerable heterogeneity in the measured “success” of

ALMP’s. Second, the distribution of medium- and long-term outcomes is more favorable than

the distribution of short-term outcomes. In the medium term, for example, 45% of the estimated

impacts are significantly positive versus 10% significantly negative. The distribution of longer-


19
   Bring and Carling (2000) show that in the Swedish case nearly one-half of those who exit for
other reasons are later found to be working, so the classification by reason for exit is noisy.
20
   Richardson and Van den Berg (2002) show that with a constant program entry rate and a
proportional effect on the hazard to employment the effect on employment can be derived.

                                                 14
term (3 years after program completion) impact estimates is even more favorable, although the

sample size is smaller.

       A third interesting conclusion from Table 5 is that there are systematic differences across

country groups in the distribution of impact estimates. In particular, short-term impacts appear

to be relatively unfavorable in Austria, Germany and Switzerland, but relatively favorable in the

Anglo countries. One explanation for this pattern is the heterogeneity across country groups in

the types of programs. In fact, as we discuss below, once we control for the type of program and

other features, the cross country differences narrow and are no longer significant.

       As mentioned earlier, we extracted standardized “effect size” estimates for a subsample

of evaluations that use the post-program probability of employment as the outcome of interest.

In this subsample the fraction of significantly positive short term estimates is slightly lower than

in the sample as a whole, while the fraction of significantly negative estimates is slightly higher

(compare row 1e to row 1a). The medium term impacts, however, have about the same

distribution as in the overall sample (compare row 2e to row 2a). Row 1f of Table 5 shows the

average short-term effect sizes for employment-based studies in each of the three categories,

while row 2f shows the average medium-term effect sizes among studies in each category.21 As

might be expected, the mean effect size for the “insignificant” program estimates is very close to

0. More surprising, perhaps, is that the mean effect size for significantly positive short-term

estimates (0.21) is equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to the mean effect size for

significantly negative short-term estimates (−0.21). This symmetry is consistent with an


21
  Recall that the effect size is the estimated program effect in the probability of employment,
divided by the average employment rate of the control group.

                                                 15
assumption that the t-statistic for a program estimate is proportional to the effect size. As we

discuss below, in this case an analysis of the sign and significance of the program estimates

yields the same conclusions as an analysis of the effect size of different programs.

       The relationship between the program impacts at different time horizons is illustrated in

Tables 6a and 6b, which show cross-tabulations between short- and medium-term impacts (Table

6a) or short- and long-term outcomes (Table 6b) for the same program. In both cases the

estimated program impacts appear to become more positive over time. For example, 31% of the

programs with a significantly negative short-term impact have a significantly positive medium-

term impact, whereas none of the programs with an insignificant or significantly positive short-

term impact have a significantly negative medium-term impact. Likewise, most of the programs

with a significantly negative short-term impact show either a significantly positive or

insignificant long-term impact.

       One important question in the evaluation literature is whether ALMP’s have become

more effective over time (see e.g., the discussion in Lechner and Wunsch, 2006). Figures 1a and

1b present some simple evidence suggesting that the answer is “no”. The figures show the

distributions of short-term and medium term program estimates for programs operated in four

time periods: the late 1980s, the early 1990s, the late 1990s, and the post-2000 period. While

there is some variability over time, particularly in the distributions of medium term impacts,

which are based on relatively small samples, there is no tendency for the most recent programs to

exhibit better or worse outcomes than programs from the late 1980s.




                                                16
IV. Multivariate Models of the Sign/Significance of Program Estimates

a. Meta-Analytic Model

        We begin by discussing the conditions under which an analysis of the sign and

significance of the program estimates from a sample of studies is informative about the actual

effectiveness of the underlying programs. Assume that the ith program estimate, b, is derived

from an econometric procedure such that b is normally distributed around the true treatment

effect β with variance V2/N, where N represents the overall sample size used in the evaluation,

i.e.,

        b ~ N ( β , V2/N ).

Let K = V/σ, where σ is the standard deviation of the outcome variable used in the evaluation

(e.g., σ = standard deviation of earnings per month). It follows that the realized value of the

program estimate b can be written as

(1)     b = β + N−½ K σ z

where z is a realization of a standard normal variate. The “t-statistic” associated with the

estimated treatment effect is

(2)     t = b / Var(b) ½ = [ N½/K ] × [ β/σ ] + z .

Note that β/σ is the “effect size” of the program. Equation (2) implies that the observed t-

statistic differs from a realization of a standard normal variate by a term that reflects a

combination of the effect size of the program, the sample size, and a “design effect” K.22

        Suppose that in a sample of program estimates the ratio N½/K is constant, and that the


22
  For example in a randomized evaluation with equal-sized treatment and control groups, if the
program causes a simple shift in the mean of the treatment group then K=2.

                                                  17
effect size of the ith program depends on a set of observable covariates (X):

(3)     β/σ = X α .

Under these assumptions an appropriate model for the observed t-statistic from the ith program is

(4)    t = X α′ + z ,

where α′ = [N½/K] α . Since z is normally distributed (with variance 1) equation (4) implies that

the probability of observing a significantly negative program estimate (t≤−2), an insignificant

estimate (−2<t<2) or a significantly positive estimate (t≥2) is given by an ordered probit model

with index function Xα′.

       The value of N½/K – which can be interpreted as the “effective sample size” underlying a

given program estimate, taking account of sample size and design complexity – surely varies

across the evaluations included in our sample. Nevertheless, we believe that the tendency for

researchers to use more complex research designs (with higher values of K) when bigger samples

are available tends to largely offset the “mechanical” effect of sample size on the distribution of

t-statistics. In this case an analysis of the “sign and significance” of the program estimates

provides a useful guide to the determinants of the effectiveness of ALMP’s.

       We conduct two specification tests designed to evaluate the validity of our main analysis,

based on sign and significance of the program estimates. First, we estimate simple probit

models for the likelihood of significantly positive or significantly negative program effects that

include the square root of the sample size as an additional explanatory variable. If the

“effective” sample size systematically varies with the actual sample size (i.e., if N½/K is

increasing in N) then we would expect to see more large positive t-statistics and more large

negative t-statistics from studies with larger sample sizes. In fact, as we show below, these

                                                 18
simple probit models show no relationship between the sample size and the probability of either

a significantly positive or significantly negative t-statistic, confirming that the “mechanical”

effect of sample size is mitigated by other design factors.

       As a second test, we fit an alternative meta-analysis model to the program estimates

derived from the subsample of programs that measure impacts of the probability of employment.

For these studies we extract an estimate of the effect size b/s, where s is the estimated standard

deviation of the outcome of interest (employment status) in the comparison group. Assuming

that

       b/s = β/σ + ε ,

where ε represents the sampling error for the estimated effect size in the ith program, equation (3)

implies that:

(5)    b/s = X α + ε .

We therefore fit a linear regression of the estimated effect sizes on the covariates X, and compare

the vector of estimated coefficients to the estimates from our ordered probit specification. If

N½/K is indeed constant, then the coefficients from the ordered probit model of sign and

significance and the OLS model of effect sizes should be proportional (with a factor of

proportionality = α′/α = N½/K).



b. Main Estimation Results

       Tables 7 and 8 present the main findings from our meta-analysis. Table 7 shows a series

of models for the likelihood of a significantly positive, significantly negative, or insignificant

short-run program estimate, while Table 8 presents a parallel set of models for the medium-term

                                                 19
program estimates, and for the change between the short-term and medium term estimates. We

begin in Table 7 by separately examining the four main dimensions of heterogeneity across the

studies in our sample. The model in column 1 includes a set of dummy variables for the choice

of outcome variable used in the study. These are highly significant determinants of the short-

term “success” of a program (i.e., roughly one year after program completion). In particular,

program estimates derived from models of the time in registered unemployment until exit to a

job (row 1), or the time in registered unemployment until any exit (row 2) or the probability of

being in registered unemployment (row 4) are more likely to yield a significant positive t-statistic

than those derived from models of post-program employment (the omitted base group). We are

unsure of the explanation for this finding, although discrepancies between results based on

registered unemployment and employment have been noted before in the literature (see e.g.,

Card, Chetty, and Weber, 2007).23

       The model in column 2 of Table 7 summarizes the patterns of sign and significance for

different program types. In the short run, classroom and on-the-job training programs appear to

be less successful than the omitted group (combined programs) while job search assistance

programs appear (weakly) more successful. The “least successful” programs are subsidized

public sector jobs programs -- a result that parallels the findings in Kluve’s (2010) study of an

earlier group of studies.

       The model in column 3 compares program estimates by age and gender. Interestingly,

the program estimates for people under 25 and those age 25 and over both appear to be more

23
  It is possible for example that assignment to an ALMP causes people to leave the benefit
system without moving to a job. In this case programs will appear to be more effective in

                                                 20
negative than the estimates for mixed age groups. We suspect this pattern reflects some

combination of program characteristics and other factors that are shared by the studies that

estimate separate effects by age (rather than an effect of participant age per se). In contrast to the

results by age, the comparisons by gender are never statistically significant.24 Finally, column 4

presents models that compare shorter and longer duration programs. There is no evidence here

that longer duration programs are more effective than short programs.

       Columns 5 and 6 of Table 7 present models that control for all four dimensions of

heterogeneity simultaneously. The extended specification in column 6 also includes dummies

for the intake group (registered unemployed, disadvantaged workers, or long-term unemployed),

the time period of the program (in 5-year intervals), and the three main country groups, as well

as controls for experimental design, sample size, and publication status. As in the simpler

models, the coefficients from the multivariate models suggest that evaluations based on measures

of registered unemployment are more likely to show positive short-term impacts than those

based on post-program employment or earnings, while job search assistance programs have more

positive impacts than training or subsidized employment programs. The gender and age effects in

columns 5 and 6 are similar to those from the model in column 3, and the program duration

effects are not too different from the effects in the model in column 4.

       Although the coefficients are not reported in Table 7, another notable finding from the


reducing registered unemployment than in increasing employment.
24
   We were able to extract separate short-term program estimates for men and women in the same
program from a total of 28 studies. Within this subgroup, the estimates for the two gender
groups have the same sign/significance in 14 cases (50%); the women have a more positive
outcome in 8 cases (29%); and the women have a less positive outcome in 6 cases (21%). The


                                                 21
specification in column 6 is that the dummies for the country group are jointly insignificant.25

Thus, differences in the outcome variable, the type of program, and the characteristics of

program participants appear to explain the rather large differences across countries that are

apparent in rows 1b-1d of Table 5.

       The estimated coefficients in column 6 associated with experimental designs, published

studies, and sample size are all small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. The estimate of

the experimental design effect suggests that controlling for the outcome measure, the program

type, and the participant group, non-experimental estimation methods tend to yield the same

distribution of sign and significance as experimental estimators.26 Likewise the estimated

coefficient for published studies suggests that these are no more (or less) likely to show

significantly positive program effects than their unpublished counterparts. The sample size

effect is harder to interpret, since if larger samples lead to more precise results we might expect

offsetting effects on the likelihood of obtaining significantly positive and significantly negative

effects. We return to the sample size effect in the “one-sided” probit models below.

       Columns 1 and 2 of Table 8 present a parallel set of ordered probit models for the

medium-term program effects (measured about 2 years after program completion). Given the

smaller number of medium-term program estimates (91 versus 180 short-term estimates) the



symmetry of these comparisons provides further evidence that program outcomes tend to be very
similar for women and men.
25
   The estimated coefficients (and standard errors) are: AGS 0.06 (0.35); Nordic countries 0.23
(0.34); Anglo countries 0.05 (0.55), all relative to the omitted group of other countries.
26
   Half of the experimental program estimates use register-based outcomes. If we include an
interaction between experimental design and register-based outcome the coefficient is
insignificant (t=0.5), so there is no indication of a differential bias in studies that use register-
based and other outcome measures, though the power of the test is limited.

                                                 22
extended specification in column 2 of Table 8 includes controls for sample size, experimental

design and publication status, but excludes the controls for intake group, time period and country

group. Although the standard errors are relatively large, the estimates point to several notable

differences in the determinants of short-term and medium term impacts.

       To evaluate these differences more carefully, we decided to fit a set of models for the

change in the relative “success” of a given program from the short term to the medium term.

Specifically we coded the change as +2 if the program estimate changed from significantly

negative in the short term to significantly positive in the medium term, +1 if the estimate moved

from significantly negative to insignificant, or from insignificant to significantly positive, 0 if the

short-term and medium term estimates were classified the same, and -1 if the estimate moved

from significantly positive to insignificant, or from insignificant to significantly negative. While

the coding system is somewhat arbitrary we believe it captures the trend over time in the sign

and significance of the impact estimates for any given program.

       Ordered probit models fit to the change in impact measure are presented in columns 3

and 4 of Table 8. The results are somewhat imprecise, but generally confirm the impressions

from a simple comparison of the short-term and medium term models. One clear finding is that

impact estimates from studies that look at the probability of registered unemployment tend to

fade between the short term and medium term, relative to impact estimates from other methods

(which on average become more positive). A second finding is that the impact of training

programs tends to rise between the short and medium runs. Interestingly, a similar result has

been reported in a recent long term evaluation of welfare reform policies in the U.S. (Hotz,

Imbens and Klerman, 2006). This study concludes that although job search assistance programs

                                                  23
dominate training in the short run, over longer horizons the gains to human capital development

policies are larger.



c. Evaluating the Meta-Analysis Model

        One simple way to test the implicit restrictions of our ordered probit model is to fit

separate probit models for the events of a significantly positive and significantly negative impact

estimate. As noted above, it is also interesting to include a measure of sample size (specifically,

the square root of the sample size) in these specifications, because unless researchers are

adjusting their designs to hold effective sample size approximately constant, one might expect

more large negative t-statistics and more large positive t-statistics from evaluations that use

larger samples.

        Table 9 shows three specifications for short run program impact. Column 1 reproduces

the estimates from the ordered probit specification in column 5 of Table 7. Column 2 presents

estimates from a probit model, fit to the event of a significantly positive short run impact.

Column 3 presents estimates from a similar probit model, fit to the event of a significantly

negative short run impact. Under the assumption that the ordered probit specification is correct,

the coefficients in column 2 should be the same as those in column 1, while the coefficients in

column 3 should be equal in magnitude and opposite in sign.27

        Although the coefficients are not in perfect agreement with this prediction, our reading is

that the restrictions are qualitatively correct. In particular, the probit coefficients for the


27
  The full set of covariates cannot be included in the probit model for a significantly negative
impact estimate because some covariates predict the outcome perfectly.

                                                   24
covariates that have larger and more precisely estimated coefficients in the ordered probit model

(such as the coefficients in rows 2, 7, 9, 10, and 11 of Table 9) fit the predicted pattern very well.

Moreover, the coefficients associated with the square root of the sample size (row 18) are

relatively small and insignificant in the probit models. This rather surprising finding suggests

that variation in sample size is not a major confounding issue for making comparisons across the

program estimates in our sample.

       Our second specification test compares the results from an ordered probit model based on

sign and significance of the program estimates to a simple linear regression fit to the estimated

effect sizes from different programs. For this analysis we use a sample of 79 program estimates

(derived from 34 studies) that use the probability of employment as an outcome. A series of

specifications for the two alternative meta-analytic models is presented in Table 10. Columns 1-

4 present a set of ordered probit models that parallel the models in columns 2-5 of Table 7.

Estimates from the subset of studies that use the probability of employment as an outcome

measure are generally similar to the estimates from the wider sample: in particular, subsidized

public sector programs appear to be relatively ineffective, while program estimates for

participants under age 25 and for age 25 and older both tend to be relatively unfavorable. More

importantly, the estimates from the ordered probit models in columns 1-4 appear to be very close

to linear rescalings of the coefficients from the OLS models in columns 5-8 (with a scale factor

of roughly 6), as would be predicted if the t-statistics for the program estimates are proportional

to the associated effect sizes. This consistency is illustrated in Figure 2, where we plot the

ordered probit coefficients from the model in column 4 of Table 10 against the corresponding

OLS coefficients from the model in column 8. The two sets of estimates are very highly

                                                 25
correlated (ρ=0.93) and lie on a line with slope of roughly 6.5 and intercept close to 0. (The t-

statistic for the test that the intercept is 0 is 1.32).

          Overall, we interpret the estimates in Table 10 and the pattern of coefficients in Figure 2

as providing relatively strong support for the hypothesis that the t-statistics associated with the

program estimates in the recent ALMP evaluation literature are proportional to the underlying

effect sizes. Under this assumption, a vote-counting analysis (i.e., a probit analysis for the event

of a significantly positive estimate), an ordered probit analysis of sign and significance, and a

regression analysis of the effect size all yield the same conclusions about the determinants of

program success. Surprisingly, perhaps, this prediction is confirmed by the models in Tables 9

and 10.



d. Estimates for Germany

          A concern with any meta-analysis that attempts to draw conclusions across studies from

many different countries is that the heterogeneity in institutional environments is so great as to

render the entire exercise uninformative. Although the absence of large or significant country

group effects in our pooled models suggests this may not be a particular problem, we decided to

attempt a within-country analysis for the country with the largest number of individual program

estimates in our sample, Germany. Since we have only 41 short term impact estimates from

Germany, and only 36 medium term estimates, we adopted a relatively parsimonious model that

included only 4 main explanatory variables: a dummy for classroom or on-the-job training

programs, a dummy for programs with only older (age 25 and over) participants, a measure of

program duration (in months), and a dummy for programs operated in the former East Germany.

                                                     26
       Results from fitting this specification are presented in Appendix Table A. There are four

main findings. First, as in our overall sample, the short run impact of classroom and on-the-job

training programs is not much different from other types of programs. But, in the medium run,

training programs are associated with significantly more positive impacts. Second, as in our

larger sample, it appears that programs for older adults only are less likely to succeed –

especially in the medium run – than more broadly targeted programs. Third, longer duration

programs are associated with significantly worse short term impacts, but weakly more positive

medium term impacts. Finally, the models show a negative impact for programs operated in the

former East Germany. Overall, we interpret the results from this analysis as quite supportive of

the conclusions from our cross-country models.



V. Summary and Conclusions

       Our meta-analysis points to a number of important lessons in the most recent generation

of active labor market program evaluations. One is that longer-term evaluations tend to be more

favorable than short-term evaluations. Indeed, it appears that many programs with insignificant

or even negative impacts after only a year have significantly positive impact estimates after 2 or

3 years. Classroom and on-the-job training programs appear to be particularly likely to yield

more favorable medium-term than short-term impact estimates. A second lesson is that the data

source used to measure program impacts matters. Evaluations (including randomized

experiments) that measure outcomes based on time in registered unemployment appear to show

more positive short-term results than evaluations based on employment or earnings. A third

conclusion is that subsidized public sector jobs programs are generally less successful than other

                                                 27
types of ALMP’s. Here, our findings reinforce the conclusions of earlier literature summaries,

including Heckman, Lalonde and Smith (1999), Kluve and Schmidt (2002), and Kluve (2010).

A fourth conclusion is that current ALMP programs do not appear to have differential effects on

men versus women. Finally, controlling for the program type and composition of the participant

group, we find only small and statistically insignificant differences in the distribution of positive,

negative, and insignificant program estimates from experimental and non-experimental

evaluations, and between published and unpublished studies. The absence of an “experimental”

effect suggests that the research designs used in recent non-experimental evaluations are not

significantly biased relative to the benchmark of an experimental design. The similarity between

published and unpublished studies likewise eases concern over the potential for “publication

bias”.

         Methodologically, our analysis points to a potentially surprising feature of the recent

generation of program estimates, which is that the t-statistics from the program estimates appear

to be (roughly) proportional to the effect sizes, and independent of the underlying sample sizes

used in the evaluation. In this case a simple “vote-counting analysis” of significantly positive

effects, or an ordered probit analysis of sign and significance, yield the same conclusions about

the determinants of program success as a more conventional meta-analytic model of program

effect sizes. We conjecture that researchers tend to adopt more sophisticated research designs

when larger sample sizes are available, offsetting the purely mechanical impact of sample size on

the t-statistics that is emphasized in much of the meta-analysis literature.

         Our reading of the ALMP literature also points to a number of limitations of the most

recent generation of studies. Most importantly, few studies include enough information to make

                                                  28
even a crude assessment of the benefits of the program relative to its costs. Indeed, many studies

completely ignore the “cost” side of the evaluation problem. Moreover, the methodological

designs adopted in the literature often preclude a direct assessment of the program effect on

“welfare-relevant” outcomes like earnings, employment, or hours of work. As the

methodological issues in the ALMP literature are resolved, we anticipate that future studies will

adopt a more substantive focus, enabling policy makers to evaluate and compare the social

returns to investments in alternative active labor market policies.




                                                 29
                                           References

Ashenfelter, Orley. “Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings” Review of
Economics and Statistics 60 (1978): 47-57.

Ashenfelter, Orley. “The Case for Evaluating Training Programs with Randomized Trials.”
Economics of Education Review 6 (1987): 333-338.

Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card. “Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings to Estimate
the Effect of Training Programs.” Review of Economics and Statistics 67 (October 1985): 648-
660.

Bergemann, Annette and Gerard van den Berg. “Active Labor Market Policy Effects for Women
in Europe: A Survey” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique (2010), forthcoming

Biewen, Martin, Bernd Fitzenberger, Aderonke Osikominu, and Marie Waller. “Which Program
for Whom? Evidence on the Comparative Effectiveness of Public Sponsored Training Programs
in Germany.” IZA Discussion Paper #2885. Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor, 2007.

Bring, Johan, and Kenneth Carling. “Attrition and Misclassification of Drop-Outs in the
Analysis of Unemployment Duration.” Journal of Official Statistics 4 (2000): 321–330.

Calmfors, Lars. “Active Labour Market Policy and Unemployment - A Framework for the
Analysis of Crucial Design Features, OECD Economic Studies 22 (Spring 1994): 7-47.

Card, David, Raj Chetty and Andrea Weber. “The Spike at Benefit Exhaustion: Leaving the
Unemployment System or Starting a New Job?” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 97 (May 2007):113-118.

Easterbrook, P. J., J. A. Berlin, R. Gopalan, and D. R. Matthews. “Publication Bias in Clinical
Research.” Lancet 337 (1991): 867-872.

Gerfin Michael and Michael Lechner. “Microeconometric Evaluation of the Active Labour
Market Policy in Switzerland.” Economic Journal 112 (2002): 854-893.

Greenberg, David H., Charles Michalopoulos and Philip K.Robins. “A Meta-Analysis of
Government-Sponsored Training Programs.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 57 (2003):
31-53.




                                               30
Hagglund, Pathric. “Are There Pre-Programme Effects of Swedish Active Labor Market
Policies? Evidence from Three Randomized Experiments.” Swedish Institute for Social
Research Working Paper 2/2007. Stockholm: Stockholm University, 2007.

Heckman, James J. and Richard Robb. “Alternative Methods for Evaluating the Impact of
Interventions.” in James J. Heckman and Burton Singer, editors, Longitudinal Analysis of Labor
Market Data. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985: 156-246.


Heckman, James J. , Robert J. Lalonde and Jeffrey A. Smith. “The Economics and
Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs.” In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, editors,
Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A. Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier, 1999: 1865-
2095.

Heckman, James J., Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeffrey A. Smith, and Petra Todd. “Characterizing
Selection Bias Using Experimental Data.” Econometrica 66 (September 1998): 1017-1098.

Heckman, James J., Hiedhiko Ichimura and Petra Todd. “Matching as an Econometric
Evaluation Estimator.” Review of Economic Studies 65 (1998): 261-94.

Hedges, Larry V. and Ingram Olkin. Statistical Methods for Meta-Analysis. New York:
Academic Press, 1985.

Higgins, Julian P.T. and Sally Green (editors). Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of
Interventions Version 5.0.1. September 2008. Available at www.cochrane-handbook.org.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Guido Imbens and Jacob Klerman. “Evaluating the Differential Effects of
Alternative Welfare-to-Work Training Components: A Re-Analysis of the California GAIN
Program.” Journal of Labor Economics 24 (July 2006): 521-566.

Imbens, Guido and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. “Recent Developments in the Econometrics of
Program Evaluation.” IZA Discussion Paper #3640. Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor,
2008.

Jespersen, Svend T., Jakob R. Munch and Lars Skipper. “Costs and Benefits of Danish Active
Labour Market Programmes.” Labour Economics 15 (2008): 859-884.

Johnson, George P. “Evaluating the Macroeconomic Effects of Public Employment Programs. In
Orley Ashenfelter and James Blum, editors. Evaluating the Labor Market Effects of Social
Programs. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Industrial Relations Section, 1976.

Kluve, Jochen. “The Effectiveness of European Active Labor Market Programs.” Labour
Economics, 2010: forthcoming.


                                              31
Kluve, Jochen and Christoph M. Schmidt. "Can training and employment subsidies combat
European unemployment?". Economic Policy 35 (2002): 409-448.

Lalonde, Robert J. “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with
Experimental Data.” American Economic Review 76 (September 1986): 604-620.

Lechner, Michael and Conny Wunsch. “Active Labor Market Policy in East Germany: Waiting
for the Economy to Take Off.” IZA Working Paper No. 2363. Institute for the Study of Labor
(IZA). Bonn, Germany, 2006.

Richardson Katarina and Gerard J. van den Berg. “The Effect of Vocational Employment
Training on the Individual Transition Rate from Unemployment to Work.” IFAU Working Paper
2002:8. Institute for Labor Market Policy Evaluation. Uppsala, Sweden, 2002.

Sianesi, Barbara. “An Evaluation of the Swedish System of Active Labor Market Programs in
the 1990s.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (February 2004): 133-155.




                                             32
Figure 1a: Distribution of Short-term Program Effects Over Time

                           1.0


                                        Positive and Significant
                           0.8          Negative and Significant

                                        Statistically Insignificant
  Fractions of Estimates




                           0.6



                           0.4



                           0.2



                           0.0
                                 1985-1989            1990-1994           1995-1999     2000-2007
                                                     Time Period of Program Operation
Figure 1b: Distribution of Medium-term Program Effects Over Time

                           1.0

                                        Positive and Significant

                                        Negative and Significant
                           0.8
                                        Statistically Insignificant
  Fractions of Estimates




                           0.6



                           0.4



                           0.2



                           0.0
                                 1985-1989             1990-1994           1995-1999     2000-2007
                                                      Time Period of Program Operation
Figure 2: Comparison of Coefficients from Alternative Meta-Analysis Models

                                                              0.5
 Coefficient from Ordered Probit Model of Sign/Significance




                                                              0.0



                                                              -0.5



                                                              -1.0



                                                              -1.5



                                                              -2.0
                                                                                     fitted regression:
                                                                                     ordered probit = 6.48 × OLS + 0.22
                                                                                                       (0.48)      (0.17)
                                                              -2.5



                                                              -3.0
                                                                 -0.40   -0.35   -0.30       -0.25         -0.20        -0.15        -0.10   -0.05   0.00
                                                                                         Coefficient from OLS Model of Effect Size
Table 1: Overview of Survey Responses
                                                                             Number         Percent of
                                     Number      Number       Response       with 1+         Contacts
                                    Contacted   Responses       Rate         Papers         with Papers
                                       (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)               (5)
1. IZA Fellows                         231          152          65.8           66                 28.6

2. NBER Labor Studies Affiliates       113           33          29.2            6                 5.3

3. Secondary Contacts                   14           12          85.7           12                 85.7

4. Total                               358          197          55.0           84                 23.5


Note: Results from survey of IZA members with interest in "Evaluation of Labor Market Programs",
conducted January 2007, and of NBER Labor Studies affiliates, conducted March 2007.
Secondary contacts were referred by original sample members.
Table 2: Distribution of Program Estimates By Latest Date and Country
                                       Number of         Percent
                                       Estimates        of Sample
                                          (1)               (2)
a. By Latest Revison or Publication Date:
            1996                             2             1.0
            1997                             2             1.0
            1998                             3             1.5
            1999                            13             6.5
            2000                            10             5.0
            2001                             4             2.0
            2002                            18             9.1
            2003                            13             6.5
            2004                            20            10.1
            2005                            12             6.0
            2006                            29            14.6
            2007                            39            19.6
            2008                            14             7.0
            2009                            13             6.5
            2010                             7             3.5
           Published Studies                128           64.3

b. By Country of Program
             Australia                       2             1.0
             Austria                        13             6.5
             Belgium                         6             3.0
             Canada                          1             0.5
             Czech Republic                  1             0.5
             Denmark                        25            12.6
             Dominican Republic              1             0.5
             Estonia                         1             0.5
             Finland                         2             1.0
             France                         14             7.0
             Germany                        45            22.6
             Hungary                         1             0.5
             Israel                          2             1.0
             Netherlands                     4             2.0
             New Zealand                     3             1.5
             Norway                          7             3.5
             Peru                            2             1.0
             Poland                          5             2.5
             Portugal                        2             1.0
             Romania                         4             2.0
             Slovakia                       13             6.5
             Spain                           3             1.5
             Sweden                         19             9.5
             Switzerland                     9             4.5
             United Kingdom                  4             2.0
             United States                  10             5.0

Notes: Sample includes 199 estimates from 97 separate studies.
Table 3: Characteristics of Sample of Estimated Program Effects

                                                                     Austria
                                                      Overall       Germany &         Nordic          Anglo
                                                      Sample        Switzerland      Countries       Countries
                                                        (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
1. Number of Estimates                                  199              67             53              20
2. Program Intake
   a. Drawn from Registered Unemployed (%)              68.3            94.0           67.9            15.0

     b. Long Term Unemployed (%)                        12.6            0.0             3.8            25.0
        (registered and other)
     c. Other (Disadvantaged, etc.) (%)                 19.1            6.0            28.3            60.0

3. Type of Program
   a. Classroom or Work Experience Training (%)         41.7            62.7           26.5            35.0

     b. Job Search Assistance (%)                       12.1            7.5             5.7            30.0

     c. Subsidized Private Sector Employment (%)        14.6            3.0            20.8            10.0

     d. Subsidized Public Sector Employment (%)         14.1            16.4            9.4             5.0

     e. Threat of Assignment to Program (%)              2.5            0.0             7.5             0.0

     f. Combination of Types (%)                        15.1            10.4           30.2            20.0

4. Program Duration
   a. Unknown or Mixed (%)                              26.1            11.9           32.1            45.0

     b. 4 Months or Less (%)                            20.6            26.9           20.8            25.0

     c. 5-9 Months (%)                                  35.2            28.4           43.4            30.0

     d. Over 9 Months (%)                               18.1            32.8            3.8             0.0

5. Gender of Program Groupa/
   a. Mixed (%)                                         59.3            55.2           73.6            40.0

     b. Male Only (%)                                   20.6            22.1           13.2            25.0

     c. Female Only (%)                                 16.6            21.0           13.2            35.0

6. Age of Program Groupb/
   a. Mixed (%)                                         63.8            62.7           56.6            60.0

     b. Age Under 25 Only (%)                           14.1            0.0            18.9            25.0

     c. Age 25 and Older Only (%)                       21.6            35.8           24.5            15.0
Notes: Sample includes estimates drawn from 97 separate studies. Nordic Countries include Denmark, Finland,
Norway and Sweden. Anglo countries include Australia, Canada, New Zealand, UK, and US.
a/
 When separate estimates are available by gender, a study may contribute estimates for males and females.
b/
 When separate estimates are available by age, a study may contribute estimates for youth and older people.
Table 4: Evaluation Methods Used in Sample of Estimated Program Effects

                                                                       Austria
                                                           Overall    Germany &      Nordic      Anglo
                                                           Sample     Switzerland   Countries   Countries
                                                            (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)

1. Number of Estimates                                         199        67           53          20

2. Basic Methodology
   a. Cross Sectional with Comparison Group (%)                3.0        0.0          5.7         0.0

   a. Longitudinal with Comparison Group (%)                   51.3       80.6        30.2        75.0

   c. Duration Model with Comparison Group (%)                 36.2       19.4        43.4         0.0

   d. Experimental Design (%)                                  9.1        0.0         18.9        25.0

3. Dependent Variable
   a. Probability of Employment at Future Date (%)             45.7       71.6        17.0        40.0

   b. Wage at Future Date (%)                                  11.6       4.5         20.8        25.0

   c. Duration of Time in Registered Unemployment              24.6       16.4        35.8        10.0
       until Exit to Job (%)
   d. Duration of Time in Registered Unemployment              8.5        1.5         22.6         0.0
       (any type of exit) (%)
   e. Other Duration Measures (%)                              3.5        0.0          0.0         0.0

   f. Probability of Registered Unempl. at                     6.0        6.0          3.8        25.0
        Future Date (%)

4. Covariate Adjustment Method
   a. Matching (%)                                             50.8       73.1        30.2        45.0

   b. Regression (%)                                           42.7       26.9        52.8        40.0

Notes: See note to Table 3 for definition of country groups.
Table 5: Summary of Estimated Impacts of ALM Programs

                                                                            Percent of Estimates that are:
                                                                    Significantly                     Significantly
                                                                     Positive        Insignificant     Negative
                                                                        (1)              (2)              (3)

1. Short-term Impact Estimates (~12 Months After Completion of Program)
a. Overall Sample (N=184)                                               39.1             36.4             24.5

b. Austria, Germany & Switzerland (N=59)                                28.8             40.7             30.5

c. Nordic Countries (N=50)                                              46.0             30.0             24.0

d. Anglo Countries (N=18)                                               66.7             16.7             16.6

e. Outcome Measure = Probability of Employment (N=79)                   25.3             41.7             33.0

f.   Median Effect Size for Estimates with Outcome =                    0.21             0.01             -0.21
     Probability of Employment (N=76)

2. Medium-term Impact Estimates (~24 Months After Completion of Program)
a. Overall Sample (N=108)                                               45.4             44.4             10.2

b. Austria, Germany & Switzerland (N=45)                                44.4             44.4             11.1

c. Nordic Countries (24)                                                37.5             50.0             12.5

d. Anglo Countries (N=15)                                               66.7             33.3                0.0

e. Outcome Measure = Probability of Employment (N=66)                   39.4             47.0             13.6

f.   Median Effect Size for Estimates with Outcome =                    0.29             0.03             -0.20
     Probability of Employment (N=59)

3. Long-term Impact Estimates (36+ Months After Completion of Program)
a. Overall Sample (N=51)                                                52.9             41.1                6.0

b. Austria, Germany & Switzerland (N=23)                                60.9             39.1                0.0

c. Nordic Countries (N=15)                                              40.0             46.7             13.3

d. Anglo Countries (N=11)                                               45.5             45.5                9.0

Notes: See note to Table 3 for definition of country groups. Significance is based on t-ratio for estimate bigger
or smaller than 2.0. Effect size for observations with outcome measure = probablity of employment equals
estimated treatment effect divided by standard deviation of outcome in the control group.
Table 6a: Relation Between Short-term and Medium-term Impacts of ALM Programs

                                             Percent of Medium-term Estimates that are:
                                             Significantly                    Significantly
                                               Positive      Insignificant     Negative
                                                 (1)              (2)             (3)
 Short-term Impact Estimate:
    a. Significantly Positive (N=30)             90.0             10.0            0.0

    b. Insignificant (N=28)                      28.6             71.4            0.0

    c. Significantly Negative (N=36)             30.6             41.7            27.8
Note: sample includes studies that report short-term and medium-term impact estimates for
same program and same participant group.




Table 6b: Relation Between Short-term and Long-term Impacts of ALM Programs

                                               Percent of Long-term Estimates that are:
                                             Significantly                  Significantly
                                               Positive     Insignificant     Negative
                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)
 Short-term Impact Estimate:
   a. Significantly Positive (N=19)              73.7             21.1            5.3

    b. Insignificant (N=13)                      30.8             69.2            0.0

    c. Significantly Negative (N=16)             43.8             43.8            12.5
Note: sample includes studies that report short-term and long-term impact estimates for
same program and same participant group.
Table 7: Ordered Probit Models for Sign/Significance of Estimated Short-term Program Impacts

                                               Dependent variable = ordinal indicator for sign/significance of estimated impact
                                              (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
Dummies for Dependent Variable (omitted=Post-program employment)
1. Time in Reg. Unemp. Until Exit to Job       0.47             --             --              --            0.34           0.18
                                              (0.20)                                                        (0.24)         (0.28)
2. Time in Registered Unemp.                   0.85             --             --              --            0.84           0.88
                                              (0.36)                                                        (0.39)         (0.49)

3. Other Duration Measure                      0.29             --             --              --            0.17           -0.07
                                              (0.21)                                                        (0.31)         (0.31)

4. Prob. Of Registered Unemp.                  1.38             --             --              --            1.22           0.92
                                              (0.47)                                                        (0.58)         (0.66)

5. Post-program Earnings                       0.26             --             --              --            0.09           -0.07
                                              (0.37)                                                        (0.38)         (0.48)
Dummies for Type of Program (omitted=Mixed and Other)
6. Classroom or On-the-Job Training       --           -0.30                   --              --            0.04           0.22
                                                      (0.26)                                                (0.30)         (0.38)
7. Job Search Assistance                        --            0.35             --              --            0.41           0.72
                                                             (0.34)                                         (0.36)         (0.44)

8. Subsidized Private Sector Job                --            -0.50            --              --            -0.25          -0.14
                                                             (0.31)                                         (0.35)         (0.42)

9. Subsidized Public Sector Job                 --            -0.67            --              --            -0.50          -0.31
                                                             (0.38)                                         (0.37)         (0.46)
Dummies for Age and Gender of Participants (omitted=Pooled Age, Pooled Gender)

10. Age Under 25 Only                           --              --            -0.70            --            -0.67          -0.69
                                                                             (0.29)                         (0.28)         (0.32)
11. Age 25 and Older Only                       --              --            -0.55            --            -0.57          -0.51
                                                                             (0.25)                         (0.27)         (0.30)
12. Men Only                                    --              --            -0.10            --            -0.03          -0.11
                                                                             (0.24)                         (0.22)         (0.24)
13. Women Only                                  --              --            -0.03            --            0.00           -0.07
                                                                             (0.23)                         (0.21)         (0.25)
Dummies for Program Duration (omitted=5-9 month duration)
14. Unknown or Mixed                            --              --             --            0.42            0.07           0.10
                                                                                            (0.24)          (0.25)         (0.28)
15. Short (≤4 Months)                           --              --             --            0.33            -0.04          0.00
                                                                                            (0.22)          (0.27)         (0.29)
16. Long (>9 Months)                            --              --             --            -0.07           -0.24          -0.24
                                                                                            (0.31)          (0.35)         (0.38)

17. Dummies for Intake Group and               No              No             No              No              No            Yes
   Timing of Program
18. Dummies for Country Group                  No              No             No              No              No            Yes

19. Dummy for Experimental Design               --              --             --              --              --           -0.06
                                                                                                                           (0.40)
20. Square Root of Sample Size                  --              --             --              --              --           -0.02
(Coefficient × 1000)                                                                                                       (0.03)
21. Dummy for Published                         --              --             --              --              --           -0.18
                                                                                                                           (0.26)
Pseudo R-squared                              0.04            0.03           0.03            0.02            0.10           0.12
Notes: Standard errrors (clustered by study) in parentheses. Sample size for all models is 181 program estimates. Models
are ordered probits, fit to ordinal data with value of +1 for significant positive estimate, 0 for insignificant estimate, and -1
for significant negative estimate. Estimated cutpoints (2 for each model) are not reported in table.
Table 8: Ordered Probit Models for Sign/Significance of Medium-term Impacts and Change in Impact from
         Short-term to Medium-term

                                                                                                       Change in Impact:
                                                           Medium-term Impact                     Short-term to Medium-term
                                                           (1)           (2)                         (3)            (4)
Dummies for Dependent Variable (omitted=Post-program employment)
1. Time in Reg. Unemp. Until Exit to Job                   1.29           0.95                       -0.10            0.66
                                                           (0.68)         (1.04)                     (1.01)          (1.30)

2. Other Duration Measure                                  0.63           0.21                        1.07            2.40
                                                           (0.46)         (1.05)                     (0.43)          (1.30)

3. Prob. Of Registered Unemp.                              0.59           0.15                       -0.55           -0.97
                                                           (0.93)         (1.04)                     (0.32)          (0.51)

4. Post-program Earnings                                   0.45           0.65                        0.18           -0.11
                                                           (0.34)         (0.63)                     (0.32)          (0.57)
Dummies for Type of Program (omitted=Mixed and Other)
6. Classroom or On-the-Job Training                        0.74           1.14                        0.81            0.84
                                                           (0.49)         (0.68)                     (0.34)          (0.64)
7. Job Search Assistance                                   0.49           1.16                        0.38            0.42
                                                           (0.61)         (0.85)                     (0.40)          (0.88)

8. Subsidized Private Sector Job                           0.36           0.79                        0.22            0.38
                                                           (0.62)         (0.92)                     (0.58)          (0.65)

9. Subsidized Public Sector Job                            -0.92          -0.46                       0.40            0.24
                                                           (0.57)         (0.74)                     (0.43)          (0.68)

Dummies for Age and Gender of Participants (omitted=Pooled Age, Pooled Gender)

10. Age Under 25 Only                                      -0.82          -0.96                       0.15            0.79
                                                           (0.28)         (0.53)                     (0.30)          (0.55)

11. Age 25 and Older Only                                  -0.92          -0.83                      -0.12           -0.16
                                                           (0.41)         (0.52)                     (0.44)          (0.60)
12. Men Only                                                0.03          -0.28                       0.31            0.47
                                                           (0.32)         (0.45)                     (0.31)          (0.45)
13. Women Only                                              0.32          0.17                        0.34            0.29
                                                           (0.36)         (0.44)                     (0.28)          (0.44)
Dummies for Program Duration (omitted=5-9 month duration)
14. Unknown or Mixed                                       -1.08          -1.57                      -0.89           -1.00
                                                           (0.33)         (0.46)                     (0.37)          (0.46)
15. Short (≤4 Months)                                      -0.29          -0.41                      -0.61           -0.35
                                                           (0.36)         (0.46)                     (0.44)          (0.52)
16. Long (>9 Months)                                       -0.34          -0.50                      -0.30           -0.36
                                                           (0.30)         (0.37)                     (0.50)          (0.68)

17. Dummy for Experimental Design                                         0.41                         --            -0.12
                                                                          (0.83)                                     (0.70)
18. Square Root of Sample Size                                            0.13                         --            -0.10
  (Coefficient × 1000)                                                    (0.13)                                     (0.11)
19. Dummy for Published                                                   -0.08                                       0.61
                                                                          (0.34)                                     (0.33)
Pseudo R-squared                                              0.19           0.26                     0.09             0.14
Notes: Standard errrors (clustered by study) in parentheses. Sample size for all models is 92 program estimates.
Models in columns 1 and 2 are ordered probit models, fit to ordinal data with value of +1 for significant positive estimate,
0 for insignificant estimate, and -1 for significant negative estimate. Models in columns 3 and 4 are ordered probit
models, fit to ordinal data with values of +2, +1, 0, and -1, representing the change form the short-term impact to the
midium-term impact. Estimated cutpoints are not reported in table.
Table 9: Comparison of Ordered Probit and Probit Models for Short-term Program Impact

                                                                                     Probit for                 Probit for
                                                                                   Significantly              Significantly
                                                     Ordered Probit                Positive Impact            Negative Impact
                                                           (1)                           (2)                       (3)
Dummies for Dependent Variable (omitted=Post-program employment)
1. Time in Reg. Unemp. Until Exit to Job                    0.32                        0.39                      -0.24
                                                           (0.24)                      (0.27)                     (0.32)

2. Time in Reg. Unemployment                                0.94                        0.99                      -0.86
                                                           (0.46)                      (0.49)                     (0.67)

3. Other Duration Measure                                   0.17                        -0.64                        --
                                                           (0.32)                      (0.52)

4. Prob. Of Registered Unemp.                               1.21                        1.11                         --
                                                           (0.58)                      (0.59)

5. Post-program Earnings                                    0.10                        0.36                       0.22
                                                           (0.38)                      (0.38)                     (0.42)

Dummies for Type of Program (omitted=Mixed and Other)
6. Classroom or On-the-Job Training                   0.06                              0.08                      -0.04
                                                    (0.36)                             (0.38)                     (0.56)
7. Job Search Assistance                                    0.42                        0.53                      -0.42
                                                           (0.38)                      (0.44)                     (0.65)

8. Subsidized Private Sector Job                           -0.21                        0.01                       0.41
                                                           (0.40)                      (0.46)                     (0.59)

9. Subsidized Public Sector Job                            -0.44                        -0.31                      0.60
                                                           (0.45)                      (0.48)                     (0.62)
Dummies for Age and Gender of Participants (omitted=Pooled Age, Pooled Gender)

10. Age Under 25 Only                                      -0.68                        -0.89                      0.50
                                                           (0.29)                      (0.34)                     (0.36)

11. Age 25 and Older Only                                  -0.56                        -0.80                      0.38
                                                           (0.27)                      (0.29)                     (0.33)
12. Men Only                                               -0.01                        0.02                       0.17
                                                           (0.23)                      (0.25)                     (0.28)
13. Women Only                                              0.01                        -0.08                     -0.10
                                                           (0.21)                      (0.26)                     (0.27)
Dummies for Program Duration (omitted=5-9 month duration)
14. Unknown or Mixed                                        0.09                        0.14                      -0.06
                                                           (0.27)                      (0.29)                     (0.38)
15. Short (≤4 Months)                                      -0.03                        0.07                       0.21
                                                           (0.29)                      (0.33)                     (0.43)
16. Long (>9 Months)                                       -0.22                        -0.01                      0.46
                                                           (0.35)                      (0.39)                     (0.41)

17. Dummy for Experimental Design                           0.05                        -0.26                       --
                                                           (0.32)                      (0.41)
18. Square Root of Sample Size                             -0.01                        0.02                       0.03
  (Coefficient × 1000)                                     (0.02)                      (0.02)                     (0.03)
19. Dummy for Published                                    -0.13                        0.02                       0.30
                                                           (0.19)                      (0.23)                     (0.26)
Pseudo R-squared                                           0.09                        0.15                       0.11
Notes: Standard errrors in parentheses. Sample sizes are 181 (cols. 1-2) and 150 (col. 3). Model in column 1 is ordered
probit fit to ordinal data with value of +1 for significantly positive estimate, 0 for insignificant estimate, and -1 for
significantly negative estimate. Model in column 2 is probit model for event of significantly positive effect. Model in column
3 is probit for event of significantly negative estimate.
Table 10: Comparison of Models for Sign/Significance and Effect Size of Short-term Program Estimates, Based on Subsample of Studies with Probability of
          Employment as Dependent Variable

                                                 Ordered Probit Models for Sign/Significance:                         OLS Regressions for Effect Size:
                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)          (6)             (7)              (8)
Dummies for Type of Program (omitted=Mixed and Other)
1. Classroom or On-the-Job Training      -0.98                  --             --             -0.89           -0.23           --              --           -0.14
                                        (0.52)                                               (0.54)          (0.12)                                       (0.12)
2. Job Search Assistance                       -0.41            --             --             -0.83           -0.07           --              --           -0.11
                                              (0.66)                                         (0.69)          (0.08)                                       (0.18)

3. Subsidized Private Sector Job               -1.50            --             --             -1.41           -0.35           --              --           -0.24
                                              (0.62)                                         (0.60)          (0.12)                                       (0.13)

4. Subsidized Public Sector Job                -2.46            --             --             -2.54           -0.46           --              --           -0.38
                                              (0.60)                                         (0.67)          (0.11)                                       (0.12)
Dummies for Age and Gender of Participants (omitted=Pooled Age, Pooled Gender)

5. Age Under 25 Only                            --             -1.11           --             -0.97            --            -0.32            --           -0.26
                                                              (0.47)                         (0.59)                         (0.04)                        (0.04)
6. Age 25 and Older Only                        --             -0.72           --             -1.14            --            -0.19            --           -0.23
                                                              (0.44)                         (0.39)                         (0.08)                        (0.06)
7. Men Only                                     --             -0.73           --             -0.51            --            -0.16            --           -0.11
                                                              (0.49)                         (0.36)                         (0.09)                        (0.07)
8. Women Only                                   --             -0.08           --              0.12            --            -0.07            --           -0.04
                                                              (0.50)                         (0.30)                         (0.08)                        (0.05)

Dummies for Program Duration (omitted=5-9 month duration)
9. Unknown or Mixed                        --             --                  0.29            -0.37            --             --            0.09           -0.04
                                                                             (0.39)          (0.52)                                        (0.13)         (0.09)
10. Short (≤4 Months)                           --              --            0.59            0.08             --             --            0.06           -0.07
                                                                             (0.34)          (0.53)                                        (0.05)         (0.08)
11. Long (>9 Months)                            --              --            0.04            -0.60            --             --            -0.04          -0.15
                                                                             (0.44)          (0.53)                                        (0.08)         (0.07)

Pseudo R-squared/ R-squared                    0.13           0.09            0.02            0.23            0.23           0.28           0.03           0.46
Notes: Standard errrors (clustered by study) in parentheses. Sample sizes are 79 (col 1-4) and 76 (col 5-8). Only progam estimates from studies that use
the probability of employment as the outcome are included. Models in columns 1-4 are ordered probit models, fit to ordinal data with value of +1 for
significant positive estimate, 0 for insignificant estimate, and -1 for significant negative estimates. Models in columns 5-8 are linear regression models, fit to
the effect size defined by the program impact on the treatment group over average outcome in the control group. Estimated cutpoints from ordered probit
models are not reported in the table.
Appendix Table A: Analysis of Estimated Program Impacts for Germany Only

                                           Short-term         Medium-term
                                             Impact              Impact
                                           (~12 mo.)           (~24 mo.)
                                              (1)                 (2)

Distribution of Dependent Variable:
   %Significant Positive (coded as +1)         24.4                52.8
   %Insignificant (coded as 0)                 31.7                36.1
   %Significant Negative (coded as −1)         43.9                11.1


Coefficients of Ordered Probit Model
   Dummy for Former East Germany               -0.24               -1.02
    (mean=0.44)                               (0.39)              (0.58)

   Dummy for Classroom or On-the-job           0.17                3.13
    Training (mean=0.80)                      (0.54)              (0.93)

   Dummy for Participants Age 25 or            -0.77               -1.19
    Older Only (mean=0.46)                    (0.42)              (0.98)

   Program Duration in Months                  -0.09               0.05
    (mean=8.91)                               (0.04)              (0.06)

Number of Estimates                               41                36
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. Models also include a dummy for
observations with imputed value for program duration. Estimated cut-points
for ordered probit (2 for each model) are not reported.
