                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    EFFECTS OF OVERWEIGHT ON RISKY SEXUAL BEHAVIOR OF ADOLESCENT
                                GIRLS

                                           Susan Averett
                                           Hope Corman
                                          Nancy Reichman

                                        Working Paper 16172
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16172


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2010




We are grateful to Asia Sikora and Julien Teitler for helpful comments and Oliver Joszt for excellent
research assistance. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen
Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding
from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss
and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health
data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support
was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Susan Averett, Hope Corman, and Nancy Reichman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Overweight on Risky Sexual Behavior of Adolescent Girls
Susan Averett, Hope Corman, and Nancy Reichman
NBER Working Paper No. 16172
July 2010
JEL No. I1,J1

                                            ABSTRACT

We use data from The National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health to estimate effects of adolescent
girls’ overweight on their propensity to engage in risky sexual behavior. We estimate single equation,
two-stage, and sibling fixed-effects models and find that overweight or obese teenage girls are more
likely than their recommended-weight peers to engage in certain types of risky sexual behavior but
not others. The results from this study underscore the importance of using multifaceted and contemporary
measures of risky sexual behavior and have implications for the health and well-being of adolescent
girls.


Susan Averett                                      Nancy Reichman
Simon Center                                       Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
Dept. of Economics                                 University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey
Lafayette College                                  97 Paterson St., Room 435
Easton, PA 18042                                   New Brunswick, NJ 08903
DYHUHWWV#ODID\HWWHHGX                             reichmne@umdnj.edu

Hope Corman
Rider University
2083 Lawrenceville Road
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
and NBER
corman@rider.edu
       Relations with the opposite sex are important social interactions in the lives of adolescent

girls. A growing literature has focused on determinants and consequences of adolescent sexual

activity, and this body of work has generated much knowledge. However, the predominant focus

has been on vaginal intercourse, while in reality teenagers engage in a variety of different sexual

activities. For example, recent findings from the National Survey of Family Growth indicate that

54% of adolescent girls age 15-19 in the United States in 2002 had ever performed oral sex

(Lindberg, Jones & Santelli, 2008), that 11% of this same cohort had ever engaged in anal sex

(Lindberg, Jones & Santelli, 2008), and that 10% of teen females have had heterosexual oral sex

but not vaginal intercourse (Mosher et al., 2005). Additionally, many studies in the existing

literature focus on questions involving the timing of sexual debut or whether individuals abstain

from sexual intercourse. That is, they generally do not distinguish between sexual intercourse

that is particularly risky (e.g., unprotected sex with multiple partners) and that which confers

much less health risk (e.g., protected sex within an exclusive relationship). The former is far

from rare. For example, reports based on the 2002 and 2003 Youth Risk Behavior Surveys

indicate that 11% of 9th-12th grade girls reported having had four or more sexual partners and that

17% of sexually active 15-19 year old girls reported that they did not use contraceptives at their

most recent sexual encounter (Abma et al., 2004; Kaiser Family Foundation, 2005).

       Many sexual activities confer health risks and females bear the brunt of most of those

risks. It is well known that unprotected vaginal intercourse is strongly associated with unintended

pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). According to Landry and Turnbull (1997):

(1) Women are more susceptible to STDs than men when they have sex with an infected partner

and do not use a condom. (2) Infected women are more likely than infected men to be

asymptomatic, which can lead to serious health complications. (3) With the exception of Human




                                                                                                     2
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), STDs may have more life-threatening consequences for women

(e.g., Pelvic Inflammatory Disease, ectopic pregnancy, and cervical cancer) than for men. (4)

Young women contract STDs more easily than adult women because they have fewer protective

antibodies and because cervical immaturity facilitates the transmission of infections. Recent

evidence from the Centers for Disease Control indicates that 1 in 4 young women between the

ages of 14 and 19 in the U.S. is infected with at least one of the most common STDs (human

papillomavirus (HPV), chlamydia, herpes simplex virus, and trichomoniasis) (CDC, 2010).

Having multiple sexual partners is an important risk factor for STDs because many teenagers do

not use condoms correctly and consistently (Santelli et al., 1998). Oral sex can also lead to

transmission of STDs and most teens do not use barrier protection during oral sex (Halpern-

Felsher et al., 2005). Finally, the odds of contracting HIV from unprotected receptive anal

intercourse are about 5 times that from unprotected vaginal intercourse (Varghesi et al., 2002;

Lescano et al., 2009), and studies have found that anal intercourse among adolescents and young

adults is often unprotected (Rotheram-Borus et al., 1999; Lescano et al., 2009).

       Overweight has become a pressing public health issue in the United States and most other

developed countries, and there is much research and policy interest in its causes and

consequences. Teenage girls have not been spared from the obesity epidemic. Between the 1960s

and 2003-2005, the prevalence of overweight in girls aged 12 to 19 in the U.S. increased from

4.7% to over 17% (National Center for Health Statistics, 2010, Table 73). A few studies in the

economics literature have investigated the role of overweight as a determinant of adolescent

sexual behavior, which is viewed through a lens of assortative mating in a market for sexual

partners. The working hypothesis has been that as an aspect of physical appearance, overweight

may be a liability in the adolescent dating market. Cawley (2001), using the National




                                                                                                  3
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), found no evidence that body weight affects initiation of

sexual activity among adolescent girls, while Cawley, Joyner & Sobal (2006) found mixed

results depending on the data set used—NLSY or The National Longitudinal Survey of

Adolescent Health (Add Health). A recent study by Sabia and Rees (2010), using Add Health

data, builds upon this research by estimating both two-stage and individual fixed-effects models

to address the potential endogeneity of body weight. Their results confirm the Add Health

findings by Cawley, Joyner & Sobal that girls who are overweight or obese are more likely than

their recommended-weight peers to delay engaging in sexual intercourse.

       To date, research on the effects of overweight on sexual behavior of adolescent girls has

rarely focused on risky sexual behaviors despite: (1) the high prevalence and public health

importance of such behaviors; (2) sociological literature suggesting that adolescents’ social

behavior is strongly influenced by peer networks (which, because they attend school, are more

organized and self-contained than those of most adults) and fear of social isolation (see Coleman,

1961; Bearman and Moody, 2004; Tani, Chavez and Deffenbacher,2001); and (3) economic

theory suggesting that girls who are perceived (or perceive themselves) as less attractive will be

more likely to engage in risky sexual behaviors--that is, move from a dating market to a market

for sexual partners (the theoretical arguments are developed below). A few studies in the medical

and public health literature have examined associations between body weight and risky sexual

behaviors among young females (e.g., Akers et al., 2009; Wiederman & Hurst, 1998; Eisenberg

et al., 2005). Of particular note, Eisenberg et al. found that among young female college

students, those with higher Body Mass Index (BMI) were more likely to engage in casual sex

and to have multiple partners.




                                                                                                     4
       As far as we know, only five studies of effects of adolescent female overweight on sexual

behavior have gone beyond sexual intercourse in characterizing adolescent heterosexual

relationships. All used Add Health, in certain cases augmented with other datasets. Halpern et al.

(1999) found that more body fat was associated with a lower probability of dating, even among

non-obese girls, and Halpern et al. (2005) found that for each one point increase in BMI, the

probability of having a romantic relationship decreased by 6%. Cawley, Joyner & Sobal (2006),

using both Add Health and the NLSY, also found that overweight girls are less likely than non-

overweight girls to date, as did Cawley (2001), and that the effect of overweight on dating

appears to be more negative than that of overweight on sexual intercourse. Finally, Cheng &

Landale (2010) found that compared to their recommended-weight peers, overweight adolescents

(males or females) have significantly later onset of first sexual intercourse and are more likely to

enter early adulthood without any intimate relationship experience (defined as romantic

relationships in which sexual intercourse occurs). None of these studies explicitly investigated

whether girls who are shut out of the dating market because they are overweight move to a

market for risky sexual encounters.

       In this paper, we use data from the Add Health study to investigate effects of adolescent

girls’ weight on their propensity to engage in risky sexual behaviors. We focus on behaviors that

have adverse effects on physical (as opposed to mental) health because the literature reveals

weak or mixed associations between risky sexual behavior and mental health (Goodson et al.,

2006; Eisenberg et al. 2009). The behaviors of interest include having unprotected vaginal

intercourse, having sex under the influence of alcohol, and having anal intercourse. Because

obesity rates vary by geography and some research has found evidence of social contagion of




                                                                                                   5
overweight within social networks (Christakis & Fowler 2007),1 we investigate the effects of not

only the individual’s absolute weight but also those of her weight relative to the other girls in her

school. We estimate single-equation, two-stage, and sibling fixed-effects models to address the

potential endogeneity of body weight.

Conceptual Framework

        Sexual activity among adolescents confers both costs and benefits. As discussed above,

the costs are higher for sex that is risky and girls face higher risks than boys. Cawley, Joyner and

Sobal (2006) present a conceptual framework that can be expanded to explain why girls may

engage in risky sex despite the costs. In their formulation, the market for dating is not necessarily

the same as the market for sex, and: (1) individuals derive utility from sex, from dating, and from

one’s reputation; (2) utility derived from sex, dating, and one’s reputation are all functions of the

attractiveness of one’s partner; and (3) overweight or obesity is a proxy for attractiveness. A

difference between dating and sex is that the former is more public (i.e., others can observe the

attractiveness of the partner), whereas the latter generally occurs in private (i.e., others are less

likely to observe the partner’s attractiveness). Thus, the influence of peer networks distinguishes

these two markets.

        Given this framework, there would be strong assortative matching in dating markets, with

more attractive teens being more desirable partners. A teen would be unwilling to match with an

unattractive teen because the expected utility from the match would be lower than that with an

attractive person and because such a match would compromise one’s reputation. Assortative

mating would be less pronounced in the market for sex than in the dating market because sex is

more private than dating and effects on reputation among one’s peers would therefore be less of


1
 Other research by Cohen-Cole and Fletcher (2008), using Add Health data, did not find any evidence of social
contagion of overweight.


                                                                                                                6
an issue. Therefore, while girls who are physically unattractive may not match with an attractive

male in the dating market, they may be able to make such a match in the sex market.

       Boys would be more willing to match with less attractive girls in the sex market than in

the dating market for two reasons. First, they may derive utility from risky sex acts, such as

vaginal intercourse without a condom, which confer less risk to them than it does to girls. In a

match of equally attractive girls and boys, girls would be less willing than boys to engage in

risky sex since they incur greater costs and do not incur greater benefits. In order to find willing

partners for risky sex, a boy may have to move to a less physically attractive match. The less

attractive girl would face greater risks in the sex market than in the dating market, but these may

be offset by the benefits of having a more attractive partner. Second, if having a greater number

of sexual partners enhances the reputation of boys but not that of girls, attractive girls would be

less available than unattractive girls in the sex market. Thus, based on the Cawley-Joyner-Sobal

framework, and assuming that overweight girls have the same tastes for both sexual activity and

risk as non-overweight girls, we hypothesize that girls who are overweight or obese may be more

likely than their non-overweight peers to engage in risky sex. However, if the markets for dating

and sex are not as distinct as the Cawley-Joyner-Sobal framework predicts, girls who are

overweight or obese may engage in less of any sexual activity compared their non-overweight

peers simply because they are not viewed as an attractive match. Finally, we expect that effects,

if any, will be stronger when considering a girl’s weight relative to that of other girls at her

school than when considering her absolute weight since, based on this model, heavy girls in

“heavy schools” should be less disadvantaged in the dating market than those in “light schools.”




                                                                                                       7
Data

           The National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health (Add Health) is a nationally

representative school-based sample of adolescents who were in grades 7 through 12 in 1995. A

stratified random sample of 20,745 of youth was administered a comprehensive questionnaire

covering numerous aspects of their school, family and private lives. For each youth, a parent was

also interviewed; in the vast majority of cases this was the mother. Currently there are four

rounds of data available, 1994-1995, 1996, 2001-2002, and 2007-2008. A sample of 80 high

schools and 52 middle schools from the U.S. was selected with unequal probability.

Incorporating systematic sampling methods and implicit stratification into the Add Health study

design ensured that this sample is representative of U.S. schools with respect to region of

country, urbanicity, school size, school type, and ethnicity (see Harris et al., 2009 for more

information on the research design). In our analysis we make use of Wave 2 for several reasons.

First, the respondents were relatively young in Wave 1. Second, Wave 2 includes measured

height and weight rather than self-reported height and weight. Lastly, Waves 3 and 4 were

fielded when the respondents were no longer adolescents.

           We limit our sample to girls who are at least 14 years old and who are in the 9th grade or

higher.2 Our upper age limit is 19. Because our study focuses on risky heterosexual behaviors,

we exclude teens who report a same-sex relationship in the past 18 months. We exclude girls

who had missing or inconsistent information for key analysis variables as well as those with

missing sample weights.

           We use three different analysis samples. The first sample (the “full sample”) includes all

girls with valid values for the analysis variables (N = 5,198). The second sample consist of girls

who are sexually active, defined broadly as those who have engaged in genital fondling, anal
2
    We exclude those below 9th grade because the survey did not ask some relevant questions to those below 9th grade.


                                                                                                                    8
intercourse, and/or vaginal intercourse with a boy or man (N= 3,618, about 70% of the full

sample).3 The third sample consists of girls who have had vaginal intercourse at least once in

their lives (N = 2,648, a bit over half of the full sample). Thus, girls who have had sex but not

vaginal intercourse represent a sizable group that may be at high risk but typically overlooked in

studies of teenage sexual behavior. Characteristics of all three analysis samples are presented in

Table 1.

Measures of Sexual Behavior

        We consider the general outcomes of ever having had vaginal intercourse and ever

having had any sex (as defined for our second sample), but are particularly interested in the

following measures of risky sexual behavior: having had vaginal intercourse without using a

condom every time (past 18 months),4 having had sex while under the influence of alcohol (past

12 months),5 and having ever had anal intercourse.6 As discussed earlier, anal intercourse imparts

high risks for contracting STDs, and most teens do not use condoms during anal intercourse. All

of the measures of sexual behavior are based on respondents’ self reports.7

        As shown in Table 1, about half of all girls have had vaginal intercourse without using a

condom every time. Seventy percent have had sex considering our broader definition (genital

fondling, anal intercourse, or vaginal intercourse). Among girls who have had vaginal

intercourse, 94% reported not having used a condom every time. These figures indicate that the

majority of teenage girls who have vaginal intercourse put themselves at significant risk for


3
  Unfortunately, although oral sex is a very prevalent behavior among high school students, neither Wave 1 nor
Wave 2 of the Add Health survey asked any questions specifically about oral sex.
4
  As discussed later, we explore less stringent definitions of vaginal intercourse without a condom.
5
  The specific question was: “Did you get into a sexual situation that you later regretted because you had been
drinking?”
6
  We were unable to investigate having multiple sexual partners as a risky behavior because the survey instrument
asked only about three different partners with whom the respondent had been in a relationship.
7
  Add Health used Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing in order to minimize underreporting of sensitive
information.


                                                                                                                    9
STDs. Of girls who have had any sex, 11 percent have done so under the influence of alcohol

and later regretted it. Nine percent of all girls have ever had anal intercourse. Of the girls who

have had sex, broadly defined, 13% had ever engaged in anal intercourse, and of those who have

ever had vaginal intercourse, almost 1 in 5 (17%) had ever had anal intercourse.

Measures of Body Weight

         In our main analyses, we characterize overweight two different ways: First, we use a

dichotomous indicator for overweight or obesity that is set equal to one if a girl’s BMI was

above the 85th percentile. In the same models, we also include a dichotomous indicator for

whether she was underweight (BMI below the 5th percentile). These cutoffs are recommended by

the Centers for Disease Control (CDC).8 In other models, we use a dichotomous indicator for

relative overweight or obesity that is set equal to one if a girl’s BMI is higher than the 85th

percentile for the girls in her school. In those models, we also include an indicator for whether

the girl’s BMI was less than the 5th percentile for the girls in her school. In supplemental

analyses for both absolute and relative weight, we use separate indicators for overweight and

obesity using the 85th and 95th percentile cutoffs in addition to the indicator for underweight. We

also considered BMI as a continuous measure in models of both absolute and relative weight.

         Over one quarter (27-29%) of the girls in each of the analysis samples are characterized

as overweight or obese, while only 2% are classified as underweight. Girls who have had vaginal

intercourse are about as likely as all girls to be overweight or obese. About 14-15% of girls in


8
  The standard for measuring child/adolescent weight in developed countries is based on the Body Mass Index
(BMI) which is defined as the ratio of weight in kilograms over height in meters squared. Because children and
adolescents are still growing, BMIs are normed by gender and age using a healthy reference population for
comparison. An adolescent is considered likely to be obese if his/her BMI is over the 95th percentile of the same age
and gender cohort in the reference population, overweight if his/her BMI is above the 85th percentile, and
underweight if his/her BMI percentile is below the 5th percentile (CDC, 2000). We calculate BMI percentiles using
the Nutstat module of the CDC’s Epi-Info software. This program also flags individuals with biologically
implausible BMI values. After deleting individuals with missing values on our outcome measures implausible BMIs
resulted in the removal of two individuals from our sample.


                                                                                                                  10
each of the analysis samples are in the heaviest 15% of girls in their school, again indicating that

heavy girls are about equally as likely as their recommended-weight peers to be sexually active.

Covariates

       The rich information available in the Add Health dataset allows us to control for

numerous individual and family characteristics that may be associated with both body weight

and sexual behavior. These measures are listed in Table 1. In all models, we control for the girl’s

age (in months), family structure (only child in household, versus not; lives with one parent, lives

with family but no parents, and lives with two parents one of whom is not biological, with each

of the three compared to lives with both biological parents), the reporting parent’s age (in years),

an indicator for missing parent’s age, the reporting parent’s education (some college, high school

graduate, less than high school graduate, and parent’s education missing, all compared to college

graduate), each parent’s occupation (less than managerial or professional, and parent’s

occupation missing, both compared to managerial or professional), each parent’s employment

(employed, versus not employed), public assistance (family relies on public assistance and

missing public assistance, both compared to does not rely on public assistance), the girl’s

religious service attendance (at least once per month, less than once per month, and missing, all

relative to never), time (in years) since menarche, time (in days) since Wave 1 interview,

race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, and other non-white, all relative to non-Hispanic

white), and urban and rural residence (both compared to suburban). Family structure is included

to capture the potential effects of siblings in the household, supervision when not in school, and

parental investments in the focal child. Parents’ age, education, occupations, employment, and

public assistance are included as indicators of socioeconomic status. Time since menarche

captures physical maturity, which has been shown to be related to both obesity (Ahmed et al.,




                                                                                                  11
2009) and initiation of sexual activity (Udry, 1979). Religious service attendance is included as a

control because adolescents who are particularly religious may choose to be sexually abstinent.

We control for the time between interviews because some of our outcome questions are

predicated on such timing. We control for race/ethnicity because there are known racial/ethnic

differences in both body weight and adolescent sexual activity. The urban and rural indicators

are included to control for geographic variations in overweight and sexual behavior. Finally, we

include indicators for the school the teen attended to allow us to control for aspects of the school

environment that may be associated with both body weight and sexual behavior.

       There are few differences in characteristics across samples. Exceptions include family

structure (being the only child in the household, living with one parent, and living with family

but no parents all increase the likelihood of having had any sex and having had vaginal

intercourse), public assistance (which is weakly but positively related to having had any sex),

and religious attendance (which is negatively associated with having had any sex).

Estimation Strategy

       The main challenge in estimating the effects of body weight on sexual behavior is the

potential for unobserved heterogeneity. That is, any observed associations may reflect

unobserved characteristics associated with both weight and behavior. To address this

methodological challenge, we employ four different estimation strategies. First, we estimate

linear probability models that control for an extensive set of covariates, including school fixed

effects which account for differences in social environments and norms across schools, and

assess patterns across different analysis samples and characterizations of body weight as

described earlier as well as across models with different sets of covariates. We use linear

probability models to facilitate comparison of the single equation results to our two-stage least




                                                                                                    12
squares results, as well as to the extant literature (e.g. Sabia & Rees, 2010).Our second strategy

is to estimate two-stage models that use (measured) overweight or obesity of the girl’s (full

biological, half biological, or non-biological) sibling of either sex (from the Add Health sibling

sample) and (self-reported) obesity of her reporting parent as identifiers, a general approach

taken by Sabia and Rees (2010). This approach characterizes a girls’ body weight solely on the

basis of shared genetic and/or environmental aspects of her family (as measured by sibling and

parent body weight) that should be associated with her own weight but not with potentially

confounding unobserved individual level characteristics. These two-stage models also control for

possible reverse causality. Third, we estimate sibling fixed-effects models that compare full

biological sisters (also using the sibling sample). This strategy, to the extent that it is successful,

nets out shared unobserved genetic and environmental influences on obesity within families that

may also be associated with risky sexual behavior. It thus captures individual differences across

teens within families. Fourth, we directly test for one potential cause of unobserved

heterogeneity—taste for risk.9 While no one approach is perfect, together they provide a cautious

and careful examination of the effects of teenage girls’ body weight on their risky sexual

behavior.




9
  In theory, one way to further address this issue would be to capitalize on the longitudinal nature of the Add Health
data by estimating individual fixed effects models. However, Waves 1 and 2 are a mere one year apart and the
measures of height and weight in Wave 1 are self-reported. Furthermore, it is far from clear that whatever
unobserved heterogeneity might exist would be constant over time. Adolescents experience a myriad of physical and
emotional changes as they mature, and it is unlikely that these changes would be time invariant. Sabia and Rees
(2010) estimated individual fixed effects models using self-reported height and weight across waves in Add Health
and found small and insignificant effects of overweight or obesity on whether a girl had ever had sexual intercourse.
The authors speculated that the weak and significant associations in this specification were due, at least in part, to
insufficient person-specific variation across the weight categories between waves.


                                                                                                                   13
Results

Linear Probability Models

        Table 2 present results from linear probability models for each of the three analysis

samples. Columns a and b present estimates from models of sexual activity and columns c

through e (highlighted in bold) present estimates from models of risky sexual behavior. In

addition to our overweight or obesity variable, all models control for the covariates listed in

Table 1, school indicators, and whether the girl was underweight (for the models estimating the

effects of overweight or obese) or whether the girl’s BMI was less than the 5th percentile for her

school (for the models using the girl’s relative weight).10

        In the first two rows, we present results for the full sample of girls using the absolute

(Row 1) and relative (Row 2) measures of overweight or obesity. The estimates can be

interpreted as follows: The marginal effect of overweight or obese on vaginal intercourse without

a condom is -.077, indicating that being overweight or obese reduces the likelihood of ever

having vaginal intercourse without using a condom in the past 18 months by 7.7 percentage

points, all else equal (Row 1, Column c). The marginal effect of overweight or obesity relative to

other girls in the same school is quite similar, at -.078, indicating that being above the 85th BMI

percentile in one’s school reduces the likelihood of vaginal intercourse without a condom by 7.8

percentage points (row 2, column c). Using both the absolute and relative indicators of

overweight or obesity, and consistent with previous research, we find that overweight or obese

girls are less likely than their recommended-weight counterparts to have had vaginal intercourse

and to have had any sex. As a result, they are less likely to have had unprotected vaginal

intercourse. However, overweight or obese girls are not significantly less likely to have had sex


10
  Full regression results for selected samples and outcomes are presented in Table 3. In these models, which include
school fixed effects, very few covariates are statistically significant.


                                                                                                                 14
under the influence of alcohol, and once they have had vaginal intercourse, their consistency of

condom use is no different from that of recommended-weight peers (Column c of Rows 5 and 6).

Moreover, they are more likely to have ever had anal intercourse. In the full sample, girls who

are overweight or obese are about 1.4 percentage points (or about 16%) more likely than their

recommended-weight peers to have ever engaged in anal intercourse. The effect is stronger and

becomes statistically significant when considering the girl’s weight relative to that of other girls

in her school. Girls in the top 15% BMI of girls in their school are 2.3 percentage points (or

about 26%) more likely than their lighter peers to engage in anal intercourse.

       The estimates in Rows 3 and 4 pertain to girls who are sexually active (that is, girls who

have ever engaged in genital fondling, anal intercourse, and/or vaginal intercourse). We find that

the negative effects of overweight or obese on having vaginal intercourse and on having vaginal

intercourse without a condom are substantially attenuated but still for the most part statistically

significant. In contrast, the estimated effects of overweight or obese on ever having had anal

intercourse are much stronger and even more significant than those in Rows 1 and 2. Among

girls who have had some sex, those who are overweight or obese are 3.2 percentage points (or

about 25%) more likely than their recommended-weight peers to have ever engaged in anal

intercourse. Again, the effect is even greater (5 percentage points or about 38%) for those with

BMI above the 85th percentile for girls in their school.

       Rows 5 and 6 present corresponding estimates for girls who have ever had vaginal

intercourse. Again, we find no evidence that sexually active overweight or obese girls take

greater risks than their recommended-weight peers in terms of having unprotected vaginal

intercourse or having sex under the influence of alcohol and later regretting it. However, in this

sample we find even stronger effects of overweight or obesity on the probability of having ever




                                                                                                   15
had anal intercourse than we did in the “any sex” sample. Overweight or obese girls who have

had vaginal intercourse are 5.1 percentage points (or 30%) more likely than their recommended-

weight peers to have ever had anal intercourse. Girls with high BMI relative to that of girls in

their school are 7.3 percentage points, or almost 43%, more likely than their recommended-

weight counterparts to have ever had anal intercourse.

       We estimated supplemental linear probability models that used alternative measures of

body weight. These included (1) separate indicators for overweight and obesity, (2) BMI and

BMI squared (in models of the effects of absolute weight), and (3) continuous measures of the

differences from the school mean percentile (in models of the effects of relative weight). We

found that the results were very consistent with those presented in Table 3. We ran models in

which we re-defined the “vaginal intercourse without condom” variable as having used a

condom half of the time or less (still within the past 18 months), and found the estimates were

very similar to those when using the more stringent measure of having had vaginal intercourse

without a condom every time. We also estimated models with additional covariates (including

participation in sports) and without school indicators and found the estimates to be remarkably

robust. Finally, the estimated effects of body weight were insensitive to the use of probit instead

of linear probability models in specifications without school fixed-effects. The results from these

and other supplemental models are not shown but are available upon request.

Two-Stage Models

       The samples for the two-stage models consist of girls who had any sibling (male or

female, biological or not) in the Add Health study and non-missing height and weight

information for both the girl and at least one sibling (N = 1,212 in the “full sample”). The

identifiers for the girl’s overweight or obesity are whether the girl had any sibling in the sample




                                                                                                   16
who was overweight or obese and whether the parent self-reported as obese. We also include an

indicator for missing parental obesity as an identifier. Table 4 summarizes the two-stage least

squares (TSLS) estimates (even numbered rows) as well as those from linear probability (OLS)

models (odd numbered rows) based on the corresponding two-stage samples. Each cell presents

estimates from a different model. In all models, we include all of the covariates from Table 3

except indicators for underweight and the school the girl attended.

       The F-statistic for the first stage, in which we estimate the girl’s overweight or obesity

status, is 58.3 in the “full” sample, 39.2 in the sample of sexually active girls, and 25.7 in the

sample of girls who have had vaginal intercourse, indicating that our identifiers are significant

predictors of girls’ overweight or obesity. The tests for over-identification (Sargan and Basmann

tests) also indicate that our two-stage strategy is valid, since the p-values from these tests are

never below .22 (not all figures are shown). In all twelve models, Hausman tests indicated that

overweight is not endogenous in the corresponding OLS models (i.e., we fail to reject the null

hypothesis of exogeneity), providing support for relying on the latter. In other words, the test

results indicate that any endogeneity of weight does not appreciably affect the OLS estimates,

and that the OLS should be preferred to TSLS since the OLS estimates are more efficient.

Cawley (2004), in research on the effect of obesity on wages, also found that OLS was preferred

to two-stage models. It is noteworthy and validating that the OLS estimates for the TSLS

samples are similar to or larger than the corresponding estimates in Table 3. That is, we still find

that being overweight or obese is negatively and significantly related to having any sexual

experience and positively related to ever having had anal intercourse.

       We estimated supplementary two-stage models that used having a sibling who was

overweight or obese as the sole identifier (results not shown). This set of specifications produced




                                                                                                     17
estimates of the effects of overweight or obesity on sexual behavior very similar to those from

Tables 3 and 4. Our rationale for estimating these supplemental models was that parental BMI

may not be a valid instrument for child BMI because it may be correlated with unobserved

determinants of adolescent’s sexual behavior. In the literature relating child’s weight to academic

achievement, parental BMI has been used as an instrument (Sabia, 2007), but Kaestner and

Grossman (2008) note that its validity is questionable on the grounds that parental obesity is likely

to be correlated with unmeasured educational inputs, genetic factors, and family resources that are

likely to affect adolescent achievement. This may be less of an issue, however, in models of

adolescent sexual activity than in models of children’s academic achievement. Another

advantage of not using parental obesity as an identifier is that this variable, coming from parents’

self reports rather than from direct measurements of height and weight, is not well measured in

the Add Health study. The disadvantage of this “single identifier” specification is that the two-

stage models are just-identified and we cannot perform tests of overidentification. However, the

fact that our instruments passed the overidentification tests in the main two-stage models

dampens our concerns about this instrument. Overall, the consistencies and patterns of estimates

across the specifications so far—in terms of both direction and magnitude—are validating of our

findings.

Sibling Fixed-Effects Models

        The samples for the sibling fixed-effects models consist of girls with any female (full

biological) siblings in the Add Health study and non-missing height and weight for both the girl

and a sister (N = 566 in the “full sample”).11 The sibling fixed-effects estimates are presented in

Table 5. Each cell presents estimates from a different model. All models control for underweight

11
  We do not present sibling fixed-effects estimates for girls who have ever had vaginal intercourse because those
analyses were based on only 200 observations and the F-statistic for the entire equation was not statistically
significant.


                                                                                                                    18
and age. Again, overweight or obese girls are found to be at elevated risk of ever having had anal

intercourse,12 and the consistency of those estimates across the various model specifications (in

Tables 3-5) is highly validating.

        We estimated supplementary sibling fixed-effects models that were identical to those

described above but also included covariates that could differ across siblings—religious

attendance and years since menarche (results not shown). These factors were uniformly

insignificant in explaining sexual behavior in these models and including them in the models did

not change the estimated effects of being overweight or obese. Finally, we estimated a set of

models that compared sisters who were twins (results not shown). The estimates were very

similar in magnitude to those from the corresponding specifications in Tables 3-5, but

overweight or obesity was not statistically significant in these models which were based on a

maximum of 322 sets of twins.

Taste for Risk as a Potential Competing Explanation

        We tested a plausible competing explanation for the observed associations between body

weight and anal intercourse—that both reflect an unobserved general taste for risk (see Lescano

et al., 2009). To address this issue, we ran supplemental models that include past year marijuana

use and also estimated a set of models with marijuana as the outcome. Although past year

marijuana use was positively related to having sex in a bivariate context (27% of all girls used

marijuana in the past year, compared to 35% of the girls who have had sex and 39% of those

who have had vaginal intercourse), we found that past year marijuana use was a statistically

insignificant predictor of having ever had anal intercourse and that including it in the models did

not appreciably change the estimated effects of body weight on anal intercourse. In the models


12
  For our small sample of girls who have sisters in the sample, we no longer find that overweight or obesity reduces
the likelihood of having vaginal intercourse.


                                                                                                                 19
predicting marijuana use, body weight was an insignificant predictor. These supplemental

findings suggest that a general taste for risk is not a viable competing explanation for the strong

and robust associations we found between teenage girl’s body weight and the likelihood that they

have ever had anal intercourse.

Discussion

        We investigated effects of overweight on risky sexual behaviors of teenage girls. We

broadened the analysis compared to many previous studies on the topic by (1) focusing on risky

behaviors as opposed to simply having vaginal intercourse, (2) considering both absolute weight

and weight relative to the others in a girl’s school, (3) using 3 different analysis samples—all

girls, girls who have had vaginal intercourse, and girls who have had sex more broadly defined,

and (4) considering a range of relevant sexual behaviors, including anal intercourse. We used

rich data that allowed us to control for numerous potential confounders including age at

menarche, socioeconomic status, family structure, and religious attendance. We included school

fixed effects, which go a long way toward accounting for potential unobserved heterogeneity.

We also estimated both two-stage and sibling fixed-effects models and found a high degree of

consistency in estimates with the expected patterns across specifications.

      Overall, we confirm previous research that overweight or obese girls are less likely than

recommended-weight girls to be sexually active (considering both vaginal intercourse and a

broader measure of sexual activity). We also found that overweight or obese girls may incur

fewer risks from vaginal intercourse because they are less sexually active, but that once they

become active in that regard, they expose themselves to the same risks from vaginal intercourse

as other girls.




                                                                                                   20
      Our most striking finding is that overweight or obese teenage girls are more likely than

their recommended-weight counterparts to have ever had anal intercourse, whether sample is all

girls, girls who have had sex (broadly defined), or girls who have had vaginal intercourse. The

results presented here support the theoretical prediction that overweight or obese girls are at

elevated risk of engaging in risky sex. That is, the findings are consistent with a scenario in

which an overweight (or less attractive) girl would be willing to incur greater risks in order to

attract a partner, and boys would move to less physically attractive matches in order to find

willing partners for risky sex. We find evidence in support of this scenario only for anal

intercourse – i.e., not for vaginal sex without a condom or sex under the influence of alcohol,

both of which recommended-weight girls appear to be as willing as their overweight peers to do.

The fact that we found stronger effects for relative weight (compared to other girls in the same

school) than an individual’s absolute weight provides further support for this scenario.

      The results from this study underscore the importance of using multifaceted and

contemporary measures of risky sexual behavior. If we had only considered outcomes related to

vaginal intercourse, we would have concluded that overweight and obese girls are less likely

than their recommended-weight peers to engage in risky sexual behavior. However, by including

heterosexual anal intercourse, a risky behavior that is on the rise both in the general population

and among teens (Mosher et al., 2005; Lescano et al., 2009), the conclusions are very different.

Future data collection and research on the topic should broaden the focus even more by

considering oral sex, a highly prevalent activity among teenage girls that we were not able to

investigate using the Add Health data, and by considering whether an individual has multiple

sexual partners, another risky behavior that we were not able to adequately examine for teenage

girls using Add Health.




                                                                                                     21
      On a broader note, this study adds to the growing knowledge about the adverse health

consequences of overweight. It is well known that overweight is a risk factor for many chronic

health conditions, including diabetes, hypertension, stroke, heart disease, and several types of

cancer, as well as reproductive problems ranging from infertility to low birthweight (NIH, 1998).

In this study, we have identified a behavioral source of health risk resulting from overweight

relatively early in the lifecourse—risky sexual behavior among adolescent girls. This finding

underscores the urgency of both stemming the tide of the obesity epidemic and educating

teenagers about safe sex.




                                                                                                   22
References


Abma J.C., et al. (2004). Teenagers in the United States: Sexual Activity, Contraceptive use, and
Childbearing, 2002. Vital and Health Statistics, Series 23, No. 24.

Ahmed, M.L., Ong, K.K., and D.B. Dunger. (2009). Childhood Obesity and the Timing of
Puberty. Trends Endocrinol Metab 20(5): 237-42.

Akers, A.Y., Lynch, C.P., Gold, M.A., Chang, J.C.-C., Doswell, W., Wiesenfeld, H.C., Feng, W.
and J. Bost. (2009). Exploring the Relationship Among Weight, Race, and Sexual Behaviors
Among Girls. Pediatrics 124: e913-920.

Bearman, P.S., and J.M. Moody. (2004). Suicide and Friendships Among American Adolescents.
American Journal of Public Health 94: 89–95

Cawley, J., Joyner, K., and J. Sobal. (2006). Size Matters: The Influence of Adolescents’ Weight
and Height on Dating and Sex. Rationality and Society 18: 67-94

Cawley, J. (2001). Body Weight and the Dating and Sexual Behaviors of Young Adolescents. In
Social Awakening: Adolescent Behavior as Adulthood Approaches, ed. R.T. Michael, pp. 174–
98. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Cawley, J. (2004). “The Impact of Obesity on Wages.” Journal of Human Resources 39: 451-
474.

Centers for Disease Control. (2010). Press Release, March 11, 2008. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/stdconference/2008/press/release-11march2008.htm

Cheng, Y.H.-A., and N.S. Landale (2010). Teen Overweight, Weight Stigma, and Intimate
Relationship Development from Adolescence to Young Adulthood. Max Planck Institute for
Demographic Research Working Paper 2010-008. Available at:
http://www.demogr.mpg.de/papers/working/wp-2010-008.pdf

Christakis, N.A., and J.H. Fowler. (2007). The Spread of Obesity in a Large Social Network
Over 32 Years. New England Journal of Medicine 357(4): 370-379.

Cohen-Cole, E., and J.M. Fletcher. (2008). Is Obesity Contagious? Social Networks vs.
Environmental Factors in the Obesity Epidemic. Journal of Health Economics 27: 1382–1387.

Coleman, J.S. (1961). The Adolescent Society. New York, NY: Free Press.

Eisenberg M.E., Neumark-Sztainer, D., and K.D. Lust. (2005). Weight-Related Issues and High-
Risk Sexual Behaviors Among College Students. J Am Coll Health 54(2): 95–101.




                                                                                               23
Eisenberg, M.E., Ackard, D.M., Resnick, M.D., and D. Neumark-Sztainer. (2009). Casual Sex
and Psychological Health Among Young Adults: Is Having “Friends with Benefits”
Emotionally Damaging? Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 41(4): 231–237.

Goodson, P., Buhi, E.R., and S.C. Dunsmore. (2006). Self-Esteem and Adolescent Sexual
Behaviors, Attitudes, and Intentions: A Systematic Review. Journal of Adolescent Health 38(3):
310-319.

Halpern, C.T., King, R.B., Oslak, S.G., and J.R. Udry. (2005). Body Mass Index, Dieting,
Romance, and Sexual Activity in Adolescent Girls: Relationships Over Time. Journal of
Research on Adolescence 15(4): 535-559.

Halpern, C.T., Udry, J.R., Campbell, B, and C. Suchindran. (1999). Effects of Body Fat
on Weight Concerns, Dating, and Sexual Activity: A Longitudinal Analysis of Black and White
Adolescent Girls. Developmental Psychology 35(3): 721–736.

Halpern-Felsher, B., et al. (2005). Oral Versus Vaginal Sex Among Adolescents: Perceptions,
Attitudes, and Behavior. Pediatrics 115: 845-851.

Harris, K.M., C.T. Halpern, E. Whitsel, J. Hussey, J. Tabor, P. Entzel, and J.R. Udry. (2009).
The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health: Research Design [WWW document].
URL: http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/design.

Kaestner, R., & M.Grossman. (2008). Effects of Weight on Children's Educational Achievement.
NBER Working Paper #13764.

Kaiser Family Foundation. (2005). U.S. Teen Sexual Activity. Publication #3040-02. Available
at: http://www.kff.org/youthhivstds/upload/U-S-Teen-Sexual-Activity-Fact-Sheet.pdf

Landry, D.J., and W. Turnbull. (1997). Issues in Brief: Sexually Transmitted Diseases Hamper
Development Efforts. Available at: http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/ib_std.html

Lescano, C., Houck, C.D., Brown, L.K., Doherty, G., DiClemente, R.J., Fernandez, M.I.,
Pugatch, D., Schlenger, W.E., and B.J. Silver. (2009). Correlates of Heterosexual Anal
Intercourse Among At-Risk Adolescents and Young Adults. American Journal of Public Health
99(6): 1131-1136.

Lindberg, L, Jones, R., and J. Santelli. (2008). Non-Coital Sexual Activities Among Adolescents.
Journal of Adolescent Health 43(3): 231-238.

Mosher W.D , Chandra, A., and J. Jones (2005). Sexual Behavior and Selected Health Measures:
Men and Women 15–44 Years of Age, United States, 2002. Advance Data from Vital and Health
Statistics, No. 362.




                                                                                                 24
National Center for Health Statistics. (2010). Health United States, 2009. Hyattsville, MD.

National Institutes of Health. (1998) Clinical Guidelines on the Identification, Evaluation, and
Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults: NIH Publication, No. 98-4083.

Rotheram-Borus, M.J., Marelich, W.D., and S. Srinivasan. (1999). HIV Risk Among
Homosexual, Bisexual, and Heterosexual Male and Female Youths. Arch Sex Behav 28: 159-
177.

Sabia, J. (2007). The Effect of Body Weight on Adolescent Academic Performance. Southern
Economic Journal 73(4): 871-900.

Sabia, J., and D. Rees. (2010). The Effect of Body Weight on Adolescent Sexual Activity.
Unpublished working paper.

Santelli, J.S., Brener, N.D., Lowry, R., Bhatt, A., and L.S. Zabin. (1998). Multiple Sexual
Partners Among U.S. Adolescents and Young Adults. Family Planning Perspectives 30(6): 271-
275.

Tani, C.R., Chavez, E.L., and J. L. Deffenbacher. (2001). Peer Isolation and Drug Use Among
White Non-Hispanic and Mexican American Adolescents. Adolescence 36: 127–139.

Udry, J.R. (1979). Age at Menarche, at First Intercourse, and at First Pregnancy. Journal of
Biosocial Science 11(4): 433-441.

Varghese, B., Maher, J.E., Peterman, T.A., Branson, B.M, and R.W. Steketee. (2002). Reducing
the Risk of HIV Transmission: Quantifying the Per-Act Risk for HIV on the Basis of Choice of
Partner, Sex Act, and Condom Use. Sex Transm Dis 29: 38-43.

Wiederman, M.W., and S.R. Hurst. (1998). Body Size, Physical Attractiveness, and Body Image
Among Young Adult Women: Relationships to Sexual Experience and Sexual Esteem. Journal
of Sex Research 35(3): 272–281.




                                                                                                   25
Table 1. Sample Characteristics
                                  Sample 1:           Sample 2:             Sample 3:
                                   All girls       Girls who have         Girls who have
                                  N = 5,198      engaged in genital      ever had vaginal
                                                    fondling, anal         intercourse
                                               intercourse, or vaginal      N = 2,648
                                               intercourse with a boy
                                                       or man
                                                      N = 3,618
Sexual Behaviors

Any sex                              .70                  -                     -
(as defined for Sample 2)
Ever had vaginal
intercourse                          .51                .73                     -
Vaginal intercourse w/o
condom                               .48                .69                    .94
Sex under influence of
alcohol and regretted it             .08                .11                    .12

Ever had anal intercourse            .09                .13                    .17
Weight Measures

Overweight or obese
(BMI > 85th percentile)              .29                .27                    .27

Underweight                          .02                .02                    .02
(BMI < 5th percentile)

BMI > 85th percentile in             .15                .14                    .14
school

BMI < 5th percentile in              .05                .05                    .05
school




                                                                                        26
Covariates


Age in months, mean            198.56    200.43    202.50
                               (15.50)   (15.15)   (14.82)

Only child in household         .23        .26      .29

Lives with 1 parent             .28        .31      .32


Lives with family but no        .10        .12      .14
parents

Two parents but one non-        .12        .13      .13
biological

Parent’s age, mean, in years   41.89     41.81     41.66
                               (6.07)    (6.25)    (6.49)

Parent’s age missing            .14        .14      .15

Parent’s education: some        .21        .22      .22
college

Parent’s education: high        .28        .30      .32
school

Parent’s education: <high       .11        .11      .13
school

Parent’s education missing      .03        .03      .03

Father’s occupation:            .51        .49      .47
<managerial/professional

Father’s occupation missing     .30        .34      .38

Father not working              .04        .04      .04

Mother’s occupation:            .54        .54      .54
<managerial/professional

Mother’s occupation             .07        .09      .11
missing




                                                             27
Mother not working                     .14                    .14                     .15

Public assistance                      .09                    .10                     .11

Public assistance missing              .04                    .06                     .07

Religious services at least
once per month                         .57                    .53                     .50

Religious services
< once per month                       .19                    .21                     .21

Religious attendance                   .01                    .01                     .01
missing

Years since menarche                  4.09                    4.39                    4.59
                                     (1.98)                  (1.92)                  (1.93)

# days between interviews,           334.94                 334.83                  334.79
mean                                 (48.29)                (48.10)                 (48.46)

Non-Hispanic black                     .23                    .25                     .27

Hispanic                               .17                    .15                     .16

Other non-white                        .20                    .18                     .18

Urban residence                        .36                    .36                     .37

Rural residence                        .23                     .24                     .24
Notes: All figures are proportions unless indicated otherwise. Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                                                               28
Table 2. Effects of Body Weight on Sexual Behavior of Teenage Girls
                        Any Sex      Vaginal     Vaginal       Sex Under                  Anal
                                   Intercourse Intercouse     Influence of             Intercourse
                                                 Without        Alcohol
                                                 Condom

                             (a)           (b)           (c)           (d)                  (e)
                                                 Full Sample N=5,198
(1)    Overweight or      -.075***      -.079***     -.077***        -.004                 .014
       obese                (.016)        (.018)       (.017)        (.007)               (.009)

(2 )   BMI > 85th         -.085***      -.076***        -.078***         -.006           .023**
       percentile in        (.021)        (.019)          (.018)         (.009)           (.011)
       school
                                                   Sexually Active N=3,618
(3)    Overweight or                     -.043**        -.047**          .005            .032**
       obese                 n/a          (.020)          (.019)        (.011)            (.013)

(4)    BMI > 85th                        -.030           -.039*           .008           .049***
       percentile in         n/a         (.021)          (.022)          (.014)           (.017)
       school
                                          Ever Had Vaginal Intercourse N=2,648
(5)    Overweight or                                  -.009             .014             .051***
       obese                 n/a           n/a        (.011)           (.013)             (.019)

(6)   BMI > 85th                                          -.017            .014          .073***
      percentile in          n/a           n/a           (.016)           (.017)          (.025)
      school
Notes: All models include all of the covariates listed in Table 1, indicators for underweight (for
models of overweight or obese) or for < 5th percentile in school (for models of relative
overweight), and school fixed effects. Coefficients are from linear probability models. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 3. Full Regressions for Selected Outcomes
                                          Full Sample             Girls Who have Had
                                           (N = 5,198)             Vaginal Intercourse
                                                                       (N = 2,648)
                                     Vaginal                      Vaginal
                                   Intercourse       Anal       Intercourse        Anal
                                     Without      Intercourse     Without      Intercourse
                                    Condom                       Condom
Overweight or obese                -0.0774***       0.0135        -0.0093       0.0505***
                                     (0.017)        (0.009)       (0.011)         (0.019)

Underweight                        -0.1395***       -0.0265       -0.0741       -0.0336
                                     (0.041)        (0.021)       (0.046)       (0.046)

Age in months                       0.0051***     0.0014***      -0.0011**      0.0012*
                                      (0.001)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.001)

Only child in household             0.0950***       0.0074        0.0118        -0.0118
                                      (0.017)       (0.011)       (0.009)       (0.018)

Lives with 1 parent                  0.0337         0.0013        -0.0206       -0.0167
                                     (0.035)        (0.02)        (0.030)       (0.035)

Lives with family but no parents    0.1194***       0.0337        -0.0150       0.0139
                                      (0.033)       (0.022)       (0.029)       (0.035)

Two parents but one non-            0.0892***       0.0209       0.0315**       0.0022
biological                            (0.021)       (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.027)

Parent’s age, years                -0.0033***       0.0003        -0.0009       0.0010
                                     (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)

Parent’s age missing                 -0.0229        -0.0055       -0.0032       0.0014
                                     (0.019)        (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.023)

Parent’s education: some college    0.0372**        -0.018        -0.0064       -0.0437
                                     (0.017)        (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.030)

Parent’s education: high school     0.0535***       -0.0119       -0.0102       -0.0431*
                                      (0.017)       (0.014)       (0.015)        (0.025)
Parent’s education: <high school    0.0375       -0.0238     -0.0239    -0.0579*
                                    (0.026)      (0.018)     (0.019)     (0.032)

Parent’s education missing          -0.0178      -0.0073     -0.0223    -0.0095
                                    (0.047)      (0.024)     (0.041)    (0.056)

Father’s occupation:                0.0222       -0.0104     -0.0013    -0.0338
<managerial/professional            (0.02)       (0.011)     (0.020)    (0.024)

Father’s occupation missing         0.0697*       0.012      0.0401     -0.0088
                                     (0.04)      (0.021)     (0.033)    (0.039)

Father not working                  0.0432        0.011      0.0036     0.0057
                                    (0.036)      (0.023)     (0.026)    (0.042)

Mother’s occupation:                0.0312*       0.0134     -0.0049    0.0106
<managerial/professional            (0.016)       (0.01)     (0.014)    (0.020)

Mother’s occupation missing        0.1077**      0.0266      0.0560     0.0245
                                    (0.042)      (0.032)     (0.040)    (0.054)

Mother not working                  0.0274      0.0345**     -0.0018    0.0583*
                                    (0.022)      (0.017)     (0.020)    (0.033)

Public assistance                   0.0334       0.0027      0.0089     0.0065
                                    (0.03)       (0.016)     (0.024)    (0.028)

Public assistance missing           -0.0632       0.0104     -0.0707    -0.0076
                                    (0.057)       (0.04)     (0.057)    (0.063)

Religious services at least once   -0.1146***   -0.0417***   -0.0021    -0.0391*
per month                            (0.018)      (0.012)    (0.014)     (0.020)

Religious services < once per       -0.0135      -0.0109     0.0069     -0.0134
month                               (0.017)      (0.014)     (0.015)    (0.022)

Religious attendance missing       -0.1543**      0.0113     -0.1366*   0.0715
                                     (0.078)      (0.05)      (0.074)   (0.103)

Years since menarche               0.0338***    0.0097***    0.0032     0.0075*
                                     (0.004)      (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.005)




                                                                                  31
# days between interviews             -0.0004***       -0.0001*         0.0000         -0.0001
                                        (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)

Non-Hispanic black                    0.0575***         -0.0073       -0.0335**        -0.0293
                                        (0.022)         (0.014)         (0.017)        (0.028)

Hispanic                                0.0298         0.0298**         0.0175         0.0476
                                        (0.024)         (0.013)         (0.018)        (0.033)

Other non-white                       -0.0567***        -0.0102         -0.0157        -0.0075
                                         (0.02)         (0.012)         (0.020)        (0.027)

Urban residence                         -0.0072         -0.0103         -0.0140        -0.0261
                                        (0.016)         (0.009)         (0.014)        (0.017)

Rural residence                         -0.0295         -0.0068         0.0030         -0.0096
                                        (0.022)         (0.015)         (0.013)        (0.028)

Constant                              -0.7160***      -0.2749***      0.8470***        -0.2352
                                        (0.128)         (0.066)         (0.106)        (0.160)
R-squared                                0.207           0.061           0.076          0.072

Notes: Coefficients are from linear probability models. Robust standard errors in parentheses. All
models also include school fixed effects.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                 32
Table 4. Effects of Overweight or Obesity on Sexual Behavior of Teenage Girls with at
Least One Sibling in Sample—Linear Probability (OLS) and Two-Stage (TSLS) Estimates
                      Any Sex       Vaginal        Vaginal      Sex Under         Anal
                                  Intercourse    Intercourse   Influence of Intercourse
                                                   Without       Alcohol
                                                  Condom
                         (a)           (b)            (c)            (d)           (e)
                                             Full Sample (N=1,212)
 (1) OLS              -.061**         -016          -.026           .014        .048**
                       (.030)        (.030)         (.030)         (.017)        (.020)

(2 )   TSLS              -.050            .001          -.024           .042                 .084
                         (.080)          (.085)        (.085)         (.048)                (.053)
                                                Sexually Active (N=840)
 (3)   OLS                                .022           .004           .030               .081***
                           n/a           (.034)        (.036)         (.025)                (.030)

 (4)   TSLS                              .045         .001            .070                  .129*
                           n/a          (.098)       (.104)          (.070)                 (.078)
                                        Ever Had Vaginal Intercourse (N=609)
 (5)   OLS                                           -.024            .034                  .086**
                           n/a            n/a        (.025)          (.030)                  (.038)

 (6)   TSLS                                                 -.051             .103           .143
                             n/a            n/a             (.071)           (.086)         (.103)
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
The regressors in the first stage, which predicted overweight or obese, are having a sibling who
is overweight or obese, having a parent who is obese, and missing parent obesity. The F-statistic
for the first stage is 58.3 for the full sample, 39.2 for the sexually active sample, and 25.7 for the
sample of girls who have had vaginal intercourse. Regressors in the second stage include all
covariates from Table 3 except underweight and school indicators. P-values from Sargon and
Basmann over-identification tests range from .22 (vaginal intercourse without a condom in
smallest sample) to .99 (anal intercourse in sexually active sample).




                                                                                                      33
Table 5. Effects of Overweight or Obesity on Sexual Behavior of Teenage Girls—Sibling
Fixed-Effects Estimates
                         Any Sex     Vaginal       Vaginal      Sex Under       Anal
                                   Intercourse Intercourse       Influence   Intercourse
                                                  Without        of Alcohol
                                                  Condom
                           (a)         (b)           (c)             (d)         (e)

Full Sample                 .008        -.010           .010           -.018           .060
(N = 566)                  (.069)       (.071)         (.075)          (.044)         (.045)

Sexually Active Girls                     .004          .047            -.040          .167**
(N = 300)                    n/a         (.103)        (.115)           (.078)          (.084)
Notes: Models compare female (biological, half or full) siblings and control for underweight and
age. Estimates are from linear probability models. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                               34
