                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               YESTERDAY'S HEROES:
                       COMPENSATION AND CREATIVE RISK-TAKING

                                            Ing-Haw Cheng
                                             Harrison Hong
                                          Jose A. Scheinkman

                                         Working Paper 16176
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16176


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2010




We thank Jeremy Stein, Rene Stulz, Luigi Zingales, Steven Kaplan, Tobias Adrian, Sule Alan, AugustinLandier,
Terry Walter, Bob DeYoung, Ira Kay, Yaniv Grinstein, Patrick Bolton, Marco Becht andparticipants
at the Princeton-Cambridge Conference, SIFR Conference,HEC, NBER, University of Michigan,University
of Technology at Sydney, Chinese University of Hong Kong, CEMFI, LSE, Universityof Kansas Southwind
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Columbia University,ECGI-CEPR-IESE Madrid
Conference, University of Florida, 2011 AFA Meetings, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 47 Annual
Conference on Banking, and the NBER Conference on Market Institutionsand Financial Market Risk
for helpful comments.The views expressed herein are those of the authorsand do not necessarily reflect
the views of theNational Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Ing-Haw Cheng, Harrison Hong, and Jose A. Scheinkman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Yesterday's Heroes: Compensation and Creative Risk-Taking
Ing-Haw Cheng, Harrison Hong, and Jose A. Scheinkman
NBER Working Paper No. 16176
July 2010, Revised June 2011
JEL No. G01,G21,G22,G24,G32

                                             ABSTRACT

We study the relationship between compensation and risk-taking among finance firms using a
neglected insight from principal-agent contracting with hidden action and risk-averse agents.
If the sensitivity of pay to stock price or slope does not vary with stock price volatility, then total
compensation has to increase with firm risk to satisfy as agent's individual rationality constraint.
Consistent with this hypothesis, we find a correlation between total executive compensation,
controlling for firm size, and risk measures such as firm beta, return volatility, and exposure to the
ABX sub-prime index. There is no relationship between insider ownership, a proxy for slope, and
these measures. Compensation and firm risk are not related to governance variables. They increase
with institutional investor ownership, which suggests that heterogeneous investors incentivize firms
to take varying levels of risks. Our results hold for non-finance firms and point to new
principal-agent contracting empirics.


Ing-Haw Cheng                                        Jose A. Scheinkman
Ross School of Business                              Department of Economics
University of Michigan                               Princeton University
701 Tappan St                                        Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                  and NBER
ingcheng@umich.edu                                   joses@princeton.edu

Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
hhong@princeton.edu
        I. Introduction

        Many blame Wall Street compensation for the most significant economic crisis since the Great
Depression. In his testimony (June 6, 2009) in front of Congress on the Treasury budget, Secretary
Geithner argues, “I think that although many things caused this crisis, what happened to compensation
and the incentives in creative risk taking did contribute in some institutions to the vulnerability that we
saw in this financial crisis” (emphasis added). To address this issue, the US has promoted reforms to tie
pay to long-term performance and increase the say of shareholders in approving compensation and
electing directors on compensation committees.1 Implicit in this view is that finance firms’ short-termist
incentives reflect mis-governance or entrenchment and a misalignment with shareholder interest.

        In this paper, we consider an alternative perspective---namely, investors of some firms very
much wanted and compensated their managers to take creative risks. In his interview with the Financial
Times back in July 2007, Chuck Prince, then CEO of Citigroup, in referring to his company not backing
away from risks at the beginning of the subprime crisis, remarked: “When the music stops, in terms of
liquidity, things will be complicated. But as long as the music is playing, you've got to get up and
dance. We're still dancing.” This quote is often attributed as market pressure (presumably being fired
by impatient shareholders) forcing Citi’s managers to take on such risks, whether or not they fully
understood them. In other words, the short-termism emanated not so much from mis-governance or
entrenchment as from demand on the part of investors themselves.2

        As such, we examine the relationship between compensation and risk taking through the lens of a
classical optimal contracting framework between a principal and a risk-averse agent. The principal in
our context is the shareholders and the agent is the CEO or other top managers. The well-analyzed
prediction of this model is that firms with more volatile stock prices should optimally give risk-averse
managers less exposure (or slope) to stock returns in the incentive scheme, typically measured by insider
ownership stakes. It is well known that there is a weak relationship between slope and stock price
volatility among a panel of firms from different industries; if anything, the relationship is positive.
There are many reasons for why this could be true in the principal-agent setting (see Prendergast, 1999
1
  The view that short-termism contributed to the crisis is shared by other governments, particularly in the UK, where a
parliamentary committee investigating the crisis “found that bonus-driven remuneration structures encouraged reckless and
excessive risk-taking and that the design of bonus schemes was not aligned with the interests of shareholders and the long-
term sustainability of the banks.” (UK House of Commons, 2009)
2
  This more nuanced perspective of a short-term stock market forcing management to be excessively myopic also has basis in
theory (see Stein, 1989 and Stein, 2003 for a review of this large literature on the contrasting perspectives of the source of
short-termism in markets).


                                                              1
and Prendergast, 2000 for reviews). Notably, managers’ hidden actions may be more important in high
volatility firms, and hence insider ownership stakes need not decrease with firm risk, and may actually
increase.

          In contrast, we study the relationship between compensation and risk-taking among finance
firms using a neglected insight from principal-agent contracting with hidden actions and risk-averse
agents. If the sensitivity of pay to stock price (the incentive slope) does not vary with stock price
volatility for whatever reason, then total compensation has to increase with firm risk to satisfy an agent’s
individual rationality constraint. That is, when the optimal incentive slope does not vary with the stock
price volatility, a riskier firm must pay more than a less risky firm to attract the same managerial talent.

         This is shown below in the linear contract set-up of Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987), but the
point is a robust one simply emanating from the risk aversion of agents and their participation constraint.
Indeed, recent models of managerial incentives also emphasize the individual rationality constraint and
deliver a similar prediction that high risk firms pay higher wages for various reasons, including disutility
of effort, efficiency wages or rent seeking.3 Our contribution is to point out that empirical work has
ignored the individual rationality constraint in favor the incentive compatibility constraint and to show
that important information can be obtained from considering the two simultaneously.

         Using data on executive compensation for finance firms from 1990-2008, we find strong support
for models of managerial incentives which predict a strong relationship between total pay and firm price
volatility and a weak relationship between incentive slopes and total pay.

         We then go on to develop further corroborating evidence by showing that high compensation and
risk-taking are correlated with higher institutional ownership. In contrast, compensation and risk-taking
are not related to governance variables.                    Contrary to the prevailing wisdom that managerial
entrenchment or a failure of governance led finance firms to take excessive risk, we argue instead that
these findings suggest that investors with heterogeneous risk preferences incentivize firms to take
different levels of risk.


3
  In the equilibrium model in Edmans and Gabaix (2011), the strength of incentives given to managers depends only on the
disutility of effort and is independent of firm’s risk or the agent’s risk aversion. As a result, expected total pay to a risk-averse
manager increases with the riskiness of the firm. In their model, better managers are assigned to larger firms, so total pay of a
manager also depends on firm size. See also Peng and Roell (2009) for a model that can generate similar predictions.
Axelson and Bond (2010) gives a similar prediction using an efficiency wage or rent mechanism in which higher risk firms
pay more, which they argue better match the empirical findings regarding the career of investment bankers as captured in
Oyer (2008). These equilibrium considerations magnify risk aversion effects even if the risk aversion effects might not be
large to begin with (Kaplan and Stromberg, 2004).
                                                                 2
        Because of our focus on the individual participation or rationality constraint (IR) rather than the
individual incentive compatibility constraint (IC), we develop different measures of compensation than
the literature. The literature’s focus on the IC has led to careful study of inside ownership stakes. But
insider ownership stakes reflect not just the compensation practice of a firm but also the portfolio choice
of the manager. If overconfident managers are more likely to work for very volatile firms and these
managers are more likely to keep sub-optimally undiversified or large stakes, then this might bias
finding the predicted IC relationship that insider stakes should be lower in more volatile firms.4 Rather,
we use the total flow pay granted each year to the top insiders. These payouts better reflect the
compensation practice of the firm. More specifically, we look at total executive compensation adjusting
for a firm’s market capitalization or size, since better managers work for more valuable firms (see, for
instance, the matching theory of Gabaix and Landier, 2008). We want to purge out quality differences
in managers and firms with a careful firm size control throughout our analysis.

         We establish the following findings. First, there is substantial cross-sectional heterogeneity in
residual total executive compensation, which is defined as the total pay of managers controlling for firm
size and finance sub-industry. The residual compensation measure obtained from this regression is
highly persistent and is a firm-specific characteristic. Firms with persistently high residual compensation
include Bear Stearns, Lehman, Citicorp, Countrywide, and AIG.                       Low or moderate residual
compensation firms include Wells Fargo and Berkshire Hathaway. Firm risk measures, including market
beta, stock price volatility and firm exposure to the ABX sub-prime index, are also highly persistent.

        We use an assortment of risk measures to capture the heterogeneous ability or inclination of
finance firms to engage in creative risk taking. For instance, a firm’s propensity to effectively sell out of
the money puts or insurance on the stock market (i.e., to engage in tail risk) may not be entirely captured
by stock price volatility. Ex post market betas in this instance may better capture a firm engaging in tail
risk since the firm is fine when the market does well and goes bust when the market does poorly. A
firm’s stock price exposure to the ABX directly captures its exposure to the subprime housing market.
In this sense, we go beyond the exercise of relating compensation to return volatility in order to better
capture finance firms’ creative risk-taking. Additionally, for finance firms, price risk measures far
outperform book measures since they often engage in off-balance sheet transactions in creating their
creative and systematic risk profiles.



4
 Indeed, Malmendier and Tate (2005) and Malmendier and Tate (2008) provide evidence that managerial overconfidence as
measured by their portfolio holdings and external press portrayals influence investment and acquisition choices.
                                                         3
        Second, we find that, although insider ownership stakes are not correlated with firm riskiness,5
our residual compensation measure is strongly correlated with these price-based measures of risk,
consistent with our hypothesis regarding the individual rationality constraint. Firms with high executive
compensation have a higher market beta, higher return volatility, and ABX exposure. For instance, a
one-standard deviation increase in stock price exposure to price movements in the ABX net of size and
finance sub-industry is associated with a 0.33-standard deviation increase in residual compensation. A
price-based risk score, defined as the average of the normalized z-scores of market beta, return volatility
and ABX exposure, is even more strongly related to residual compensation than any of the measures
individually.

        Not surprisingly, firms with high residual compensation, since they have higher beta and are
more volatile, are more likely to be in the tails of performance, with extremely good performance when
the market did well and extremely poor performance when the market did poorly. For example, a one-
standard deviation increase in residual compensation in 1998-2000 is associated with 21% lower returns
over the market in the 2001-2008 period. These results stand in contrast to more traditional book-based
measures of risk-taking, which do less well. This is perhaps not surprising since many of the finance
firms’ exposures during the recent crisis were off balance sheet.

        These findings suggest that there is substantial heterogeneity among financial firms in which
high-compensation and high risk-taking go hand in hand. As a result, the aggressive firms that were
yesterday’s heroes when the stock market did well can easily be today’s outcasts when fortunes reverse,
very much to the point of what we have experienced in the last twenty or so years. The important thing
to note here is that our price risk score measure is robust and statistically significant across all sub-
industries of finance including broker dealers, banks and insurance companies. Our findings are also
robust to a series of other checks.

        We then relate residual total compensation and firm riskiness to governance or entrenchment
measures. We find that standard governance measures such as the Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003)
and Bebchuk, Cohen and Ferrell (2009) measures of entrenchment, as well as board independence, are
not correlated with our results. So it appears that there is little evidence of mis-governance using these

5
  Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2010) find that finance firms with higher insider ownership stakes had poorer performance during
the crisis, suggesting little relationship between insider ownership and firm risk. Keys, Mukherjee, Seru and Vig (2009) also
find little evidence that CEO incentives affected loan quality. Mehran and Rosenberg (2008) show stock option grants lead
CEOs to take less borrowing and higher capital ratios but to undertake riskier investments. Laeven and Levine (2009) find
that bank risk is higher among banks that have large owners with substantial stakes.


                                                             4
standard metrics for mis-alignment of interest between shareholders and management, at least in the
cross-section.

        In contrast, we find that residual compensation and risk-taking are positively correlated with
institutional ownership. The presumption, given that institutional investors are sophisticated, is that the
incentives provided were consistent with optimal contracts and shareholder preferences.                                The
institutional ownership finding suggests that there is heterogeneity in investor preferences with
institutional investors wanting certain firms to take more risks and hence having to give them incentives
to do so (Froot, Perold and Stein, 1992; Bolton, Scheinkman and Xiong, 2006). Indeed, both anecdotal
and empirical evidence suggests that institutional investors are the ones with the power to pressure
management (Graham, Harvey and Rajgopal, 2005; Parrino, Sias and Starks, 2003). Of course, one has
to be careful in interpretations here. If institutional investors are too short-termist and always flip the
shares of the company, then they will not have any influence over management. But in practice, there is
plentiful evidence that institutional investors care greatly about companies making quarterly earnings
targets, presumably because the accompanying growth in share prices helps the institutional investors’
portfolio performance. Our analysis here builds on the Hartzell and Starks (2003) analysis of the key
role of institutional investors in providing incentives.

        We stress that we do not view this hypothesis as incompatible with the hypothesis that
entrenchment is a significant problem that led to the crisis. But in light of the non-correlation between
shareholder rights and both risk-taking and price performance, our results at a minimum suggest that
further research should explore investor preferences as an alternative hypothesis to failures of
governance.

        We focus on finance firms since we are better able to address unobserved heterogeneity by
conditioning our analysis within sub-industries of finance. However, our insights apply more broadly to
other firms. To this end, we extend our analysis to non-financial firms. We find similar results, though
we are less confident in the interpretation since there is much more heterogeneity in this sample.
Nonetheless, it appears that our insight regarding the relationship between total pay and stock price
volatility holds generally. Hence, our paper points to a need to refocus empirical strategies in the
principal-agent contracting literature.6




6
  Oyer (2004) also shows the way on the importance of looking at IR constraints. He shows that, if an agent’s outside option
is positively correlated with the market, then it might make sense to incentivize the manager with systematic risk.
                                                             5
             Our paper is organized as follows. We present a simple model in Section II to motivate our
empirical analysis and the data in Section III. We present the results in Section IV and conclude with
some thoughts on future research in Section V.

             II. Model

             Our simple model highlights the prediction of the classical principal-agent model that
equilibrium total compensation must increase with firm risk to satisfy an agent’s participation constraint
when the sensitivity of pay to stock price (the incentive slope) does not vary with stock price risk.7
While we focus on the classical set-up for expositional reasons, one can obtain similar conclusions using
more recent dynamic and equilibrium managerial incentive models highlighted in the introduction.

             Consider a firm whose output     is a linear function of an agent’s effort, a, and Gaussian noise,
    ̃~N(0,     ):

                                                       =ℎ + ̃

The parameter h reflects the agent’s marginal productivity of effort, which may be a function of the risk
of the firm,        , as well as other sources of heterogeneity. The agent cares about their total pay less a
positive, increasing, convex cost of supplying effort, ( ), with (0) = 0, and has exponential utility
with constant absolute risk aversion . Effort is unobserved to the principal, but all other parameters are
common knowledge. If we let ( ) =               +       denote a linear sharing rule between the principal and
the agent, this implies that the agent maximizes

                                                    + ℎ − ( )−
                                                                     2

Optimal effort is governed by the incentive compatibility constraint, which requires

                                                       ( )= ℎ

Participation requires that the expected utility equals the agent’s reservation utility :


                                   ≡      ( ) =      + ℎ =         + ( )+
                                                                               2



7
 The reasons why the incentive slope may not move with volatility are varied. For example, Prendergast (2000) notes that
whether the slope increases or decreases depends on the nature of the uncertainty and whether inputs may be easily
monitored.
                                                           6
               The principal maximizes output net of payments to the agent subject to these two constraints,
which leads to the familiar equilibrium piece rate,

                                                     ∗
                                                                       1
                                                         =
                                                             1+         ′′( ∗ )/ℎ

Our insight is that, if the equilibrium piece rate is insensitive to changes in the risk, then the expected
                                                                                     ∗                           ∗
total compensation            must increase with the risk; that is, if                   /      = 0 , then           /      > 0. This
situation arises in our model when the marginal productivity of the agent is positively correlated with the
risk of the firm. For example, one may conjecture that for risky firms like Bear Stearns, traders have a
higher marginal impact on outcomes.

               For concreteness, consider the classic case where the cost of effort is quadratic, ( ) =                         /2. A
                                                     ∗
necessary and sufficient condition for                   /      = 0 is then

                                                                ℎ/ℎ   1
                                                                    =
                                                                 /    2

If the elasticity of the marginal productivity of effort with respect to output variance is one-half, then we
expect equilibrium incentive slopes not to vary with observed risk. High risk firms are also high
productivity firms, and although it is optimal to incentivize the manager to work hard at these firms
through a higher slope , the higher risk tempers this in equilibrium.

                                             ∗
               More generally, whenever          /           = 0, then, for a wide range of effort disutility functions c,
total dollar compensation           must rise with            , for two reasons. First, from the participation constraint,
the principal must compensate the risk-averse agent more from a classical insurance motive.                                        (If
      ∗
          /      < 0, this may not hold in equilibrium since the equilibrium slope may fall as firm risk rises.)
Second, the principal needs to compensate the agent to work harder at the high marginal productivity
firm. Formally, we have the following proposition:

Proposition. Suppose the disutility of effort satisfies                       > 0,           > 0, and       <2           for a > 0. If

          = 0, then      > 0 and      > 0.

Proof: See the Appendix. Note that the condition on the cost function c is satisfied by every                                  =
for           > 1,   > 0 and also every exponential function of the form                 = exp(         ) with   > 0. ■



                                                                   7
        Our simple model highlights the fact that any test of the principal-agent theory must be a joint
test of both the incentive constraint and the participation constraint. The often-neglected participation
constraint can offer additional empirical insight when the incentive slope appears insensitive to the risk
                                                                         ∗
of the firm.      (The proposition generalizes to the case where             /   ≥ 0, with the additional
assumption that      ( ) ≥ 0.) This is the empirical implication that we examine in this paper.

        Our strategy is to relate size and industry-adjusted measures of total compensation T and slope to
ex post realizations of risk. Adjusting for size and industry is important since the prediction of the
model only holds for firms of equal scale or capital. We proxy for the scale of a firm using the market
capitalization of its equity. We would also like to obtain a measure of T, the total dollar compensation
paid to the manager. We focus on the total level of flow compensation to the manager. Intuitively,
measuring the flow pay to the manager best captures compensation practices of the principal, which is
the spirit of the IR constraint. While another potential measure could be the dollar value of the
manager’s accumulated stake in the firm, this is potentially contaminated by the manager’s individual
portfolio decisions and hence could be subject to managerial behavioral biases (Malmendier and Tate,
2005). Alternatively, one can think of the flow compensation as a proxy for the total pay received in
annuity over the tenure of the manager.

        We also verify in our data that slope is insensitive to risk. We use the effective percentage
ownership as a measure of slope incentives as this is the closest proxy for      in our model. Jensen and
Murphy (1990) use effective inside ownership as a measure of incentives. One concern is that different
measures of incentives may be appropriate under alternative assumptions. Baker and Hall (2004) and
Hall and Liebman (1998) suggest using the market value of insider equity as a measure of incentives.
We verify in our data that alternative measures of incentives also have a non-negative relationship with
risk.

        In order to capture the complex risk profiles of financial firms, we go beyond the practice of
relating compensation to return volatility and relate compensation to not only volatility, but also a firm’s
market beta and stock price exposure to movements in the ABX subprime index. The idea is that these
other measures may capture additional risks that managers face. For example, a high tail-risk strategy
such as selling out of the money puts on the stock market is inherently a high beta strategy. At financial
firms, these risk profiles may also be influenced by managerial hidden actions, and thus managers would
need to be compensated for these risks. For example, in our model, one can interpret the managerial



                                                     8
action a as selling these out of the money puts.8 As we will show, compensation is strongly related to
individual measures of risk as well as our price risk score.

        III. Empirical Methodology

        A. Classifying Financial Firms

        Our sample consists of financial firms in the intersection of ExecuComp and the CRSP-
COMPUSTAT Annual file, 1992-2008. We identify three groups of financial firms. We first construct
a group of primary dealers by hand-matching a historical list from the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York with PERMCOs from our CRSP file. When a primary dealer is a subsidiary of a larger bank
holding company in CRSP, we group the bank holding company with the primary dealers.

        We then use SIC codes to classify firms into a second group of banks, lenders, and bank-holding
companies which do not have primary dealer subsidiaries. According to the US Department of Labor
OSHA SIC Manual, this group comprises firms from SIC 60 commercial banks, SIC 61 non-deposit
lenders, and SIC 6712 bank holding companies. Our third and last group of financial firms are insurers
from SIC 6331 (fire, marine and casualty insurance) and SIC 6351 (surety insurance). This group of
insurers contains firms such as AIG and monoline insurers such as MBIA.

        Our data on SIC codes comes from both CRSP and COMPUSTAT. We include a firm as a
financial firm if either its CRSP or COMPUSTAT SIC code indicates it is a financial firm. However, a
number of the SIC codes obtained from CRSP and COMPUSTAT do not exactly match the SIC
classification in the SIC Manual, particularly for bank holding companies. For example, Countrywide
(PERMCO 796) and AMBAC Financial (PERMCO 29052) have SIC 6711 and 6719 in CRSP,
respectively. We worry that we might have misclassified some financial firms. We supplement this list
by hand collecting additional financial firms from the more expansive three-digit SIC codes of 670 and
671 and then looking at company description via 10-K statements on EDGAR. We conduct a similar
check for three-digit SIC codes 633 and 635. Finally, we hand check all the firms on our list to make
sure we have not included any non-financials. We also exclude Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Sallie
Mae from our analysis since they are effectively government enterprises. Our baseline sample of
financial firms has to have data from all three of these databases.


8
  Strictly speaking, in our simple model, the parameter    is exogenous. However, Edmans and Gabaix (2011) show that if
the manager may control risk itself, incentives may be increasing in risk. Thus a similar insight applies: total compensation
must increase with risk. Additionally, Oyer (2004) shows that if managers’ outside options are correlated with market
movements, then tying compensation to systematic risk may be optimal.
                                                             9
        B. Cross-Sections and Variable Definition

        Our goal is to relate heterogeneity in compensation practices at finance firms to heterogeneity in
their ex post realizations of risk within the cross-section. To this end, we split our sample into two
periods—an early period defined as 1992 (when we start having reasonable executive compensation
data) up to 2000, which marks the end of the dot-com era and a late period from 2001-2008 which marks
the beginning and end of the housing boom. We then take 1992-1994 (1998-2000) to create a ranking of
executive compensation among firms at the end of 1994 (2000). As we will show, compensation
practices are highly persistent across time, which makes our approach very conservative compared to a
pooled panel analysis. Additionally, this persistence implies that the variation in compensation practices
we are exploiting is essentially a firm fixed-effect, making a “within-firm” analysis inappropriate. Our
choice of sample split is simply designed to give us a long period over which the market rose and
another long period over which the market fell. In fact, the relationship between compensation practices
and risk is even stronger in a pooled panel analysis, which we show in the robustness section.

        We measure total flow compensation by averaging the total direct compensation (TDC1 in
ExecuComp) across the top five executives at each firm, and we label this variable Executive
Compensation.9 Total direct compensation includes bonus, salary, equity and option grants, and other
forms of annual compensation. We exclude pay in years associated with IPOs since pay during those
periods often involve one-time startup stock grants that are less relevant for persistent compensation
practices. We measure Inside Ownership as the total effective number of shares owned by the top five
executives, where we include delta-weighted options using the method described in Core and Guay
(1999), divided by the total number of shares outstanding.

        We compute Market Capitalization in a year as shares outstanding (SHROUT) times price (PRC)
as of the fiscal year-end month (summed up over all classes of stock) from CRSP. The market-to-book
ratio is Market Capitalization divided by book equity (stockholders equity plus deferred taxes and
investment tax credits, less the book value of preferred stock, from COMPUSTAT). We measure
leverage as Total Book Assets (AT) divided by Stockholders Equity (SEQ), following Adrian and Shin
(2009). We think of these variables as sources of heterogeneity in compensation practices, and each of
these variables is accordingly averaged over the ranking period.

9
  Firms occasionally report the compensation of more than five people, in which case we take the top five highly paid
executives. Occasionally, firms report compensation of fewer than five people as well. Because firms who report less than
five executives may not be strictly comparable to firms who report compensation of the top five (the vast majority of the
sample), we also re-do our analysis using top 5 compensation only when five executives report compensation. Results are
very similar.
                                                           10
        We compute three measures of ex post realizations of risk: 1) the beta of the firm’s stock (Beta),
2) the firm’s stock return volatility (Return Volatility), 3) the correlation of a firm’s daily stock returns
with returns to the ABX AAA index (Exposure to ABX). We compute a firm’s Market Beta and Return
Volatility for a given period (1995-2000 in the early period or 2001-2008 in the late period) using the
CRSP Daily Returns File, and take our market return to be the CRSP Value-Weighted Index return
(including dividends). Our data on the risk-free return comes from Ken French’s website. In computing
betas and volatility, we require at least one year’s worth of observations (252 trading days) in that
period. We report volatility in annualized terms, and we follow Shumway (1997) in our treatment of
delisting returns.    For firms with dual-class stock such as Berkshire Hathaway, we compute our
measures of risk using a value-weighted set of returns.

        We use the on-the-run ABX daily price index obtained from Barclays Capital Live to compute a
firm’s ABX exposure.10 Following Longstaff (2010), we compute the ABX return as the log of the
time-t price divided by the time t-1 price, where we ignore the coupon rates of each tranche (i.e.,
following Longstaff, 2010, we are assuming a coupon yield of zero). We compute a firm’s exposure to
the AAA tranche by regressing returns obtained from the CRSP Daily Returns File on returns to the
ABX AAA and returns to the market for each firm from when the ABX was created in 2006 through the
end of 2008. We take the coefficient on ABX returns as the firm’s Exposure to ABX.

        We compute a price-based risk score measure that is an equal-weighted average of the
standardized z-scores of a firm’s Beta, Return Volatility and, in the late period, Exposure to ABX. As
previously discussed, a composite score can better capture many dimensions of firm risk important for
financial firms. Additionally, individual risk measures are noisy and hence averaging them provides a
cleaner measure of firm risk. This price-based risk score is our primary measure of ex post realizations
of risk.11 We measure firm outcomes by looking at a firm’s Cumulative Excess Return, defined as the
total buy-and-hold return of a firm’s stock over each period less the total buy-and-hold return of the
market.

        We also relate these measures of compensation, risk and stock price performance to measures of
governance.      We obtain from RiskMetrics data on corporate governance including the G index
(Gompers, Ishii and Metrick, 2003) and the percentage of directors that are outsiders (classified as

10
   Barclays Capital Live, formerly known as Lehman Live, is available at http://live.barcap.com/ . The ABX indices are
compiled and maintained by MarkIt, at http://www.markit.com/ . Longstaff (2010) provides a discussion of the index.
11
   Our price-based risk score is also motivated by a principal components analysis of Market Beta, Return Volatility and
Exposure to ABX. The first principal component explains over 70% of the variation in the three measures and has loadings
very close to an equal-weighted average.
                                                          11
“Independent” by RiskMetrics). Since the RiskMetrics data on directors goes back to 1997, we have
data on independence only for our late period. We obtain data on the Entrenchment Index (Bebchuk,
Cohen and Ferrell, 2009) from Lucian Bebchuk’s website.

         We obtain data on institutional ownership from the Thomson Reuters S34 database, which
captures 13F filings by financial institutions electronically. We match 8-digit CUSIPs in Thomson to
PERMNOs in CRSP, noting that the CUSIPs in Thomson are provided for the filing date (not the
reporting date). For each PERMNO, we divide the shares held by each financial institution (SHARES)
by the shares outstanding (as reported by Thomson in SHROUT1 before 1999 and SHROUT2 after
1999) and sum up over each stock. We take care to ensure that holdings and shares outstanding both
reflect stock splits when necessary.12 We censor the percentage of shares held by institutions at 1 for a
few observations.

         C. Adjusting for Size and Industry

         Within each cross section that we work with, we adjust total compensation for firm size and
finance sub-industry, since the theory speaks to compensation practices netted out of these factors. We
adjust for firm size since it is well known that the best personnel work for the biggest firms (Gabaix and
Landier, 2008; Murphy, 1999), and we adjust for finance sub-industries since each sub-industry may
have different compensation practices.13

         Ideally, we would like to control for heterogeneity by allowing both slopes and intercepts to vary
across sub-industries. Unfortunately, the limited number of primary dealers per year does not allow us
to form reliable estimates of the slope and intercept within that group.14 Instead, we take the log of
average executive compensation in 1992-1994 (1998-2000 in the late period) and regress it on the log of
firms’ average market capitalization during the same period, allowing intercepts to vary by sub-industry
and allowing the insurers group to have a slope distinct from banks and primary dealers.                                   This

12
   We always divide shares held by the Thomson-provided value of shares outstanding rather than the CRSP value of shares
outstanding to avoid mis-computing institutional ownership due to misalignments between when Thomson and CRSP report
splits. When Thomson reports multiple filings, we always take the first filing, which corrects for the fact that shares
outstanding may have changed by a later filing. There is one instance where Thomson’s value of shares outstanding
(SHROUT2) does not make any sense, for Independence Community Bank (PERMNO 85876) in 1998Q3. Here we replace
that value with the CRSP value of shares outstanding.
13
    Murphy (1999) documents that there is substantial heterogeneity in how pay scales with size across non-financial
industries. We view our three groups as a rough split among firms that engage in investment banking and intensive trading
activity, other banks that operate more as commercial banks and lenders, and, finally, financial insurers.
14
   In particular, the estimate of the slope of compensation and market capitalization fluctuates depending on the year in which
the regression is run due to changes in the composition of the primary dealer group. Consistent with this, running a
regression that allows for slopes and intercepts to vary across all sub-industries yields a large standard error on the slope for
primary dealers.
                                                              12
specification allows for heterogeneity in the levels of pay across sub-industries and for an insurer-
specific slope (where we have enough observations to form a reliable estimate).

        Our measure of compensation practices is the residual of each one of these regressions, which we
term Residual Compensation, and which captures firm compensation practices net of firm size and
industry factors. Our approach necessarily emphasizes the cross-sectional distribution of such practices,
and we relate these measures to ex post realizations of risk described above. We emphasize ex post
realizations of risk since in principle the compensation that principals pay should align with the risk of
future outcomes expected ex ante. Our analysis thus implicitly assumes rational expectations on the part
of the principal.

        Specifically, we regress residual compensation from 1992-1994 on risk measures computed
using data from 1995-2000. We perform a similar exercise using residual compensation from 1998-
2000 and risk measures from 2001-2008. During the late period, our price risk score includes the
sensitivity of a firm’s stock price to the ABX subprime index. To the extent that high residual
compensation firms are high risk firms, we expect these firms to have done the best when the market
was up (the early period) and done the worst when the market was down (the late period). To this end,
we also look at the correlation between residual compensation and cumulative return performance.

        We adjust all variables in our analysis, including inside ownership, risk measures, and
governance measures, symmetrically. In other words, variables in our regressions are residuals, which
we winsorize at the 1 and 99% levels. Econometrically, our regression results are nearly equivalent to
regressing unadjusted compensation variables on unadjusted risk variables while including a set of size
and industry controls described above. However, given that sample compositions vary when we look at
different measures of risk and governance, our approach has the advantage of maintaining a constant
residual compensation ranking relative to the case where size controls are included separately in each
regression. For example, we only have data on the G Index for a subset of our firms. If sample
compositions did not vary, the two approaches would be exactly equivalent. We also believe residual
compensation has a natural economic intuition of pay netted out for industry and size, which most
appropriately matches the prediction we are trying to test from the theory. In order to econometrically
account for our adjustment, we include a degree-of-freedom correction in all of our results; our results
are nearly identical when using raw levels and including size and industry controls in each regression
instead of using residuals.

        IV. Results
                                                   13
        Our final data set comprises two cross-sections: the first containing data on pay of 144 firms (14
primary dealers, 99 banks, 31 insurers) in 1992-1994 and their risk in 1995-2000, and the second
containing data on pay of 141 firms (10 primary dealers, 96 banks, 35 insurers) in 1998-2000 and their
risk-taking in 2001-2008, with 74 firms reporting in both periods.

        Table 1 reports summary statistics for compensation, firm characteristics and risk for our two
periods. Since compensation and market capitalization do not scale linearly, we find it convenient to
work with log compensation and log market capitalization. For convenience, we report here the raw
compensation figures. The mean (median) executive compensation in 1992-1994 was $1.43M ($800K)
with a standard deviation of $1.87M.                In the 1998-2000 sample, the mean (median) executive
compensation was $3.81M ($1.57M) with a standard deviation of $6.52M. Mean (median) firm market
capitalization was $2.94B ($1.36B) with a standard deviation of $4.01B in 1994, and was $11.5B
($2.67B) with a standard deviation of $25.3B in 2000. Our sample encompasses a broad cross-section
of finance. It includes the top investment banks, commercial banks, and insurers in both the early and
late periods (Bear Stearns, Citigroup/Travelers, AIG, etc.), and smaller firms.

        A. Heterogeneity in Compensation Practices

        We first document that there is substantial cross-sectional heterogeneity in executive
compensation controlling for firm size and finance sub-industry classifications. The formal regression
results are presented in Panel A of Table 2. The first column shows the results for the early period and
the second shows the results for the late period. Notice in the early period that the coefficient in front of
Log Market Capitalization is positive (0.49) and very statistically significant. The coefficient in front of
the insurer specific slope is -0.31 and also significant, indicating that insurer pay increases less quickly
with firm size than for primary dealers and banks. The relationship is economically significant with an
R-square above 0.6. The results for the late period in the second column are qualitatively similar.15

        Figure 1 plots the observations along with the fitted values from the regressions in Panel A of
Table 2. Each panel plots the log of average total compensation among executives in each ranking
period against log market capitalization, and highlights the relationship for our three groups. For
example, Panel A plots, for the early period, the log of executive compensation against the log of market
capitalization during 1992-1994, with three lines representing the linear fit of size to compensation for

15
  In all specifications reported in this paper, heteroskedasticity is an a priori major concern since we suspect substantial
heterogeneity among banks, insurers, and primary dealers. We use HC3 standard errors, which are robust to
heteroskedasticity but have much better small-sample properties than the usual Huber-White sandwich estimator, as
documented in MacKinnon and White (1985) and Long and Ervin (2000).
                                                            14
our three sub-industries. A quick eyeball of the figure suggests that there is indeed a strong linear
relationship between log total compensation and log market capitalization, with primary dealers having a
higher-than-average level of pay relative to banks and insurers and insurers having a lower pay-size
slope compared to primary dealers and banks. Panel B of Figure 2 plots the results for the late period.
Notice that the two figures are fairly similar. This is not a coincidence as the residual pays from these
two periods are quite correlated, as we show below.

       Panel B of Table 2 gives summary statistics for log compensation and log market capitalization
by sub-industry and period. Together with the regression results from Panel A of Table 2, we can
calculate the economic significance of the findings. For example, a one-standard deviation increase in
log market capitalization is associated with a 0.79-standard deviation increase in total compensation in
the early period among banks and bank holding companies. (A one-standard deviation increase in log
market capitalization in the early period for banks is associated with a 1.1112 [1 SD] x 0.4942 [slope] =
0.5492 increase in log pay, which is 0.5492 / 0.696 = 0.79-standard deviations of log pay for banks.)
Given our small sample size and the fact that we have statistical significance, it is not surprising that the
implied economic significance from our regression in Panel A of Table 2 is quite large.                More
interestingly, the residual compensation measures obtained from this regression are highly correlated
across the two sub-samples, as shown in Panel C. The correlation between residual compensation in the
two periods is 0.75 with a p-value of zero when testing against the null hypothesis of no-correlation.

       Table 3 lists quintile rankings of residual executive compensation (ranked within each sub-
industry) for firms prominent in the financial crisis. High residual compensation firms include Bear
Stearns, Citigroup, Countrywide, and AIG, and they tend to be high residual compensation firms even as
far back as the 1992-1994 ranking period. We emphasize this point because we believe this suggests our
residual compensation measure is a good proxy for firm-specific compensation practices.

       To analyze this point further, we examine whether CEO turnover and stock price performance
drive changes in the residual compensation measures. The idea is that if these variables do not drive
changes in residual compensation then it is suggestive of something more fundamental about the culture
or technology of the firm. Panel A of Table 4 presents the results of an exercise where we regress
quintile rankings of residual compensation in the late period on quintile rankings of residual
compensation in the early period, cumulative returns in between the two periods (1995-1997), and
whether there was any CEO turnover in between the two periods. The first column shows that the 1992-
1994 quintile ranking is significant at the 1% level and explains 33.7% of the variance of 1998-2000

                                                     15
quintile rankings. The second column shows that introducing returns and CEO turnover between the
two periods leads to an R-squared of 34.97%. Both coefficients are statistically insignificant. Good past
price performance leads a firm to have slightly higher residual compensation in the late period and CEO
turnover leads to lower residual compensation, but the bulk of explanatory power for what a firm’s
residual compensation ranking is in the late period is provided by the ranking in the early period. Since
the theoretical directional effect of CEO turnover on rankings is unclear, in the third column, we regress
the absolute value of changes in rankings on an indicator for whether there was any CEO turnover in
1995-1997, and find a statistically insignificant coefficient.

         Panel B repeats this exercise for raw residual compensation (not quintile rankings) and finds that
the coefficient on early period compensation is 0.82; returns and CEO turnover are both statistically
insignificant and provide little additional R-squared. We conclude that CEO turnover and stock price
performance have weak explanatory power for changes in rankings and that the bulk of explanatory
power is provided by past rankings. The economic significance of stock price performance and CEO
turnover in the interim are negligible. We note finally that a Breusch-Godfrey test of serial correlation
in the residual compensation between the two periods rejects the null hypothesis of no serial correlation
with a p-value of zero.16 As such, we interpret our residual compensation measure as being largely a
firm fixed-effect and that there is substantial cross-sectional variation in this residual compensation
measure.

         Finally, because we are concerned that sample attrition between our early and late ranking
periods may be driving our results, we examine whether there are systematic differences between the 70
firms who are not present in both 1992-1994 and 1998-2000 samples and the 74 that are present in both.
First, we examine whether persistence among firms that are present in 1992-1994 and 1995-1997 but not
in 1998-2000 (there are 41 such firms) is different than persistence for firms that survive through 2000.17
We regress 1995-1997 residual compensation as the dependent variable on 1992-1994 residual
compensation and include an interaction with an indicator for whether a firm subsequently drops out.
We find no statistical evidence that persistence for dropouts is different than persistence for survivors: in
fact, the point estimate on 1992-1994 residual compensation is even higher for the 41 firms who
subsequently drop out than for those that survive, although the difference is not statistically significant.
Second, we look at CRSP delisting codes for those firms that do not survive and find that mergers


16
   This holds regardless of whether standard-errors are clustered at the firm level or if standard errors robust to small-sample
bias such as the HC3 standard error are used.
17
   The remaining 29 firms in the 1998-2000 sample first appear in ExecuComp after 1994.
                                                              16
account for many of the firms that drop out. Since targets are typically smaller firms, we examine
whether there is a size bias in our results by dropping the bottom 25% of firms by market capitalization
in both the 1992-1994 and 1998-2000 samples and repeating our analysis. We find that our estimates of
persistence are if anything higher and our results on risk below are virtually unchanged. We conclude
that attrition between the two samples is not driving our persistence results.

       B. Compensation and Risk

       We now analyze the relationship between residual compensation, inside ownership, and ex post
realizations of risk. We treat our two cross-sections separately: using data from 1995-2000, we regress
residual compensation and inside ownership (from 1992-1994) on risk measures (from 1995-2000), and
repeat this exercise where we regress residual compensation and inside ownership constructed from
1998-2000 on risk measures constructed over 2001-2008.

       Our main results are that, consistent with the literature, there is little relationship between inside
ownership and risk, yet a positive relationship exists between residual compensation and risk. This
holds in both of our subsamples. Furthermore, high residual compensation firms in the early period did
very well when the market rose from 1995-2000, were likely to be high residual compensation firms in
1998-2000, and yet did very poorly from 2001-2008. These results are consistent with our model and
suggest that the relationship between pay and risk are related to features of the optimal contract and
investor demands.

       Table 5 documents that residual compensation is highly correlated with Beta, Return Volatility,
and Exposure to ABX, and yet inside ownership has little relationship to these same risk measures. The
first two columns correlate residual compensation in 1992-1994 to risk from 1995-2000 and residual
compensation in 1998-2000 to risk from 2001-2008, respectively. All correlations are positive and
highly economically significant. For example, a one-standard deviation increase in beta in the early
period cross-section is associated with a 0.51-standard deviation increase in residual pay, yet virtually
zero increase in inside ownership. Similarly, return volatility is increasing with total compensation yet
has little relationship to ownership. In results not reported, we verify that, if anything, ownership is
increasing, not decreasing, in idiosyncratic volatility. The non-negative relationship between ownership
and volatility is consistent with studies cited in Prendergast (2000). In the late period cross-section, a
one-standard deviation increase in exposure to ABX is associated with a 0.33-standard deviation
increase in residual pay.


                                                     17
        Our price risk score aggregates risk information across Beta, Return Volatility, and Exposure to
ABX, and a one-standard deviation increase in the price risk score is associated with a 0.54-standard
deviation and a 0.37-standard deviation increase in residual compensation in the early and late periods,
respectively, with again near zero relationship for inside ownership. Notice that the t-statistics are
higher in each case and the economic significances are at least as high as when we consider the risk
measures separately. This suggests that our individual risk measures, even though they are individually
significant, are nonetheless noisy and that this combined measure is a cleaner way to measure firm risk.
Our results hold for each individual risk measure. For brevity, we focus on this measure for the
remainder of this paper.

        We next consider how the cumulative returns of these firms are related to their compensation
practices. The idea is that high residual compensation firms are more likely to be in the tails of
performance, with extreme good performance pre-crisis when the market did well and extreme poor
performance during the crisis period when the market did poorly. In fact, firms with one-standard
deviation higher returns had 0.29-standard deviation higher residual compensation in the early period; in
the late period, high residual compensation firms did very poorly, corroborating this hypothesis.

        Figure 2 demonstrates these results graphically for the price risk score, exposure to ABX, and
returns.   It is worth re-emphasizing that, by construction, all measures, including risk and inside
ownership measures, are pre-adjusted for size and industry in the same manner that residual
compensation is adjusted for size and industry. For example, Panels A and B reveal that residual
compensation is significantly and positively related to the price risk score.18 Firms such as Bear Stearns,
AIG and Lehman are high compensation, high price risk firms, even relative to their industry-size
benchmark.

        Since a portion of financial firms’ exposure to the subprime market operated through off-balance
sheet vehicles, we next consider our ABX measure, which should more sharply capture the large risks
that banks took than balance-sheet measures.               Off-loading risky assets into structured investment
vehicles (SIVs), which finance the purchase of these assets using short-term paper, did not off-load the
risk from the sponsoring firms themselves. Sponsoring firms often retained risk by granting “liquidity
backstops” or credit lines to these vehicles, to be drawn in case these SIV’s could not continue to
finance themselves in the market. This is exactly what happened, bringing enormous losses to the


18
  In particular, our results are not being driven by only the ABX, which is only available in 2006-2008. If we use a price-
based risk-score based on only beta and return volatility we find even stronger results.
                                                            18
sponsoring firms. Panel C graphically demonstrates the relationship between residual compensation and
the Exposure to ABX.

        In economic terms, we estimate that a one standard deviation increase in Exposure to ABX is
associated with a 0.33-standard deviation increase in residual compensation, and a much smaller
increase in inside ownership. The figure also reveals that firms prominent in the crisis and those most
exposed to subprime, such as Bear Stearns (BSC), Lehman Brothers (LEH) and AIG (AIG), were high
residual compensation firms in 1998-2000. Other firms who had significant exposure to the crisis were
also high residual compensation firms – Hartford Financial (HIG), an insurer who received $3.4 billion
in TARP money, is a high residual compensation firm, as are Countrywide (CCR) and Fremont General
(FMT).19

        Given the persistence of residual compensation, the results show that aggressive firms that were
yesterday’s heroes when the stock market did well can easily be today’s outcasts when fortunes reverse.
Panels D and E illustrate these results by plotting the relationship between residual compensation and
cumulative excess returns. Bear Stearns (BSC), Citigroup/Travelers (C/TRV), and AIG (AIG) are prime
examples.      In other words, there is substantial heterogeneity in financial firms in which high
compensation, high risk-taking and tail performance go hand in hand. In particular, it is important to
note that this link between compensation and risk-taking (as measured by beta, volatility, ABX exposure
and returns) persists in both periods, even before the crisis. This suggests that the persistent effect
picked up by our residual compensation measure is consistently linked to risk over time.

        In Table 6, we repeat our analysis relating residual compensation in 1992-1994 (1998-2000) to
risk in 1995-2000 (2001-2008), where we successively drop different groups of financial firms in our
analysis to see how our results vary across different sub-industries. We focus on the price risk measure
since this is our least noisy measure of risk taking. First, we exclude the primary dealers from our
analysis and find consistent results across all our measures of risk-taking. Second, because we are also
concerned that the results may be driven by the insurance companies, we repeat the analysis dropping
insurers. Again, the results are similar. Finally, we run our results using only banks and bank holding
companies, excluding both insurers and the primary dealers. Although statistical significance is a bit
more limited for individual risk-taking measures (not surprising given that we are losing 25-30% of our
sample), our findings are still economically and statistically significant. Notably, the point estimates are

19
  Fremont General was a relatively small California bank that nevertheless managed to originate a significant volume of
subprime mortgages nationally and did not stop doing so until faced with a likely cease and desist order from the FDIC in
2007. Afterwards, Fremont General became embroiled in lawsuits alleging predatory lending.
                                                           19
remarkably stable across these different samples, and are also consistent with the point estimates from
the full sample in Table 5. So our results are not just due to primary dealers, though the results are
stronger when primary dealers are included. This is not surprising, since these firms have more
discretion to take risks (e.g., Bear Stearns and Citigroup). Additionally, the results are not simply due to
insurance companies. Moreover, in results not reported, the correlation between risk taking measures
and residual compensation is primarily a compositional effect in that changes in the risk-taking measures
are uncorrelated with changes in the residual compensation measure. This drives home again the point
that we are dealing with permanent cross-firm differences.

          C. Robustness Checks

          In Table 7, we perform a series of additional robustness checks of the above findings. First, we
redo our analysis by calculating residual compensation using book asset values rather than market values
on the idea that book asset values will reflect both debt plus equity. This is reported in the first row. We
report only the coefficient in front of residual compensation both for the early and late period for each of
the risk-taking measures, which are given by the columns. The results are very similar to the ones
before.

          One may worry that the relationship between residual compensation and risk is simply leverage.
However, adding book leverage as a control does not significantly affect our results. To further examine
this hypothesis, in results not reported, we also include leverage on the right-hand side when computing
residual compensation in the first-stage and find that including leverage only marginally improves the fit
between compensation and size and does not affect our correlations with risk.

          Third, we exclude the CEO’s pay when computing our residual compensation measure and find
nearly identical results. Even after excluding the CEO, a one-standard deviation increase in the price risk
score in the late period is associated with a 0.35-standard deviation increase in residual compensation
when using non-CEO compensation. While ideally we would have data on compensation of other
employees at financial firms (e.g., traders), whether our result would flip if we had such data on non-
executive employees depends on whether the relative ranking order of average pay would change
substantially if we measured pay of employees lower down rather than executives.                It seems a
reasonable conjecture that Bear Stearns, for example, would be in the highest quintile of payers relative
to its peers even when measuring non-executive pay.             Either way, the persistence in residual
compensation and the positive association between non-CEO executive compensation and risk-taking
suggest that residual compensation is more indicative of an overall firm effect.
                                                     20
        Fourth, we do the same exercises for non-financial industries as an out-of-sample check since the
principal-agent theory relating compensation and risk should apply to non-financial industries as well.
We find similar results relating our price risk score to residual compensation, although very little effect
in cumulative excess returns. The latter is not surprising since non-financial industries comprise a large
portion of the market as a whole, and the cumulative excess return is computed over the market.
Although we are wary of the interpretation of our results since there is so much heterogeneity among
non-financial firms, it appears that our insight regarding the relationship between total pay and firm risk
holds generally. Hence, our paper points to a need to refocus empirical strategies in the principal-agent
literature.

        Fifth, we run a pooled regression version of our analysis. More specifically, rather than just
running two cross-sectional regressions, an early period and a late period, we regress residual
compensation on beta, return volatility, and price risk scores in a pooled regression spanning 1992-2008.
Our risk measures are computed on a contemporaneous annual basis, and the price risk score includes
beta and return volatility for each year 1992-2005 until the ABX begins, after which it also includes the
Exposure to ABX. We do not examine results on returns because our one year is an insufficiently long
horizon to assess tail performance. Our results relating the price risk score to residual compensation are
positively and highly statistically significant, while there is again virtually zero relationship for inside
ownership (not reported). If we use the following year’s realizations of risk, results are virtually
identical. The bulk of the analysis tells us that our results are not an artifact of how we cut the sub-
periods in our analysis.

        D. Mis-Governance or Investor Preferences?

        Having established that total pay increases with risk in accordance to the model, we now dig
deeper and ask whether these pay levels are the outcome of optimal contracting. We test the alternative
hypothesis that pay levels are associated with managerial rent expropriation. Under this alternative,
firms with high residual compensation and high risk-taking should also be firms with weak shareholder
rights. We thus relate residual compensation to measures of governance and managerial entrenchment
on the right-hand side.

        We first examine measures of shareholder rights using the Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003) G
Index and the Bebchuk, Cohen and Ferrell (2009) E Index. Table 8 demonstrates our results. We
consistently find that neither of these measures is associated with high residual compensation.


                                                    21
Furthermore, none of these measures are associated with high ex post realizations of risk, or poor
cumulative excess returns.

        Thus, weaker shareholder rights are not associated with high residual compensation or
subsequent risk-taking in either the early or late periods. Our results on board composition reinforce this
non-correlation result. The economic effect is also not significant: a one-standard deviation increase in
the percentage of outsiders on a board, net of size and industry factors, is only associated with a 0.04-
standard deviation increase in residual compensation. If anything, firms with more independent boards
were actually higher risk firms. Overall, we consistently find that the percentage of outsiders on the
board does not predict risk, or even returns, during the late period when the crisis occurs.20

        We next explore the idea that residual compensation and risk are related to investor preferences
by examining whether residual compensation and risk are related to institutional ownership. Intuitively,
institutional investors are more sophisticated and provide a monitoring service, so a finding of a positive
relationship between institutional ownership and residual compensation suggests a story related to
investor demands and optimal contracting rather than a story of misalignment with shareholder interests.
For example, Hartzell and Starks (2003) find that institutional investors have important influence in
setting compensation practices.

        Table 8 demonstrates that higher residual compensation is strongly associated with higher
institutional ownership. A one-standard deviation increase in institutional ownership in the late-period
cross-section is associated with a 0.36-standard deviation increase in residual compensation during that
period; in the early period, this number is 0.41-standard deviations. This association also feeds through
to risk in that a high price risk score is also associated with high levels of institutional ownership. This
finding suggests that there is heterogeneity in investor preferences with institutional investors wanting
certain firms to take more risks and hence having to give them incentives to do so.

        Broadly, the evidence supports a story where investors incentivize management to take large bets
on risky propositions. This alternative does not necessarily imply that managers were fully aware of
these risks or that they knew which risks to take ex ante. If shareholders in certain firms want their
managers to take risks they will offer appropriate contracts. Managers will also select themselves into
these firms. Ceteris paribus, these firms will end up with managers that have more tolerance for risks or



20
  We do, however, acknowledge that there is endogeneity in board composition (Hermalin and Weisbach, 1998), and that
factors other than board independence such as financial expertise may be important.
                                                        22
that do not fully perceive risks. As an example, one might think that Joseph Casano (of AIG FP) or
Stanley O’Neal were ideal managers for stockholders that wanted their firms to take a lot of risk.

       V. Conclusion

       We use the oft-neglected participation constraint to shed new light on the relationship between
compensation and risk. In light of the finding that there is little relationship between incentives and risk,
the participation constraint predicts that total pay levels must be increasing in the level of risk precisely
because agents must be appropriately incentivized to join high-risk firms. By jointly considering both
the implications of the incentive compatibility and participation constraints, we help reconcile the view
among academics that there is little relationship between incentives and risk and the broader view that
there is indeed a relationship between pay and risk.

       In particular, our analysis highlights that there is important heterogeneity across firms in risk-
taking (i.e., Bear Stearns, Lehman and Citigroup have been previously skating on the edge and have
come close to failing before the most recent events) and that this is correlated with persistent
compensation practices. Furthermore, our analysis points to the role of heterogeneous shareholder
preferences for risk as an important determinant in the behavior of firms. Our findings indicate that
heterogeneity of firm compensation and risk-taking behavior are not related to entrenchment per se, but
either reflect a sorting of investors with like preferences into these firms, or the outcome of optimal
contracting.

       Indeed, the following quote by Michael Lewis (2004) nicely sums up the viewpoint derived from
these findings:

       ”The investor cares about short-term gains in stock prices a lot more than he does about
       the long-term viability of the company. Indeed, he does not seem to notice that the two
       goals often conflict. … The investor, of course, likes to think of himself as a force for
       honesty and transparency, but he has proved, in recent years, that he prefers a lucrative
       lie to an expensive truth. And he’s very good at letting corporate management know it.”

       Our results indicate any effort for regulation of pay should begin with an analysis of the wedge
between the interests of the firm (either management or shareholders themselves) and the taxpayer, who
may end up bearing losses from too-big-to-fail firms, instead of a wedge between shareholders and
management.


                                                       23
       Our paper also suggests broadening the scope of research on pay and risk beyond the pay-for-
performance dimension into how contracts as a whole are related to risk in accordance with principal-
agent theory. Intuitively, the optimal contract reflects both the incentive and participation constraint.
Further work along these lines is likely to yield considerable insights.




                                                     24
                                              References

Adrian, T., and H. S. Shin (2009): “Liquidity and Leverage,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Reports, January 2009.

Axelson, U. and P. Bond (2009): “Investment Banking (and Other High Profile) Careers,” Working
Paper, October 23 2009.

Baker, G. P., and B. J. Hall (2004): “CEO Incentives and Firm Size,” Journal of Labor Economics,
22(4), 767-798.

Bebchuk, L., A. Cohen, and A. Ferrell (2009): “What Matters in Corporate Governance?,” Review of
Financial Studies, 22(2), 783-827.

Bolton, P., J. Scheinkman, and W. Xiong (2006): “Executive Compensation and Short-Termist
Behaviour in Speculative Markets,” Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 577-610.

Core, J., and W. Guay (1999): “The Use of Equity Grants to Manage Optimal Equity Incentive Levels,”
Journal of Accounting and Economics, 28(2), 151-184.

Edmans, A., and X. Gabaix (2011): “The Effect of Risk on the CEO Market,” Review of Financial
Studies, forthcoming.

Fahlenbrach, R., and R. Stulz (2010): “Bank CEO Incentives and the Credit Crisis,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 99, 11-26.

Froot, K., A. Perold and J. Stein (1992): “Shareholder Trading Practices and Corporate Investment
Horizons,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 5, 42-58.

Gabaix, X., and A. Landier (2008): “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 123(1), 49-100.

Gompers, P., J. Ishii, and A. Metrick (2003): “Corporate Governance and Equity Prices,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116(1), 107-155.

Graham, J. R., C. R. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal (2005): “The Economic Implications of Corporate
Financial Reporting,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 40(1), 3-73.

Hall, B. J., and J. B. Liebman (1998): “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 63(3), 653-691.

Hartzell, J. and L. Starks (2003): “Institutional Investors and Executive Compensation,” Journal of
Finance, 58(6), 2351-2374.

Hermalin, B., and M. Weisbach (1998): “Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors and Their
Monitoring of the CEO,” American Economic Review, 88(1), 96-118.

Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom (1987): “Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision of Intertemporal
Incentives,” Econometrica, 55(2), 303-328.
                                               25
Jensen, M. C., and K. J. Murphy (1990): “Performance Pay and Top-Management Incentives,” Journal
of Political Economy, 98(2), 225-264.

Kaplan, S. and P. Stromberg (2004): “Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions: Evidence from Venture
Capitalist Analyses,” Journal of Finance, 59(5), 2177-2210.

Keys, B. J., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig (2009): “Financial Regulation and Securitization:
Evidence from Subprime Loans,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(5), 700-720.

Laeven, L., and R. Levine (2009): “Corporate Governance, Regulation, and Bank Risk Taking,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 93, 259-275.

Lewis, Michael (2004): “The Irresponsible Investor,” New York Times Magazine, June 6 2004, Online
at http://www.nytimes.com/2004/06/06/magazine/the-irresponsible-investor.html.

Long, J. S., and L. H. Ervin (2000): “Using Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Standard Errors in the Linear
Regression Model,” The American Statistician, 54(3), 217-224.

Longstaff, F. A. (2010): “The Subprime Credit Crisis and Contagion in Financial Markets,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 97(3), 436-450.

MacKinnon, J. G., and H. White (1985): “Some Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix
Estimators with Improved Finite Sample Properties,” Journal of Econometrics, 29(3), 305-325.

Malmendier and Tate (2005): “CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment,” Journal of Finance,
60(6), 2661-2700.

Malmendier and Tate (2008): “Who Makes Acquisitions? CEO Overconfidence and the Market’s
Reaction,” Journal of Financial Economics, 89(1), 20-43.

Mehran, H. and J. Rosenberg (2007): “The Effect of CEO Stock Options on Bank Investment Choice,
Borrowing, and Capital,” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Murphy, K. J. (1999): “Executive Compensation,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, pp. 2485-
2563. Elsevier.

Oyer, P. (2004): “Why Do Firms Use Incentives That Have No Incentive Effects?,” Journal of Finance,
59(4), 1619-1650.

Oyer, P. (2008): “The Making of an Investment Banker: Stock Market Shocks, Career Choice, and
Lifetime Income,” Journal of Finance, 63(6), 2601-2628.

Parrino, R., R. W. Sias, and L. T. Starks (2003): “Voting With Their Feet: Institutional Ownership
Changes Around Forced CEO Turnover,” Journal of Financial Economics, 68(1), 3-46.

Peng, L., and A. Roell (2009): "Managerial Incentives and Stock Price Manipulation," SSRN Working
Paper #1362599.

                                                   26
Prendergast, C. (1999): “The Provision of Incentives in Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37(1),
7-63.

Prendergast, C. (2000): “The Tenuous Trade-Off between Risk and Incentives,” Journal of Political
Economy, 110(5), 1071-1102.

Shumway, T. (1997): “The Delisting Bias in CRSP Data,” Journal of Finance, 52(1), 327-340.

Stein, Jeremy C. (1989): “Efficient Capital Markets, Inefficient Firms: A Model of Myopic Corporate
Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 655-669.

Stein, Jeremy C. (2003): “Agency, Information and Corporate Investment,” in Handbook of the
Economics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milt Harris and René Stulz, pp. 111-165.
Elsevier.

UK House of Commons, Treasury Committee (2009): “Banking Crisis: Reforming Corporate
Governance and Pay in the City.” Ninth report of the session 2008-2009.
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/cmselect/cmtreasy/519/519.pdf




                                                  27
                                                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics

We report summary statistics for our measures of executive compensation, residual compensation, insider ownership, market capitalization, and risk-taking measures in
two cross-sections, the “early” and “late” periods. Panel A reports summary statistics for average executive compensation in 1992-1994 as well as summary statistics of
measures of subsequent risk-taking for those firms. Panel B reports summary statistics for the late period, where we compute residual compensation in 1998-2000 and
risk-taking in 2001-2008. To obtain residual executive compensation, we take residuals from a regression of log executive compensation on log market capitalization in
the two periods, as described in Table 2. Note that winsorization at the 1% and 99% implies that the mean residual is not zero.


            Period          Variable                           Mean         SD          Skew       Min.        Max.      Median        IQR          N
            Panel A:        Early Period
            1992-1994       Log Executive Compensation         6.859       0.816        0.789      5.343      9.528       6.684       1.182        144
            1992-1994       Residual Compensation              0.001       0.465        0.563     -1.296      1.369       -0.041      0.552        144
            1992-1994       Total Insider Ownership            0.037       0.053        2.753      0.001      0.309       0.016       0.037        144
            1992-1994       Log Market Capitalization          7.251       1.243        0.170      4.870      10.233      7.217       2.107        144
            1992-1994       Market/Book                        1.418       0.514        1.684     0.624       3.569       1.332       0.469        144
            1992-1994       Leverage                           11.889      5.547        0.705      1.858      33.093      12.417      6.251        144
            1995-2000       Beta                               0.865       0.337        0.444     0.247       1.705       0.834       0.454        144
            1995-2000       Return Volatility                  0.305       0.061        0.422      0.175      0.469       0.300       0.084        144
            1995-2000       Price-Based Risk Measure           0.030       0.722        0.358     -1.460      2.004       -0.005      0.960        144
            1995-2000       Cumulative Excess Return           0.972       1.948        1.353     -2.202      7.302       0.489       1.971        144

            Panel B:        Late Period
            1998-2000       Log Executive Compensation         7.533       1.096        0.687      5.507      10.916      7.360       1.421        141
            1998-2000       Residual Compensation              0.006       0.557        0.073     -1.687      1.378       -0.064      0.680        141
            1998-2000       Total Insider Ownership            0.052       0.073        3.009      0.002      0.442       0.024       0.040        141
            1998-2000       Log Market Capitalization          8.089       1.546        0.435      5.118      12.082      7.889       2.231        141
            1998-2000       Market/Book                        2.270       1.103        1.267     0.796       5.537       2.032       1.206        141
            1998-2000       Leverage                           11.490      5.790        0.779      1.653      32.442      11.786      6.749        141
            2001-2008       Beta                               1.126       0.336        0.544     0.407       2.029       1.078       0.439        141
            2001-2008       Return Volatility                  0.453       0.254        2.432      0.213      1.520       0.372       0.170        141
            2001-2008       Exposure to ABX                    0.054       0.245        1.160     -0.695      1.075        0.019      0.205        111
            2001-2008       Price-Based Risk Measure           0.044       0.635        1.143     -0.826      2.195       -0.147      0.720        111
            2001-2008       Cumulative Excess Return           0.210       0.884        0.970     -1.252      3.120       0.072       1.101        141




                                                                                   28
                                                             Table 1: Summary Statistics (Continued)

We report summary statistics for our measures of governance and institutional ownership in our two cross-sections, the “early” and “late” periods. Panel A reports
summary statistics for the early cross-section (1992-1994). Panel B reports summary statistics for the late cross-section, where governance and institutional ownership
are computed in 1998-2000.


            Period          Variable                           Mean         SD          Skew       Min.        Max.      Median        IQR          N
            Panel A:        Early Period
            1992-1994       G Index                            9.874       2.690        -0.175     3.000      16.000      10.000      4.000        111
            1992-1994       E Index                            2.471       1.393        -0.219     0.000      5.000       2.167       2.333         80
            1992-1994       Institutional Ownership            0.484       0.167        -0.123     0.122      0.829       0.494       0.248        144

            Panel B:        Late Period
            1998-2000       G Index                            9.494       2.947        -0.143     2.000      15.667      9.833       4.333        114
            1998-2000       E Index                            2.631       1.532        0.098      0.000      6.000       2.667       2.333        103
            1998-2000       % Independent Directors            0.647       0.155        -0.432     0.269      0.923       0.667       0.237        115
            1998-2000       Institutional Ownership            0.512       0.201        0.224      0.162      0.958       0.514       0.306        141




                                                                                   29
                                            Table 2: Residual Compensation

Panel A reports OLS estimates of a regression where log executive compensation is the dependent variable and log market
capitalization is the independent variable. We run these regressions in two periods, the “early period” (1992-1994) and
“late period” (1998-2000), where we allow for primary dealer, banks/lenders/BHC, and insurer fixed effects, and for an
insurer-specific slope. We compute executive compensation by averaging the total compensation of the top five executives
for each firm-year and then averaging this over the three years within each window. We measure market capitalization as
of each fiscal year reporting date for years when executive compensation is reported. Panel B reports means and standard
deviations for executive compensation by each sub-industry. Panel C reports the correlation between residual executive
compensation between the two periods. T-statistics computed using HC3-robust standard errors are reported below each
coefficient. * denotes significant at 10%, ** denotes significant at 5%, and *** denotes significant at 1% level.

                                    Panel A: Executive Compensation and Firm Size

                                                                 Early Period     Late Period
                                Log Executive Compensation
                                                                  1992-1994        1998-2000
                                   Log Market Capitalization        0.4942           0.5624
                                                                 [10.9489]***     [13.4620]***
                                   Log Market Capitalization       -0.3131              -0.268
                                                 (Insurers)      [-2.5737]**          [-1.7420]*
                                                                   0.6715              0.9129
                                            Primary Dealers
                                                                  [2.3921]**      [2.7548]***
                                                                    2.1045             2.0367
                                                      Insurers
                                                                  [2.5733]**          [1.7675]*
                                                                   3.2514              2.9515
                                                   Constant
                                                                 [10.3460]***     [8.6802]***
                                               Observations         144                 141
                                                 R-squared         0.6445              0.7055


                                  Panel B: Means and Standard Deviations by Industry

                                             Early Period, 1992-1994               Late Period, 1998-2000
                                           Log Executive    Log Market          Log Executive    Log Market
                                           Compensation Capitalization.         Compensation Capitalization.
                                    Mean       8.171          8.595                 9.686          10.353
             Primary Dealers          SD       0.947              0.991               1.030        1.198
                                       N         14                14                   10          10
                                    Mean       6.729              7.036               7.369        7.855
              Banks, Lenders
                                     SD        0.696              1.112               0.958        1.384
                  and BHCS
                                      N         99                 99                  96           96
                                    Mean       6.683              7.329               7.368        8.084
                     Insurers         SD       0.554              1.378               0.798        1.564
                                       N         31                31                   35          35

                                Panel C: Correlation of Residual Executive Compensation

                                                Residual Executive
                                                                          1992-1994
                                                    Compensation
                                                                          0.7548***
                                                           1998-2000
                                                                               N=74


                                                            30
                                  Table 3: Firms Ranked by Residual Compensation

We track the within-industry quintile ranking (5=highest, 1=lowest) of residual executive compensation of firms who
played prominent roles in the financial crisis. We find firms in the “late period” (1998-2000) and track what their ranking
was in the early period (1992-1994). Names and tickers correspond to names and tickers that applied in the late period
(1998-2000); we note changes in names and tickers when applicable. Residual compensation is computed by regressing
executive compensation on market capitalization in each period (results reported in Table 2) and taking the residual.

                                               Panel A: Primary Dealers
                                                                               Late Period     Early Period
             Company                                                           1998-2000        1992-1994
             Bank of America (BAC)                                                                NB: 2
                                                                                    2
              -Previously Nations Bank (NB)                                                      BAC: 1
             Bear Stearns (BSC)                                                     5               5
             Chase Manhattan (CMB) / JP Morgan (JPM)                                             CMB: 2
              -JP Morgan in Early Period                                            3            JPM: 3
              -Previously Chemical Banking (CHL)                                                 CHL: 2
             Citigroup, Inc. (C)
                                                                                    4                5
              -Previously Travelers, Inc. (TRV)
             Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. (GS)                                         4                .
             Lehman Brothers (LEH)                                                  5                .
             Merrill Lynch & Co. (MER)                                              3                4
             Morgan Stanley Dean Witter & Co. (MWD)
              -Previously Morgan Stanley Group (MS)                                 2                4
              -Subsequently changes ticker back to MS
             Total # of Firms                                                       10              14

                               Panel B: Banks, Lenders, and Bank Holding Companies
                                                                               Late Period     Early Period
             Company                                                           1998-2000        1992-1994
             Countrywide Credit (CCR)
                                                                                    5                5
              -Later Countrywide Financial Corp. (CFC)
             Wells Fargo & Co. (WFC)                                                             NOB: 4
                                                                                    2
              -Previously Norwest Corp. (NOB)                                                    WFC: 4
             Washington Mutual, Inc. (WM)                                           2              3
             Total # of Firms                                                       96            99

                                                    Panel C: Insurers
                                                                               Late Period     Early Period
             Company                                                           1998-2000        1992-1994
             American International Group, Inc.                                     5               5
             AMBAC Financial, Inc.                                                  3                .
             Berkshire Hathaway, Inc.                                               1               1
             MBIA, Inc.                                                             5               4
             Total # of Firms                                                      35               31




                                                            31
                          Table 4: Residual Compensation, CEO Turnover, and Past Returns

The first two columns of Panel A report results from an OLS regression where the dependent variable is a firm’s within-
industry quintile ranking of residual compensation in 1998-2000 and the independent variables are the firm’s ranking in
1992-1994, returns in 1995-1997 and an indicator for CEO turnover in 1995-1997. The third column reports results from a
regression where the dependent variable is the absolute changes in the rankings between the early and late periods, and
where the independent variables are the ranking in 1992-1994 and an indicator for CEO turnover during 1995-1997. Panel
B repeats the exercise in Panel A using raw residual compensation as the dependent variable. T-statistics computed using
HC3 robust standard errors are reported in brackets below each coefficient. For all standard errors and hypothesis tests, we
apply a degree-of-freedom adjustment to account for our size and industry adjustment. * denotes significant at 10%, **
denotes significant at 5%, and *** denotes significant at 1% level.

                                  Panel A: Within-Industry Quintile Rankings (N=74)
                                                   Ranking          Ranking         Abs(Diff.)
                                                 (1998-2000)      (1998-2000)      (Late-Early)
                                      Ranking        0.5353          0.5226           0.0832
                                  (1992-1994)     [5.8356]***     [4.7275]***        [0.9572]
                                      Returns                        0.0768
                                  (1995-1997)                       [0.3375]
                               CEO Turnover                          -0.3517          0.1657
                                 (1995-1997)                        [-0.7759]        [0.5000]
                                     Constant        1.2787          1.2693          0.6831
                                                  [4.4585]***     [4.2884]***      [2.5023]**
                                   R-Squared        0.3371           0.3497          0.0233


                                Panel B: Raw Residual Executive Compensation (N=74)
                                                  Resid.
                                                             Resid. Comp.    Abs(Diff.)
                                                  Comp.
                                               (1998-2000)    (1998-2000)   (Late-Early)
                              Residual Comp.         0.8283          0.8456           0.1043
                                 (1992-1994)      [7.5952]***     [7.3983]***        [1.6582]
                                      Returns                        -0.0541
                                  (1995-1997)                       [-0.7754]
                               CEO Turnover                          -0.0285          -0.058
                                 (1995-1997)                        [-0.2459]       [-0.8527]
                                     Constant       -0.0532          0.0054          0.3139
                                                   [-1.2138]        [0.0643]      [11.9704]***
                                   R-Squared        0.5697           0.582             0.08




                                                             32
                            Table 5: Residual Compensation, Inside Ownership, and Risk

We report results from OLS regressions where the dependent variables are residual compensation and inside ownership,
and where the independent variables are ex post realizations of risk. The first two columns report results for residual
compensation and the third and fourth column report results for inside ownership for the early and late periods,
respectively. Each cell represents a distinct regression. In the early cross-section, residual compensation and inside
ownership are computed in 1992-1994 and risk measures are computed in 1995-2000. For the late cross-section, residual
compensation and inside ownership are computed in 1998-2000 and risk measures are computed in 2001-2008, with the
exception of Exposure to ABX, which is computed from 19Jan06-31Dec08. Each risk measure has industry and size
factors removed, where we allow for primary dealer, banks/lenders/BHC, and insurer fixed effects, and for an insurer-
specific slope in the same way we computed residual compensation. Beta is the beta of firm returns with returns to the
CRSP value-weighted market return (including dividends), computed from daily data. Return volatility is the volatility of
daily returns over the risk-free rate annualized to one trading year (252 days). Exposure to ABX is the coefficient from a
regression of returns over the risk-free rate on returns to the ABX AAA tranche, controlling for the excess market return,
computed using daily return data. The price risk score is an equal-weighted average of the z-scores of the above three
measures. Cumulative excess returns are the buy-and-hold returns in excess of the market over each period. T-statistics
computed using HC3 robust standard errors are reported in brackets and R-squareds are reported in parentheses. For all
standard errors and hypothesis tests, we apply a degree-of-freedom adjustment to account for our size and industry
adjustment. * denotes significant at 10%, ** denotes significant at 5%, and *** denotes significant at 1% level.


                                LHS:        Residual Compensation                Insider Ownership

                                RHS:     Early Period     Late Period      Early Period      Late Period
                                            1.1443           0.6693           -0.0009          -0.0238
                                         [6.4612]***       [3.7726]***       [-0.0378]        [-0.9309]
                                 Beta
                                            N=144            N=141            N=144             N=141
                                           (0.2592)         (0.1375)          (0.0000)         (0.0109)
                                             3.606            0.6401           0.1372          -0.0086
                                         [4.8991]***       [2.6299]***       [1.7858]*        [-0.4012]
                    Return Volatility
                                            N=144             N=141            N=144           N=141
                                           (0.1869)          (0.0864)         (0.0234)         (0.001)
                                                             0.8271                             0.0524
                                                           [2.7597]***                        [1.8925]*
                   Exposure to ABX
                                                             N=111                              N=111
                                                            (0.1074)                           (0.0287)
                                            0.4654            0.3283           0.0089          -0.0061
                                         [6.7511]***       [2.9599]***        [1.0425]        [-0.4582]
                    Price Risk Score
                                            N=144             N=111            N=144            N=111
                                           (0.2914)          (0.1358)         (0.0091)         (0.0031)
                                            0.0746           -0.1647           0.003            0.018
                  Cumulative Excess      [2.9088]***      [-2.9093]***        [1.4767]         [1.4594]
                           Returns          N=144            N=141            N=144             N=141
                                           (0.0841)         (0.0629)          (0.0121)         (0.0472)




                                                           33
                               Table 6: Results Broken Down By Finance Sub-Industries

We report results from OLS regressions where the dependent variable is residual compensation and where the independent
variables are ex post realizations of risk, for three finance sub-industries. The dependent variables are our price-based risk-
score and cumulative excess returns defined in Table 5, and the independent variable is residual executive compensation,
defined in Table 2. We report results from six separate regressions: the early and late period cross-sections for each of the
three groupings. Each cell represents a distinct regression. The first row within each risk-taking measure reports results
excluding the primary dealers from the sample, and the second row excludes the insurers. The third row within each risk-
taking measure only includes banks and bank-holding companies, which are not primary dealers in the sample. The two
columns represent the results of running these exercises in the early and late period cross-sections separately. T-statistics
computed using HC3 robust standard errors are reported in brackets below each coefficient. For all standard errors and
hypothesis tests, we apply a degree-of-freedom adjustment to account for our size and industry adjustment. * denotes
significant at 10%, ** denotes significant at 5%, and *** denotes significant at 1% level.


                                 RHS:                    Grouping      Early Period       Late Period
                                                 Excluding Primary          0.41             0.2832
                                                           Dealers      [5.4887]***        [2.2958]**
                            Price Risk                                     0.5021            0.3391
                                                 Excluding Insurers
                                 Score                                  [6.7978]***        [2.4801]**
                                                                           0.4408            0.2747
                                                 Banks/BHCs Only
                                                                        [5.4069]***         [1.6991]*
                                                 Excluding Primary         0.0561            -0.147
                                                           Dealers       [1.9859]**        [-2.5648]**
                          Cumulative                                       0.0767            -0.1725
                                                 Excluding Insurers
                       Excess Returns                                   [2.7482]***        [-2.1267]**
                                                                           0.0555            -0.1429
                                                 Banks/BHCs Only
                                                                         [1.7621]*         [-1.6971]*




                                                             34
                                                                     Table 7: Robustness Checks

Each row is a different exercise and each column reports the results from an OLS regression with a different risk-taking measure as the independent variable and
residual compensation as the dependent variable. Each cell represents a distinct regression. In the first row, we use residual compensation computed from book asset
values instead of market capitalization as the independent variable. The second row adds a control for leverage, de-scaled by size and industry. The third row uses
residual non-CEO executive compensation as the independent variable The fourth row repeats our exercise by using a sample of non-financial ExecuComp firms where
we compute residual compensation along two-digit SIC codes. In the fifth row, we check whether our results are sensitive to the cutoff period by running our analysis
using a pooled regression, where residual compensation is computed within each year and each measure of risk is measured using contemporaneous data on returns
during that year. We then run a pooled regression of each year’s residual compensation on risk. T-statistics computed using HC3 robust standard errors are reported in
brackets under each coefficient except for the last row, where we cluster standard errors by firm. For all standard errors and hypothesis tests, we apply a degree-of-
freedom adjustment to account for our size and industry adjustment. * denotes significant at 10%, ** denotes significant at 5%, and *** denotes significant at 1% level.


                                                                                                           Price Risk        Cumulative
                                                            Robustness Exercise                 RHS:
                                                                                                              Score         Excess Return
                                                                                                               0.45             0.0727
                                                                                          Early Period
                                Using book asset values when computing residual                           [4.7078]***         [2.4891]**
                                                                 compensation                                0.2971             -0.2017
                                                                                          Late Period
                                                                                                           [2.2746]**        [-3.0895]***
                                                                                                             0.4511              0.07
                                                                                          Early Period
                             Controlling for book leverage and size in risk-taking                        [5.8400]***         [2.5601]**
                                                                      regressions                            0.2866            -0.1548
                                                                                          Late Period
                                                                                                           [2.3762]**        [-2.6631]***
                                                                                                             0.4365              0.0746
                                                                                          Early Period
                                                                                                          [6.6029]***         [2.9088]***
                                    Using only non-CEO executive compensation
                                                                                                             0.3177             -0.1647
                                                                                          Late Period
                                                                                                          [2.6399]***        [-2.9093]***
                                                                                                             0.1532             0.0108
                                                                                          Early Period
                                                                                                          [6.4005]***          [1.5837]
                                             Analysis on non-financial industries
                                                                                                             0.2922            -0.0026
                                                                                          Late Period
                                                                                                          [8.1640]***         [-0.2468]
                                                               Pooled Regression                             0.4287
                                                                     (1992-2008)                          [9.1836]***




                                                                                     35
                             Table 8: Residual Compensation, Governance, and Investors

We report results from separate OLS regressions where the dependent variables are residual compensation and our price
risk score, and where the independent variables are the G Index, E Index, Percentage of Independent Directors, and
Institutional Ownership, computed over 1992-1994 for the early period and 1998-2000 for the late period. Each cell
represents a distinct regression. G-Index is the Gompers-Ishii-Metrick (2003) measure of managerial entrenchment. E-
Index is the Bebchuk, Cohen and Ferrell (2008) measure of entrenchment. Percentage of Independent Directors is the
percentage of outside directors who have no significant connection with the firm (classified as “Independent” by
RiskMetrics). Institutional Ownership is defined as the total shares held by institutions reporting in 13F statements divided
by the number of shares outstanding, averaged over the 12 quarters in 1992-1994 for the early period and 1998-2000 for the
late period. T-statistics computed using HC3-robust standard errors are reported in brackets below each coefficient. For all
standard errors and hypothesis tests, we apply a degree-of-freedom adjustment to account for our size and industry
adjustment. * denotes significant at 10%, ** denotes significant at 5%, and *** denotes significant at 1% level.


                                  LHS:        Residual Compensation                 Price Risk Score
                                               Early             Late            Early             Late
                                  RHS:        Period           Period           Period           Period
                                              0.0053           0.0053           0.0164            0.0215
                               G Index
                                             [0.3000]          [0.2592]         [0.7162]         [0.9766]
                                              -0.0374          -0.0073          -0.0309           0.0281
                               E Index
                                             [-0.6640]        [-0.1575]        [-0.5902]         [0.5650]
                       % Independent                           0.1677                             0.607
                            Directors                          [0.3932]                          [1.2495]
                           Institutional      1.3753           1.1744           0.9983            1.0238
                            Ownership       [4.7509]***      [4.2020]***      [2.6687]***      [3.2783]***




                                                            36
                               Figure 1: Log Average Executive Compensation and Market Capitalization

                                                                                  Panel A




                                    10
                                                          Primary Dealers
                                                          Banks                              BSC            TRV
                    Log Avg Compensation, 1992−1994       Insurers
                                                9                                                     MS MER
                                                                                                            JPM
                                                                                                             CCI
                                                                                          CCR               NB    AIG
                                       8


                                                                                                        NOB   BAC
                                                                                                        WFC
                                                                                                       CMB
                                                                                                MBI
                              7




                                                                                                       WB
                      6




                                                                                                                   BRK
                                    5




                                                      4                   6                 8                      10
                                                                      1992−1994 Log Avg Market Capitalization

                                                                                  Panel B
                                    11




                                                          Primary Dealers                                               C
                                                          Banks
                                                                                                            CMB
                                                                                                              MWD
                    Log Avg Compensation, 1998−2000




                                                          Insurers                                         GS   BAC
                                                10




                                                                                       BSCLEH              MER

                                                                                                                        AIG
                                                                                                               WFC
                                          9




                                                                                       MBI
                                                                                    CCR               WM
                                 8




                                                                                     ABK
                    6      7




                                                                                                                  BRK
                                    5




                                                      5                 7              9                 11                   13
                                                                      1998−2000 Log Avg Market Capitalization

The figure plots the log of average executive compensation on the vertical axis against log market capitalization on the
horizontal axis, and overlays a linear fit. Panel A plots this relationship for the early period (1992-1994) and Panel B plots
this relationship for the late period (1998-2000). Slopes and intercepts are calculated using a model where all three groups
(primary dealers, banks, insurers) have their own intercepts and insurers have a distinct slope from banks and primary
dealers. Tickers significant to the crisis are labeled.




                                                                                     37
                                                             Figure 2: Residual Executive Compensation and Risk-Taking

      Residual Compensation, 1992−1994                         Panel A                                                                                                                               Panel B




                                                                                                                                       Residual Compensation, 1998−2000
                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                          Slope: .465
                                          t: 6.75                                                      BSC                                                                     Slope: .328
                                          p: 0                  TRV                                       CCR                                                                  t: 2.96                 BSC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MBI
                              1




                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                     AIG                                                                       p: .004                                        LEH
                                                                                                                   MS                                                                            CCR           AIG
                                                        NOB MBI                                             MER                                                                  GS C
                                                JPM   WFC                                                                                                                          CMB   MER
                                                                                                                                                                                           MWD                         ABK
                     0




                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                            CCI                                                                                                                  BAC WFC                                      WM
                                                  NB
                                                   WB CMB
                                                        BAC
             −1




                                                                                                                                              −1
                                                       BRK
                                                                                                                                                                               BRK
      −2




                                                                                                                                       −2
                                          −1        −.5        0        .5         1                                          1.5                                         −1                  0                 1               2
                                                 Price Risk Score Residual, 1995−2000                                                                                                Price Risk Score Residual, 2001−2008


                                                                                                                                    Panel C
                                                                                                 2
                                                                  Residual Compensation, 1998−2000




                                                                                                                Slope: .827
                                                                                                                t: 2.76                                                                  BSC
                                                                                                                                 MBI
                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                p: .007                                                                   LEH
                                                                                                                                  CCR AIG
                                                                                                                         ABKGS C
                                                                                                                         CMBMER
                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                            MWD
                                                                                                                            BAC WFC                                                       WM
                                                                         −1




                                                                                                                                     BRK
                                                                 −2




                                                                                                     −1         −.5         0            .5                                                      1
                                                                                                            Exposure to ABX Residual, 2006−2008


                                                               Panel D                                                                                                                               Panel E
      Residual Compensation, 1992−1994




                                                                                                                                       Residual Compensation, 1998−2000
                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                      2




                                               Slope: .074                                                                                                                                                      Slope: −.16
                                               t: 2.90       BSC                                                                                                                                                t: −2.9
                                               p: .004         CCR                                                    TRV                                                               BSC                     p: .004
                                                                                                                                                                                        MBI
                              1




                                                                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                          AIG                                                                            LEH
                                                                                                                   MS                                                                  CCR         AIG
                                                          MBI                     NOB                      MER                                                                                       GS
                                                                                                                                                                                       ABK       C
                                                    JPM WFC                                                                                                                                     MER CMB
                     0




                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                 MWD BAC
                                                                                                                                                                                                       WFC
                                                CCI                                                                                                                                   WM
                                               NB WBCMB
                                                    BAC
             −1




                                                                                                                                              −1




                                                             BRK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BRK
      −2




                                                                                                                                       −2




                                         −4       −2         0         2         4                                            6                                           −2          −1         0         1         2              3
                                                  Excess Return Residual, 1995−2000                                                                                                   Excess Return Residual, 2001−2008

We plot residual compensation on the vertical axis against ex post realizations of risk and outcomes on the horizontal axis
for both the early and late cross-sections. Panels A and B plot the relationship of residual compensation with a firm’s price
risk score. Panel C plots the relationship for Exposure to ABX, and Panels D and E plot the relationship for Cumulative
Excess Returns. Each variable is adjusted for size and industry. A linear fit is overlaid and we report the slopes, t-statistics,
and p-values associated with each fit. The t-statistics are calculated using HC3-robust standard errors with a degrees-of-
freedom adjustment to account for our size and industry adjustment. Tickers significant to the crisis are labeled.




                                                                                                                                  38
                                                     Appendix: Proofs

Proposition. Suppose the disutility of effort satisfies                               > 0,              > 0, and       <2        for a > 0. If

     = 0, then      > 0 and        > 0.


Proof. If        = 0 then direct computation shows that

                                                     ℎ                     ℎ ′′
                                                         =
                                                                      2     −              ′


By supposition,       ,   > 0, so the sign of                        is determined by the sign of 2                          −       . For cost

functions such that       <2       , we have that                    > 0 is then a necessary condition for                           = 0. From

the equilibrium condition      ( ) = ℎ, direct computation shows that

                                                1            ℎ                                      ℎ
                                          =                      +ℎ               =                      >0
                                                ′′

Direct computation also shows that                   =     ( )             +           > 0. Note that the condition on the cost

function c is satisfied by every        =            for         > 1,          > 0 and also every exponential function of the
form    = exp(      ) with    > 0. Notice that a > 0 in equilibrium so we do not have to worry about the
denominator going to zero.

        More generally, we have

                                            1                                                                   ′′
                                        −        1+                         −                   ℎ          −
                               ℎ                           ℎ                      ℎ        ′′                  ℎ
                                    =
                                                           −           2       −                ′
                                                                 ℎ

If     ≥ 0, with the additional assumption that                                > 0, then                   > 0.      Since       =           +

ℎ      > 0 and


                                        =       ( )          +              +          2                 >0

the conclusion follows. ■


                                                                      39
