                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       OFF THE CLIFF AND BACK? CREDIT CONDITIONS AND INTERNATIONAL
                 TRADE DURING THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS

                                              Davin Chor
                                             Kalina Manova

                                         Working Paper 16174
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16174


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2010




We thank the editor, Charles Engel, and two anonymous referees for their detailed comments. We
also thank Jae Bin Anh, Pol Antrás, Bo Becker, Marco Bugamelli, Jeanne Gobat, Robert Hall, Dirk
Jenter, Luc Laeven, Philippe Martin, Marc Melitz, Dennis Novy, Monika Piazessi, Heiwai Tang, Daniel
Treer, and David Weinstein for insightful conversations, as well as audiences at the 2010 AEA meetings,
the EITI conference (Keio University), the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (Singapore), the CEGE
Annual Conference (UC Davis), the NY Fed Conference on Global Dimensions of the Financial Crisis,
the NBER-SLOAN Project on Market Institutions and Financial Market Risk, the NBER ITI winter
2010 meeting, the Asia Pacific Trade Seminars (Osaka), Harvard international lunch, University of
New South Wales, Nanyang Technological University, and Singapore Management University. Carlo
Antonio Cabrera, Vera Eidelman, Chan Li, Jun Jia Ng, Zhicheng Song, and Abiy Teshome provided
excellent research assistance. This project was supported by a Stanford Vice Provost for Undergraduate
Education Faculty Grant and SMU Office of Research Grant No. 09-C244-SMU-010. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Davin Chor and Kalina Manova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Off the Cliff and Back? Credit Conditions and International Trade during the Global Financial
Crisis
Davin Chor and Kalina Manova
NBER Working Paper No. 16174
July 2010, Revised February 2011
JEL No. F10,F14,F42,G01,G20,G28

                                               ABSTRACT

We study the collapse of international trade flows during the global financial crisis using detailed data
on monthly US imports. We show that credit conditions were an important channel through which
the crisis affected trade volumes, by exploiting the variation in the cost of capital across countries
and over time, as well as the variation in financial vulnerability across sectors. Countries with higher
interbank rates and thus tighter credit markets exported less to the US during the peak of the crisis.
This effect was especially pronounced in sectors that require extensive external financing, have limited
access to trade credit, or have few collateralizable assets. Exports of financially vulnerable industries
were thus more sensitive to the cost of external capital than exports of less vulnerable industries, and
this sensitivity rose during the financial crisis. The quantitative implications of our estimates for trade
volumes highlight the large real effects of financial crises and the potential gains from policy intervention.


Davin Chor
Singapore Management University
School of Economics
90 Stamford Rd
Singapore 178903
Singapore
davinchor@smu.edu.sg

Kalina Manova
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
manova@stanford.edu
1        Introduction and motivation

The global financial crisis has had far-reaching repercussions on cross-border economic activity. After a
sharp and sudden collapse in international trade in the last quarter of 2008, world trade flows declined by
about 12% in 2009 according to the WTO. This exceeded the estimated loss of 5.4% in world GDP during
the same period.1 The contraction in exports was especially acute for small open economies, several of
whom saw their trade volumes in the second half of 2008 fall by up to 30% year-on-year. This trade
decline contributed to the spread of recessionary pressures to countries which had little direct exposure
to the US subprime mortgage market where the crisis originated. For example, the popular press has
provided anecdotal accounts of how manufacturing plants around the world scaled down production and
employment in response to limited export opportunities.2
        Two aspects of the global financial crisis are believed to be behind this large decline in international
trade. On the producer side, the credit crunch at the height of the crisis resulted in a severe reduction
in the availability of external finance, thus curtailing firms’ production and export capacities. On the
consumer side, the gloomy economic outlook led to a slowdown in global demand in general, and for
imports in particular. The effects of these forces may very well have been amplified by disruptions to
global production lines, and by inventory adjustments made by importing firms and distributors.
        This paper is one of the first to establish the effect that credit conditions had on international trade
during the recent global crisis. We examine the evolution of monthly US imports over the November
2006 to October 2009 period, and compare trade patterns before and during the crisis.3 We identify the
impact of credit conditions by exploiting the variation in the cost of external capital across countries and
over time, as well as the variation in financial vulnerability across sectors. We find that during the crisis
period, countries with higher interbank rates and thus tighter credit availability exported less to the US,
relative to countries where interbank rates were lower as a result of more aggressive monetary easing
policies. These effects were especially pronounced in sectors that require extensive external financing,
have limited access to buyer-supplier trade credit, or have few collateralizable assets.4 In other words,
exports of financially vulnerable industries were more sensitive to the cost of external capital than exports
of less vulnerable industries, and this sensitivity rose during the financial crisis. These results are robust
to controlling for cross-country differences in initial income (GDP and GDP per capita) and factor
    1
     Authors’ own calculations, using GDP in current prices from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook Database.
    2
     See for example Schwartz (2009a,b) in The New York Times.
   3
     Based on the developments in global financial markets described in Section 2, we date the crisis period from September
2008 (when credit conditions started unraveling in earnest) to August 2009 (one year after, when conditions had largely
calmed down). We discuss the robustness of our results to alternative crisis period dates later below.
   4
     We use the term “trade credit” to refer to transactions between a firm and its buyers or suppliers that involve the
transfer of goods or services without an advance or immediate transfer of payment funds. On the other hand, we use the
term “trade finance” to refer to formal borrowing by firms from banks or other financial institutions to facilitate international
trade activities, such as export letters of credit or trade insurance.



                                                               1
endowments, which themselves could influence trade patterns. Moreover, our findings suggest that credit
conditions exerted a disproportionately disruptive effect on trade flows beyond their effect on domestic
output, as they continue to hold when we control for countries’ industrial production index.
       Using our estimates, we infer how US imports would have evolved under two alternative scenarios:
(1) credit conditions remained tight, with interbank rates fixed at their September 2008 peak levels
throughout the crisis period; and (2) credit conditions eased considerably, with interbank rates dropping
immediately after September 2008 to their low levels of August 2009. These projections provide rough
upper and lower bounds for the crisis-induced damage to trade flows mediated through the credit channel.
We conclude that the 2008-2009 crisis would have reduced US imports by 2.5% more and 5.5% less under
these respective scenarios, based on specifications in which the effect of credit conditions is estimated
off the within-country variation in interbank rates. Estimates from less restrictive specifications that
use the full cross-country variation in the cost of capital indicate that these magnitudes could have
been much larger. Moreover, credit conditions contributed to large and systematic differences in export
performance across sectors at different levels of financial vulnerability. For example, US imports in the
most external finance dependent sector would have dropped 13.4% more and 8.2% less than imports in
the least dependent sector, under the respective scenarios. Overall, these estimates highlight the large
impact of financial market disturbances on the real economy and the scope for policy intervention through
the easing of the credit crunch.
       Our findings constitute new evidence on the importance of credit and financing for export activities.
Access to outside capital matters for both domestic production and exporting because firms often incur
substantial upfront costs that cannot be funded out of internal cash flows or retained earnings. Export-
ing, however, is more reliant on external finance for three reasons. First, it is associated with additional
upfront sunk and fixed outlays specific to international trade. These include learning about the prof-
itability of export opportunities; making market-specific investments in capacity, product customization,
and regulatory compliance; and setting up and maintaining foreign distribution networks. Some variable
trade costs, such as shipping and duties, may also have to be incurred before export revenues are realized.
Second, exporters’ need for working capital is magnified by the fact that cross-border transactions on av-
erage take between 30-90 days longer to process than domestic sales.5 Finally, the added risk that is faced
in exporting relative to domestic activities necessitates insurance for many international transactions.
       These factors have led to a very active credit market for cross-border activities: Up to 90% of world
trade reportedly depends on some form of trade finance or insurance, with the total size of this market
estimated at about $10-12 trillion in 2008 (Auboin 2009). Given these considerations, firms located in
   5
    See Djankov et al. (2010) and the Doing Business dataset. It can take up to 30 days in some countries to secure passage
of a shipment from the factory to the export dock, and a further 30 days between arrival at the import dock and delivery
at the destination warehouse. This does not include the time in shipping transit.



                                                            2
countries with cheaper bank credit should in principle be able to produce and export more. Our finding
that economies with lower interbank rates systematically exported more to the US is thus a reflection of
the liquidity constraints that exporting firms around the world faced during the height of the crisis.
      While credit availability is generally important in all industries, our empirical strategy relies on the
observation that some sectors are more dependent on the financial system than others for arguably
largely technological reasons beyond the control of individual firms. The growth and finance literature
has identified several such measurable dimensions that characterize a sector’s financial vulnerability.
First, production and exporting in some industries are associated with bigger capital expenditures that
cannot be serviced internally, and such industries require more external finance (Rajan and Zingales
1998). Second, in some sectors, firms routinely receive more buyer-supplier trade credit which gives them
an alternative to and thus potentially reduces their dependence on bank financing (Fisman and Love
2003). Finally, industries with more tangible assets such as plant, property and equipment enjoy easier
access to outside capital because firms can pledge more collateral (Braun 2003, Claessens and Laeven
2003). This is incidentally consistent with anecdotal evidence that many of the firms reporting big losses
in output and employment since September 2008 have been in computers and electronics (Sprint, Nokia,
Texas Instruments, Philips, Microsoft, Sony, Ericsson), transportation and machinery (Caterpillar, Harley
Davidson), and chemical manufacturing and pharmaceuticals (Pfizer).6 These sectors feature relatively
high dependence on external finance, limited access to trade credit, and/or low levels of tangible assets
respectively (see Appendix Table 2).
      The central result in our paper is that exports in financially vulnerable sectors became particularly
sensitive to the cost of credit at the height of the global crisis. This cannot simply be attributed to
countries with cheaper external capital having a comparative advantage in financially dependent indus-
tries, since this would not explain the intensification of the effect during the crisis. Instead, we offer two
potential explanations. First, the crisis period saw US import demand plummet as American households
cut consumption spending and American producers scaled down their purchases of intermediate inputs.
This reduced the export revenues and profitability of foreign firms selling to the US, making it more
difficult for these exporters to raise the necessary funds for their US sales from lenders in their home
country. Second, exporting firms can in practice also access trade financing in the destination market
or rely on trade credit raised there by the importing party. The availability of such US-based trade
financing would have fallen sharply as the crisis unfolded, potentially hampering export flows to the US.
The uneven impact of the crisis across countries and sectors can therefore be attributed to the combined
effects of tighter credit at home, sectors’ varying degree of financial vulnerability, and depressed demand
and/or tighter credit in the US. Using data on retail sales and business loans in the US, we find evidence
  6
      See Healy (2009) and Rampell (2009) in The New York Times.



                                                          3
that the sharp drop in US final demand was more decisive in explaining trade patterns during the crisis
period than the decline in US loan supply.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature. Section 3 describes
the collapse in trade flows during the crisis, while Section 4 discusses the data used in our analysis.
Section 5 presents our core results on the cross-country, cross-sector impact of credit conditions during
the crisis period, while Section 6 examines their effects at the country level. We interpret the economic
significance of our findings via the two hypothetical scenarios in Section 7. The last section concludes.



2    Related literature

Our results add to an established literature on the role of financial frictions in international trade. A
number of theoretical and empirical papers have shown that, in the presence of credit constraints, coun-
tries with more developed financial institutions have a comparative advantage in financially vulnerable
sectors.7 While this literature exploits the same cross-sector variation in financial vulnerability as we do,
it typically relies on country-level measures of financial development (such as private credit over GDP,
accounting standards, or creditor rights protection) that exhibit little or no time-series variation. By
contrast, we explore the response of trade flows to short-term fluctuations in the cost of capital using
high frequency (monthly) data. We also focus on export patterns before and during a financial crisis,
instead of on conditions in steady state.
    The global liquidity squeeze has renewed interest in academic and policy circles alike in the effect
of credit constraints on export performance at the firm level. There is now ample evidence from micro
data demonstrating that more credit-constrained firms indeed display a lower capacity for exporting.8
For example, Amiti and Weinstein (2009) show that Japanese banks transmitted financial shocks to
exporters during the systemic crisis that plagued Japan in the 1990s. Similarly, Bricongne et al. (2010)
find that the exports of French firms in more external finance-dependent sectors were more adversely hit
during the recent global crisis.
    Our paper also falls within a broader research agenda on the impact of banking and financial crises
on economic outcomes such as sectoral growth (Kroszner et al. 2007, Dell’Ariccia et al. 2008) or firms’
planned R&D, employment, and capital spending (Campello et al. 2010). With regard specifically to
the impact on international trade, Iacovone and Zavacka (2009) find that annual export growth rates
were hurt more during banking crises in sectors more dependent on external finance and in sectors with
   7
     See Kletzer and Bardhan (1987), Beck (2002), Matsuyama (2005), Becker and Greenberg (2007), Do and Levchenko
(2007), Chaney (2005), Manova (2008a), and Ju and Wei (2008) for theoretical models, and Beck (2002, 2003), Svaleryd
and Vlachos (2005), Hur et al. (2006), Becker and Greenberg (2007), and Manova (2008a,b) for empirical evidence.
   8
     See for example Greenaway et al. (2007) based on UK data, Muûls (2008) on Belgium, Manova et al. (2009) on China,
and Minetti and Zhu (2010) on Italy.



                                                          4
fewer tangible assets, but that these effects were mitigated in countries with stronger levels of financial
development. Our results further suggest that movements in the cost of capital can have large real effects
on trade in the short run even when broader financial institutions remain unchanged.
         Finally, our paper contributes to a fast-growing body of work investigating the trade effects of the
2008-2009 crisis. Freund (2009) and Levchenko et al. (2010) document that the decline in world trade has
become increasingly pronounced relative to the decline in GDP in recent downturns, especially during the
global financial crisis.9 Several papers have sought to explain this large fall in trade relative to output.
Eaton et al. (2010) evaluate the relative contributions of changes in demand versus changes in trade
frictions, using a general equilibrium model of production and trade. While they deduce that the fall
in demand was more important, trade frictions nevertheless accounted for a significant fraction of the
overall decline in the trade to GDP ratio. Behrens et al. (2010) reach a qualitatively similar conclusion,
based on an analysis of Belgian firm-level data.10 Separately, Alessandria et al. (2010) explore the role
of inventory adjustments, while Bems et al. (2010) and Levchenko et al. (2010) emphasize the disruption
of global production lines and the reduction in trade in intermediate goods. There has also been work
examining whether the decline in trade can be attributed to a rise in protectionist policies (Evenett 2009,
Kee et al. 2010). We view these alternative mechanisms as potentially magnifying the role of credit
conditions during the crisis, although we do not explicitly test this in the present paper.



3         Preview: The crisis-related decline in US imports

Our primary goal is to track how trade flows reacted to the unfolding global crisis. For this reason, we
examine trade data on a monthly basis for the US. These data are readily available from the US Census
Bureau website, and are regularly released with a lag of about three months.
         Figure 1 offers an overview of the main trends in US aggregate trade over the sample period. Trade
volumes were recording modest trend growth until mid-2008, when they started contracting severely both
in terms of speed and magnitude. US trade flows witnessed a sharp month-on-month decline between
October and November 2008, coinciding with the height of the global credit crunch. While nervousness
over the exposure of financial institutions to the subprime mortgage market had been building up steadily
since the end of 2007, two events in September 2008 – the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the government
bailout of AIG – brought credit activity to a virtual standstill.

                                              [Figure 1 about here.]
    9
    See also Berman and Martin (2010) who detail the impact of the crisis on African countries’ exporting prospects.
    10
    The World Bank has similarly assessed that about 10-15% of the decline in international trade has been driven by the
lack of trade financing, with the remaining decline attributable to the collapse in aggregate demand (reported in Auboin
2009), although these figures appear to be relatively rough estimates. See also McKibbin and Stoeckel (2009) who emphasize
the much larger contraction of trade in durables relative to its production during the crisis.


                                                            5
       Several observations regarding the collapse in US trade flows are worth noting. First, the fall in
US imports was more precipitous than that in US exports. On a month-on-month basis, US imports
contracted 23.1% between October and November 2008, while exports fell 13.6%. This reflects presumably
the particularly sharp decline in consumer sentiment and import demand in the US relative to other
countries.11 Second, trade flows in the manufacturing sector (NAICS first digit = 3) mirrored closely
this aggregate decline. US manufacturing imports were 19.3% lower in November 2008 compared with
the previous month, while the corresponding fall for manufacturing exports was 13.8%.12 Third, this
contraction was very broad-based, as reported in Table 1. Focusing on the import figures, no 3-digit
manufacturing industry was spared, with the only difference across industries being one of severity. The
worst-hit sector was by far petroleum and coal products where import volumes more than halved during
this month. On the other end of the spectrum, food and furniture manufacturing saw the most moderate
reductions, but these still registered a more than 5% fall. Finally, although this is not shown in Figure 1,
the drop in trade flows reflects primarily declines in quantities traded as opposed to prices, with one key
exception: commodities and related industries (Levchenko et al. 2010, Haddad et al. 2010). Nevertheless,
excluding the petroleum and coal sector does not change the overall picture of a sharp drop in trade flows.

                                                [Table 1 about here.]

       This collapse in US exports and imports coincided with a severe contraction in trade financing, a by-
product of the overall freeze in lending activity at the height of the crisis. While it is difficult to obtain
definitive figures, estimates of the worldwide shortfall in trade finance range from $25-500 billion for the
second half of 2008 (Auboin 2009, Chauffour and Farole 2009). Separately, IMF reports have suggested
that banks’ capacity constraints affected about 6-10 percent of developing country trade, implying a
trade finance gap in the order of $100-300 billion (IMF-BAFT 2009).
       In terms of the cost of trade financing, all available accounts point to sharply rising interest rates
leading up to the last quarter of 2008. For example, an IMF-BAFT (Bankers’ Association for Finance
and Trade) survey of 44 banks from 23 developed and emerging markets reported a broad-based increase
in the price of various trade-related credit instruments between October 2008 and January 2009. While
the exact magnitudes vary across countries, there was a near doubling in the spread between banks’ cost
of funds and the rates on lines of credit or export credit insurance. A similar World Bank survey of firms
and banks in 14 developing countries found that the crisis led to a fall in export pre-payments, forcing
firms to stretch out their cash flow cycles. While the prices of different credit instruments apparently
  11
     This contrast is even starker when the figures are calculated in year-on-year terms for November 2008: US imports fell
17.5%, while US exports dropped a more moderate 4.9%.
  12
     Borchert and Mattoo (2009) document that trade in services was more resilient than trade in manufactured goods during
the global financial crisis. They attribute this to the demand for services being less cyclical, and to services production and
trade being less dependent on external finance.



                                                              6
peaked and started to moderate by the first quarter of 2009, they were still above their pre-crisis levels
(Malouche 2009). These developments prompted many economists and policy-makers to press the case
for a coordinated push from country governments to shore up lines of credit (Ellingsen and Vlachos 2009),
as evidenced by the April 2009 G20 Summit commitment to raise $250 billion for trade finance.



4         Data description

Since our interest is in understanding how source-country differences in the severity of the credit crunch
affected trade performance, we examine US import flows in what follows. We use monthly data for a
three-year window, starting in November 2006. It is helpful to have the data start before 2007, as the
problems in the US subprime mortgage market were already becoming apparent in the second half of
2007. Our sample ends in October 2009, amid signs of a steady recovery in trade flows (Figure 1).13
         We require a measure of credit conditions across countries as our key explanatory variable. In prin-
ciple, a direct measure of the cost of trade financing, such as the rates charged on export credit lines or
insurance, would be ideal. Such data are unfortunately not readily available for a large sample of coun-
tries. For example, the IMF and World Bank surveys cited above suffer from limitations in country and
time coverage, as well as potential difficulties in the cross-country comparability of the credit instruments
for which rates are quoted.
         In the absence of systematic information on trade financing costs, we appeal instead to a broader
measure of the cost of external finance in the economy. We use the interbank lending rate as a measure
of the tightness of prevailing credit conditions in each country over time. These interbank rates are
the interest rates that commercial banks charge each other for short-term loans of a pre-set duration
(typically: overnight, one month, or three months), which allow banks to adjust their liquidity positions
and meet reserve requirements. More generally, the interbank rate has come to be seen as a benchmark
for the overall cost of credit in the economy, as other loans such as housing mortgage rates often take their
cue from it. During the recent crisis, the interbank rate was a closely-watched indicator that exhibited
co-movements with the level of financial stress that the corporate sector was experiencing: Spikes in the
interbank rate coincided with a drop in firms’ ability to access external capital through the commercial
paper market in North America and Europe, while the converse movements were observed as the crisis
eased over time (Keogh 2008, Freilich and McGeever 2009, Brunnermeier 2009).14 To the extent that
    13
     While the Census Bureau typically posts the trade data within 3 months, it periodically updates past data, presumably
as more precise figures become available. Any such revisions are minor, typically not exceeding 1% of the trade value initially
reported. We view this as part of the standard noise in our regression models.
  14
     For our purposes, it would naturally be preferable to have a measure of the cost of borrowing such as commercial paper
rates that reflects the default risk specific to firms, as opposed to that of banks. Such data are unfortunately not available
for a wide set of countries, especially since commercial paper tends to be used as a primary means for firms to raise capital
in North America and select European markets.



                                                              7
the interbank rate is a noisy measure of the actual cost of trade financing to exporting firms, it would
introduce measurement error and bias our estimation results downwards.
      There are two further reasons why we may in fact underestimate the true impact of financial distress
on trade flows by using the interbank borrowing rate. First, the lending terms we observe are for contracts
that actually took place. Since financial transactions that did not occur would have presumably cleared
at higher interest rates, the actual cost of capital for the marginal exporter would likely have been even
higher. Second, survey and anecdotal evidence indicate that at the height of the crisis, credit tightening
manifested itself in both higher costs of credit and limited availability of external financing, both of which
would hamper firms’ ability to export. We unfortunately cannot evaluate the impact of credit rationing,
given the absence of systematic data on loan quantities across countries and over time. Our results using
the interbank rate can thus be seen as providing a lower bound for the combined effect of both margins
of credit tightening.
      In practice, at any given time, interest rates may differ across individual interbank contracts, de-
pending for example on the perceived credit-worthiness of the borrowing institution. That said, these
rates have historically exhibited a high correlation across lending banks within a country, particularly in
developed economies where the banking industry is competitive. In some countries, banking associations
and even the central bank will quote a reference rate that reflects prevailing conditions in the interbank
market, which then serves as a benchmark for the cost of borrowing in that economy. A well-known ex-
ample is the London Interbank Offer Rate (LIBOR), which is reported each business day by the British
Bankers’ Association (BBA). Reflecting this reality, the Thomson Reuters Datastream database which
we use can contain more than one interbank rate series for a country, even for loans of the same duration.
For each country, we opted first to use a series quoted by the country’s central bank. If this was not
available, we then turned to rates reported by banking associations or regulatory bodies, such as the
BBA, European Banking Federation (FBE), or Financial Markets Association (ACI). In the absence of
such sources, we then chose finally to use an interbank rate quoted by a major commercial bank.
      For our baseline results, we use the one-month (or thirty-day) interbank rate, to be consistent with the
typical duration needed to complete an international trade shipment. Our results are extremely similar
when we instead use the three-month (or ninety-day) rate, as the various rates are highly correlated.
We average the interbank rate quoted across business days to obtain a monthly measure of the cost of
credit in each country. In all, Datastream provides information on interbank rates for a sample of 31
economies. While this may not be a particularly large number of countries, it nevertheless covers most
of the US’ key trading partners and up to 72% of total US manufacturing imports in 2007.15 The sample
also contains a broad spectrum of countries in terms of levels of economic and financial development,
 15
      The three largest US trade partners by import value that are missing from our sample are Mexico, Israel, and Korea.



                                                             8
including most of the OECD, several key emerging markets (Romania, Hungary) and some small open
economies (Singapore, Hong Kong). We do not view the lack of coverage of developing countries as a
major problem, as the interbank rate is likely a poorer indicator of the cost of credit in countries where
the banking sector and interbank market are generally less developed.
   Figure 2 and Appendix Table 1 illustrate the evolution of the one-month interbank rate during our
sample period. Borrowing rates typically peaked in mid to late 2008 in most major economies. This
reflects the rising cost of private credit as banks became extremely averse to lending and preferred
instead to shore up their capital positions. Lending rates spiked in September 2008, when Lehman
Brothers collapsed and AIG failed. Credit conditions only began easing in November 2008, in response
to the broad range of extraordinary monetary policy moves deployed by central banks around the world
to bolster liquidity. These successfully lowered the interbank cost of borrowing from a median in our
sample of 4.66% (September 2008) to 0.44% (October 2009).

                                           [Figure 2 about here.]

   Beneath this broad trend, there are important differences in the time paths of the interbank rate
across countries. This reflects differences in the severity and timing of the credit crunch, as well as the
extent to which policy interventions were successful at easing credit conditions. In countries such as
Germany and Bulgaria, the interbank rate was on a steady upward trend before an abrupt reversal in
October and November 2008. In contrast, interbank rates were declining from a much earlier date in
Canada and Singapore, where central bankers intervened earlier to cope with the impending downturn.
In China, there was a spike in the cost of credit in the latter half of 2007, well before the height of the crisis
in the US and Europe. As for Japan, although interbank rates there also crept up during the financial
crisis and fell back again as monetary easing commenced in the last quarter of 2008, they were always
very low and never climbed above the 1% level. This cross-country variation in the (policy-induced)
declines in the cost of credit will be crucial to our empirical strategy for estimating the importance of
credit conditions for international trade.
   Our empirical strategy further exploits differences in the sensitivity to credit availability across sec-
tors. We follow closely the prior literature in constructing three such variables of industry financial
vulnerability. External finance dependence (EXT F IN ) is measured as the fraction of total capital ex-
penditure not financed by internal cash flows from operations, and reflects firms’ requirements for outside
capital (Rajan and Zingales 1998). Access to (buyer-supplier) trade credit (T CRED) is calculated as
the ratio of the change in accounts payable over the change in total assets, and indicates how much
credit firms receive in lieu of having to make upfront or spot payments (Fisman and Love 2003). In
principle, the availability of such trade credit provides a potential substitute to formal trade financing.
Note that while EXT F IN proxies for firms’ long-term needs for external finance, T CRED relates to

                                                        9
their short-term working capital requirements. Finally, asset tangibility (T AN G) is constructed as the
share of net plant, property and equipment in total book-value assets. This captures firms’ ability to
pledge collateral in securing external finance (Braun 2003, Claessens and Laeven 2003).
   To construct each of these variables, we use data on all publicly-traded firms in Compustat North
America. We first calculate financial vulnerability at the firm level as an average measure over the
1996-2005 period. This pre-dates the crisis, so that its impact on firm behavior does not contaminate
the measures. We then use the median value across firms in each NAICS 3-digit category as the sector
measure of EXT F IN , T CRED and T AN G, respectively. Appendix Table 2 lists these values and
provides some summary statistics for the 21 industries in our data.
   These three variables are widely viewed as technologically-determined characteristics of a sector which
are innate to the manufacturing process and exogenous from the perspective of an individual firm. This
is corroborated by the relative stability of these measures over time and their much greater variation
across industries than among firms within a given industry. The value of these sector characteristics
may in principle differ across countries, but we construct them using US data. This is motivated by
three considerations. First, similar firm-level data are not systematically available for a broad range
of countries. Second, the US has one of the most advanced financial systems, recent developments
notwithstanding, and the behavior of US firms thus likely reflects an optimal choice over external financing
and asset structure. Finally, our empirical strategy requires only that the relative rank ordering of the
industries remain stable across countries, even if the precise magnitudes may vary.
   As is standard in the literature on trade and finance, the sector measures we use are based on firms’
overall financing decisions and asset composition. While they are not available specifically for activities
related to international trade, we argue that they are nevertheless appropriate proxies for three reasons,
which we illustrate for the case of external finance dependence. First, firms need to incur the same
production costs in manufacturing for the foreign market as in manufacturing for the home country, and
these production costs often constitute a large share of the total cost of exporting. Second, products
which entail a lot of R&D, marketing research and distribution fixed costs at home plausibly also require
similarly large fixed costs for product customization, marketing and distribution in foreign markets. Both
of these factors imply that whatever forces a firm in a particular industry to fund its domestic operations
with outside finance will also force it to use external capital for its sales abroad. Finally, the empirical
measure is based on data for all publicly listed companies in the US. Since these companies are typically
large exporters, EXT F IN measures their total requirement for external finance, and not just that for
their domestic activities. Similar arguments can be made for the sector measures of trade credit intensity
and asset tangibility. Ultimately, what is important for identifying the effects of credit conditions on
trade flows is the relative rank ordering of sectors in terms of financial vulnerability. As long as this rank


                                                     10
ordering is similar for domestic sales and exporting, the sector indicators we use will reflect it.
    The Data Appendix describes all other control variables used in the empirical analysis.



5    Effects of credit conditions across countries and sectors

We examine how credit conditions affected trade flows during the global financial crisis in three steps.
We first show that countries with higher interbank rates exported relatively less in financially vulnerable
sectors, and that this effect intensified during the peak crisis months. Exploiting the variation across
countries and sectors in this way allows us to isolate the effect of credit conditions from that of other
potential confounding factors. Next, we document that at the country level, a higher interbank rate was
indeed associated with lower exports to the US during the crisis period, but not in the months before or
after it. Together, these two steps allow us to gauge the magnitude of the effect that credit conditions
had on the level and sectoral composition of trade flows.
    In this section, we undertake the first of these steps, and study the differential effect of the crisis
across exporting countries with varying levels of credit tightness and across sectors with varying levels
of financial vulnerability. We explore the three sector characteristics that reflect firms’ sensitivity to the
cost of external capital: dependence on external finance (EXT F IN ), access to trade credit (T CRED),
and endowment of tangible assets (T AN G). Focusing on one sector measure at a time, for example
EXT F IN , we estimate the following specification:

               ln Yikt = β1 IBrateit × EXT F INk + β2 Dcrisis × IBrateit × EXT F INk

                              +Dit + Dkt + Dik + ikt                                                     (1)

where Yikt is the value of US imports from country i in sector k, and IBrateit is the interbank rate
in that exporting country during month t. We report standard errors clustered by country, to allow
for correlated idiosyncratic shocks at the exporter level. Similar results obtain under clustering at the
country-industry level instead (available on request).
    We define Dcrisis as a binary variable equal to 1 from September 2008 to August 2009, which we refer
to as the crisis period. We date the start of this crisis period to a key month (September 2008) marked
by several major financial institution failures and bailouts, including Lehman Brothers and AIG, that
triggered a sharp escalation in the global credit crunch. On the other hand, trade flows were on a steady
recovery path by the second half of 2009. We thus designate August 2009 as the last month for the crisis
dummy, one year after its onset. That said, our intention is not to provide a canonical dating for the
end of the crisis; our results are similar if we allow the crisis dummy to stretch to the last month in our
sample (October 2009).


                                                     11
       The main variables of interest are the double and triple interaction terms.                   The coefficient on
IBrateit × EXT F INk estimates the effect of fluctuations in countries’ cost of capital over time on the
sectoral composition of their exports. We expect that countries may export relatively less in financially
dependent sectors when they experience higher interbank rates, namely β1 < 0. Given the extensive set
of fixed effects used in the regression (see the discussion below), β1 is identified from the variation in
financial dependence across industries within a given country-month, the variation in the cost of credit
across exporting countries in a given industry-month, and the variation in the cost of credit over time
within a given country-sector.
       The triple interaction term (Dcrisis × IBrateit × EXT F INk ) in turn tests whether the sensitivity of
financially vulnerable sectors to the cost of capital intensified during the crisis period. Equivalently, β2
establishes whether any negative effect of the crisis on exports was not only stronger in countries with
tighter credit markets, but also concentrated on the most financially dependent sectors in those countries.
We thus anticipate that β2 < 0. Conceptually, β2 reports the difference between the crisis-driven change
in exports of a country with tight credit markets in a financially dependent sector versus a financially
less dependent sector, and compares that to the same difference for a country with lower interbank rates.
       Importantly, we condition on an extensive set of fixed effects to guard against omitted variables
bias. First, we include industry-month pair fixed effects, Dkt . Among other things, these control for
fluctuations in sector-specific import demand in the US, for any time-series variation in the availability
of trade financing in the US, and for monthly seasonality in the trade data. Note also that these fixed
effects subsume the average effect of the crisis on US bilateral imports (the main effect of Dcrisis ), and
any differential effect that the crisis had on sectors at different levels of financial dependence (Dcrisis ×
EXT F INk ).16
       We further control for country-month fixed effects, Dit . These take into account the impact of shocks
to aggregate production and credit conditions in each exporting country over time, as well as bilateral
exchange rate fluctuations. They also accommodate the possibility that the financial crisis affected
exports differentially across countries with varying degrees of credit tightness, which would have entered
as Dcrisis × IBrateit had country-month fixed effects been excluded.
       Finally, we incorporate country-industry fixed effects, Dik . These account for time-invariant sources
of comparative advantage that affect the average pattern of country exports across sectors. In particular,
they control for the comparative advantage that countries with lower interbank rates might have in
financially dependent sectors on average.
  16
    If consumers also need to borrow, sectors’ dependence on external capital on the consumption side may in principle be
correlated with sectors’ dependence on external capital on the production side. The Dkt ’s, however, control for US consumer
demand by sector and month, including consumers’ ability to finance such demand. The triple interaction thus isolates the
trade effect of credit conditions on the production side, in the exporting country.




                                                            12
   It should be emphasized that this estimation approach provides a very stringent test. The set of fixed
effects included is exhaustive in that only explanatory variables that simultaneously vary by country,
industry and month can be estimated. This significantly allays concerns regarding omitted variables and
alternative explanations. Consider, for instance, the possibility that the interbank rate might capture
the effect of some other unobserved country characteristic which was the actual driving force behind the
impact of the crisis on trade flows. This could rationalize why countries with higher interbank rates may
have seen their export levels decline during the crisis (an effect implicitly controlled for with the country-
month fixed effects). It could not, however, easily explain why the crisis exerted a disproportionately
large effect on financially vulnerable industries in such countries.

5.1   Core results

The results from estimating equation (1) are presented in Table 2. As anticipated, we find that countries
with higher interbank rates tend to export relatively less in sectors with a greater requirement for external
finance (β1 < 0), although this is not precisely estimated (Column 1). Of note, this effect intensified
significantly during the crisis period (β2 < 0, Column 2, significant at the 10% level).

                                          [Table 2 about here.]

   We obtain similar results when considering the variation in sectors’ access to trade credit (T CRED).
On the one hand, trade credit that is extended by upstream suppliers or downstream buyers in lieu of cash
in advance or spot payments can offer firms a substitute for formal bank loans. If one’s business partners
are willing and able to continue extending trade credit despite developments in the financial sector, this
would suggest that industries with greater routine access to trade credit would be more resilient in the
face of high costs of trade financing. On the other hand, it is possible that the willingness to extend
trade credit may have dried up as a result of the general liquidity crunch. If so, trade credit may have
diminished during the crisis period, with a more severe export contraction witnessed in countries with
higher interbank rates, where both formal and informal credit would presumably have been hit harder.
   The results in Columns 4 and 5 point strongly to the former interpretation. Countries with high
interbank rates exported relatively more in sectors with greater access to trade credit, and this effect
became more pronounced during the crisis period (β2 > 0, significant at the 1% level). This result is
not inconsistent with the anecdotal evidence of a collapse in overall financing during the crisis for two
reasons. First, our measure of T CRED is based on firms’ use of trade credit in 1996-2005, before the
crisis began. Second, and more importantly, our identification relies on the technologically-determined
variation in this measure across sectors. Fisman and Love (2003) have shown that the relative ranking of
sectors is similar when T CRED is computed using firm-level data from different decades. This suggests



                                                     13
that the ranking of sectors by T CRED would likely remain stable even when the level of total trade
credit available, and presumably that available in each sector, drops.
   Finally, we consider sectors’ endowment of tangible assets (T AN G) as an inverse proxy for financial
vulnerability. Since industries characterized with more hard assets can in principle offer greater collateral
to secure a loan, such sectors should be less sensitive to adverse credit conditions. We thus expect the
signs of the coefficients to be reversed compared to the results obtained with EXT F IN . Indeed, we
find that countries with higher interbank rates posted a better export performance in sectors intensive
in tangible assets (Column 7). Moreover, this comparative advantage was markedly stronger during the
financial crisis (Column 8, β2 > 0, significant at the 1% level).
   Note that our results are consistent with Levchenko et al. (2010), who find weaker evidence for the
role of trade credit in explaining sector-level trade flows during the crisis. Their analysis focuses on
the cross-industry variation in access to trade credit. By contrast, we exploit both this cross-industry
variation, as well as the cross-country variation in the cost of formal bank financing to uncover the role
of T CRED. In addition, while they examine the annual change in trade between the second quarter
of 2008 and the second quarter of 2009, we analyze the substantial movements in export patterns and
credit conditions at the monthly frequency. Our findings thus suggest that the differential response of
trade flows across countries and sectors, as well as the rapid unfolding of the crisis, are important factors
for identifying the effects of credit conditions on cross-border activity.

5.2   Sensitivity analysis

While the extensive set of fixed effects in equation (1) go a long way towards mitigating concerns about
omitted variables, we nevertheless perform a series of robustness tests.
   We first confirm that our results are not driven by cross-country differences in factor endowments
which may affect the pattern of export specialization. Specifically, we interact countries’ initial physical
and human capital per worker (log(K/L)i and log(H/L)i ) respectively with measures of industry factor
intensities (log(k/l)k and log(h/l)k ), as well as with the crisis dummy. This is in the spirit of Romalis
(2004), who finds that skill-abundant countries tend to export more in skill-intensive industries (likewise
with physical capital). The only difference here is that we allow the strength of such factor-endowment
motives for trade to change during the crisis. Since the double interaction terms between country en-
dowments and industry factor intensities are subsumed by the country-industry fixed effects, we control
only for the triple interaction terms, Dcrisis × log(K/L)i × log(k/l)k and Dcrisis × log(H/L)i × log(h/l)k .
   We also allow for the possibility that our measure of the cost of capital, IBrate, may be correlated
with and thus picking up the effect of country size or overall level of development. To do so, we include
the triple interactions of an initial measure of country GDP with Dcrisis and a full set of industry fixed



                                                     14
effects. We also condition on a similar set of triple interactions based on initial country GDP per capita.
(Once again, the double interactions of initial GDP and GDP per capita with industry fixed effects are
subsumed by the Dik ’s.)
   Even with these controls for the role of country endowments, size and income, our main findings on
the importance of credit conditions continue to hold. The triple interaction coefficients for EXT F IN
and T CRED remain highly significant in Columns 3 and 6 (Table 2). While that for T AN G is no
longer statistically significant in Column 9, its point estimate retains the same sign and magnitude. In
the tables that follow, we will report specifications that include this extended set of factor endowment,
country size and income controls; the results are similar if these auxiliary controls are taken out.
   Our findings are also robust to accounting for a number of particularities of our country sample, as
shown in Table 3. Columns 1, 4 and 7 report results treating the Euro-zone member countries as one
cluster when computing the robust standard errors, for each of the three sector measures of financial
vulnerability respectively. This helps to address the concern that interbank rates in the Euro zone track
each other very closely because of the common monetary policy regime, so that the interbank rate obser-
vations from individual Euro-zone countries cannot be regarded as strictly independent. Reassuringly,
our findings are unaffected by this correction. Columns 2, 5 and 8 confirm the stability of our results
to removing the country with the highest interbank rates in the sample (Turkey). Columns 3, 6 and 9
likewise show that there is no substantial change when we exclude the economy with the lowest inter-
bank rates (Japan), which also exhibits the smallest movements in IBrate over the sample period. In
unreported regressions, we have further found that our conclusions hold when we drop the petroleum
and coal products industry, this being the key sector for which price changes contributed more to the
decline in US imports than quantity adjustments.

                                         [Table 3 about here.]

   Our results also obtain under different assumptions about the timing of the crisis period and with
alternative interbank rate measures (Table 4). Under each financial vulnerability measure, the first
column dates the start of the crisis to March 2008, the month of the Bear Stearns collapse, instead of
September 2008. The second column lags the interbank rate by one month to account for the possibility
that firms need to borrow in advance of the export delivery date. Finally, the third column uses the
three-month instead of the one-month interbank rate. Our findings hold in all of these specifications
with estimates of comparable magnitudes and levels of statistical significance, with the exception of the
coefficients for T AN G which are less precisely estimated.

                                         [Table 4 about here.]

   To summarize, countries with higher interbank rates and hence worse credit conditions recorded lower

                                                    15
exports in financially vulnerable sectors, and this effect was more pronounced at the height of the crisis.
Recall that over the course of the crisis period, interbank rates were generally decreasing as policies to ease
the credit crunch took effect. Our findings thus highlight the contrast in cross-sector export performance
that arose from the variation in the extent to which policies succeeded in lowering interbank rates in
different countries. Note also that our results are particularly strong for T CRED in both quantitative
and qualitative terms. This suggests that at the short-run monthly frequency, firms’ access to trade
credit matters more for the sensitivity of their exports to credit conditions relative to firms’ long-term
external capital requirements and their availability of collateral. This is corroborated by Appendix Table
3, which reports joint tests including interactions with all three sector measures of financial vulnerability
in the same regression. The signs and magnitudes of the point estimates obtained are similar to those in
Table 2. However, while the coefficients for T CRED remain statistically significant, those for EXT F IN
and T AN G report larger standard errors. This likely reflects the fact that the coefficients are identified
from the variation in three sector characteristics across a relatively small number of 21 industries.
   In results available in a previous working paper version, we have also found that higher pre-crisis
levels of financial development mitigated the adverse effects of the crisis. In particular, the exports of
countries with stronger initial financial institutions (as measured by private credit as a share of GDP)
were more resilient to the crisis in financially vulnerable sectors. It thus appears that both long-term
institutional features of the financial system, as well as short-term fluctuations in the cost of capital, did
influence the trade impact of the financial crisis.

5.3   An illustration of the short-run effects of credit conditions

Our main estimating equation (1) assumes that the crisis resulted in a one-time stepwise change in trade
patterns. To illustrate how the effect of credit conditions on trade flows evolved as the financial crisis
unfolded, we next relax this assumption and employ a more flexible regression specification:
                             M
                             X
                 ln Yikt =         βm Dm × IBrateit × EXT F INk + Dit + Dkt + Dik + ikt                   (2)
                             m=1

This allows the effect of credit conditions on the composition of exports to vary non-linearly over time,
by using a full set of month dummies, Dm (equal to 1 in month m) instead of the crisis indicator, and
interacting each Dm with the product of the interbank rate in country i in month t and the external
finance dependence of industry k. The Dit , Dkt and Dik are country-month, industry-month, and country-
industry fixed effects as before.
   We plot the βm coefficients estimated from (2) against time in Figure 3A. Figures 3B and 3C present
similar graphs from using T CRED and T AN G respectively. In each figure, the dotted lines indicate the
90% confidence intervals of each βm coefficient. Two linear regression trend lines for the βm ’s are also


                                                      16
shown, for the pre- and post-September 2008 periods.

                                         [Figure 3 about here.]

   Two patterns stand out. First, despite some month-to-month volatility, the coefficients on the inter-
actions with EXT F IN are almost always negative, while those with T CRED and T AN G are almost
always positive. This reinforces our earlier conclusion that countries with higher interbank rates export
systematically less in financially vulnerable sectors that require more external finance, enjoy less access
to trade credit, or have few collateralizable assets.
   Second, all three figures clearly indicate that the importance of credit conditions for the composition
of exports increased dramatically as the crisis deepened. There is a pronounced break right around
September 2008, the month we use as the start date for Dcrisis in our earlier analysis. This is consistent
with the core results from the more parsimonious specification in (1).
   Figure 3 naturally raises the question whether the severe and rapid crisis of 2008-2009 will have long-
lasting consequences for trade patterns. Put simply, will the global economy transition to a new steady
state in which trade finance becomes a more important determinant of export patterns? Or will the
relevance of credit conditions for trade ease off once this crisis is decisively behind us? Figure 3 suggests
that EXT F IN became progressively more important for the sectoral composition of trade as the crisis
unfolded, but also that T CRED and T AN G became less salient over time. Based on this, we cannot
conclusively determine whether the crisis has permanently raised the importance of credit channels of
comparative advantage, and a complete verdict will have to await the availability of more data.

5.4   Decomposing the interbank rate

While we have so far been using the interbank rate as a proxy for the cost of capital, this can in turn be
written as the sum of two components: (i) a baseline short-term lending rate, such as the rate on three-
month treasury bills; and (ii) the spread between the interbank rate and this baseline rate. Conceptually,
the former reflects the baseline risk of systemic default in the financial system. On the other hand, the
spread captures the premium required to additionally compensate lenders for the risk of default that is
specific to interbank loans, and by extension to the commercial banking system. The finance literature
has often measured credit conditions with this interbank spread, as it has historically widened when the
perceived risk of bank default increased during periods of adverse credit or banking conditions.
   In our benchmark analysis, we have used the interbank rate rather than the spread as the former in
principle captures the total cost of capital that exporting firms have to incur. Moreover, to the extent that
the countries in our sample are well-integrated financially, creditors around the world would presumably
have access to the same baseline sovereign debt instrument, namely US treasuries. The spread would
then be equal to the local interbank rate less that paid on three-month US treasury bills, otherwise known

                                                        17
as the TED spread.17 But since the US treasury bill rate does not differ across exporting countries, its
effect would already be fully absorbed in the estimation of (1) by the industry-month dummies. Given
these fixed effects, we would in fact not be able to empirically disentangle the role of the interbank rate
from that of the spread.
       Notwithstanding these considerations, if borrowers in some countries lack ready access to US sovereign
debt instruments, then the relevant spread measure should arguably be calculated using a local treasury
bill rate. In this case, we can check which component of the overall cost of capital, namely the baseline
treasury rate or the interbank spread, drives our baseline results. To this end, we use data on local
three-month treasury bill rates from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics, supplemented with
information for missing countries from Global Financial Data.18 In all, data on local treasury rates are
available for 21 out of the 31 countries in our sample. This incomplete country coverage is an important
caveat to consider when interpreting our results here, as it may reduce the precision of our estimates.
       Table 5 presents the results from re-estimating (1) using either local treasury bill rates or the spread
between countries’ interbank and treasury bill rates in place of our key IBrate explanatory variable.
For each sector measure of financial vulnerability, we consistently find statistically significant effects that
enter with the right predicted sign when using the baseline treasury bill rate (Columns 1, 3, 5). By
contrast, the coefficients for the interbank spread are always imprecisely estimated (Columns 2, 4, 6).
Together, these results indicate that changes in the baseline risk of systemic default were more important
for the decline in trade flows than risks captured specifically by the interbank spread.

                                               [Table 5 about here.]

       These findings are not surprising upon closer inspection of the time series correlation between the
interbank rate, the local three-month treasury rate and the interbank spread. The raw correlation between
the interbank rate and the local treasury bill rate in the panel is 0.98, while that between IBrate and
the spread is a much smaller 0.18. For the mean country in our sample, the former correlation is 0.93
in the time series, with a tight standard deviation of 0.07 across countries. By contrast, the time-series
correlation between the interbank rate and the spread is 0.24 for the average economy, and varies from
−0.26 to 0.62.19 The much tighter correlation between IBrate and the treasury rate indicates that the
overall cost of capital was driven more by the baseline risk of default during this recent crisis. Our
analysis would have missed out an important component of the cost of credit had we focused instead on
the spread as a proxy for credit conditions.
  17
     A commonly quoted TED spread is the London interbank offer rate (LIBOR) less the rate on three-month US treasuries.
  18
     We took care to exclude countries in the IMF International Financial Statistics for which the reported treasury rates
were not explicitly for a three-month maturity. For the Global Financial Data, we took the average of daily closing rates to
calculate a monthly measure.
  19
     The correlation between the three-month treasury rate and the interbank spread was even lower, varying from −0.78 to
0.26 and averaging −0.05 across the countries.


                                                            18
5.5   Effects on trade vs. production

Our primary interest has been in the effect of the financial crisis on trade flows via the credit channel.
It is nevertheless useful to ask whether this effect holds over and above that on domestic output. To the
extent that both domestic producers and exporters incur the same costs in developing and manufacturing
a product, they may be equally hurt by credit conditions. But exporters may be affected more because
of the additional costs they bear that are specific to production for and shipping to foreign markets.
   To explore this issue, we would ideally like to control on the right-hand side of (1) for each exporting
country’s sector-level industrial production at the monthly frequency. Such data are unfortunately not
available for a large number of economies. Instead, we control for the monthly log industrial production
index (IPI) in each sending country interacted with a full set of industry fixed effects. We also include
the corresponding triple interactions with the crisis dummy. In this way we account as best we can
for the overall effect of aggregate production on trade flows, while allowing the strength of this effect
to vary freely across sectors, as well as during the crisis period. There are however two limitations to
this approach: First, output fluctuations across different industries need not be proportional to those in
aggregate production. Second, the IPI is not available for all the countries in our sample, so we face the
potential problem of a loss of precision once again.
   Bearing in mind these caveats, Table 6 does suggest that credit conditions had more severe reper-
cussions for international trade than for domestic output. While the point estimates for EXT F IN and
T AN G remain largely unchanged, they are now less precisely estimated. The findings for T CRED, on
the other hand, remain statistically and economically significant. This suggests that rising costs of capital
had a larger effect on the pattern of trade than on the pattern of production, a conclusion which dovetails
with the larger decline in trade flows relative to GDP reported in Freund (2009) and Levchenko et al.
(2010). It is also consistent with the firm-level evidence in Amiti and Weinstein (2009) and Bricongne et
al. (2010) that financial crises distort cross-border activity more than domestic transactions. In the same
spirit but using country-level data for economies in steady state, Manova (2008b) finds that financial
development allows countries to export relatively more in financially dependent sectors even controlling
for domestic output by sector.

                                         [Table 6 about here.]

5.6   Teasing out the mechanisms

What might explain the intensification of credit channels of comparative advantage during the crisis pe-
riod? Recall from Figure 2 that the time path of interbank rates exhibits a fair amount of variation across
countries, so that IBrate is not collinear with the crisis dummy, Dcrisis . Our results therefore cannot be
attributed simply to a non-linear effect of the cost of capital on export performance. We consider instead

                                                       19
two potential explanations why countries with higher interbank rates may have experienced larger falls
in their exports during the crisis, especially in financially vulnerable sectors.
       First, the crisis period was marked by a sharp decline in the demand for imported final goods as
households took a hit in their real estate and financial asset values. The prospect of job insecurity also
dampened consumer sentiment. Producers in turn scaled down their output plans, prompting a reduction
in the demand for imported intermediate inputs. While non-durable goods and services may have been
more resilient, demand for imported manufactures as a whole collapsed. The anticipated decline in US
market sales would have made it more difficult for foreign firms to raise trade financing to cover their
fixed upfront costs, given that these firms would require sufficiently large export revenues to guarantee
lenders a high enough expected return. Faced with tighter credit conditions, both the number of firms
exporting from each country to the US, as well as the value of each firm’s exports would contract in
response to a sharp decline in US demand. This contraction would be amplified in countries with high
interbank rates, and felt most acutely in financially vulnerable sectors.20
       An alternative explanation recognizes that exporting firms may access trade financing not only in
their home country, but also in their destination market. Exporters may directly obtain bank loans in
the destination country, or receive trade credit that its import partner firm raises in its local market.
It is thus possible that US imports fell because exporters found it more difficult to secure financing in
the US during the crisis period. If exporters indeed depend on US credit markets, then adverse credit
conditions in the US would be particularly burdensome on firms based in countries where external credit
is limited, especially those firms engaged in financially vulnerable sectors. This interpretation raises the
possibility that financial turmoil in one country can amplify the effect of credit tightening in its trade
partners.21
       To explore these two explanations, we re-estimate equation (1) using proxies for US final goods
demand and US credit supply conditions in place of the crisis dummy, Dcrisis . We use monthly data
on log retail sales in the US from the US Census Bureau to measure movements in final goods demand.
As an indicator of the availability of external finance in the US, we take the log value of US business
and commercial loans extended by financial institutions in each month, from Federal Reserve releases.
Since we expect higher demand or credit supply levels in the US to mitigate the effects of adverse credit
conditions in exporting countries, we anticipate the triple interactions with these variables to both enter
with the opposite sign to those with Dcrisis . Finding significant coefficients for the interactions with
retail sales or business loans would then provide support for one or both of the above explanations.
However, to the extent that these variables are imperfect measures, we may not be able to entirely reject
  20
     This logic can be formalized using a model with credit constraints and firm heterogeneity, as in Manova (2008a).
  21
     This is consistent with the theory and evidence in Manova (2008a), Antràs et al. (2009) and Manova et al. (2009) that
foreign portfolio flows and foreign direct investment can compensate for underdeveloped domestic financial markets.



                                                            20
a mechanism based on insignificant coefficients.
    The evidence in Table 7 suggests that the sharp drop in US demand was more decisive than tighter
US loan supply in explaining why exports to the US became particularly sensitive to credit conditions at
the height of the crisis. While countries with higher interbank rates on average exported less in sectors
more reliant on external finance, this distortion was alleviated during months of stronger demand in the
US (Column 1). On the other hand, reductions in US loan supply did not seem to intensify the impact
of credit conditions in the sending country (Column 2). These conclusions are further confirmed by
the horse-race in Column 3: When we include interactions with both US demand and US credit supply
in the same regression, the former continues to play a statistically significant role, while the latter no
longer does. Qualitatively similar patterns obtain when we instead consider the variation across sectors
with different access to trade credit, although the results are weaker with our final financial vulnerability
variable, T AN G.22

                                                 [Table 7 about here.]

    In our working paper version, we also pursued an alternative approach to evaluate the role of credit
availability in the destination country. Instead of examining US imports, we considered US exports
by destination country and sector as the outcome variable. We regressed it on the interactions of the
interbank rate in the importing market with sectors’ financial dependence and the crisis dummy. The
largely insignificant effects we found offer further suggestive evidence that the cost of capital at the export
dock is substantially more important for trade activity than that in the importing country.



6     Level effects of credit conditions on trade flows

The econometric approach in Section 5 exploits the variation in financial vulnerability across sectors,
and permits the inclusion of a demanding set of fixed effects. This alleviates concerns regarding omitted
variables, and allows us to isolate a plausibly causal effect of credit conditions on trade flows during
the financial crisis. However, it precludes an evaluation of the level effect of credit conditions. We now
examine this level effect, so that we can later quantify the impact of credit conditions during the crisis
on overall trade volumes.
  22
     We have also run specifications in which the triple interaction with the US final demand and/or credit supply proxies
enter together with the triple interaction using the crisis dummy (available on request). The crisis dummy term generally
tends to be more robustly significant than the US retail sales and/or business loans interactions, with the latter two often
losing statistical significance. In particular, this means either that our US final demand proxies are relatively noisy variables
or that the US final demand story does not fully explain the intensification during the crisis period.




                                                               21
6.1    Cross-country estimation

We first study the impact of the crisis on trade flows across exporting countries with varying levels of
the cost of capital. In particular, we estimate the following:

                             ln Yikt = γ1 IBrateit + γ2 Dcrisis × IBrateit + Dkt + ikt                                 (3)

As before, Yikt and IBrateit are respectively the value of US imports from country i in industry k
and the interbank rate in that country during month t. Dcrisis is again a binary variable equal to 1
between September 2008 and August 2009. We include industry-month fixed effects which subsume the
average effect of the crisis on US sectoral imports. These also control for fluctuations in sector-specific
US import demand, as well as for monthly seasonality in the data. We further condition on the log
monthly-averaged nominal bilateral exchange rate with the US dollar (log EXCHit ) and its interaction
with the crisis dummy (Dcrisis × log EXCHit ), to account for any effects that exchange rate movements
may have had on trade flows. These can now be identified because we do not include country-month fixed
effects in the regression.23 We report standard errors clustered by country, but the results are similar
when clustering by country-industry.
    The coefficients of interest, γ1 and γ2 , are now identified from the variation in the cost of capital
across exporting countries in a given month and sector. The main effect of IBrateit thus establishes the
extent to which countries with cheaper credit are able to export more to the US. The interaction term
in turn identifies the impact of credit tightness on trade flows at the height of the crisis.
    As Table 8 documents, countries with lower interbank rates systematically exported more to the US
(Column 1). This effect is statistically significant at the 10% level, with the point estimate implying
that a one percentage point rise in the cost of bank financing would be associated with approximately a
16% drop in that country’s exports to the US market. This result is consistent with the broader body
of evidence in the prior literature demonstrating that financial frictions constrain firms’ export levels, or
even prevent firms from exporting altogether.

                                               [Table 8 about here.]

    We also find that tight credit conditions became particularly damaging to a country’s exports dur-
ing the crisis. While the point estimate of γ2 is negative but not significant in Column 2, this finding
strengthens considerably when we further control for cross-country differences in per worker factor en-
dowments, GDP and GDP per capita, along with their respective interactions with the crisis dummy
(Columns 3 and 4; γ2 now significant at the 5% level). Column 5 explores the extent to which credit con-
ditions during the crisis were disproportionately damaging for trade flows relative to overall production.
  23
     Our results are not particularly sensitive to this control as exchange rates moved relatively little during this period
compared to the interbank rate and trade volumes. The effect of log EXCHit itself shows up as expected, with a stronger
exporter exchange rate associated with lower exports to the US (results available on request).


                                                            22
We control here for countries’ log industrial production index, as well as its interaction with the crisis
dummy. In contrast to our earlier findings in Section 5.4, we now find weaker evidence that financial
frictions restricted the overall volume of cross-border activity over and above total output.

6.2      Within-country estimation

To what extent were these level effects of the interbank rate also manifest in the within-country experi-
ence? To this end, we consider a more stringent specification that includes country-industry fixed effects
(Dik ). We estimate the following fully saturated model:

                                       ln Yikt = γ1 IBrateit + Dkt + Dik + ikt                                           (4)

The Dik ’s now control for time-invariant determinants of comparative advantage that affect the average
pattern of country exports across sectors, including the average effect that high interbank rates might
have on financially vulnerable sectors. These also control for all other country characteristics that are
relatively stable over time. The coefficient of interest, γ1 , is thus identified purely from the variation in
the cost of capital within countries over time, and abstracts from the variation in the (average) interbank
rate in the cross-section of countries. In practice, we estimate (4) for different subperiods in our sample,
to explore whether the level effect of the interbank rate varied over time. This is similar in spirit to (3),
but slightly more flexible in that it does not impose a stepwise change during the crisis period.
       We report results for the full sample period in the top panel of Table 9. In contrast to our findings
in Table 8 which were based on the cross-country variation in IBrate, we now document a positive
but smaller within-country association between exporting countries’ interbank rates and sales to the US
(Column 1, significant at the 5% level). This result is not driven by movements in the bilateral exchange
rates against the US dollar (Column 2). However, it is not robust to controlling for exporters’ industrial
production index (Column 3). It also does not survive a number of other sensitivity checks, including
treating Europe as a cluster, dropping the petroleum and coal products industry, or lagging the interbank
rate (available on request).24

                                                [Table 9 about here.]

       We next break the sample into three subperiods that correspond to the months before the crisis
unfolded in earnest (November 2006 to August 2008), the most acute stage of the crisis (September 2008
to December 2008), and the remainder of the sample period (January 2009 to October 2009). As the rest
of Table 9 shows, this breakdown allows us to uncover a strong and very robust negative relationship
between a country’s interbank rate and export performance at the very peak of the financial crisis. On
  24
    When we include Dcrisis × IBrateit in this regression for the full sample period, the results are similar to the top panel
in Table 9. Dcrisis × IBrateit typically yields a positive though frequently insignificant coefficient (available on request).


                                                             23
the other hand, no systematic pattern emerges for the periods before or after this peak. (We have
experimented with extending the most acute phase of the crisis, either with an earlier start or a later
end month. The correlation between IBrate and log exports tends to become successively less negative
as we expand this period, before eventually turning positive and insignificant.)
    How should we interpret these results? The prevailing cost of credit in an economy reflects the equilib-
rium between the demand for external capital and the supply of such financing. During normal economic
times, interbank rates tend to be higher during business cycle peaks, reflecting firms’ increased demand
for bank financing in order to service attractive investment and export opportunities. By contrast, during
a period of unusual financial turmoil as was the case during the recent crisis, higher interbank rates likely
capture instead the limited availability of capital. Our results suggest that the latter effect dominated
during the height of the crisis. Since the September through December 2008 months were generally
marked by falling interbank rates as monetary policies were eased, our results imply that countries where
the cost of capital did not fall as much had a worse overall trade performance than countries where
interbank rates fell more substantially.
    It is important to emphasize that these findings do not contradict our earlier results in Table 8. In
particular, the sector-month fixed effects in (3) control for changes in US import demand that affect all
exporting countries equally. The effects of the interbank rate are thus identified primarily from cross-
country differences on the supply side, namely credit availability, and it may indeed be the case that
credit availability was generally higher and export performance stronger in countries with lower average
interbank rates. On the other hand, the additional country-industry fixed effects in (4) ensure that
the effect of the interbank rate in Table 9 is identified from time-series fluctuations in both supply and
demand within each exporting country. Our results in Tables 8 and 9 are also consistent with our findings
on the differential effect of the crisis across sectors in Section 5. Regardless of whether a high interbank
rate is due to strong demand for capital or a shortage of credit supply, firms in financially vulnerable
sectors would be constrained in their ability to expand due to their higher sensitivity to the cost of credit.



7    Interpreting the magnitudes

Sections 5 and 6 provide strong evidence that credit conditions were an important determinant of ag-
gregate trade flows and their sectoral composition during the height of the global financial crisis. These
results reflect the importance of the cost of securing short-term financing, as proxied by the interbank
rate, for exporting activity. In this section, we perform some exercises to gauge the contribution of
changing credit conditions to the overall trade collapse witnessed during the crisis.
    To do so, we use our regression estimates to infer how US imports would have evolved under two



                                                     24
alternative scenarios. First, we evaluate the hypothetical impact on trade had interbank rates remained
at their peak levels of September 2008 throughout the crisis period. We then consider the opposite
extreme, assuming that interbank rates had dropped immediately after September 2008 to their low
levels of August 2009. These two calculations provide rough upper and lower bounds respectively for the
damage that the crisis could have inflicted on trade flows specifically through the credit channel.
   It is tempting to interpret the first scenario as one in which the policy response by monetary authorities
to ease credit conditions was not effective, resulting in persistently high interbank rates. Conversely, the
latter scenario might be viewed as one of exceptionally aggressive policy interventions to lower interbank
rates. We would however caution that our analysis is not a precise policy evaluation. Given the reduced-
form nature of our empirical approach, our point estimates are not strictly adequate for projecting the
general equilibrium effects of policies. We instead view this exercise as providing a ballpark estimate to
make sense of how much credit conditions affected international trade flows.

7.1   Case 1: persistently high cost of credit

We first examine the scenario where the interbank rate in each country remains fixed at its peak September
2008 level through August 2009. To proceed, we use our regression point estimates and the actual
interbank rates to obtain the predicted US imports from each country and sector. We then compare
these against the predicted trade flows under the counterfactual path of interest rates.
   To infer the additional decline in overall trade volumes that would have resulted, we first consider
the estimates from equation (3). Recall that in this specification, the level effect of credit conditions is
estimated primarily from the cross-country variation in the cost of capital. Based on Column 2 of Table
8, we find that the US would have imported 35.2% less from the average country and sector between
September 2008 and August 2009, had interbank rates remained at their elevated September 2008 levels.
   These figures of course rely on a less-restrictive specification. A more conservative estimate of the
trade impact of the crisis can be obtained using equation (4), which was estimated purely from the
within-country movements in the cost of capital over time. Based on Column 2 of the “Sep 08 to Dec
08” panel in Table 9, we find that the crisis would have lowered US imports by an additional 2.5% over
this period had interest rates remained at their peak levels. While this impact is considerably less severe,
it is nevertheless quite sizable when considered against the overall 12% drop in world trade flows for the
whole of 2009. This magnitude is also in line with recent estimates on the firm-level impact of the crisis:
Using French micro data, Bricongne et al. (2010) find that firms which had defaulted on a payment in the
preceding 12 months, and hence presumably had limited access to finance during the crisis, subsequently
saw a 2% worse export performance relative to firms that did not experience such a payments incident.
   Our results naturally point to a more severe impact on trade flows in financially vulnerable sectors. To



                                                    25
quantify the size of these cross-sector effects, we use the estimates from the triple interaction regression
in (1), specifically the estimates from Columns 2, 5 and 8 in Table 2. If all countries’ interbank rates
had stayed at their September 2008 levels until the end of August 2009, US imports would have been
13.4% lower in the most external finance-dependent sector (chemical manufacturing) relative to the least
dependent sector (leather and allied products). Similarly, countries would have exported 16.9% less on
average in the sector with the least availability of trade credit (textiles) relative to the sector with the
greatest access (petroleum and coal products). Finally, trade would have been 17% weaker in the industry
with the lowest share of tangible assets (leather and allied manufacturing) relative to the industry with
the hardest assets (petroleum and coal products).

7.2   Case 2: instantaneous drop in the cost of credit

We next consider the converse scenario, under which the interbank rate in each country drops to its low
August 2009 level immediately after September 2008. To gauge how much higher trade flows would have
been, we once again use our point estimates from the respective regressions described in the previous
subsection. This time, we compare the predicted trade flows under the actual interbank rates to those
under the assumption of permanently low rates after September 2008.
    We conservatively conclude that the 2008-2009 crisis would have hurt overall US imports by 5.5%
less under this scenario (based on the Table 9 specification). Our estimates from the less restrictive
specification that uses the full cross-country variation in credit conditions indicate that this magnitude
may be as high as a 30.5% improvement (based on the Table 8 specification). Once again, trade flows
in financially vulnerable sectors would have benefited disproportionately more from the increased avail-
ability of cheaper external credit. The difference in export performance between the most and least
external capital-dependent industries would have been 8.2%. The corresponding difference when con-
sidering industries’ access to trade credit or endowment of tangible assets would have been a 9.7% gap
(coincidentally equal for both sector measures).
    These hypothetical scenarios provide a sense of the large impact of financial market disturbances on
the real economy. They also indirectly suggest that policy interventions that lowered the cost of capital
were quite important in averting a substantially more severe collapse in trade flows. At the same time,
the effect of the crisis would have been significantly milder had credit conditions improved faster.



8     Conclusion

This paper is one of the first to establish and quantify the effect that credit conditions had on international
trade during the 2008-2009 global financial crisis. Using monthly data on US imports, we find that
countries with higher interbank rates and thus tighter credit conditions exported less to the US during

                                                      26
the crisis period. These effects were especially pronounced in sectors that require extensive external
financing, have limited access to buyer-supplier trade credit, or have few collateralizable assets. In other
words, exports of financially vulnerable industries were more sensitive to the cost of external capital than
exports of less vulnerable industries, and this sensitivity rose during the financial crisis. This impact
of credit conditions on trade flows holds even after controlling as best we can for domestic production,
so that the financial market disruptions mattered for international trade over and above their effect on
output per se.
    Our findings imply that adverse credit conditions played an important role in the transmission of
the effects of the crisis to international trade flows. They also suggest that policy interventions that
contributed towards relaxing the high cost of capital substantially dampened the detrimental impact on
cross-border trade. For example, our most conservative estimates indicate that US imports would have
fallen by about 2.5% more had interest rates persisted at their peak September 2008 levels.
    In sum, our paper provides further evidence of the effect of credit conditions on trade, particularly
during a severe shock to the banking and financial sector. It highlights the potential gains from inter-
ventions targeting access to external finance, and sheds light on the role of such policies in mitigating
the uneven impact of the crisis on trade flows across countries and sectors.



9    References
Alessandria, G., Kaboski, J.P., Midrigan, V., 2010. The great trade collapse of 2008-09: an inventory
   adjustment? IMF Economic Review 58, 254-294.
Amiti, M., Weinstein, D., 2009. Exports and financial shocks. NBER Working Paper 15556.
Antràs, P., Desai, M., Foley, C.F., 2009. Multinational firms, FDI flows and imperfect capital markets.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1171-1219.
Auboin, M., 2009. Boosting the availability of trade finance in the current crisis: background analysis
   for a substantial G20 package. Centre for Economic Policy Research Policy Research No. 35.
Bartelsman, E.J., Becker, R.A., Gray, W.B., 2000. NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database.
Beck, T., 2002. Financial development and international trade: is there a link? Journal of International
   Economics 57, 107-131.
Beck, T., 2003. Financial dependence and international trade. Review of International Economics 11,
   296-316.
Beck, T., Demirgüc-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2009. A new database on financial development and structure.
   World Bank mimeo.
Becker, B., Greenberg, D., 2007. Financial development, fixed costs and international trade. Harvard
   Business School mimeo.
Behrens, K., Corcos, G., Mion, G., 2010. Trade crisis? What trade crisis? CEPR Discussion Paper 7956.
Bems, R., Johnson, R.C., Yi, K.M., 2010. The role of vertical linkages in the propagation of the global
   downturn of 2008. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia mimeo.


                                                    27
Berman, N., Martin, P., 2010. The vulnerability of sub-saharan Africa to the financial crisis: the case of
    trade. CEPR Discussion Paper 7765.
Borchert, I., Mattoo, A., 2009. The crisis-resilience of services trade. World Bank Policy Research
    Working Paper 4917.
Braun, M., 2003. Financial contractibility and asset hardness. University of California-Los Angeles
    mimeo.
Braun, M., Larrain, B., 2005. Finance and the business cycle: international, inter-industry evidence.
    Journal of Finance 40, 1097-1128.
Bricongne, J.C., Fontagné, L., Gaulier, G., Taglioni, D., Vicard, V., 2010. Firms and the global crisis:
    French exports in the turmoil. Bank of France mimeo.
Brunnermeier, M.K., 2009. Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-08. Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 23(1), 77-100.
Campello, M., Graham, J., Harvey, C., 2010. The real effects of financial constraints: evidence from a
    financial crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 97, 470-487.
Caselli, F., 2005. Accounting for cross-country income differences. In: Aghion, P., Durlauf, S. (Eds.),
    Handbook of Economic Growth. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Chaney, T., 2005. Liquidity constrained exporters. University of Chicago mimeo.
Chauffour, J.P., Farole, T., 2009. Trade finance in crisis: market adjustment or market failure? World
    Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5003.
Claessens, S., Laeven, L., 2003. Financial development, property rights, and growth. Journal of Finance
    58, 2401-2436.
Dell’Ariccia, G., Detragiache, E., Rajan, R., 2008. The real effect of banking crises. Journal of Financial
    Intermediation 17, 89-112.
Djankov, S., Freund, C., Pham, C.S., 2010. Trading on time. Review of Economics and Statistics 92,
    166-173.
Do, Q.T., Levchenko, A.A., 2007. Comparative advantage, demand for external finance, and financial
    development. Journal of Financial Economics 86, 796-834.
Eaton, J., Kortum, S., Neiman, B., Romalis, J., 2010. Trade and the global recession. University of
    Chicago mimeo.
Ellingsen, T., Vlachos, J., 2009. Trade finance in a liquidity crisis. World Bank Policy Research Working
    Paper 5136.
Evenett, S.J., 2009. What can be learnt from crisis-era protectionism? An initial assessment. The
    Berkeley Electronic Press Journals: Business and Politics 11, Article 4.
Feenstra, R.C., Romalis, J., Schott, P.K., 2002. US imports, exports and tariff data.
Fisman, R., Love, I., 2003. “Trade credit, financial intermediary development, and industry growth.
    Journal of Finance 58, 353-374.
Freilich, E., McGeever, J., 2009. Euro Libor dips, US commercial paper up. Reuters.com, October 1.
Freund, C., 2009. The trade response to global downturns. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
    5015.
Greenaway, D., Guariglia, A., Kneller, R., 2007. Financial factors and exporting decisions. Journal of
    International Economics 73, 377-395.




                                                    28
Haddad, M., Harrison, A., Hausman, C., 2010. Decomposing the great trade collapse: products, prices,
    and quantities in the 2008-2009 crisis. NBER Working Paper 16253.
Hall, R., Jones, C., 1999. Why do some countries produce so much more output per worker than others?
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 83-116.
Healy, J., 2009. 62,000 jobs are cut by U.S. and foreign companies. The New York Times, January 27.
Heston, A., Summers, R., Aten, B., 2006. Penn World Table Version 6.2. Center for International
    Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania.
Hur, J., Raj, M., Riyanto, Y., 2006. The impact of financial development and asset tangibility on export.
    World Development 34, 1728-1741.
Iacovone, L., Zavacka, V., 2009. Banking crises and exports: lessons from the past. World Bank Policy
    Research Working Paper 5016.
IMF-BAFT, 2009. A survey among banks assessing the current trade finance environment.
Ju, J., Wei, S.J., 2008. When is quality of financial system a source of comparative advantage? NBER
    Working Paper 13984.
Kee, H.L., Neagu, C., Nicita, A., 2010. Is protectionism on the rise? Assessing national trade policies
    during the crisis of 2008. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5274.
Keogh, B., 2008. Libor rises, commercial paper slumps as credit freeze deepens. Bloomberg.com, October
    2.
Kletzer, K., Bardhan, P., 1987. Credit markets and patterns of international trade. Journal of Develop-
    ment Economics 27, 57-70.
Kroszner, R.S., Laeven, L., Klingebiel, D., 2007. Banking crises, financial dependence, and growth.
    Journal of Financial Economics 84, 187-228.
Levchenko, A.A., Lewis, L., Tesar, L.L., 2010. The collapse of international trade during the 2008-2009
    crisis: in search of the smoking gun. IMF Economic Review 58, 214-253.
Manova, K., 2008a. Credit constraints, equity market liberalizations and international trade. Journal of
    International Economics 76, 33-47.
Manova, K., 2008b. Credit constraints, heterogenous firms, and international trade. NBER Working
    Paper 14531.
Manova, K., Wei, S.J., Zhang, Z., 2009. Credit constraints and international trade: a firm-level analysis.
    Stanford University mimeo.
Malouche, M., 2009. Trade and trade finance developments in 14 developing countries post September
    2008: a world bank survey. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5138.
Matsuyama, K., 2005. Credit market imperfections and patterns of international trade and capital flows.
    Journal of the European Economic Association 3, 714-723.
McKibbin, W.J., Stoeckel, A., 2009. The potential impact of the global financial crisis on world trade.
    World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5134.
Minetti, R., Zhu, S.C., 2010. Credit constraints and firm export: microeconomic evidence from Italy.
    Forthcoming, Journal of International Economics.
Mora, J., Powers, W., 2009. Did trade credit problems deepen the great trade collapse? VoxEU.org, 27
    November.
Muûls, M., 2008. Exporters and credit constraints. A firm level approach. London School of Economics
    mimeo.



                                                   29
Raddatz, C., 2006. Liquidity needs and vulnerability to financial underdevelopment. Journal of Financial
    Economics 80, 677-722.
Rajan, R., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review 88, 559-
    586.
Rampell, C., 2009. Layoffs spread to more sectors of the economy. The New York Times, January 27.
Romalis, J., 2004. Factor proportions and the structure of commodity trade. American Economic Review
    94, 67-97.
Schwartz, N., 2009a. Job losses pose a threat to stability worldwide. The New York Times, February 15.
Schwartz, N., 2009b. Rapid declines in manufacturing spread global anxiety. The New York Times,
    March 20.
Svaleryd, H., Vlachos, J., 2005. Financial markets, the pattern of industrial specialization and compar-
    ative advantage. European Economic Review 49, 113-144.
Yi, K.M., 2003. Can vertical specialization explain the growth of world trade? Journal of Political
    Economy 111, 52-102.


10    Data Appendix
A. Trade flows

  US trade flows: From the US Census Bureau Foreign Trade Statistics. Monthly data at the 3-digit
NAICS level is used.

B. Industry characteristics

    External capital dependence (EXT F IN ): Constructed following Rajan and Zingales (1998).
See Section 3.
    Trade credit (T CRED): Constructed following Fisman and Love (2003). See Section 3.
    Asset tangibility (T AN G): Constructed following Braun (2003). See Section 3.
    Factor intensities (log(k/l), log(h/l)): From the NBER-CES database. These are constructed first
for SIC 4-digit industries: (i) Physical capital intensity as the log of the ratio of real capital stock to
total employment; and (ii) Skill intensity as the log of the ratio of non-production workers to total
employment. These are calculated using 1996 data, the most recent year available. We map SIC 4-digit
to NAICS 3-digit industries using concordance weights between the two classification systems constructed
from US import volumes from 1989-2006, obtained from the Feenstra et al. (2002) database. The factor
intensity of each NAICS 3-digit industry is the concordance-weighted average of the factor intensities of
its constituent SIC 4-digit industries.

C. Country variables

   Interbank rates (IBrate): See Section 3.
   Factor abundance (log(K/L), log(H/L)): Based on Caselli (2005) and the Penn World Tables,
Version 6.2 (Heston et al. 2006). Physical capital stock is calculated using the perpetual inventory
method, namely: Kt = It + δKt−1 , where It is investment and δ = 0.06 is the assumed depreciation rate.
The investment flow and labor force data are from the latest version of the Penn World Tables. Human


                                                    30
capital per worker is taken from Caselli (2005). Following Hall and Jones (1999), H/L is calculated as a
Mincerian return-weighted average years of schooling, namely H/L = exp(φ(s)), where s is the average
years of schooling in the population over 25 years of age, and φ(·) is a piece-wise linear function with a
slope of 0.13 for s < 4, 0.10 for 4 < s < 8, and 0.07 for s > 8. We use the average value of K/L and H/L
over 1996-2005 as our measures of initial factor endowments.
    Exchange rates: From Thomson Datastream, in units of foreign currency per US dollar. A monthly
average of daily rates is used.
    Treasury Bill rate: Three-month rate. From the IMF International Financial Statistics; countries
for which the reported treasury bill rate was not explicitly documented to be for a three-month maturity
were dropped. Supplemented for some additional countries by information from the Global Financial
Data; a monthly average of daily closing rates was used.
    Industrial Production Index: From the IMF International Financial Statistics.
    GDP and GDP per capita: From the World Development Indicators (WDI), in PPP units.
Averaged over 1996-2005.
    US retail sales: Seasonally adjusted. From the US Census Bureau.
    US business loans: Total commercial and industrial loans at all US commercial banks, seasonally
adjusted. From the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System H.8 release.




                                                   31
                                    Table 1
       The Month-on-Month Fall in US Manufacturing Imports (Oct-Nov 2008)


A: Industries (NAICS 3-digit) with sharpest declines in imports (top 5)

324:       Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing                                     -54.0%
315:       Apparel Manufacturing                                                         -33.3%
331:       Primary Metal Manufacturing                                                   -23.7%
316:       Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing                                      -22.6%
335:       Electrical Equipment, Appliance, and Component Manufacturing                  -22.3%




B: Industries (NAICS 3-digit) with smallest declines in imports (bottom 5)

321:       Wood Product Manufacturing                                                    -12.3%
336:       Transportation Equipment Manufacturing                                        -11.8%
326:       Plastics and Rubber Products Manufacturing                                    -10.1%
311:       Food Manufacturing                                                            -7.3%
337:       Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing                                   -5.5%


Notes: Calculated from US Census Bureau Data on US imports from the rest of the world.
                                                                                Table 2
                                                    Effects of the Crisis on Trade across Countries and Sectors

Crisis = 1: Sep 08 to Aug 09                                                          Dependent variable: Log (Industry exports to the US)
Fin Vulnerability measure:                                        EXTFIN                                           TCRED                                              TANG
                                                     (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)             (9)

IBrate X Fin Vuln                                  -0.006           -0.001          0.000           0.565*            0.281           0.288           0.152*           0.120           0.137
                                                   [0.005]         [0.003]         [0.003]          [0.293]          [0.275]         [0.311]          [0.081]         [0.092]         [0.109]
Crisis X IBrate X Fin Vuln                                         -0.007*        -0.009**                          0.495***        0.587***                         0.057***          0.057
                                                                   [0.004]         [0.004]                          [0.109]         [0.174]                          [0.017]          [0.041]

Factor endowments controls                           No              No              Yes              No              No              Yes               No              No              Yes
Initial size & income controls                       No              No              Yes              No              No              Yes               No              No              Yes
Cty-Ind, Cty-Mth, Ind-Mth fixed effects              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
Observations                                       22,901          22,901          20,208           22,901          22,901          20,208            22,901          22,901          20,208
R-squared                                          0.964           0.964           0.965            0.964           0.964           0.965             0.964           0.964           0.965


Notes: Standard errors are clustered by country, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. The dependent variable is log monthly exports to the US
in 3-digit NAICS manufacturing industries, covering Nov 06 to Oct 09. All specifications include country-industry, country-month, and industry-month fixed effects. The Crisis variable is an
indicator equal to 1 from Sep 08 to Aug 09. The financial vulnerability measure in Columns (1)-(3) is EXTFIN, that in Columns (4)-(6) is TCRED, and that in Columns (7)-(9) is TANG. For each
financial vulnerability measure, the first two columns are lean specifications containing no auxillary controls. The third column includes factor endowment controls (Crisis X Log(K/L) X Log(k/l)
and Crisis X Log(H/L) X Log(h/l)), as well as country size and income controls (Crisis X Log(GDP) X Industry fixed effects and Crisis X Log(GDPpc) X Industry fixed effects).
                                                                                   Table 3
                                                                         Robustness I: Country Sample

Crisis = 1: Sep 08 to Aug 09                                                        Dependent variable: Log (Industry exports to the US)
Fin Vulnerability measure:                                      EXTFIN                                          TCRED                                             TANG
                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)              (7)             (8)             (9)
                                                EU cluster     Less TUR        Less JPN         EU cluster      Less TUR       Less JPN         EU cluster      Less TUR        Less JPN

IBrate X Fin Vuln                                  0.000          0.004           -0.000           0.288          0.300           0.472            0.137          0.048           0.142
                                                  [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.003]          [0.314]        [0.527]         [0.339]          [0.109]        [0.148]         [0.118]
Crisis X IBrate X Fin Vuln                       -0.009**        -0.014*        -0.009**         0.587***        0.675**        0.541***           0.057         0.132**          0.059
                                                  [0.004]        [0.007]         [0.004]         [0.138]         [0.260]        [0.161]           [0.037]        [0.050]         [0.041]
Factor endowments controls                         Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Initial size & income controls                     Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Cty-Ind, Cty-Mth, Ind-Mth fixed effects            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Observations                                      20,208         19,461          19,452           20,208         19,461          19,452           20,208          19,461         19,452
R-squared                                         0.965          0.966           0.964            0.965          0.966           0.964            0.965           0.966          0.964

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Standard errors are clustered by country, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. For each financial vulnerability
measure, the first column treats the Euro zone countries as a group when clustering the standard errors, while the second and third columns drop Turkey and Japan respectively. All columns
include the factor endowment controls, as well as the country size and income countrols.




                                                                              Table 4
                                                     Robustness II: Crisis Date and Interbank Rate Measures

Crisis = 1: Sep 08 to Aug 09                                                        Dependent variable: Log (Industry exports to the US)
Fin Vulnerability measure:                                      EXTFIN                                          TCRED                                             TANG
                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)              (7)             (8)             (9)
                                                  Mar 08       Lag IBrate      3m IBrate          Mar 08        Lag IBrate     3m IBrate          Mar 08        Lag IBrate      3m IBrate

IBrate X Fin Vuln                                  0.000           -0.002         0.001            0.258           0.328          0.336            0.138          0.148           0.149
                                                  [0.005]         [0.004]        [0.003]          [0.279]         [0.331]        [0.310]          [0.097]        [0.104]         [0.103]
Crisis X IBrate X Fin Vuln                       -0.009**        -0.009**       -0.009**          0.471*         0.517***       0.599***           0.036          0.040           0.058
                                                  [0.004]         [0.004]        [0.004]          [0.254]        [0.158]        [0.168]           [0.047]        [0.039]         [0.040]
Factor endowments controls                         Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Initial size & income controls                     Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Cty-Ind, Cty-Mth, Ind-Mth fixed effects            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Observations                                      20,208         20,208          20,208           20,208         20,208          20,208           20,208          20,208         20,208
R-squared                                         0.965          0.965           0.965            0.965          0.965           0.965            0.965           0.965          0.965

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Standard errors are clustered by country, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. For each financial vulnerability
measure, the first column dates the start of the crisis to March 2008, the second column uses the lag of the one-month IBrate, and the third column uses the three-month IBrate. All columns
include the factor endowment controls, as well as the country size and income countrols.
                                                          Table 5
                                               Components of the Cost of Capital

Crisis = 1: Sep 08 to Aug 09                                   Dependent variable: Log (Industry exports to the US)
Fin Vulnerability measure:                                 EXTFIN                            TCRED                             TANG
                                                    (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)
Cost of Capital measure:                          TBill rate     IB spread         TBill rate      IB spread         TBill rate     IB spread

IB component X Fin Vuln                             0.003           0.008            0.036           0.068             0.038           1.176
                                                   [0.004]         [0.007]          [0.100]         [0.145]           [0.408]         [0.819]
Crisis X IB component X Fin Vuln                   -0.016*          -0.010          0.161**          0.124           0.919***          0.527
                                                   [0.008]         [0.009]          [0.066]         [0.143]          [0.305]          [1.250]

Factor endowments controls                           Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
Initial size & income controls                       Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
Cty-Ind, Cty-Mth, Ind-Mth fixed effects              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
Observations                                       13,649          13,649           13,649          13,649            13,649          13,649
R-squared                                          0.970           0.970            0.971           0.970             0.971           0.970

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Standard errors are clustered by country, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
respectively. For each financial vulnerability measure, the first column uses the 3-month local treasury bill rate as the cost of capital measure,
while the second column uses the local IB spread (IBrate less the 3-month local treasury bill rate). All columns include the factor endowment
controls, as well as the country size and income countrols.




                                                             Table 6
                                                 Effects on Trade vs. Production

Crisis = 1: Sep 08 to Aug 09                                   Dependent variable: Log (Industry exports to the US)
Fin Vulnerability measure:                                 EXTFIN                            TCRED                             TANG
                                                     (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)

IBrate X Fin Vuln                                   -0.002          -0.001           -0.105          -0.149            0.069           0.080
                                                   [0.003]         [0.003]           [0.288]        [0.286]           [0.104]         [0.122]
Crisis X IBrate X Fin Vuln                          -0.007          -0.006          0.557***        0.706**           0.064**          0.059
                                                   [0.004]         [0.005]          [0.173]         [0.288]           [0.029]         [0.049]

Factor endowments controls                           No              Yes              No              Yes               No              Yes
Initial size & income controls                       No              Yes              No              Yes               No              Yes
IPI controls                                         Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
Cty-Ind, Cty-Mth, Ind-Mth fixed effects              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
Observations                                       17,695          15,758           17,695          15,758            17,695          15,758
R-squared                                          0.963           0.965            0.963           0.965             0.963           0.965

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Standard errors are clustered by country, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
respectively. For each financial vulnerability measure, the first column contains no auxillary controls, whereas the second column includes the
factor endowment controls, and the country size and income controls. All columns control for Log(Industrial Production Index) X Industry FEs
and Crisis X Log(Industrial Production Index) X Industry FEs.
                                                                        Table 7
                                        Final Goods Demand vs. Credit Supply Conditions in the Destination Market

Crisis = 1: Sep 08 to Aug 09                                                        Dependent variable: Log (Industry exports to the US)
Fin Vulnerability measure:                                      EXTFIN                                           TCRED                                            TANG
                                                  (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)               (6)             (7)            (8)               (9)
Crisis measure:                                 US retail       US loans       Joint Test        US retail      US loans        Joint Test        US retail      US loans        Joint Test

IBrate X Fin Vuln                               -1.439**         0.143*          -1.203          73.515*          -1.098          53.442           -1.258          -9.577         -4.802
                                                 [0.683]         [0.072]         [0.791]         [41.351]         [1.733]        [62.033]          [7.548]        [12.211]        [7.898]
Log (US retail) X IBrate X Fin Vuln             0.073**                          0.066*           -3.726*                         -3.081            0.073                          0.182
                                                 [0.035]                         [0.038]          [2.102]                         [2.652]          [0.383]                        [0.376]
Log (US loans) X IBrate X Fin Vuln                              -0.020**         -0.012                            0.173           1.024                           1.392           0.192
                                                                 [0.010]         [0.010]                          [0.236]         [1.879]                         [1.692]         [0.240]

Factor endowments controls                         Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Initial size & income controls                     Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Cty-Ind, Cty-Mth, Ind-Mth fixed effects            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Observations                                     20,208          20,208          20,208           20,208          20,208         20,208            20,208         20,208          20,208
R-squared                                        0.965           0.965           0.965            0.965           0.965          0.965             0.965          0.965           0.965

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Standard errors are clustered by country, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. For each financial vulnerability
measure, the table explores how final demand proxied by Log (US retail sales) or credit supply proxied by Log (US business loans) interact with credit conditions in the exporting country and
financial vulnerability of the industry in explaining exports to the US. All columns include the factor endowment controls, as well as the country size and income countrols.
                                         Table 8
                  Credit Conditions and Trade Volumes across Countries

Crisis = 1: Sep 08 to Aug 09                Dependent variable: Log (Industry exports to the US)
                                             (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)

IBrate                                    -0.162*         -0.143*         -0.199*          -0.037         0.019
                                          [0.079]         [0.082]         [0.101]         [0.064]        [0.067]
Crisis X IBrate                                            -0.036        -0.069**        -0.059**         -0.060
                                                          [0.167]         [0.030]         [0.026]        [0.037]

Factor endowments controls                  No              No              Yes            Yes             Yes
Initial size & income controls              No              No              No             Yes             Yes
IPI controls                                No              No              No             No              Yes
Ind-Mth fixed effects                       Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes

Observations                              22,145          22,145          20,208          20,208          15,758
R-squared                                 0.283           0.284           0.336           0.577           0.603

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by country, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels respectively. The dependent variable is log monthly exports to the US in 3-digit NAICS manufacturing
industries, covering Nov 06 to Oct 09. All specifications include industry-month fixed effects. The Crisis variable
equals 1 from Sep 08 to Aug 09. All columns control for the log bilateral exchange rate (EXCH) and Crisis X
Log(EXCH). Columns (3)-(5) control for Log(K/L), Crisis X Log(K/L), Log(H/L), and Crisis X Log(H/L). Columns (4)-(5)
control for Log(GDP), Crisis X Log(GDP), Log(GDPpc), and Crisis X Log(GDPpc). Column (5) further includes
Log(Industrial Production Index) and Crisis X Log(Industrial Production Index).
                                      Table 9
               Credit Conditions and Trade Volumes within Countries

                                        Dependent variable: Log (Industry Exports to the US)
                                                (1)                      (2)                     (3)

Nov 06 to Oct 09:

IBrate                                       0.016**                  0.016*                    0.008
                                             [0.008]                  [0.008]                  [0.006]

Observations                                 22,901                   22,145                   17,695
R-squared                                    0.961                    0.961                    0.960

Nov 06 to Aug 08:

IBrate                                       0.028*                    0.023                    0.003
                                             [0.016]                  [0.015]                  [0.014]

Observations                                 14,121                   13,659                   10,937
R-squared                                    0.966                    0.966                    0.964

Sep 08 to Dec 08:

IBrate                                       -0.025**                 -0.022**                -0.033***
                                              [0.010]                  [0.009]                 [0.009]

Observations                                  2,566                    2,482                    1,988
R-squared                                     0.981                    0.982                    0.980

Jan 09 to Oct 09:

IBrate                                        0.016                    0.009                    0.012
                                             [0.021]                  [0.021]                  [0.025]

Observations                                  6,214                    6,004                    4,770
R-squared                                     0.968                    0.969                    0.969

Log (Exchange Rate)                            No                       Yes                      Yes
Log (IPI)                                      No                       No                       Yes
Cty-Ind, Ind-Mth fixed effects                 Yes                      Yes                      Yes

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by country, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels respectively. The dependent variable is log monthly exports to the US in 3-digit NAICS
manufacturing industries. All specifications include country-industry and industry-month fixed effects.
Regressions are performed in each panel for the months stated. Columns (2)-(3) control for Log(EXCH), while
Column (3) also controls for Log (Industrial Production Index).
                                        Appendix Table 1A
                     List of Countries with Interbank Rate Data (Datastream)

Australia (AUS); Belgium (BEL); Bulgaria (BGR); Canada (CAN); China (CHN);
Czech Republic (CZE); Germany (DEU); Denmark (DNK); Spain (ESP); Finland (FIN);
France (FRA); Great Britain (GBR); Greece (GRC); Hong Kong (HKG); Hungary (HUN);
Ireland (IRL); Italy (ITA); Japan (JPN); Malaysia (MYS); Netherlands (NLD); Norway (NOR);
New Zealand (NZL); Poland (POL); Portugal (PRT); Romania (ROM); Singapore (SGP);
Slovakia (SVK); Sweden (SWE); Thailand (THA); Turkey (TUR); Taiwan (TWN)

Notes: Sample consists of 31 countries for which one-month interbank rate data was available from Thomson
Datastream.




                                      Appendix Table 1B
                   Summary Statistics for Country One-Month Interbank Rates

                      Min          5 pct       Median       95th pct       Max              Mean        Std Dev

    Nov 06            0.38         1.67          3.47        8.76         19.26              4.52           3.23
    Mar 08            0.85         1.22          4.31        10.27        16.35              4.97           2.92
    Sep 08            0.74         1.28          4.66        12.99        18.12              5.32           3.30
    Jan 09            0.25         0.50          2.16        14.59        15.14              3.52           3.61
    Oct 09            0.12         0.15          0.44        7.38         10.33              1.77           2.47
                                                                        Appendix Table 2
                                                           Industry Characteristics: Summary Statistics

                                                                                        External            Asset                            Phy Cap         Human Cap
                                                                                      Finance Dep         Tangibility     Trade Credit        Intensity        Intensity
NAICS Industry                                                                         (EXTFIN)            (TANG)          (TCRED)           (Log(k/l))       (Log(h/l))

311      Food Manufacturing                                                               -0.558            0.332             0.078            4.854             -1.424
312      Beverage and Tobacco Product Manufacturing                                       -0.452            0.321             0.044            5.132             -0.918
313      Textile Mills                                                                    -0.154            0.371             0.063            4.198             -1.893
314      Textile Product Mills                                                            -0.335            0.264             0.024            3.313             -1.671
315      Apparel Manufacturing                                                            -0.646            0.131             0.066            2.617             -1.943
316      Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing                                         -1.857            0.115             0.083            3.254             -1.853
321      Wood Product Manufacturing                                                       -0.372            0.428             0.037            3.816             -1.820
322      Paper Manufacturing                                                              -0.366            0.535             0.063            5.783             -1.459
323      Printing and Related Support Activities                                          -0.487            0.296             0.084            3.587             -0.628
324      Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing                                        -0.175            0.551             0.123            6.857             -1.040
325      Chemical Manufacturing                                                            5.472            0.138             0.032            5.606             -0.848
326      Plastics and Rubber Products Manufacturing                                       -0.278            0.355             0.081            4.280             -1.571
327      Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing                                        -0.394            0.417             0.050            4.403             -1.562
331      Primary Metal Manufacturing                                                      -0.364            0.406             0.084            5.584             -1.407
332      Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing                                           -0.781            0.279             0.093            4.097             -1.391
333      Machinery Manufacturing                                                          -0.237            0.182             0.070            4.380             -1.001
334      Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing                                     0.435            0.116             0.054            4.686             -0.726
335      Electrical Equipment, Appliance, and Component Manufacturing                     -0.288            0.197             0.080            3.973             -1.297
336      Transportation Equipment Manufacturing                                           -0.386            0.250             0.120            4.957             -1.643
337      Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing                                      -1.040            0.289             0.081            2.952             -1.387
339      Miscellaneous Manufacturing                                                       0.549            0.135             0.042            3.597             -1.227

Notes: EXTFIN, TANG and TCRED are calculated from 1996-2005 Compustat data. Log(k/l) and Log(h/l) are calculated from 1996 NBER-CES data for US manufacturing. For more
details, please see the Data Appendix.
                                    Appendix Table 3
        Effects of the Crisis on Trade across Countries and Sectors: Joint Tests

Crisis = 1: Sep 08 to Aug 09                       Dependent variable: Log (Industry Exports to the US)
                                                         (1)                       (2)                       (3)

IBrate X EXTFIN                                        0.003                      0.006                    -0.001
                                                      [0.006]                    [0.008]                   [0.007]
Crisis X IBrate X EXTFIN                              -0.003                     -0.004                     0.001
                                                      [0.005]                    [0.005]                   [0.007]
IBrate X TCRED                                         0.261                      0.305                    -0.244
                                                      [0.346]                    [0.388]                   [0.327]
Crisis X IBrate X TCRED                               0.394**                    0.464*                    0.692*
                                                      [0.180]                    [0.243]                   [0.367]
IBrate X TANG                                          0.122                      0.146                     0.083
                                                      [0.098]                    [0.116]                   [0.131]
Crisis X IBrate X TANG                                0.035*                      0.026                     0.039
                                                      [0.017]                    [0.046]                   [0.052]

Factor endowments controls                              No                         Yes                       Yes
Initial size & income controls                          No                         Yes                       Yes
IPI controls                                            No                         No                        Yes
Cty-Ind, Cty-Mth, Ind-Mth fixed effects                 Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Observations                                           22,901                    20,208                    15,758
R-squared                                               0.964                     0.965                     0.965

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Standard errors are clustered by country, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels respectively. Column (1) is a lean specification containing no auxillary controls. Column (2) includes
the factor endowment controls, and the country size and income controls. Column (3) additionally controls for Log(Industrial
Production Index) X Industry FEs and Crisis X Log(Industrial Production Index) X Industry FEs.
                                                               Figure 1
                                   The Decline in US Trade Volumes during the Global Financial Crisis




                                   200
                                                  US imports
                                                  US exports
    Trade volumes (US$ billions)
                                   150
                                   100
                                   50




                                         Jan 07        Jul 07   Jan 08       Jul 08    Jan 09    Jul 09

                                                                         Month

Source: US Census Bureau.



                                                                Figure 2
                                            Interbank Rates during the Global Financial Crisis
                                   8
                                   6
      1 month interbank rates




                                         CAN                                          DEU
                                   4




                                                                                                     BGR



                                         CHN
                                   2




                                                                   SGP


                                          JPN
                                   0




                                         Jan 07        Jul 07   Jan 08       Jul 08    Jan 09    Jul 09

                                                                         Month

Source: Thomson Datastream.
                                                                                                                           Figure 3
                                                                                             The Importance of Credit Channels of Comparative Advantage over Time

A: IBrate X EXTFIN                                     .02                                                                               C: IBrate X TANG




                                                                                                                                                                         .4
  Coefficient of IBrateXextfin




                                                                                                                                            Coefficient of IBrateXtang
                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                       -.02




                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                       -.04




                                                                         90% CI upper         90% CI lower                                                                              90% CI upper        90% CI lower




                                                                                                                                                                         -.4
                                                               Jan 07          Jul 07    Jan 08              Jul 08   Jan 09    Jul 09                                         Jan 07         Jul 07   Jan 08              Jul 08   Jan 09   Jul 09

                                                                                                  Month                                                                                                         Month




B: IBrate X TCREDIT
                                                                                                                                         Notes: The month-varying βm coefficients of IBrate X Fin Vuln are obtained by
                                                                                                                                         estimating equation (2), as described in Section 5.3. The Fin Vuln measure in
                                                          2




                                                                                                                                         Panel A is EXTFIN, while that used in Panels B and C are TCREDIT and TANG
                                                                                                                                         respectively. In each panel, the dotted lines indicate the bounds of the 90%
                                                                                                                                         confidence interval of each βm coefficient. Two linear trend lines for the βm’s are
                       Coefficient of IBrateXtcredit
                                                          1




                                                                                                                                         plotted, one for pre-September 2008 and a second for September 2008 and after.
                                                                                                                                         A horizontal line at 0 is included.
                                                          0
                                                          -1




                                                                          90% CI upper        90% CI lower
                                                          -2




                                                                Jan 07          Jul 07   Jan 08              Jul 08   Jan 09   Jul 09

                                                                                                  Month
