                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            WHY DID HIV DECLINE IN UGANDA?

                                         Marcella M. Alsan
                                          David M. Cutler

                                        Working Paper 16171
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16171


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2010




This paper was previously circulated as "The ABCDs of Health: Explaining the Reduction in AIDS
in Uganda." We are grateful to David Bangsberg, Seth Berkley, Esther Duflo, Max Essex, Erica Field,
Ron Gray, Howard Hiatt, Guido Imbens, Joseph Konde-Lule, Michael Kremer, Yuka Manabe, Frank
Nalugoda, Thomas Quinn, David Serwadda, Maria Wawer, and staff at the Ugandan Ministry of Health
Libraries for helpful comments. Seth Berkley and Joseph Konde-Lule graciously supplied the data
for the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Marcella M. Alsan and David M. Cutler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Why did HIV decline in Uganda?
Marcella M. Alsan and David M. Cutler
NBER Working Paper No. 16171
July 2010, Revised June 2012
JEL No. I1,O55

                                              ABSTRACT

Uganda is widely viewed as a public health success for curtailing its HIV/AIDS epidemic in the early
1990s. We investigate the factors contributing to this decline. We first build a model of HIV transmission.
Calibration of the model indicates that reduced pre-marital sexual activity among young women is
the most important factor in the decline in HIV. We next explore what led young women to change
their behavior. We estimate that approximately one-third the reduction in HIV in this cohort and almost
20 percent of the overall HIV decline was due to a gender-targeted education policy.


Marcella M. Alsan
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
malsan@fas.harvard.edu

David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
       While the AIDS epidemic has exacted a terrible price in sub-Saharan Africa, Uganda is
widely viewed as a success story and a model for the rest of the continent (Schoepf, 2003).
The reduction in AIDS in Uganda was rapid: HIV prevalence fell from an estimated 15%
of the general population in 1990 to 5% in 2007 (UNAIDS, 2008). The steepest decline
occurred in the early 1990s: between 1990 and 1995 the prevalence of HIV among urban
pregnant women dropped from approximately 30 to 15%. This fall in HIV prevalence was
most impressive for women under the age of 25.
       A number of hypotheses have been put forward to explain the downward trend. One set
of theories focuses on behavioral changes (USAID, 2002), potentially spurred on by fear of
HIV acquisition or Uganda’s well-known Abstinence, Be Faithful and use Condoms (ABC)
Campaign. A less encouraging theory stresses epidemic maturity and high rates of AIDS-
related mortality (Wawer et al., 2005).1
       Epidemiologists have investigated the decline in HIV among young cohorts in Uganda, but
the results have been inconsistent. Contrasting behaviors in Uganda with behaviors in other
countries, Stoneburner and Low-Beer (2004) emphasize the role of reductions in non-regular
partnerships, particularly among urban males, in explaining the reduction in HIV. Using the
same data but a slightly diﬀerent definition of non-regular partnerships, however, Asiimwe-
Okiror and colleagues (1997) do not find a significant decline in non-regular partnerships.2
Rather, they conclude that the reduction in HIV was due to a delay in sexual intercourse
and increased condom use. However, both studies lack micro-level data on HIV prevalence
in the general population. And neither study examines why behavior changed.
   1
     In the time period we are considering, there were no eﬀective AIDS treatment in Uganda, and so we do
not consider a theory of better medical care.
   2
     The definition of non-regular partnerships (NRP) used by Stoneburner and Low-Beer are sexual part-
nerships within the last 12 months, other than those with a spouse or a regular partner, divided by all
persons in the survey. The Asiime-Okikor et al., (1997) definition is the same numerator, divided by only
those individuals who are sexually active. This mechanically makes the NRP number for Stoneburner and
Low-Beer lower. This diﬀerence may account for the disparate conclusions. Using the Stoneburner Low-Beer
definition, NRP could be reduced due to population growth or an increase in the number of people who used
to have non-regular partners, now not having sex (in which case the measure is conflating a measure of
secondary abstinence with a reduction in partnerships). In this paper, we have and therefore use data on
extra-marital partnerships as opposed to non-regular partners.



                                                   1
      The aim of this paper is to understand both how and why HIV declined in Uganda.
We first develop a model of HIV transmission. The model is used to identify the most
important factors contributing to the decline. To calibrate the model, we rely heavily on
HIV testing and sexual behavior questions from the 1987 Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices
(KAP) Survey conducted by the Ugandan Ministry of Health (Konde-Lule et al., 1989). We
supplement these data with questions on behavior change from the Demographic and Health
Surveys (DHS) and HIV data from antenatal clinics.3
      We simulate the impact of reduced pre-marital and extra-marital sex, greater condom
use, and selective mortality on the time pattern of HIV. All told, we explain 83% of the
reduction in AIDS in Uganda. Our results show the rapid decline in HIV was driven by
a reduction in pre-marital sex among young women. This factor accounted for 59% of the
decline in this cohort and 36% overall.
      We next ask what led young women to abstain. The time period of rapid HIV decline
among this cohort coincided with a dramatic rise in secondary school enrollment. To identify
whether there is a causal relationship between these contemporaneous trends, we instrument
for secondary school enrollment with distance to secondary school, conditional on county
fixed eﬀects. We find that girls’ enrollment in secondary education significantly increases
the likelihood of abstaining from sex.
      One could argue that girls stayed in school because they were fearful of contracting HIV.
Although this may be partly true, we find that some of the schooling increase among young
women was in response to a 1990 aﬃrmative action policy giving women an advantage over
men on University applications. Using men as a placebo group and exploiting heterogeneity
in birth year and distance of birthplace to public Universities, we show that the University
preference policy was eﬀective in recruiting women into higher education. Our findings
suggest that one-third of the 14 percentage point decline in HIV among young women and
  3
    Another survey we might have used in the analysis is the Uganda Knowledge Attitudes and Behavior
(KAB) Surveys in 1989 and 1995. Unfortunately, the questionnaire design diﬀered across time, making it
diﬃcult to compare indicators. Sample coverage also varied and was not always nationally representative
(see Appendix B of Bessinger et al. (2003) for a discussion of the merits of the DHS over the KAB).


                                                  2
approximately one-fifth of the overall HIV decline can be attributed to this policy.
    Our study contributes to the debate regarding the role of behavior change in curtailing
the HIV epidemic in Africa. Oster (2012) has argued that behavior change is muted in
Africa due to the (perceived) high risk of mortality, which deters investments in healthy
behaviors. Other social scientists have questioned the malleability of sexual norms in Africa,
citing entrenched cultural practices as obstacles to behavior change (see UNECA (2008) for
a review). On the other hand, Lakdawalla et al. (2006) as well as Philipson (2000) suggest
HIV-related mortality may actually reduce risky behavior. Our study documents behavior
change in the face of very high HIV mortality.
    Our study also contributes to the literature on the role of education in health. Many in-
vestigators have noted a positive relationship between maternal education and child survival
(see Schultz (2002) for a review). Our findings concur with Baird et al. (2011) and Duflo
et al. (2011), who have documented a negative correlation between girls’ schooling and sexual
activity in randomized trials. However, this is the first study to link increased opportunities
for higher education among women with decreasing HIV prevalence on a population scale.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The first section discusses the AIDS
epidemic in Uganda. Section II presents our simulation model and tests of validity. Section
III then examines the impact of risk practices and mortality on AIDS prevalence over time.
Section IV investigates the factors that led to behavior change and the last section concludes.


I   HIV in Uganda

HIV is postulated to have been introduced to Eastern Africa from Central Africa, where
it emerged in the 1960s. Findings by Smallman-Raynor and Cliﬀ (1991) suggest that the
Ugandan HIV epidemic became generalized in the mid-1980s, when civil war ended and
infected troops returned to civilian life. Oster (forthcoming) has noted a positive relationship
between HIV incidence and export value, particularly in the early stages of the HIV epidemic
in sub-Saharan Africa.

                                               3
    The most complete data on HIV status over the time period of interest comes from
antenatal clinics (ANC, described below); most pregnant women attend such clinics, and
many Ugandan clinics have standard HIV screening.4 The screened prevalence rates from
antenatal clinics are typically sent to the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), which compiles them.5 We use ANC data from four cities that report serial,
age-specific infection rates and sample size (see figure 1).6
    Figure 2 shows HIV positive rates in Uganda between 1987 and 2005. In 1987, about
one-quarter of pregnant women in urban areas in Uganda tested positive for HIV. Between
1987 and 1990, the HIV positive rate rose by 5 percentage points. It then fell markedly. The
cumulative reduction in HIV in urban areas of Uganda was approximately 20 percentage
points, or about two-thirds of the pre-reduction peak. The majority of this decline occurred
between 1990-1995. This is the time period of focus in our analysis.
    The trends in Uganda are in stark contrast to the trends in other sub-Saharan African
countries (figure 3). Kenya, just east of Uganda, had an urban ANC-based HIV prevalence
rate of about 16% from 1993 to 2001 and has only recently experienced a decline. Tanzania,
a Southern neighbor of Uganda, likewise has not seen an appreciable decline. The ANC
rates of Southern African countries hardest hit by the epidemic (for example, Botswana and
South Africa) continued to climb over this time period.
    To presage our later analysis, we start by analyzing the dimension of the AIDS epi-
    4
      Montana and colleagues (2008) compared HIV prevalence estimates from recent antenatal clinic surveil-
lance with population-based surveys in sub-Saharan Africa. Overall, the prevalence estimates for Uganda
were roughly similar (6.4% in the population-based survey vs. 6.0% in the ANC surveillance data). For all
countries included, the ANC estimates were most accurate in urban areas, which is the location of greatest
HIV decline in Uganda (see figure 2). In the 1980s, the majority of Kampalan women attended an antenatal
clinic at least once during their pregnancy.
    5
      In compiling the data, UNAIDS uses the median percentage rate of all antenatal clinics reporting in a
given year, since some of the clinics do not include the number of women tested. The trends are the same,
however, when looking at clinics present over the entire time period or forming a chain index linking clinics
in adjacent years.
    6
      Sample size is needed so the HIV prevalence can be averaged across sites. Detailed ANC data are available
from the United States Census Bureau. The specific data used in our modeling exercise was obtained by
using filters for high-quality data, age group and urban/capital city. Including rural areas in the filter allows
Gulu district to be incorporated into the analysis, but Gulu does not start reporting until 1993. Moreover,
Gulu is located in northern Uganda where the Lord’s Resistance Army was active during the period of study.
Entebbe starts reporting age-specific data in 2002 and is used to verify broad trends.


                                                       4
demic in Uganda, especially between 1990 and 1995, and the groups for which it declined
most rapidly. Population-level HIV sero-surveillance data are available for 1987 from the
Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices Survey. The Survey was carried out in two peri-urban
communities: the Kasangati region which lies 10-20 km north of Kampala and the Nsangi
region which lies 10-20 km south. The data include responses from nearly 4000 Ugandans
over age 15 as well as serological testing. Respondents were asked general questions about
HIV knowledge, and detailed sexual histories were obtained. Blood samples were collected
and tested for the presence of antibody to HIV.7
       Seroprevalence data from the KAP Survey in 1987 are shown in figure 4. The hardest
hit demographic groups were slightly older never married women and young women in all
marital categories, with older, never-married men also having high rates. The rate for never
married young women is always above the rate for never married men, and the rate for
married young women is above the rate for married young men.
       These diﬀerences suggest a division of the population into six groups, which we employ
below: three groups of men and three groups of women. We label the male groups , ,
and  (table 1).  males are never married men aged 20 and older, and widowed or divorced
males. As these men age, they accumulate wealth and are therefore better situated to buy
sex from young girls or commercial sex workers (CSW). The 1987 KAP Survey shows this
group has a HIV prevalence of 17%.  males are younger and have little financial means
and are therefore less likely to be engaged in commercial sex transactions. Their observed
HIV positive rate is 10%.  males are the lowest risk group. These are older men with
several wives. We find these men have the lowest observed HIV (6%) and reported sexually
   7
     The regions were divided into administrative zones with approximately 10 clusters of equal size. Initial
homesteads for interview were identified with the help of local chiefs and twenty neighboring homesteads were
surveyed in order to achieve a representative sample. Interviews were conducted in the local language by 10
teams who had received health training for a week prior to survey onset. Surveys were undertaken using a
standardized questionnaire and blood samples were drawn from each respondent and tested for the presence
of antibody to HIV. HIV status was assessed using Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assays (ELISA). It is
standard in developed countries to confirm a positive ELISA with a Western Blot. Financial considerations
prevented the investigators from performing Western Blots on all samples; however, a concurrent study in
the same laboratory reported that 93% of positive ELISAs were true positives as evidenced by confirmatory
testing.


                                                     5
transmitted infections (STI) rate.
         Corresponding to the  males are a group of  women, who represent CSWs. Our
sample does not contain self-described CSWs. This may be because women are hesitant
about admitting they are engaged in such an activity. We take the HIV prevalence among
older never married women as the rate among CSWs. The  group includes never married
and young (25) married women. Because these women frequently have sex with older,
never married and widowed/divorced men, they are at high risk of HIV. Their observed
HIV prevalence is 19%.  women are older married women and women who are widowed or
divorced. Older married women rarely have high risk sex, and thus have relatively low HIV
positive prevalence rates—9% in the KAP Survey.
         The 1995 Ugandan DHS does not contain data on HIV status of individuals. However,
we do have data on age-specific changes for women from the ANC.8 Figure 5 shows the trend
in HIV positive rates by age in Kampala among pregnant women. The HIV rate fell most
dramatically at younger ages, and was relatively unchanged among older women. Indeed, the
rate was flat among women aged 30 and older. In our analysis, we concentrate on explaining
the trend for young women in the early nineties, though we remark on the older women as
well.


II        Modeling the HIV Epidemic in Uganda

Background

Several models of AIDS transmission within Africa have been developed in the literature.
All have to contend with the biological fact that the rate of HIV transmission is very low
and the HIV prevalence among certain age and sex groups is particularly high. Jeremy
Magruder (2011) argues that age-independent models of HIV transmission that focus on
heterogenous preferences for risk or networks of concurrent sexual partners cannot explain
     8
   Since only some clinics report data by age, the mean rate across all groups is not the same as the
unconditional mean across all clinics.


                                                 6
the age-distribution of HIV-related deaths in South Africa. Magruder develops a model of
spousal search showing that the riskiness associated with finding a partner through serial
monogamy (at a time of acute HIV infection) can generate a positive skew in the age distrib-
ution of HIV. His paper reaches the same general conclusion as ours, namely that pre-marital
sexual relations—which Magruder refers to as “marital shopping”—are key to understanding
the dynamics of HIV spread in Africa.9
       However, there are several points of diﬀerence between our model and Magruder’s. First,
while Magruder is trying to understand what pattern of sexual activity could have generated a
generalized HIV epidemic, our question is what caused HIV to decline. Second, the matching
model might not fit the Ugandan experience as well as in South Africa. For example, the
median person stays single for 8.5 years in that model, which does not fit the empirical
data for Uganda well (table 2). Finally, the richness of our dataset allows us to calculate and
predict, as opposed to stochastically generate, events in an individual’s lifetime. Age of sexual
debut and age of first marriage are not randomly drawn from the uniform distribution but
predicted using conditional distributions. Mixing probabilities are not obtained via random
draws but are computed from a system of linear equations.10


Data and Model Assumptions

The majority of HIV transmission in sub-Saharan Africa is from heterosexual intercourse. We
thus model transmission through that route. An individual has a probability of contracting
   9
      Our analysis does not explicitly model concurrency. Through our mixing probabilities (see discussion
below) individuals distribute their sexual activity among many partners. This does not entirely capture the
phenomenon of concurrency because it neglects the enhanced risk associated with having sex with a partner
who has recently acquired HIV. However, a large cohort study designed to test for the role of concurrency
in the HIV epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa demonstrated that it had no explanatory value; rather, it was
the number of partners over time that predicted HIV infection (Tanser et al., 2011). Concurrency should
be contrasted with intergenerational sex, which we also do not assume but is a prediction of our model (see
table 3).
   10
      Compartmental models (such as the Susceptibility-Infected (SI) model of May and Anderson (1991), are
common in the HIV modeling literature as well (i.e., Stoneburner and Low-Beer (2004)). SI models assume
all behavior in a compartment is identical (usually the average value of some parameter) which may lead to
bias when parameters (i.e., number of sexual partners) are not normally distributed, or when the relationship
between sexual behavior and HIV is nonlinear.



                                                     7
HIV with each unprotected coital act with a person who is HIV positive. That probability
depends on four factors: the presence of another STI, HIV viral load, gender and age.
   Taking these factors into account, the probability that an individual female  (individual
male ) who is a member of group  (member of group ) contracts HIV during a given
coital act with a member of group  (member of group  ) can be expressed as:


             Pr ( contracts HIV per sex act with member of group )

         = Pr ( ) · Pr (   +) · Pr (  )                   (1)


where  is an element of the set {, , } for women and  is an element of the set {, , }
for men. The  total coital acts of female  ( for male ) are calculated as follows:


                                            =  ·                                        (2)


where  refers to the duration sexually active and  refers to the frequency of coital acts.
The  are distributed across the  groups ( groups) according to the mixing probabilities,
   (  )  The mixing probabilities must satisfy two conditions. The first is the conservation
of sex acts: coital acts between groups A and B must equal those between B with A. Let
      P                                                                    P
 =   conditional on  being a member of group  and similarly,  =    The
conservation of sex acts then implies:


                                          ·  =   ·                                  (3)


The second condition is that all sex acts are accounted for—that is, there is a partner for
every coital act. This amounts to the restrictions that:

                                                        =3
                                 X
                                 =3                   X
                                          = 1 and            = 1                        (4)
                                 =1                    =1




                                                  8
The equation governing whether female  has contracted HIV is:

                                    Y
       Pr [ contracts HIV] = 1 −       {1 − Pr [ contracts HIV from group ]} ·     (5)
                                    


and similarly for male  :

                                    Y
       Pr [ contracts HIV] = 1 −       {1 − Pr [ contracts HIV from group  ]} ·    (6)
                                    



   Estimating equations (5) and (6) requires three types of data: individual sexual histories
(including HIV status), mixing probabilities, and HIV transmission probabilities. We discuss
the source and construction of these data in several steps outlined below. Parameters and
sources are summarized in Online Appendix C.
   The sexual history of each individual includes when the individual debuted sexually, when
they married (if applicable), how frequently they have sex, how many partners they have
had within and outside of marriage, whether they have contracted a STI and the use of male
condoms. Because HIV prevalence rates were low prior to the mid-1980s, we take the sexual
history to be the past 10 years or the time from sexual debut, whichever interval is shorter.
   Estimating  . The 1987 KAP Survey includes age, marital status, wife rank, HIV
status, STI and fertility history, and the number of sexual contacts in the last six months
for each individual. Data on age of first marriage, age of first sex and coital frequency are
imputed. For women, we regress age of marriage/first sex on education and current age using
the 1988 Uganda DHS (Online Appendix A table A1). These coeﬃcients are applied to the
KAP Survey and allow us to calculate duration of pre-marital sex and duration married.
The 1988 Uganda DHS does not include male respondents. Thus, we use the 1995 Uganda
DHS and perform the same OLS analysis restricting the sample to men alive during the late
1980s. This may introduce survivorship bias into our estimates as men who survived until
1995 could be diﬀerent than those who died from HIV or other causes.
   Estimating  . To predict coital frequency, we employ a negative binomial model using

                                                9
a quadratic form in age (Online Appendix A table A2). For married men, coital activity
is predicted from the females’ by randomly matching each husband with their reported
number of wives and ascribing the wives’ sexual activity to their husband.11 It would not be
appropriate to assume single men were as sexually active as young single women; as noted,
many single women will have sex with married men. Thus for this category, we estimate
coital frequency using the Tanzanian DHS 1991-2. We compare the relative frequency of
sexual activity among single males versus single females in the Tanzanian data from around
the same time period and use those proportions as coeﬃcients multiplying the mean number
of acts per month of the Ugandan single women to obtain acts for single Ugandan men.
       Table 2 reports the imputed age at first marriage, age of sexual debut and coital frequency
among KAP respondents. For women, the mean age at first marriage is 17.3 years (in the
1988 Uganda DHS, the average age of marriage is 17.0). For men, the age at first marriage is
older, 23.4 years (in the 1995 Uganda DHS, the mean age at first marriage for the surviving
cohort is 22.5). The mean age of sexual debut is 14.9 for women and 17.3 for men. Married
men have on average more sex with their wives than wives do with their husbands; this is
due to polygamy.
       Estimating    . Apart from knowing how long and with how many partners an indi-
vidual has been sexually active, we need an idea of who they were having sex with. Our
data do not indicate who the sexual partners are. Thus, we need to estimate the probability
that one group mixes with another. We use an algorithm based on equations (3) and (4)
to calculate the group mixing probabilities. Without further restrictions, the model cannot
be solved, since there are not enough linearly independent equations. Specifically, omitting
unobserved CSWs, there are 15 unknown mixing probabilities and 11 equations (five are
accounting equations and the other six are adding up constraints). In order to reduce the
dimensionality of the matrix, we impose restrictions, explained in more detail in Online Ap-
pendix B. The primary restriction is that the rate of STIs among men in a given group is
  11
    To derive coital frequency for men and women reporting extra-marital partnerships, the coital frequency
within marriage is deflated by a constant of proportionality.


                                                    10
inversely proportional to the probability of mixing with older married females and directly
proportional to the probability of mixing with CSWs.12
    The sexual relationship probabilities for the baseline model are given in table 3. Each
cell in the table reports two values. The first is the probability of a woman in the indicated
row having sex with a man in the indicated column, conditional on having sex. The second
is the probability of a man in the indicated column having sex with a woman in that row.
Note that since we do not observe CSWs in our data, we do not estimate the distribution of
sexual acts for CSWs.
    The  young women are mixing a disproportionate amount of time (84%) with the highest
prevalence  males.  women are spending the least amount of time with the lower preva-
lence, older married men. In addition, high risk  males not only mix with the  women, but
also mix around a third of the time with CSWs, making them an excellent bridge population,
transmitting the disease from sex workers to young women. Three-quarters of the sexual
activity of  women is with older, lower risk, married males.
    HIV Transmission Rates. Also needed to estimate equations (5) and (6) are HIV
transmission rates. The transmission probabilities used in the study are presented in Online
Appendix A, table A3, and reflect the aggregation of many biomedical studies. These studies
find higher transmission rates during acute HIV, in the presence of genital ulcers, and among
younger individuals, particularly young women (Boily et al., 2009; Gray et al., 2001; Pettifor
et al., 2007).13


Testing the Predictions

We use the data on reported number of children to see if the estimates of coital frequency are
reasonably accurate. A particular concern is that young unmarried women may underreport
   12
      Older women have the lowest overall rate of STIs (10% for women 25 years of age or above, versus 15%
for women younger than 25; whereas in men, the prevalence ranges from 24 to 50%).
   13
      Young women are particularly at risk for acquiring HIV through receptive intercourse (Karim et al.,
2010). Cervical ectopy (Moss and colleagues, 1991), reproductive tract immaturity and the forceful penetra-
tion associated with rape are all considered supportive factors in male to female HIV transmission.



                                                    11
their amount of sexual activity (Gersovitz et al. (1998)), which would aﬀect not only the
estimated HIV prevalence in this cohort, but among all cohorts since the mixing probabilities
would be biased (see equations 3 and 4).14 However, using the 1988 Uganda DHS, we do
not find systematic evidence of duplicity–the predicted (based on reported sexual activity)
and actual number of births is not statistically diﬀerent (p-value=0.72). For never married
females living in Uganda’s Central region, 70 women out of 474 report having a child in the
last year (15%); we predict 66 births (probability of conception from Wilcox et al. 1995). The
paradoxical observation—young unmarried women have the highest HIV prevalence despite
low coital frequency—is then explained by the fact that their partners were particularly high
risk, which is precisely what our model suggests. We also find evidence that men were not
lying about their higher number of partners and frequency of sex, as represented by their
higher rate of reported sexually transmitted infections.15
    We can use the model to estimate the predicted HIV positive rates directly, and compare
them to the actual prevalence. We start by assuming that there was no HIV among any of
the groups in 1977 except for CSWs () who we seed with an (arbitrary) HIV prevalence of
5%. We further make the conservative assumption that men were mixing twice as often with
CSWs during wartime (in the late 1970s when Uganda was at war with Tanzania, and when
Yoweri Museveni overthrew President Obote in the mid-1980s).16 We then iterate the model
forward year by year, updating the prevalence among all groups each year until 1987.17
    Predicted versus actual prevalence are reported in table 4. The model is calibrated fairly
  14
     Although Gersovitz et al. (1998) did find large diﬀerences between men and women in the reporting
of sexual activity, ultimately they were not able to distinguish between the external hypothesis (that the
diﬀerence is due to an omitted group, namely, CSWs) versus the internal hypothesis (that the diﬀerence was
due to under-reporting by females).
  15
     For example,  males have a reported STI prevalence of 35% and  males have a STI prevalence of 50%.
  16
     From a 1989 Ugandan survey (when Uganda was not at war), 24% of men engaged in casual sex.
This designation was thought to capture sex with prostitutes. According to the report: “In the absence of
subgroups designated as prostitutes and their clients. . . sexual behavior designated as ‘casual’ was considered’
(MoH, 1989). From a survey of African troops stationed in southern Sudan on the border of Tanzania, Kenya
and Uganda in the 1980s, 50% had had sex with a prostitute (McCarthy and colleagues, 1989).
  17
     Although it is possible to perform year by year updating of prevalence among the various groups, this
comes at the cost of additional assumptions on sexual behavior. We thus use this methodology as a loose
verification of our model rather than to calibrate our main results since the plausibility of the assumptions
are diﬃcult to verify.


                                                       12
well across most groups. Predicted rates generally average about the actual rate. Among
women, for example, the predicted rate is 13.2%, compared to an actual rate of 13.1%.
Among men, the predicted and actual rates are 10.9 and 10.6%. The biggest diﬀerence be-
tween predicted and actual rates is for older married men, for whom the model overestimates
HIV prevalence by 30% (6.0 versus 4.2%). Overall, however, the results are fairly close.
   Finally, we verify that our model matches the baseline ANC data on HIV positive rates
by age. We average the earliest three years of available ANC data (1990-92) to obtain mean
HIV prevalence rates among pregnant women by age group. We then compare the observed
values for HIV with a model-generated weighted average of HIV infection per age group,
where the weights are the probability a particular woman was pregnant.
   Table 5 panel A shows the actual and predicted HIV prevalence rates by age group. The
predicted rate is very close to the actual rate for young women, within 0.8 percentage points.
The gap gets bigger for older women, where the predicted rate is 30% below the actual rate.
This may be because for women who are widowed or divorced, we assume that their time
was divided equally between divorce and marriage for the period under observation. This
assumption may underestimate their sexual activity, since divorced women report a much
lower coital frequency than married women.


III    Explaining the Reduction in HIV in Uganda

We now use our simulation model to explain the reduction in HIV prevalence in Uganda.
Since the change in HIV prevalence was greatest for young women, we focus on this group.
We consider three explanations: increased use of condoms, less non-marital sex (both pre-
marital sex among girls and reduced out-of-marriage sex among men), and death among
people with AIDS.
   There are two modeling issues to address. Because we are focusing on a very short period,
the major issue is the direct impact of the various interventions, which are immediate, and
not the indirect (feedback) eﬀects as a result of changing prevalence and thus subsequent

                                             13
infections, which occurs over time. We model each behavior change separately, and sum up
the change in prevalence of HIV attributable to each.18
    A second modeling issue is what to assume about the amount of sex when the supply
of an available type of partner changes. Consider the simulation where young girls delay
the age at which they debut sexually. This clearly aﬀects the number of contacts they have
with men. What impact does this have on sexual activity among men? At one extreme, one
might assume that there are simply fewer opportunities for men to have sex, and thus overall
sexual contacts among men decline. Alternatively, however, men might see CSWs more, or
married men might have more sex within marriage.
    Based on the limited empirical evidence available, we assume that the supply of sexual
partners is relatively elastic.19 Thus, if younger women delay their sexual debut, men, in the
short run, will turn to alternative sources of supply, such as CSWs.


Abstinence

We start by considering the impact of less pre-marital sex. As demonstrated in table 6,
young women in Uganda under the age of 25 increasingly waited and abstained from sex
in the pre-marital period over our time period. The share of 15-19 year old never married
women who were virgins increased from 50.3% to 68.7% between 1988 and 1995. Similar
to Ueyama and Yamauchi (2009) we do find a slight increase in the percent married in the
presence of HIV, but it is not statistically significant.
    Less pre-marital sexual activity reduces the number of sex acts that women in this age
group have and changes who they have it with. Online Appendix table B1 shows the change
  18
     The only exception to this general rule is when we are modeling death, since the direct eﬀect of that
“intervention” is the removal of certain individuals from the population, thereby changing prevalence directly.
  19
     Dupas (2011) shows that an intervention which informed young girls about the relative risk of HIV
acquisition (as well as other HIV prevention messages) led to a substitution of sexual acts towards younger
men and away from older men, but not a large reduction in overall sexual activity. Similarly, Luke (2001)
demonstrates that “sugar daddies” prefer sex without a condom. However, if age and economic disparities
are not great enough to impose this preference on their partner, these same men will use a condom and
have sex with older, less impoverished women or commercial sex workers. Both of these findings suggest the
short-run demand for sex is relatively inelastic.



                                                      14
in sexual mixing rates implied by delayed sexual initiation. Relative to the base case in table
3, young women have slightly more sex with safer groups. The much larger impact, however,
is that they engage in far fewer sexual acts. Since many of these contacts are with high
risk men, the predicted HIV rate falls as well. Men, in contrast, have more sex with CSWs,
though we do not model HIV positive rates among men.
   Table 5 panel B reports the results. Reduction in pre-marital sex accounts for an 8.3
percentage point reduction in HIV positive rates among teenage girls, roughly 59% of the
observed decline. The decline is 1.3 percentage points among women aged 20-24, or 19% of
the observed change. Reflecting the longer length of time prior to marriage, the impact of
abstinence is negligible in women aged 25 and older.


Reduced Out-of-Marriage Sexual Contact

Increased faithfulness was a second goal of the Ugandan program. This would show up in
the first instance as fewer out-of-marriage sexual contacts for men (recall that our data omit
CSWs). In the 1995 Uganda DHS, men were asked whether they had changed their sexual
practices to prevent AIDS and, if so, how. Only 16% of married men admitted to changing
their sexual behavior so as to remain active with only one partner. The percentages for
single men are much smaller.
   When married men are more faithful, they have more sex with their wives (given the
same frequency of sexual contact). Online Appendix table B1 shows the changes in the
overall pattern of sexual activity implied by increased faithfulness. Given the small change
in faithfulness reported, the impact on sexual mixing probabilities is small, as is the change
in HIV positive rates. Interestingly, since many married men are HIV positive, increased
faithfulness actually increases slightly the share of women who are HIV positive in the short
run. Table 5 panel B shows that HIV positive rates increase by about 0.9 percentage points
among the youngest cohort of women as a result of this change.




                                              15
Increased Condom Use

Condoms were introduced into Uganda in 1991, but remained relatively scarce until 1997
(USAID, 2002). The 1995 Uganda DHS asked men about condom use. The specific questions
included whether a condom was used at last sex; whether it was used when the man last
had sex with his wife; and whether the condom was last used with a partner other than his
wife. From this, we infer data on condom use by male category and in some cases female
partner. Online Appendix A table A4 shows the responses for condom use at last sex. The
rate is lower among married men, especially with their spouse and higher among older, never
married men.
      We assume condom use in extra-marital sex acts exhibited linear growth from zero in
1991 to 40% in 1995.20 We also assume that condoms were used correctly. Under these
assumptions and correcting for the impact of condom use on fertility, we derive the contri-
bution of condom usage to the decline in HIV. The results are reported in table 5. Among
women aged 15-19, increased condom use explains a 3.3 percentage point reduction in pre-
dicted HIV positive rates. This is 24% of the actual reduction in rates between 1990-92 and
1994-96. Condom use becomes less important for explaining the pattern of HIV as women
age.


Death of HIV Positive Men

Those that died over this time period were primarily the high risk males, either through
combat, aging or AIDS. Since older men were infected early by CSWs, they would be the
first ones to succumb in the generalized epidemic. Timaeus and Jasseh (2004), using DHS
sibling reports of mortality from several African countries, suggest that 20% more men than
women die early in the AIDS epidemic. In addition, studies on the natural history of HIV
have shown that age is an important determinant of survival: the older one is, the shorter
the incubation period and faster the time to death (Coutinho, 2000).
 20
      This is approximately the average condom use across all groups.


                                                     16
   To model AIDS-related mortality, we extrapolate from Kaplan-Meier estimates of the
cumulative probability of death within a year after an individual has been diagnosed with
AIDS (defined as a CD4 cell count 200 cells/cubic millimeter). Based on the natural history
of HIV infection, we modeled death as a 15, 22.5 or 30% mortality rate among  males over
a horizon of 5 to 10 years. Each rate directly impacts the prevalence of HIV in the  group
and necessitates a recalculation of sexual mixing probabilities. The best fit appeared to be
a 22.5% mortality rate.
   As men with AIDS die, this implicitly means that young women have more sex with
younger men, who are less likely to have AIDS. Online Appendix B shows the new mixing
probabilities, accounting for increased mortality among  males. Young women tend to have
relatively more sexual contact with lower risk men, although the magnitude is not enormous.
The direct eﬀect of fewer older men being HIV positive is the greater impact.
   Table 5 shows that death was an important component to the HIV decline and explains
18.6% of the predicted decline among women ages 15-19. Unlike condom use, death explains
a larger share of the modest decline in HIV prevalence as women age. Overall our analysis
shows that the most important factor in the decline in HIV was primary abstinence among
young women. Abstinence in this group explains 59% of the reduction in HIV for teenage
girls and 36% of the reduction overall.


IV    Why Did Young Women Abstain? The Role of Education

In this section we examine what could have motivated such changes in sexual practice. One
obvious correlate of the reduction in HIV was an increase in secondary school enrollment
of girls in the late eighties and early nineties. This trend is apparent in both the DHS
and the Census (figure 6). According to the Ugandan DHS, secondary education rose by
12 percentage points (23.8 to 35.9%) among 15-29 year-old women over the period 1988 to
1995. A similar trend was not noted in Kenya (34.7 to 35.4% between the 1989 and 1993
Kenya DHS) or Tanzania (17.9 to 15.1% between the 1991 and 1996 Tanzania DHS) over

                                            17
approximately the same time.
       The mechanisms by which education may lead to better health are still being elucidated,
but there is evidence to suggest that the better educated avoid risky health behaviors (Cutler
and Lleras-Muney, 2006). In Africa, de Walque (2007) and Duflo et al. (2011) have found
evidence to support the view that girls’ education leads to a delay in the initiation of sexual
activity. The evidence is mixed, however, as Fortson (2009) concludes that education is a
risk factor for HIV acquisition in sub-Saharan Africa.21
       To examine the link between education and sexual activity for young Ugandan women
in the early 1990s, we estimate an equation of the form:


                      =  0 +  1   + 0  2 +   +                  (7)


 1 tests whether school enrollment is correlated with virginity.   is a county fixed eﬀect,
and  is a vector of individual controls, including age, religion and ethnicity. We include all
women aged 15-24 in the 1995 Uganda DHS.
       Of course, education and sexual activity are correlated for many reasons. For example,
girls in sub-Saharan Africa are often forced to drop out of school if they became pregnant.
To mitigate the eﬀects of reverse causality and omitted variables, we take three steps. First,
we limit the sample to women who report that they did not leave a school due to pregnancy.
Second, we include county fixed eﬀects and demographic controls that may aﬀect girls’ access
and ability to stay in school. Third, we instrument for education using distance to secondary
school. In poor countries such as Uganda, distance to school has been shown to be correlated
with schooling (Bommier and Lambert, 2000; Glewwe and Jacoby, 2004).
       Figure 7 shows the identification strategy visually. Virginity (the reduced form) and en-
rollment (the first-stage) are plotted against distance to secondary school for young Ugandan
women (ages 15 to 24). There is considerable co-movement between the two outcomes and
  21
    Fortson (2008) discusses whether this relationship is causal or driven by omitted variable bias and
concludes she is not able to distinguish between the two.



                                                  18
both are inversely related to distance.
       The results of the enrollment equation are presented in table 7. The first column shows
the OLS estimate with only controls for birth year. Enrollment in school increases the
likelihood of being a virgin by 45 percentage points conditional on year of birth. Adding
controls for ethnic and religious background, county fixed eﬀects and a proxy for local HIV
prevalence does not materially change the point estimate.22
       The last column of table 7 reports the two-stage least squares results. The eﬀect of
enrollment on virginity is slightly larger though less precise, consistent with measurement
error in the self-reported schooling variable (Ashenfelter and Krueger, 1994).23 The F -test
for the impact of distance on school enrollment is 24.5, well above standard critical values.
The coeﬃcient is extremely large; being enrolled in school increases the probability of being
a virgin by 73 percentage points.
       Thus, it seems clear that staying in school has a large eﬀect on sexual debut. Coincident
with the reduction in HIV, figure 6 shows a steady rise in secondary education for young
girls in 1990. We now turn to explaining this trend.


Aﬃrmative Action and Higher Education

The rule of Idi Amin, Uganda’s military dictator from 1971-1979, was particularly detrimen-
tal for women. His militia frequently used rape to suppress dissent and banned all inde-
pendent women’s organizations (Tripp, 2002). Following Museveni’s rise to power, women
gained the right to organize and sought elected oﬃce. One of their priorities was gender
equality in education. These eﬀorts led to the institution of an aﬃrmative action policy in
1990 that gave women 1.5 extra points on their application to public Universities (Muhewzi,
2003). David (2007, p.20) describes the policy as follows:
  22
      The Baganda are the wealthiest ethnicity in Uganda. We experimented with other controls for socioe-
conomic status (such as sex of household head and possession of durables). The results are qualitatively the
same.
   23
      If we also include a control for distance to urban center, the instrumented enrollment coeﬃcient is still
significant and increases to 1.47, but is much less precise (s.e. 0.75).



                                                      19
          For a long time, there was only one University in Uganda, Makerere Univer-
      sity.24 This limited opportunities for both boys and girls. Even then, boys were
      more favoured by the system until the famous 1.5 was introduced to enable eligi-
      ble females to access University education. The 1.5 was added to the total score
      of all individual girls as an aﬃrmative action policy. This has increased girls
      enrolment from about 20% to nearly half the total number of students currently
      at Makerere University.


    The response to the policy occurred rather quickly. Female enrollment in Makerere
increased from 24% in 1989/1990 to 35% by 1993/1994 (MOES, 2001). Although only a
small percentage of girls received tertiary education, the policy was well-known and may
have aﬀected the perceived returns to girls’ higher education, especially for those living near
a public University.25
    Using data from the 2002 Uganda Census, we examine whether the rise in attendance at
secondary school was associated with the introduction of the aﬃrmative action policy. In
addition to timing and gender, we utilize the diﬀerential impact of the policy on individuals
born closer to a public University versus those further away (see figure 1). Our setup is
similar to that of Duflo (2001):

                 X                X                                     £                    ¤
 =  0 +            +          +  1   +  2  ∗ ln()−1
                                                                                          

               £               
                                     ¤                               £                             ¤
           + 3 ln()−1
                          ∗                                                      −1
                                     +  4 [ ∗  ] +  5  ∗ ln() ∗ 


           + 6  +                                                                                        (8)


where  is an indicator variable for whether individual  in district  of age  completed
secondary school or obtained more than seven years of schooling. Age is a set of cohort
dummies.  refers to distance from the centroid of the district the respondent was born in
  24
     Makerere opened in 1922. Mbarara University of Science and Technology opened in 1989. No other
public Universities opened until the late nineties (see figure 1). Three small private institutions also opened
over this time period (two of which had an enrollment of approximately 80 students each).
  25
     Perception of the returns to schooling has been found to be particularly important in determining years
of schooling completed in developing countries (Jensen, 2010).




                                                      20
to the nearest public University.26 We use the district of birth to avoid endogenous mobility.
Young refers to children aged 8-12 in 1990, on the cusp of entering secondary school the time
when the policy was initiated. The control group includes individuals ages 19 to 23 in 1990,
who, on average, would have been too old for secondary school.27  is the (normalized)
district-cohort population.
       Table 8 panel A shows the results of the coeﬃcient on the triple interaction between
female, young, and the inverse log of distance. The triple interaction is positive and statis-
tically significant—that is, secondary school completion rates rose more for young girls near
the Universities than for older girls in those areas, or for boys living in those same areas.
The same is true for the alternative measure of higher education, obtaining more than seven
years of schooling (panel A, column 2).
       Table 8 panel B presents the results of the placebo experiment (comparing women aged
19-23 in 1990 to those aged 24-28). Using either measure of higher education, the triple
diﬀerence fails to achieve significance at conventional levels and is significantly diﬀerent
from the estimates in panel A.
       We can extend the analysis by allowing the treatment intensity to vary for each birth
cohort. Specifically, we replace the young dummy variable with a set of age dummies in each
of the parts of equation (8):

                 X                 X                                    X      £                  ¤
 =  0 +             +          +  1   +          ∗ ln()−1
                                                                                               
                                                                      
                £                      ¤ X                        X £                             ¤
            + 2 ln()−1
                           ∗    +   [ ∗  ] +    ∗ ln()−1
                                                                                      ∗  
                                                                              
            + 3  +                                                                                      (9)


Individuals age 30 in 1990 are considered the control and this dummy is omitted from the
regression.
  26
     Distance is measured in meters (so there are no distances ≤ 1). We use the inverted log of this distance
so that we are capturing the eﬀect of being relatively close to a public University.
  27
     Primary school usually starts around age 6 though some children in Africa start later. Secondary school
starts around age 13 until age 18.


                                                      21
   The coeﬃcients of interest are the 0 , which show the secondary schooling completion
rates for girls versus boys, near versus far from the public Universities, before and after the
policy was put in eﬀect. The 0 , as well as their three year moving average, are graphed
in figure 8. The vertical lines represent the approximate age of entry into primary school,
secondary school, and University in 1990. There is a steep upward slope in female secondary
school attendance between ages 12 and 18 (lines 2 and 3), the age groups where University
admissions would be increasingly important. The eﬀect flattens out for those in primary
school at the time of the policy change.
   The one anomalous feature of the chart is a decline in relative secondary school completion
for girls less than 6 years old in 1990. This is likely because many young children have not
yet reached the age of secondary school completion at the time of the 2002 Census. In
addition, Uganda implemented a Universal Primary Education initiative in 1997, which led
to compositional changes in the students enrolled in primary school, and this may have had
spillover eﬀects for those in secondary school.
   The evidence presented in this section suggests that education policies targeting women
can account for some of the increase in secondary education during the early nineties. To
evaluate the impact of the education policy on HIV we need three estimates: the impact of the
policy on female enrollment, the impact of enrollment on virginity and how abstinence aﬀects
HIV. For the first of these, we modify equation (8), changing the educational outcome to be
a dummy for whether an individual was still in school at a given age, to find the average
enrollment induced by the educational policy for girls aged 13-19. This increase is 14.4
percentage points. We multiply this number by the two-stage least squares estimate of the
impact of enrollment on virginity (73 percentage points, from table 7) to calculate that the
policy increased virginity by about 10 percentage points. Our simulation model implies a 10
percentage point increase in virginity would lead to a 4.6 percentage point reduction in HIV
infection, about one-third of the reduction in HIV for this cohort of women and one-fifth of
the overall decline. While this calculation clearly has uncertainty, our tentative conclusion


                                              22
is that about one-third of the reduction in HIV for younger women seems to result from the
education policy supporting women in higher education admissions.


V     Conclusion

The decline in HIV in Uganda in the early 1990s was concentrated among young women.
Among 15-19 year old pregnant women in Kampala, for example, HIV positive rates fell from
30% in the early 1990s to 15% in the mid-1990s. By building a simulation model of HIV,
we established abstinence among young women as the most important factor contributing
to this decline.
    We next explored why young women chose to abstain. We found that the percentage of
females enrolled in secondary school increased greatly in Uganda as compared to other East
African countries over this time period. Instrumenting for school attendance with distance
to secondary school, enrollment was strongly predictive of (reported) virginity. Exploiting
heterogeneity by gender, birth year and location, we found girls stayed in school longer
partly in response to the increased opportunities for higher education brought about by an
aﬃrmative action policy.
    There are two natural extensions to our work. First, it would be useful to extend our
analysis to later years to explain the second phase (albeit much less steep) of Uganda’s HIV
decline. Researchers tackling more recent periods have to contend with the introduction of
HIV treatment and the complexities (moral hazard, decreasing transmission due to reduced
viral load) that the expectation and distribution of antiretroviral therapy introduces into the
analysis. Further, HIV prevalence may mechanically rise as more people with HIV are kept
alive on treatment.
    Second, our results support the view that encouraging girls to stay in school delays their
sexual debut and reduces their lifetime risk of acquiring HIV. Do these results imply that
gender-targeted education policies are especially eﬀective ways to curtail HIV? A complete
answer to this question would involve additional research on the costs and benefits of such

                                              23
policies for both men and women in the long run. For example, a greater supply of educated
women may lead to more female policymakers promoting an agenda of gender equity (Duflo
and Chattopadhyay, 2004). On the other hand, if men prefer less-educated spouses, this
could tighten the marriage market and lead to more marital shopping. This, too, we leave
to future research.




                                           24
References
Ashenfelter, O. and A. Krueger (1994). Estimates of the economic returns to schooling from
  a new sample of twins. American Economic Review 84, 1157—1173.

Asiimwe-Okiror, G. and colleagues (1997). Change in sexual behaviour and decline in HIV
  infection among young pregnant women in urban Uganda. AIDS 11, 1757—1763.

Baird, S., C. McIntosh, and B. Ozler (2011). Cash or Condition: Evidence from a cash
  transfer experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 1709—1753.

Bessinger, R., P. Akwara, and D. Halperin (2003). Sexual behavior, HIV and fertility trends:
  A comparative analysis of six countries. USAID and Measure Evaluation Joint Report.

Boily, M.-C., R. F. Baggaley, L. Wang, B. Masse, R. G. White, R. J. Hayes, and M. Alary
  (2009). Heterosexual risk of HIV-1 infection per sexual act: systematic review and meta-
  analysis of observational studies. Lancet Infect Dis 9, 118—129.

Bommier, A. and S. Lambert (2000). Education demand and age at school enrollment in
  Tanzania. Journal of Human Resources 35, 177—203.

Coutinho, R. (2000). Some aspects of the natural history of HIV infection. Tropical Medicine
  and International Health 5, A22—A25.

Cutler, D. and A. Lleras-Muney (2006). Education and health: Evaluating theories and
 evidence. NBER Working Paper 12352 .

David, M. M. (2007). Gender policies in Uganda: The thorny road to gender equality.
  Department of Women and Gender Studies, Makerere University mimeo.

de Walque, D. (2007). How does the impact of an HIV/AIDS information campaign vary
  with educational attainment? Evidence from rural Uganda. Journal of Development
  Economics 84, 686—714.

Duflo, E. (2001). Schooling and labor market consequences of school construction in In-
 donesia: Evidence from an unusual policy experiment. American Economic Review 91,
 795—813.

Duflo, E. and R. Chattopadhyay (2004). Women as Policymakers: Evidence from a random-
 ized policy experiment in India. Econometrica 72, 1409—1443.

Duflo, E., P. Dupas, and M. Kremer (2011). Education, HIV and early fertility: Experimental
 evidence from Kenya. Stanford Manuscript.

Dupas, P. (2011). Do teenagers respond to HIV risk information? Evidence from a field
 experiment in Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3, 1—34.

Fortson, J. (2009). HIV/AIDS and fertility. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics 1, 170—194.


                                            25
Gersovitz, M., H. G., Jacoby, and F. S. Dedy (1998). The balance of self-reported heterosex-
 ual activity in KAP surveys and the AIDS epidemic in Africa. Journal of the American
 Statistical Association 93, 875—883.

Glewwe, P. and H. Jacoby (2004). Student achievement and schooling choice in low-income
  countries: Evidence from Ghana. Journal of Human Resources 29, 843—864.

Gray, R., M. J. Wawer, R. Brookmeyer, N. K. Sewankambo, D. Serwadda, and the Rakai
  Project Team (2001, Apr). Probability of HIV-1 transmission per coital act in monoga-
  mous, heterosexual, HIV-1-discordant couples in Rakai, Uganda. Lancet 357 (9263), 1149—
  1153.

Jensen, R. (2010). The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 515—548.

Karim, Q., S. Sibeko, and C. Baxter (2010). Preventing HIV in women: A global health
 imperative. Clinical Infectious Diseases 50 supp, s122—s129.

Konde-Lule, J., S. Berkley, and R. Downing (1989). Knowledge, attitudes and practices
 concerning AIDS in Ugandans. AIDS 3, 513—518.

Lakdawalla, D., N. Sood, and D. Goldman (2006). HIV breakthroughs and risky sexual
  behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 1063—1102.

Magruder, J. (2011). Marital shopping and epidemic AIDS. Demography 48, 1401—1428.

May, R. L. and R. Anderson (1991). Infectious diseases of humans: dynamics and control.
 Oxford University Press.

McCarthy, M. and colleagues (1989). Hepatitis B and HIV in Sudan: a serosurvey for hepati-
 tis B and human immunodeficiency virus antibodies among sexually active heterosexuals.
 American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 41, 726—731.

MOES (2001). The development of education in Uganda in the last ten years. Kampala.
 Uganda Ministry of Education and Sport.

MoH (1989). The 1989 Knowledge AIDS and Practices Survey. Kampala.

Montana, L. and colleagues (2008). Comparison of HIV prevalence estimates from antenatal
 care surveillance and population-based surveys in sub-Saharan Africa. Sexually Transmit-
 ted Infections 84 Suppl 1, i78—i84.

Moss, G. and colleagues (1991). Association of cervical ectopy with heterosexual transmission
 of HIV: Results of a study of couples in Nairobi, Kenya. Journal of Infectious Diseases 164,
 588—591.

Muhewzi, D. (2003). Gender sensitive educational policy and practice: a Uganda case study.
 UNESCO background paper prepared for Education for All Global Monitoring Report.



                                             26
Oster, E. (2012). HIV and sexual behavior change: Why not Africa? Journal of Health
  Economics 31, 35—49.
Oster, E. (forthcoming). Routes of infection: Exports and HIV incidence in Sub-Saharan
  Africa. Journal of the European Economic Association.
Pettifor, A. E., M. G. Hudgens, B. A. Levandowski, H. V. Rees, and M. S. Cohen (2007).
  Highly eﬃcient HIV transmission to young women in South Africa. AIDS 21, 861—865.
Philipson, T. (2000). Economic epidemiology and infectious diseases. Elsevier. In 
    .
Schoepf, B. G. (2003). Uganda: Lessons for AIDS control in Africa. Review of African
  Political Economy 30, 553—572.
Schultz, T. P. (2002). Why governments should invest more to educate girls. World Devel-
  opment 30, 207—225.
Smallman-Raynor, M. and A. Cliﬀ (1991). Civil war and the spread of AIDS in Central
  Africa. Epidemiology and Infection 107, 69—80.
Stoneburner, R. and D. Low-Beer (2004). Population-level HIV declines and behavioral risk
  avoidance in Uganda. Science 304, 714—718.
Tanser, F., T. Baernighausen, L. Hund, G. P. Garnett, N. McGrath, and M.-L. Newell (2011).
  Eﬀect of concurrent sexual partnerships on rate of new HIV infections in a high-prevalence,
  rural South African population: a cohort study. Lancet 378, 247—255.
Timaeus, I. and M. Jasseh (2004). Adult mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa: Evidence from
  Demographic and Health Surveys. Demography 41, 757—772.
Tripp, A. M. (2002). A New Generation of Women’s Mobilisation in Uganda. Fountain
  Press. In  0    .
Ueyama, M. and F. Yamauchi (2009). Marriage behavior response to prime-age adult mor-
  tality: Evidence from Malawi. Demography 46, 43—63.
UNAIDS (2008). Report on the global HIV epidemic. Geneva.
UNECA (2008). The Commission on HIV/AIDS and governance in Africa: Securing our
 future. Addis Ababa.
USAID (2002). What happened in Uganda? Washington D.C.
Wawer, M., R. Gray, D. Serwadda, and F. Mukumbi (2005). Declines in HIV prevalence
 in Uganda: Not as simple as ABC. 12th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic
 Infections. Boston.
Wilcox, A., C. Weinberg, and D. Bard (1995). Timing of sexual intercourse in relation to
 ovulation: Eﬀects on the probability of conception, survival of the pregnancy, and sex of
 the baby. New England Journal of Medicine 333, 1517—1521.

                                             27
VI   Figures
             Figure 1: Map of Uganda




 Notes: Map of Uganda showing ANC cities, districts and public Universities.




                                         28
         Figure 2: Median HIV Prevalence Among Pregnant Women, Uganda




                   .35
                   .3
                   .25
                   .2
                   .15
                   .1
                   .05
                   0




                         1986        1990          1994           1998           2002    2006
                                                           year

                                                     Urban               Rural



   Notes: Data are from the UNAIDS Uganda Epidemiological Fact Sheets on HIV/AIDS
from 2004, 2006 and 2008. Median annual prevalence is from antenatal clinics that performed
surveillance HIV testing.


    Figure 3: Median HIV Prevalence Among Pregnant Women in Urban Areas,
                           Select Countries in Africa
                         .5
                         .4
                         .3
                         .2
                         .1
                         0




                              1985          1990               1995              2000      2005
                                                               year

                                                   Uganda                 Kenya
                                                   Tanzania               South Africa
                                                   Botswana



    Notes: Data are from the UNAIDS Epidemiological Facts Sheets on HIV/AIDS for the
relevant countries from 2004, 2006 and 2008. Median annual prevalence is from urban
antenatal clinics that performed surveillance HIV testing.




                                                          29
                                             Figure 4: HIV Prevalence by Marital Status and Age

                                    Females                                                                                Males




       .4
                                                                                          .4




       .3
                                                                                          .3




       .2
                                                                                          .2




       .1
                                                                                          .1




       0
                                                                                          0
        15-19   20-24    25-29      30-34         35-39   40-44       45-49       50-54    15-19   20-24    25-29      30-34         35-39   40-44       45-49       50-54
                                            age                                                                                age




30
                    Currently or Previously Married               Never Married                        Currently or Previously Married               Never Married



     Notes: Data are from the 1987 KAP Survey. The prevalence is the percent of individuals in each subgroup with a positive
     HIV-1 antibody test. For never married women and men, after a certain age (45 for men, 40 for women), there are very few
     people. Speci…cally, there are 24 females and 17 males above these cuto¤s. We omit those values.
               Figure 5: HIV Prevalence Among Pregnant Women
                            by Age Group, Kampala




                  .4
                  .3
                  .2
                  .1
                  0




                        1990   1991        1992        1993     1994         1995   1996
                                                       Year

                                                   15-19        20-24
                                                   25-29        30+



Notes: Data are from the United States Census Bureau, HIV/AIDS Surveillance website.



                Figure 6: Secondary Schooling by Gender, Uganda
                  .45
                  .4
                  .35
                  .3
                  .25
                  .2




                         5            10                 15             20           25
                                                      age1990

                                                  Females        Males




    Notes: This figure shows the trend in receipt of greater than seven years of education
for Ugandan females and males living near to a public University. Data are from the 2002
Uganda Census.




                                                      31
    Figure 7: Distance to School, Virginity and Secondary School Enrollment
                        Among Young Ugandan Women




                          .28




                                                                                    .25
                          .26




                                                                                    .2
                             .24




                                                                                          Enrolled
                      Virgin
                   .22




                                                                                    .15
                          .2




                                                                                    .1
                          .18




                                   0   1.0   1.0       3.3       5.0   7.1   17.2
                                                Mean Distance (Km)

                                                Virgin     Enrolled



    Notes: This figure plots the correlation between virginity, enrollment and distance to the
nearest secondary school. To construct these figures, we bin distance into 7 equal sized bins
and plot the mean of the outcome within each bin. The mean of the distance within each bin
is indicated on the x-axis. Data are from the 1995 Uganda DHS. Sample includes Ugandan
women aged 15-24.




                                                     32
     Figure 8: E¤ect of A¢ rmative Action on Girls’Secondary School Completion




              6
              4
              2
                                   Primary             Secondary        University




              0




33
              -2
                   0   2   4   6     8       10   12   14 16       18    20    22    24   26   28   30
                                                         age

                                    Coefficient                Moving Average


     Notes: This …gure plots the triple interaction coe¢ cients and their three year moving
     average from equation (9). The sample includes all men and women in the 2002
     Uganda Census between the ages of 0 and 30 in 1990, the year in which an a¢ rmative
     action policy granting women preferential treatment in their application to public Univer-
     sities was enacted. The vertical lines represent the approximate cuto¤s between primary
     secondary and University education. Standard errors are clustered at the
     district level. Filled in circles are coe¢ cients signi…cant at 10% level.
VII     Tables
                                   Table 1: HIV Prevalence in Uganda, 1987
        Group                                     Description                                  % HIV+

      α males        Never married males > 20 and widowed divorced males                        17%
      β males        Never married males 15-19 and young < 30 married males                     10%
      δ males        Older married males >30                                                    6%
      μ females Commercial sex workers                                                          37%
      λ females All never married females and young < 25 married females                        19%
      ω females All widowed/divorced females and older > 25 married females          9%
      Notes : Data are from the 1987 KAP Survey. Prevalence is the percent of those in a given
      subgroup with a positive HIV-1 antibody test, except for Commercial Sex Workers, who are
      assumed to have the HIV prevalence of older, never married females.



                             Table 2: Characteristics of Sexual Activity, 1987
                Characteristic                               Females        Males
                Age of sexual debut
                 Mean                                        14.9           17.3
                 2.5%ile, 97.5%ile                           14.0, 15.6     15.5, 18.8

                Age of first marriage
                 Mean                                             17.3            23.4
                 2.5%ile, 97.5%ile                                16.2, 18.2      19.5, 29.3

                                                             #
                Coital frequency for married individuals
                 Mean                                             6.3             7
                 2.5%ile, 97.5%ile                                0, 25           0, 26

                Number of extramarital partners*
                 μ females / α males                              NA              2.4
                 λ females / β males                              1.1             2.1
                 ω females / δ males                              0.6             1.1
                Notes : Average age of sexual debut and first marriage are predicted using
                the coefficients in Online Appendix table A1. Coital frequency for women
                is predicted using the coefficients in Online Appendix table A2. Coital
                frequency for married men is derived by randomly matching each husband
                with their reported number of wives and ascribing the wives’ sexual activity
                to their husband. See text for further details. Number of extra-marital
                partners is based upon responses in the 1987 KAP Survey.
                #
                    In the last four weeks.
                *
                    If unmarried, this is the average total number of partners.



                                                        34
              Table 3: Estimated Mixing Probabilities in the Baseline Model
                                          Males
           Females        α              β             δ            Total
           μ              NA / 30%       NA / 21%      NA / 14%     100% / …
           λ              84% / 41% 14% / 37% 2% / 24%              100% / …
           ω              17% / 30% 7% / 43%           76% / 62% 100% / …
           Total          … / 100%       … / 100%      … / 100%
           Notes : The first item in each cell is the share of people in that row
           having sex with people in that column. The second item is the share
           of people in that column having sex with people in that row. The
           probabilities are derived from the model in Online Appendix B using
           the data sources described in Online Appendix C.




                Table 4: Predicted and Actual Baseline Prevalence of HIV
                           Actual           Predicted        Percentage
Demographic group                                                             % difference
                           prevalence       prevalence       point difference
Women
 Total                        13.1%           13.2%        -0.1%             0.4%
 Never married                22.5%           20.9%        -1.6%             -7.3%
 Young married                17.5%           19.1%        -1.6%             -9.0%
 Old married                  8.3%            9.0%         -0.7%             -7.9%
 Divorced/widowed*            9.5%            7.5%         2.0%              21.4%
Men
 Total                        10.6%           10.9%        -0.3%             -2.4%
 Young never married          5.9%            5.2%         0.8%              12.7%
 Old never married            13.7%           13.3%        0.0%              3.2%
 Young married                10.9%           9.4%         -1.5%             -13.7%
 Old married                  6.0%            4.2%         -1.8%             -29.6%
 Divorced widowed*            20.7%           23.1%        -2.4%             -11.5%
*Assumed married for 1/2 time sexually active
Notes : Starting with a 5% HIV prevalence among CSWs in 1977.




                                            35
 Table 5: Simulated Impact of Abstinence, Faithfulness, Condom Use, and Death on
                   HIV Positive Rates Among Pregnant Women
                                                     Pregnant Women of Age
                                               15-19     20-24   25-29     30+
Panel A: Baseline Simulation
 Actual rate, 1990-1992                            26.5%      26.8%   23.1%   15.7%
 Predicted rate                                    25.7%      24.4%   24.6%   11.0%
 % difference                                       3.0%       9.0%    6.5%   30.0%
 Percentage point difference                       0.8%       2.4%    -1.5%   4.7%
 Change in rate: 1990-92 to 1994-96               -14.0%      -6.8%   -2.3%   0.2%

Panel B: Simulating Population Changes
Reduction in Pre-Marital Sex (Women)
 Predicted rate                                    17.4%      23.1%   24.7%   11.0%
 Percentage point change in predicted rate         -8.3%      -1.3%    0.1%   0.0%


Reduction in Extra-Marital Sex (Men)
 Predicted rate                                    26.6%      24.7%   24.5%   11.0%
 Percentage point change in predicted rate          0.9%       0.3%   -0.1%   0.0%

Impact of Condom Use (Men)
 Predicted rate                                    22.4%      23.1%   24.5%   10.8%
 Percentage point change in predicted rate         -3.3%      -1.3%   -0.1%   -0.2%

Impact of AIDS-Related Deaths (Men)
 Predicted rate                                    23.1%      22.2%   24.2%   10.7%
 Percentage point change in predicted rate         -2.6%      -2.2%   -0.7%   -0.3%

 Cumulative Impact                                -13.3%      -4.5%   -0.8%   -0.5%
 Share of total decline                           95.0%       66.0%   35.0%     ---
Notes : All estimates come from the model described in the text.




                                             36
           Table 6: Abstinence, Sexual Debut and Marital Trends,
                   Young Ugandan Women, Urban Areas
                                     Ages 15 to 19     Ages 20 to 24
                                    1988      1995    1988       1995
    Married                           18.7%      21.2%   45.1%    49.4%
    Virgin | never married           50.3% 68.7%** 20.3%         21.2%
    Age of first sex | having sex     14.9       14.8      15.9   16.1
     - Married                         15         15       15.6    16
     - Never married                  14.9       14.6      16.7    17
    Age of first marriage | married   15.9       15.9      17.7   17.7
    Notes: Data are from the 1988 and 1995 Uganda DHS. Percentages do
    not add to 100% because of omitted marital categories.




                     Table 7: Enrollment and Virginity
                                        (1)          (2)           (IV)
Enrolled                             0.45***      0.46***        0.73***
                                      (0.022)     (0.022)        (0.214)
Birth year                             0.06      -0.06***        0.05***
                                      (0.002)     (0.003)        (0.010)
Catholic                                           -0.007         0.002
                                                  (0.012)        (0.015)
Baganda                                          -0.02***         -0.04*
                                                  (0.016)        (0.024)
Know someone who died of AIDS                        -0.03***     -0.04*
                                                      (0.019)    (0.024)
County FE                                 N              Y          Y
First-stage F- stat                                                24.5
No. obs                                 2987          2940         2940
R2                                       0.40         0.40         0.36
Notes : Data are from the 1995 Uganda DHS. Sample includes females ages
15-24 who did not self-report leaving school due to pregnancy. Robust
standard errors in parentheses.
*
  Statistically significant at the 1% level
**
   Statistically significant at the 5% level.
***
    Statistically significant at the 1% level.




                                        37
    Table 8: Effect of the Policy on Higher Education: Coefficients on the
 Interaction of Gender, Proximity to Public University and Cohort Dummies
                                           Secondary School Completed >7
                                              Completion      Years of School
Panel A: Experiment Comparing Educational Outcomes for Girls aged 8-12 versus those
aged 19-23 in 1990
                                                   2.79***             3.42***
Female*Young*(1/Ln(Distance))
                                                   (0.361)             (0.469)
District FE                                           Y                   Y
Cohort FE                                             Y                   Y
Cohort-Size                                           Y                   Y
No. obs                                            338545              353782
No. clusters                                          55                  55
R2                                                   0.11                0.12
Panel B: Placebo Comparing Educational Outcomes for Girls aged 19-23 versus those
aged 24-28 in 1990
                                                 0.521                0.568
Female*Young*(1/Ln(Distance))
                                                (0.646)              (0.513)
District FE                                        Y                    Y
Cohort FE                                          Y                    Y
Cohort-Size                                        Y                    Y
No. obs                                         230502               245130
No. clusters                                       55                   55
   2
R                                                 0.11                 0.11
Notes : Data are from the 2002 Uganda Census. Robust standard errors clustered at
the district level in parentheses.
*
  Statistically significant at the 1% level
**
   Statistically significant at the 5% level.
***
    Statistically significant at the 1% level.




                                         38
VIII   For Online Publication: Appendices
Appendix A

               Table A1: Predicted Age of First Marriage and Age of Sexual Debut
                                                Females                Males

                                       Age of first Age of   Age of first Age of
         Independent Variable
                                        marriage sexual debut marriage sexual debut
                                              ***        ***
                                         1.05       0.74           0.34         -0.64
         Education
                                          (0.21)     (0.17)      (0.34)        (0.59)
         Age                             0.036**     0.11 **
                                                                 0.19  ***
                                                                               0.34**
                                          (0.01)     (0.05)      (0.04)        (0.16)
                                                           **
                                                   -0.002                      -0.004
         Age2                            ---                        ---
                                                    (0.001)                   (0.002)
                                             ***          ***           ***
                                      14.90        12.83        15.34         11.21***
         Constant
                                       (0.40)        (0.74)       (1.07)       (3.24)
         No. obs                        1154          1287         423           568
           2
         R                              0.05          0.05         0.1           0.03
         Notes : For females, the data are from the 1988 Uganda DHS. For males, the
         data are from the 1995 Uganda DHS. Only men who married or debuted at
         least 10 years prior to the survey were included in the analysis. Robust
         standard errors in parentheses.
         **
              Statistically significant at the 5% level.
         ***
               Statistically significant at the 1% level.




                                                    39
                                            Table A2: Predicted Coital Frequency
                                                    Number of coital acts per month
                                                                                          Zero inflated negative
                                         Zero inflated negative
                                                                   Negative binomial            binomial
     Independent Variable                      binomial
                                                                  Never married females    Divorced/widowed
                                           Married females
                                                                                                 females
     Age                                          0.001                  0.574**                  0.114
                                                 (0.016)                 (0.226)                 (0.089)
     Age2                                        -0.0002                -0.013***                 -0.002
                                                (0.0003)                 (0.005)                 (0.001)
     Constant                                    2.060***                -6.089**                  -0.29
                                                 (0.225)                 (2.494)                 (1.318)
     (inflate) Constant                         -1.995***                   ---                  0.711***
                                                 (0.108)                                         (0.148)
     Natural log alpha                          -0.357***                 1.677                   -0.328
                                                 (0.091)                 (0.139)                 (0.447)




40
                                               2455                       471                 177
     Nonzero observations
     Vuong test                                 5.59                       ---                2.75
     Notes : Data are from the 1988 Uganda DHS. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Depending on Vuong
     test results, a zero inflated negative binomial or a negative binomial model was used.
     **
          Statistically significant at the 5% level.
     ***
           Statistically significant at the 1% level.
                             Table A3: Transmission Probabilities
                                        Male to Female
                Females                 Husband          α            β         δ
                Age < 20                0.0025        0.015    0.01         0.005
                Age 20-29               0.0025        0.0075   0.005        0.0025
                Age >30                 0.00125       0.006    0.003        0.002
                                         Female to Male
                Males                     Wife           λ        µ             ω
                Age < 30                0.0016        0.0025   0.005        0.0016
                Age >30                 0.00125       0.0025   0.005        0.0016
                Notes : Probabilities are based on the medical literature. See text
                for references.




                        Table A4: Condom Use Among Urban Men, 1995
                                                     Males
                             Young,
                                       Old, never   Young,                Divorced/
Females                       never                         Old, married
                                        married     married                widowed
                             married
Never married             50%         50%         34%       20%          61%
Young, married             50%          50%              7%               20%         61%
Old, married               50%          50%              34%              4%          61%
Divorced/widowed         50%         50%                 34%              20%         61%
Notes : Data are from the 1995 Ugandan DHS.




                                                 41
Appendix B
This Appendix explains our mixing equations and the assumptions we use to identify those
equations.
    Denote   as the probability that a women in group  has sex with a man in group 
and   as the probability that a man in group  has sex with a woman in group . There
are 9 probabilities for each of three groups of men having sex with three groups of women
(        ;         ; and    ,   ) and 9 probabilities for each of three groups
of women having sex with each of three groups of men (  ,   ,   ;   ,   ,   ; and
  ,   ,  ). Since we do not observe CSWs in our data, we omit   ,   ,   from
consideration. This leaves 15 unknown parameters.
    These parameters are identified through two types of equations. The first equations are
the observation equations: every sexual act is with one of these groups. This corresponds to
the assumptions that:

   1.   +   +   = 1

   2.   +   +   = 1

   3.   +   +   = 1

   4.   +  +   = 1

   5.   +   +   = 1

   The second equations are the conservation of sex acts: the total number of acts that
group A has with group B is the same as the number of acts that group B has with group
A. Again excluding CSWs, this yields the equations:

   6.    =   

   7.    =  

   8.    =   

   9.    =  

 10.    =   

 11.    =   

   Thus, there are 11 equations and 15 unknowns.
   To solve the equations, we need an additional assumption. We do this with knowledge of
sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Let   and  be the prevalence of sexually transmit-
ted infections in the , , and  groups of males, respectively; where     . In practice,
we calculate  = 50  = 35and  = 24. We use these fractions to weight the coeﬃcients
and reduce the dimensionality of the matrix from 11 to 9 equations. Specifically, we assume
that the probability that  (older, safer) women have sex with  (older) men is declining in
the probability of STIs among older men, the probability that men have sex with  women

                                                     42
is inversely proportional to STI rates, and that the probability that men have sex with 
women (CSWs) is directly proportional to STI rates. Thus:
     = (1 − ) ¡ ¢
     = (1 −   ) ¡          ¢
                                 
     = (1¡  ¢−   ) 1 − 
     = ¡  ¢ (  )
     = ¡  ¢ (  )
     = ¡  ¢ (  )
     =  (  )
    This translates into the following 9 equations, which can be used to solve for 8 unknowns:
     ,   ,  ,   ,   ,   ,  , and   .

  1.   +   +   = 1

  2.   +   +   = 1

  3.   +    +   = 1

  4.   +    +    = 1

  5.   +   +    = 1

  6.    =   

  7.    =  

  8.    =   
               £                  ¤
  9.  =    +   +  




                                             43
 Table B1: Estimated Mixing Probabilities Under Alternative
                        Simulations
                           Males
Females α                 β                δ
Reduced Pre-marital Sex
 μ       NA / 39%         NA / 27%         NA / 19%
 λ       83% / 31%        15% / 30%        2% / 19%
 ω       17% / 30%        7% / 43%         76% / 62%

Reduced Extra-marital Sex
 μ       NA / 29%              NA / 20%           NA / 14%
 λ       85% / 41%             14% / 37%          1% / 23%
 ω       17% / 30%             7% / 43%           76% / 63%

Death of α males
  μ        NA / 12%            NA / 9%              NA / 6%
  λ        83% / 51%           15% / 40%            2% / 20%
  ω        17% / 36%           7% / 51%             76% / 75%
Notes : The first item in each cell is the share of people in that row
having sex with people in that column. The second item is the
share of people in that column having sex with people in that row.
CSWs are not in our sample; thus, we do not estimate the
probability that they have sexual contact with any particular set of
men.




                                 44
Appendix C
      Condom Use: Sample includes men in urban areas, stratified by the groups described
in table 1. The variable is constructed from a question regarding condom use at last sex
(mv761) and a question on whether condom was used with wife (mv851) or with others
(mv850a) to determine which acts were protected for married men (see Online Appendix A
table A4) Source: 1995 Uganda DHS.
    Distance to Public Universities: This was calculated using coordinates for Makerere
University (0.35 , 32.68) and for Mbarara University of Science and Technology (-0.62 ,
30.66). A map of Ugandan districts was projected into Africa_Equidistant_Conic. The
centroid of each individual’s birth district (BPLUG) was then used. Distance was calculated
in meters using the Near tool in ArcMap 10, as the distance between the centroid of the
respondent’s birth district and the nearest public University. Source: 2002 Uganda Census.
    Distance to Secondary School: This variable is defined as distance to secondary school
and is measured in kilometers, (c111b). Source: 1995 Uganda DHS.
    Enrolled: This variable is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the respondent answers yes
to the question of whether they are still in school (v148). Source: 1995 Uganda DHS.
    Fidelity: Sample includes men in urban areas who have ever been married and is defined
specifically as an indicator equal to one for those who meet the joint condition of responding
yes to the question on whether they have reduced their partners (mv760e) and now only
have one partner (mv760d). Source: 1995 Uganda DHS.
    Secondary School Attendance: This variable is an indicator equal to one if the individual
completed secondary school. Specifically, EDATTAND must be equal to 221 or 311 in the
data set, corresponding to completion of lower or upper secondary general school. Secondary
technical track was excluded since this would not have been aﬀected by the 1990 aﬃrmative
action policy (technical training is a substitute for University education). Source: 2002
Uganda Census.
    Virginity: This variable equals zero if the respondent gives an age to the question on
age of first intercourse and one if they have not yet had intercourse, (v525). Source: 1988
Uganda DHS and 1995 Uganda DHS.




                                             45
                                        Table C1: Model Overview and Data Sources
                     Parameter                    Data Source/Methodology                    Values
                                          Biomedical literature (see text for
     Pr {HIV transmission}                                                     Table A3
                                          references)
     Prevalence of STIs                   1987 KAP Survey                      α=.50, β=.35 and δ=.24
     Pr {HIVf } and
                                          1987 KAP Survey                           Table 1
     Pr {HIVm }
     N i = duration* coital frequency
         Duration sexually active         1988 and 1995 Uganda DHS                  Table A1
         Coital frequency                 1988 Uganda DHS                           Table A2
         Mixing probabilities (πfm )      Calculated from equations (3) and (4)     Table 3 and Appendix B
     Behavior Change (A)                  1988 and 1995 Uganda DHS                  Tables 6 and B1
                                                                                    Reduction in the number of
     Behavior Change (B)                  1995 Uganda DHS                           extramarital coital acts lowers N j
                                                                                    changes πmf. Table B1.




46
     Behavior Change (C)                  1995 Uganda DHS                          Table A4
                                                                                   Sensitivity analysis for death of α
                                          Biomedical literature on time to
     Mortality (D)                                                                 males which lowers Pr(HIVα) and
                                          developing AIDS. See text for references
                                                                                   changes πmf. Table B1
      Notes: Parameters given are those for estimating equation (5) for a representative female. The male equation (6) is
     symmetric except for the following: Prevalence of STIs in Females, µ=.50 λ=.15 and ω=.10 and coital frequency is
     found by pairing married males with married women, and, for single men, multiplying the ratio of acts for Tanzanian
     single men/single women by Ugandan coital acts for single women.
