NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF MORTGAGE BROKERS IN THE SUBPRIME CRISIS
Antje Berndt
Burton Hollifield
Patrik Sandås
Working Paper 16175
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16175

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

We are grateful for financial support from the McIntire Center for Financial Innovation. We thank
Sonny Bringol of Victorian Finance, LLC and Paul Allen of Oakmont Advisors, LLC for helpful discussions
about the structure of the mortgage market and Michael Gage of IPRecovery for help with the New
Century database. We are grateful to Vijay Bhasin, Bo Becker, Amit Seru, Amir Sufi and seminar
participants at Aalto University, Carnegie Mellon University, Case Western University, Copenhagen
Business School, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Hanken School of Economics, HEC Paris, Insead,
SIFR, UC Berkeley, UNC Chapel Hill, University of Waterloo, Wilfrid Laurier University, the NBER
Securitization Meeting, the third McGill/IFM2 Risk Management Conference, and the NBER Financial
Institutions and Market Risk Conference for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Antje Berndt, Burton Hollifield, and Patrik Sandås. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Role of Mortgage Brokers in the Subprime Crisis
Antje Berndt, Burton Hollifield, and Patrik Sandås
NBER Working Paper No. 16175
July 2010
JEL No. G12,G18,G21,G32
ABSTRACT
Prior to the subprime crisis, mortgage brokers originated about 65% of all subprime mortgages. Yet
little is known about their behavior during the runup to the crisis. Using data from New Century Financial
Corporation, we find that brokers earned an average revenue of $5,300 per funded loan. We decompose
the broker revenues into a cost and a profit component and find evidence consistent with brokers having
market power. The profits earned are different for different types of loans and vary with borrower,
broker, regulation and neighborhood characteristics. We relate the broker profits to the subsequent
performance of the loans and show that brokers earned high profits on loans that turned out to be riskier
ex post.

Antje Berndt
Carnegie Mellon University
Tepper School of Business
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
aberndt@andrew.cmu.edu
Burton Hollifield
Carnegie Mellon University
Tepper School of Business
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
burtonh@andrew.cmu.edu

Patrik Sandås
University of Virginia
McIntire School of Commerce
P.O. Box 400173
Charlottesville, VA, 22904
patriks@virginia.edu

1.

Introduction

Mortgage brokers act as ﬁnancial intermediaries matching borrowers with lenders, assisting in the selection of loans, and completing the loan application process. Mortgage
brokers became the predominant channel for loan origination in the subprime market.
For example, in 2005 independent mortgage brokers originated about 65% of all subprime
mortgages.1 Despite the mortgage brokers’ central role in the subprime market, little is
known about their behavior and incentives, nor about the types of loans, borrowers, or
properties that generated proﬁts for the brokers. We study the role of independent brokers in the mortgage origination process using a dataset from one large subprime lender,
New Century Financial Corporation, whose rapid rise and fall parallels that of the subprime mortgage market from the mid nineties until the beginning of the subprime crisis
in 2007. Figure 1 plots the loan volume originated by New Century between 1997 and
2006 and the split between broker and retail originated loan volume. The rapid growth
between 2001 and 2006 mirrors that of the overall subprime market and much of that
growth stems from broker originated loans, underscoring the importance of independent
mortgage brokers.
Traditionally a mortgage broker operates as an independent service provider, not as a
direct agent of the borrower nor a direct agent of the lender. The broker charges a direct
fee to the borrower and earns an indirect fee—known as the yield spread premium—from
the lender. The broker’s services include taking the borrower’s application, performing
a ﬁnancial and credit evaluation, giving the borrower information about available loan
options, and producing underwriting information for the lender. Figure 2 plots the
unconditional frequency distribution of the broker gross revenues and its components
in our sample. The top plot shows the distribution of the direct fee portion of the
revenues, the middle plot shows the yield spread premium, and the bottom plot shows
the distribution of the total broker revenues. All the distributions are quite skewed—
1

Detailed information is available at the National Association of Mortgage Brokers website at
www.namb.org.

1

there are some extremely large fees and yield spreads paid out to the brokers.
The lender sets a schedule of yield spread premia that rewards the broker for originating loans with a higher interest rate holding other things equal. In addition, the yield
spread premium schedule often varies with loan, borrower, and property characteristics.
For example, if hybrid mortgages are more appealing to the lender and loans to ﬁnance
second homes or investment properties are less appealing to the lender, then the lender
may set higher yield spread premia for hybrid loans and lower yield spread premia for
second home or investment property loans. A more attractive yield spread premium
schedule may encourage the broker to focus on originating certain types of loans.
The mortgage broker is likely to trade oﬀ the potential beneﬁts of ﬁnding the best
loan product for the borrower—which may help the broker win future business—against
originating a loan product that may generate the highest revenues for the broker from
the current loan. We develop a framework that allows us to empirically examine these
trade-oﬀs and apply it to a large sample of subprime mortgages. The questions we seek to
address are: Is there evidence that mortgage brokers extract rents from the transactions?
For what types of loans or borrowers do the brokers extract greater proﬁts? Is there any
relationship between broker rents and the subsequent loan performance?
We study these questions using an extensive sample of mortgages originated by New
Century Financial Corporation. The sample contains detailed information on the credit
worthiness of the borrower, the purpose of the loan, the appraised property value, the
location and type of property, the type and terms of loans originated, loan servicing
records, and information on whether or not a mortgage broker was involved in the loan.
The sample also reports the fees and yield spread premia earned by the brokers, allowing
us to compute the total broker revenues for each funded mortgage.
Our empirical framework is based on the idea that in order for a mortgage to be
funded, it must be acceptable to the borrower, the broker, and the lender given the
information each observes. We model the interaction between the borrower and the
broker as a bargaining game over the loan terms and type, subject to the constraint that
2

the lender will fund the loan. The framework decomposes the total revenues charged
by the broker into a cost of facilitating the match and a component that reﬂects the
broker’s proﬁts. The lender’s surplus is the net present value to the lender from funding
the loan less the yield spread premium paid to the mortgage broker. The lender aﬀects
the broker’s behavior indirectly via the yield spread schedule and directly via the decision
to fund a loan, and here we focus on the yield spread premium. The borrower’s surplus
depends on the beneﬁt that the borrower receives from the loan which in turn depends on
the value that the borrower assigns to owning the property and the valuation of various
mortgage attributes.
Some proﬁts must be generated in the chain of loan origination in order for both
the lender and the broker to be able to extract proﬁts. Why would competition not
eliminate such proﬁts? One possibility is that the range of diﬀerent mortgage products
allows suﬃcient risk-adjusted price dispersion to exist. Such price dispersion may arise
for strategic reasons as argued by Carlin (2009) and may not be eliminated by competition as shown by Gabaix and Laibson (2006). Research on household ﬁnancial decisions
provides evidence that individuals and households often make suboptimal decisions, see,
for example, Campbell (2006). More choices may also not lead individuals or households to make better decisions, see, for example, Iyengar, Jiang, and Huberman (2004).
It therefore is plausible that neither comparison shopping by borrowers nor more competitive pricing by lenders would necessarily eliminate the price dispersion that enables
brokers to proﬁt from originating the loans.
We estimate a stochastic frontier model that decomposes the broker’s revenues into a
cost component and a proﬁt component. The decomposition rests on the idea that when
the borrower uses the broker, the broker will only propose loans with non-negative broker
proﬁt. The decomposition is identiﬁed in our sample because of the empirical skewness,
illustrated by Figure 2, in the total broker revenues. In our sample, the mean broker
revenue is $5,300 per loan, and our decomposition attributes approximately $1,100 to
broker proﬁts. We ﬁnd evidence that hybrid and piggyback loans are particularly prof3

itable in part because the yield spread premia are higher for such loans, whereas balloon
loans are more proﬁtable in part because the direct fees are higher. In general, brokers
earn greater proﬁts from originating loans in neighborhoods with a greater fraction of
minority populations. We ﬁnd some evidence that stricter state regulations of the lending
practices and of mortgage brokers are associated with lower broker proﬁts.
To investigate the relationship between broker proﬁts and the subsequent loan performance, we estimate a Cox proportional hazard model for loan delinquency. The estimates
imply that the marginal eﬀect of broker proﬁts is positive for future delinquency once
we condition on characteristics of the loan, the borrower and the broker, suggesting that
brokers earned high proﬁts on loans that turned out to be riskier ex post. To determine
if the eﬀect is primarily driven by the direct fees or by the yield spread premium, we condition on the ratio of fees to loan amount and yield spread premia to loan amount in the
hazard model. We ﬁnd that abnormally high fees increase the delinquency hazard rate
whereas abnormally high yield spread premia decrease the hazard rate, indicating that
abnormally high broker fees may play an important role in predicting high delinquency
rates. The relationship between broker proﬁts and the risk of delinquency is present for
the whole sample period although it is somewhat stronger during the last few years.
Demyanyk and Hemert (2009), as well as Mian and Suﬁ (2009), analyze the quality of
securitized subprime mortgage loans. Keys, Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig (2009) and Purnanandam (2009) argue that the lack of screening incentives for originators and excessive
risk-taking contributed to the subprime crisis. Despite the prominence of brokers in the
subprime mortgage market, little is known about their behavior during the runup to the
crisis. El-Anshasy, Elliehausen, and Shimazaki (2006) and LaCour-Little (2009) compare
the rates on subprime mortgages originated by lenders through the retail channel and
through mortgage brokers. LaCour-Little (2009) shows that loans originated by brokers
cost borrowers more than retail loans, while El-Anshasy, Elliehausen, and Shimazaki
(2006) do not ﬁnd support that loans originated through brokers cost borrowers more.
Woodward and Hall (2009) examine the total revenues paid by borrowers to mortgage
4

brokers for a sample of FHA loans originated in 2001 and show that a substantial portion can be attributed to broker proﬁts and that the broker proﬁts vary with borrower
characteristics, consistent with the brokers’ proﬁts stemming from lack of information
among borrowers. Our approach to estimating broker rents is similar to the one taken
by Woodward and Hall (2009) in that we use stochastic frontier analysis to decompose
the broker revenues charged into a cost and a proﬁt component. Garmaise (2009) studies
the length and intensity of the broker-lender relationship and ﬁnds that the quality of
loans originated actually declines in the number of interactions between the broker and
the lender.

2.

Our Sample

Our dataset contains all loans originated by New Century Financial Corporation (New
Century) between 1997 and March 2007. New Century made its ﬁrst loan to a borrower
in Los Angeles, California in February 1996 and in 2006, New Century had more than
7,100 employees and 222 sales oﬃces nationwide. In 2006, New Century was one of the
largest subprime mortgage originators in the United States
New Century originated, retained, sold and serviced home mortgage loans designed
for subprime borrowers. In 1996, the company originated over $350 million in loans.
In 1997, New Century went public and was listed on NASDAQ. In 2001, the company’s
subprime loan origination volume exceeded $6 billion. Volume continued to grow rapidly,
and volume increased tenfold to over $60 billion in 2006. The company grew its product
oﬀerings so that by 2006, New Century provided ﬁxed rate mortgages, hybrid mortgages
which are adjustable rate mortgages that convert to ﬁxed rate mortgages after a number
of months, and balloon mortgages. In 2004, New Century restructured into a real estate
investment trust (REIT) and began trading on the NYSE. In February of 2007, New Century announced that it would have to restate earnings for the ﬁrst nine months of 2006
and that it had record a loss for the last quarter of 2006. Increased rates of delinquency

5

among recent borrowers and inadequate reserves for such losses were the proximate reasons for the company’s troubles. New Century ﬁled for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection
on April 2, 2007.
2.1.

Origination data

Our dataset contains detailed information on the credit worthiness of the borrower,
the purpose of the loan—either a property purchase or a reﬁnance, appraised value,
location and type of property, the type and terms of loans originated, origination fees,
yield spread premium, and information on whether or not a mortgage broker was involved.
These data provide enough detail to allow us to study the matching of borrowers with
loan types and the relationship between loan types and revenues paid and received. The
dataset was obtained from IPRecovery, Inc., and it contains information on all loan
applications and funded loans.2 We focus on the loans originated by independent brokers
as opposed to correspondent brokers, who are aﬃliated with New Century, and construct
a sample that includes all loans originated by independent brokers that meet a set of
sample selection and matching criteria. We present details on the sample construction
in Appendix A and descriptive statistics below. Table 1 lists variables that we use in our
analysis with brief descriptions. We discuss these variables in more detail in Section 4.2.
Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for our sample including the number of broker
originated loans, the average loan amount, and the number of brokers who originated
loans by origination year. After an initial jump, the number of loans and active brokers
stays relatively constant between 1998 and 2000. After 2001, the growth picks up and
both the number of loans and the number active brokers grow rapidly until 2006 when
the growth slows down again. Over the whole sample period, about 715,000 loans were
originated by 58,000 independent brokers with an average loan amount of $189,000.
The next panel shows that our sample represents subprime loans from all parts of
2

As part of the New Century Financial Corporation bankruptcy proceedings, IP Recovery, Inc. purchased from the New Century Liquidating Trust a collection of datasets on loan origination, loan servicing, loan performance, and broker data for loans originated/serviced by New Century between 1997
and its bankruptcy ﬁling in 2007.

6

the country by providing the geographical breakdown of the properties. We break out
California, Florida, and Texas because they are the three biggest markets by number of
loans originated throughout our sample period. We break down the remaining markets
by the census regions—West, Midwest, South, and Northeast without California, Florida,
and Texas. As the loan volume grows the geographical distribution shifts away from the
Midwest to the South including Texas and Florida and to the Northeast. For example,
in 1997, only 11% of the loans were originated for properties in the South but by 2006,
the corresponding share had grown to 33%. Similarly, 3% of the loans in 1997 were
for properties in the Northeast compared to 17% in 2006. California’s share ﬂuctuates
between a low of 19% and a high of 32%, but without a clear trend. The regions that
grow more slowly than the rest appear to be the West outside California and the Midwest.
Throughout the sample period, 90% or more of all loans were originated in metropolitan
areas.
The next set of statistics shows the breakdown of the purpose of the loans. For
the whole sample period, approximately two-thirds of the loans were taken to reﬁnance
existing loans. Of all the loans taken to reﬁnance existing mortgages, the majority
involved the borrower taking out some cash. These percentages are comparable to the
ones reported for the subprime market in general by, for example, Demyanyk and Hemert
(2009). From 2003 onwards, loans to reﬁnance become less important and the fraction
of loans to purchase properties grows from 20% to 44%. The last two panels of the table
report the distribution of loans by type of occupancy and property. The majority of
loans are obtained for a single family used as the borrower’s primary residence.
Table 3 reports descriptive statistics on the loans in our sample. We can match most
second lien loans in our sample with a ﬁrst lien loan by using a matching algorithm
that compares the date and place of origination, the broker, and the characteristics of
the borrower and the property. We provide more details on the matching algorithm in
Appendix A. We refer to the matched pairs of loans as piggyback loans and to the

7

unmatched ﬁrst lien loans as free-standing ﬁrst lien loans.3 Piggyback loans become
quite popular in the last few years of our sample period with over 40,000 such loans
originated in both 2005 and 2006. Many, but not all, piggyback loans in our sample are
of the 80/20 type, so a natural benchmark of the total amount borrowed would be a 25%
greater loan amount than the ﬁrst lien amount. The actual diﬀerence in our sample of
piggyback loans exceeds that benchmark in all years, with the combined loan amount of
the piggyback loans exceeding that of the free-standing ﬁrst lien loans by 33% to 41%.
The next three panels of the table reports the distribution of loan types across major
loan programs—hybrid, ﬁxed-rate, and balloon loans.4 For the whole sample period,
hybrid loans were the most common ones followed by ﬁxed-rate loans. In the last two
years, loans with balloon payments become much more popular reaching 40% of the loans
in 2006. For most of the sample period the 2/28 hybrid dominates in the hybrid category
and the 30-year ﬁxed-rate loan in the ﬁxed-rate category.
Like many other subprime lenders, New Century had three levels of income documentation: full, limited, and stated. For a full documentation loan, the applicant was
required to submit two written forms of income veriﬁcation showing stable income for at
least twelve months. With limited documentation, the prospective borrower was generally required to submit six months of bank statements. For stated documentation loans,
veriﬁcation of the amount of monthly income the applicant stated on the loan application was not required. Palepu, Srinivasan, and Sesia Jr. (2008) note that in all cases,
the applicant’s employment status was veriﬁed by phone (salaried employees). Stated
documentation mortgages were often referred to as “liar loans.” While there are some
ﬂuctuations year-to-year, the general trend for our sample period is to have fewer full
3

It is worth noting here that we do not know if a borrower with a free-standing ﬁrst lien loan in our
sample took out a second lien loan with another lender. In our sample, the majority of second lien loans
can be matched with a ﬁrst lien, suggesting that New Century did not typically originate free-standing
second lien loans. Of course, that need not be true for other lenders, so our percentage of piggyback
loans may be viewed as a lower bound for such loans.
4
We categorize each loan based on the ﬁrst lien loan, that is, we ignore the second liens of the
piggybacks in this case. A loan with a balloon payment shows up as a balloon loan regardless of whether
it is a ﬁxed-rate or hybrid loan.

8

documentation loans and many more stated documentation loans.
Table 4 reports descriptive statistics for the borrowers in our sample. We report the
mean credit score (Fico), the percent of borrowers with a Fico score at or above 620,
which is one commonly used cut-oﬀ for the subprime category, the monthly income of
the borrower, the combined loan to value ratio (CLTV) and the borrower’s total monthly
debt payment to income ratio. Both the CLTV and the debt-to-income ratios suggest
that loan amounts grew relative to both property values and income levels over the
sample period. The credit scores provide a bit more mixed meassage but if we compare
the ﬁrst couple of years to the last couple of years there seems to be a shift towards
borrowers with higher credit scores. The next three panels break down the statistics by
full or limited documentation versus stated documentation loans and piggyback loans,
and show that a change in the composition may explain some of the observed trends.
The borrowers who take out free-standing, that is, no piggyback, loans with full
or limited documentation have credit scores that are lower and more stable than the
borrowers taking out piggyback loans. The stated documentation loans have higher Fico
scores and borrowers who take out piggyback loans have even higher Fico score. Part
of the rise in overall Fico score may therefore come from a change in the loan type and
borrower mix. The rise in CLTV and debt-to-income ratios can also at least in part be
traced to the balloon loans.
The last two panels highlight a diﬀerent side of the changes in the borrower characteristics by contrasting the average characteristics of borrowers with Fico scores above
620 to those with Fico scores below 620. In 1997, the two groups have approximately
the same CLTV and debt-to-income ratios. But over the sample period, the higher Fico
score borrowers’ loan amounts grow more quickly both relative to the other group and
relative to their incomes. As a result, by the end of the sample period, the higher Fico
score borrowers have CLTV ratios around 90% and debt-to-income ratios of 41% compared to 82% and 40% for the lower Fico score borrowers. To sum up, over the sample
period, the typical borrower’s creditworthiness increased as measured by the Fico score
9

but their leverage and the debt-to-income ratios also increased, and this increase was
more pronounced among borrowers with high credit scores.
2.2.

Broker compensation

As discussed above, a broker typically earns a direct fee paid by the borrower and an
indirect fee, the yield spread premium (YSP), paid by the lender. The lender’s wholesale
rate sheet sets the minimum mortgage rate based on a number of loan and borrower
characteristics. Brokers may then earn a higher fee for originating higher rate loans, all
else equal. Yield spread premia therefore are an indirect way for the lender to inﬂuence
the brokers’ origination activity. Brokers need not disclose the YSP to borrowers until
closing statements are signed.5 Exhibit 1 at the end of the paper shows an example
of a rate sheet distributed by New Century in March of 2007. (Source: “Subprime
Debacle Traps Even Very Credit-Worthy,” Wall Street Journal, Section: A1, December
3rd, 2007, Rick Brooks and Ruth Simon.) The main matrices show at what rates New
Century was willing to fund loans as a function of the loan program, that is, full versus
stated documentation, and the loan to value ratio (LTV), the borrower’s Fico score, and
several other loan features, borrower and property characteristics. On the right hand
side of the graphic, about half way down the page, is the YSP box that shows that on
this date a 0.5 percent higher rate than the minimum translated into a 1% yield spread
premium whereas a 0.875% higher rate translated into a 1.5% yield spread premium.
The rate sheet shown here can be viewed as a benchmark. Diﬀerent brokers may have
received a slightly more or less favorable set of quotes depending on their loan volume
and history.
Table 5 shows that the average broker revenue, as a percent of the loan amount,
declines steadily over the sample period from 5.0% to 2.8% whereas the dollar revenues
increase every year, with the exception of 1998, from $4,300 to $5,600 per loan. The
increase in the dollar revenue corresponds to an annual compound rate of 2.7% which,
5

The yield spread premium is reported on lines 80–81 of the HUD-1 statement. A good faith estimate
of the closing costs that is required prior to the closing must include a range of the various loan-related
costs.

10

depending on the benchmark, is on par with the rate of inﬂation. The lower percentage
revenues and relatively modest growth in dollar revenues may reﬂect increased competition with more brokers doing business with New Century.
The third and fourth panels of Table 5 provide more systematic evidence by reporting
the skewness coeﬃcients for both the percentage and the dollar yield spread premia,
direct fees, and broker revenues by origination year conﬁrming that the distribution tend
to be right skewed. The dollar distribution may exhibit more right skewness because
loan amounts are naturally right skewed as well, but the property is present even in the
percentage revenues.
Figure 3 provides further evidence on the distribution of broker revenues across different types of loans; ﬁxed-rate versus hybrid loans, free-standing ﬁrst lien loans versus
piggyback loans, full or limited documentation versus stated documentation; loans with
no prepayment penalty versus loans with prepayment penalty; and low versus high credit
score loans. The right skewness in the distributions appears to be a robust characteristic
across the diﬀerent types of loans. The distribution also appears to shift with the type
of loan. For example, the distribution for hybrid loans appears to be shifted to the right
compared with that for ﬁxed-rate loans.
The bottom part of Table 5 provides additional information on the broker compensation by the type of loan, loan amount, credit score and for diﬀerent levels of documentation. The ﬁxed-rate loans generate lower revenues than the hybrid, balloon, and
piggyback loans which generate above average broker revenues. For all types of loans, the
stated documentation loans generate greater broker revenues. On average, the greater
revenues for stated versus full or limited documentation loans comes both from fees and
the yield spread premium albeit that for ﬁxed-rate loans the yield spread premium is
the same regardless of the level of documentation. The bottom part of the panel conﬁrms the previous results for skewness. Figure 3 provides some insight into how broker
compensation varies along diﬀerent dimensions.
To complement these univariate statistics, we report regression results in Table 6
11

for Tobit regressions of the direct fees and yield spread premia on our conditioning
variables. These regressions illustrate that both fees and yield spread premia may vary
systematically, both for diﬀerent types of loans, e.g., hybrid versus ﬁxed-rate loans, and
for diﬀerent borrowers or properties, e.g., with the borrower’s Fico score or depending on
whether the property is a primary residence or a second home or an investment property.
The results highlight that for many loan, borrower, or property characteristics we observe
a trade-oﬀ between fees and the yield spread premia. For example, as expected, higher
mortgage rates are associated with higher yield spread premia, holding other things equal,
and lower direct fees albeit that the trade-oﬀ is far from one-for-one. Similarly, between
1998 and 2001 direct fees are rising in dollar terms and the yield spread premia are falling
followed by the reverse trend over the next three to four years. There is also evidence
of some trade-oﬀs with respect to loan characteristics. For example, we observe lower
fees and higher yield spread premia for hybrid and piggyback loans and the reverse for
stated documentation and balloon loans. Borrower with higher Fico scores pay lower
direct fees but generate higher yield spread premia. Below we will develop a framework
that allows us to address the question of whether these variations reﬂect diﬀerences in
costs or proﬁts.
2.3.

Loan performance data

The data obtained from IPRecovery contains detailed loan servicing records on most
of the originated mortgages. For every year from 1999 to 2006, 93% or more of the funded
loans are part of the servicing data, except for 2001 (47%) and 2002 (30%). Figure 4
plots the percentage of loans delinquent as a function of the age of the loan by the year of
origination. A loan is considered delinquent if payments on the loan are 60 or more days
late, or if the loan is reported as in foreclosure, real estate owned, or in default. The left
panel of the ﬁgure shows actual delinquency rates, which are computed as follows: Let
p̂ks denote the observed ratio of the number of vintage k loans experiencing a ﬁrst-time
delinquency at s months of age over the number of vintage k loans that either are still

12

active in the servicing data after s months or experience a ﬁrst-time delinquency at age
s. We compute the actual (cumulative) delinquency rate for vintage k at age t, P̂tk , as
P̂tk

= 1−

t
∏
(

)
1 − p̂ks ,

for k = 1999, . . . , 2005.

s=1

We ﬁnd that loans originated in 1999, 2000 and 2001 have the highest unconditional
delinquency rates. Tables 3 and 4 suggest that loans originated during these years have,
on average, higher initial rates and lower Fico scores than loans funded later in the sample. We control for such diﬀerences in loan-level characteristics by computing adjusted
delinquency rates, which are obtained by using estimated coeﬃcients for vintage dummies after controlling for loan, borrower and broker characteristics, and macroeconomic
variables.6 Following Demyanyk and Hemert (2009), we impose the restriction that the
average actual and average adjusted delinquency rates are equal for any given age of the
loan. The average actual delinquency rate, P̄t , is deﬁned as
P̄t = 1 −

t
∏

(1 − p̄s ) ,

s=1

where p̄s =

1
7

∑2005
k=1999

p̂ks . The right panel of Figure 4 shows the adjusted delinquency

rates. The plot is consistent with the evidence reported in Demyanyk and Hemert
(2009) in that, after controlling for year-by-year variation in loan-level characteristics
and macroeconomic variables, loans originated in 2004 and 2005 appear riskier ex post
than loans originated earlier.

3.

Framework

We model the underwriting process as follows. The borrower arrives to the broker requesting a mortgage loan. The broker evaluates the borrower’s characteristics including
the borrower’s credit quality and willingness to pay, and based on that information the
6

Details are provided in Section 5.

13

broker provides the borrower with ﬁnancing options. The broker submits funding requests to one or more lenders, and the lenders respond with a decision to fund the loan
or not. Funding requests are submitted until the borrower, broker and lender ﬁnd an
acceptable loan. At that point, the mortgage is written. If no acceptable loan is found,
then no mortgage is written.
We consider some borrower i and broker j. To describe the terms of the loan broker j originates with borrower i, let P denote the loan principal. In what follows, we
assume that the amount P the prospective homebuyer wants to borrow is given. The
borrower and broker then have to agree on the type of loan, l—ﬁxed, hybrid, maturity,
documentation type, does the loan have a prepayment penalty, maturity, and so on—and
the loan’s interest rate r, so that L = (P, l, r) denotes the loan.
Let fi,j denote the total fees that broker j charges borrower i for originating the
loan, including the origination fee and the credit fee. Deﬁne νi,j as the borrower’s dollar
valuation for the loan as a function of the loan characteristics L. The function νi,j =
νi,j (L) measures the wealth equivalent beneﬁts that the borrower receives from the loan.
Assuming that the borrower is risk-neutral, the borrower’s total surplus from receiving
a funded loan L, and paying fees of fi,j , is
νi,j − fi,j .

The lender pays the broker a yield spread of yi,j for originating the loan. We use
Ci,j to denote the broker’s costs of originating the loan. It includes the broker’s time
costs of dealing with the borrower, as well as any administrative costs paid by the broker
for intermediating the mortgage. Both yi,j = yi,j (L) and Ci,j = Ci,j (L) are functions of
the loan characteristics L. Assuming that the broker is risk-neutral, the broker’s surplus
from originating a funded loan L, receiving fees of fi,j and a yield spread of yi,j , and
paying costs of Ci,j is
fi,j + yi,j − Ci,j .

14

We assume that the terms of the mortgage loan can be described by a generalized
Nash bargain between the broker and the borrower, subject to the constraint that the
lender will fund the loan. Let F denote the set of loans that will be funded by the lender:

Fi,j = {L|lender will fund loan type L = (P, l, r) for borrower i and broker j}.
We use ρi,j ∈ [0, 1] to denote the bargaining power of broker j relative to the bargaining power of borrower i. If ρi,j = 0, the borrower has all the bargaining power, and
if ρi,j = 1, the mortgage broker has all the bargaining power. The funded loan contract
maximizes the generalized Nash product:

max

fi,j , L∈Fi,j

(fi,j + yi,j − Ci,j )ρi,j (νi,j − fi,j )1−ρi,j ,

subject to the participation constraints:

νi,j − fi,j ≥ 0,

(1)

fi,j + yi,j − Ci,j ≥ 0.

(2)

Condition (1) requires that the fees do not exceed the borrower’s valuation of the
loan and condition (2) requires that the fees plus the yield spread premium are greater
than or equal to the broker’s cost. The participation constraints can only be satisﬁed if
the gains to trade are non-negative:

νi,j + yi,j − Ci,j ≥ 0.

If the gains from trade are negative, the bargaining ends and no mortgage is funded.
When the gains from trade are positive and the terms of the loan are in the interior

15

of F , the ﬁrst-order conditions imply:

(1 − ρi,j ) (νi,j + yi,j − Ci,j ) = ρi,j (νi,j − fi,j ) ,

(3)

and
∂νi,j ∂yi,j
+
∂L
∂L

=

∂Ci,j
.
∂L

(4)

Condition (3) is the direct condition for setting the fees: the fees are set so that the
total surplus is split according to the relative bargaining power of the broker and the
borrower. Using condition (3) to solve for the fees yields

fi,j = ρi,j νi,j + (1 − ρi,j ) (Ci,j − yi,j ) .

(5)

If borrower i has all the bargaining power, then ρi,j = 0 and
fi,j = Ci,j − yi,j ,

so that all the surplus ﬂows to the borrower. If the broker has all the bargaining power,
then ρi,j = 1 and
fi,j = νi,j ,
so that all the surplus ﬂows to the broker.
Condition (4) is an eﬃciency condition: the sum of the marginal gains to trade for
the terms of the loan are equal to zero, that is, the loan type maximizes the total surplus.
Recall that we have assumed that the borrower and mortgage broker bargain over the
loan type l and interest rate r, but not over the loan size P . If we relaxed that assumption
and allowed the loan size to be part of the bargaining, then similar eﬃciency conditions
would also hold with regard to loan size.
The lender eﬀects the loan underwriting process in two ways. First, the lender deter16

mines the yield spread function, which determines which loans will be submitted because
the yield spread function directly determines the broker’s participation constraint in
equation (2) and eﬃciency condition (4). Since the broker’s surplus directly depends
on the yield spread, condition (3) implies that the fees themselves depend on the yield
spread. Second, the lender’s decision on which loans to fund determines which loans will
be oﬀered directly though the eﬀects of the constraints in the set of loans that will be
funded, F , on the generalized Nash solution. In our empirical analysis, we focus on the
ﬁrst channel while conditioning on the loan being funded.
For the funded loans in our sample, we observe the broker’s revenue equal to fi,j +yi,j .
Substituting in the equilibrium fees from equation (5), we obtain

fi,j + yi,j = Ci,j + ρi,j (νi,j + yi,j − Ci,j ) ,

(6)

which states that the broker’s revenue equals the cost of intermediating the loan plus the
fraction of the total gains from trade that the broker is able to capture. If the broker
has all the bargaining power (ρi,j = 1), the broker receives all the gains from trade, and
if the borrower has all the bargaining power (ρi,j = 0), the broker revenues are equal to
the costs of intermediating the trade.
From equation (6), the broker’s proﬁts can be high for a few reasons. First,the broker
might have high bargaining power, measured by a high ρij . Such high bargaining power
may arise because there is little competition among the brokers perhaps because the
borrowers have high search costs, or because the broker puts little weight on reputation
concerns. Second, the total surplus may be high for the loan. The loan surplus could
be high because the yield spread premium is high relative to the broker’s cost, or the
surplus could be high because the borrower have a high valuation for the loan. Such a
high valuation could arise because the borrower values the underlying property highly, or
perhaps because the borrower has optimistic expectations for future property values and
the ﬁnancing ﬂexibility in the loan, or perhaps because the borrower has a short horizon

17

relative to the length of the loan. The framework thus allows for both opportunistic
brokers and opportunistic borrowers.

4.

Estimating Broker Proﬁts

We now describe our empirical approach for decomposing broker revenues into costs and
proﬁts, and discuss the estimation results.
4.1.

Decomposing broker revenues into costs and proﬁts

We are interested in empirically decomposing the observed revenues into a cost component and the gains from trade captured by the broker. We deﬁne Xij as the vector
of conditioning variables the econometrician can observe. It includes a vector of characteristics for borrower i such as Fico score and borrower income, a vector of the broker’s
characteristics such as the broker’s underwriting history and market share, and a vector
of overall market conditions such as the benchmark 30-year mortgage rate or recent house
price appreciation. Xi,j also captures the loan type L that is the outcome of the bargain
between borrower i and broker j.
We then parameterize the broker’s cost function as

Ci,j = C(Xi,j ) + ²i,j ,

(7)

where C(Xi,j ) is the cost function conditional on loan, borrower and mortgage broker
characteristics, and ²ij is a symmetric mean zero error term that represents unobserved
heterogeneity in the brokers’ costs. Let ξi,j = ρi,j (νi,j + yi,j − Ci,j ) denote the broker’s
proﬁt. Then equations (6) and (7) yield

fi,j + yi,j ≡ C(Xi,j ) + ²i,j + ξi,j ,

(8)

where ξi,j is non-negative. Conversations with a market participant indicated that a

18

brokers cost function is likely to be unaﬀected by the loan amount, the loan type, or loan
rates. But since our sample includes many brokers operating in many diﬀerent markets
we include the loan amount to capture diﬀerences in costs that may be correlated with
diﬀerences in the price of housing. To check the robustness of our results we also consider
speciﬁcations that allow the cost function to depend, among others, on the loan type,
the prepayment penalty, and whether or not the loan is a reﬁnance. Our main results
carry through to a range of model speciﬁcations.
The model in equation (8) ﬁts naturally into a speciﬁcation that can be estimated
using stochastic frontier analysis. Kumbhakar and Lovell (2000) and Greene (2002) are
textbook references for stochastic frontier models. Frontier models are used to estimate
cost or proﬁt functions that are viewed as the most eﬃcient outcomes possible. Individual
observations deviate from the eﬃcient outcomes by a symmetric mean zero error and
a one-sided error that measures that observation’s ineﬃciency. Such models have been
applied in ﬁnancial economics by Hunt-McCool, Koh, and Francis (1996) and Koop and Li
(2001) to study IPO underpricing, by Altunbas, Gardener, Molyneux, and Moore (2001)
and Berger and Mester (1997) to study eﬃciency in the banking industry, by Green,
Holliﬁeld, and Schürhoﬀ (2007) to study dealers’ proﬁts in intermediating municipal
bonds, and by Woodward and Hall (2009) in studying broker proﬁts in the mortgage
industry.
In our application, the broker’s costs for underwriting the loan take the place of
the most eﬃcient broker revenue, and the eﬃciency term is a measure of the broker’s
proﬁts. If the borrowers have enough bargaining power, then the broker’s revenues would
be driven down to their costs, and the one-sided error would be zero. Measures of the
relative importance and determinants of the distribution of the one-sided error therefore
provide useful information about the brokers’ ability to earn proﬁts by underwriting loans.
In particular, the distribution of the one-sided error across diﬀerent loan characteristics
provides estimates of the relative proﬁtability of diﬀerent types of loans.7
7

We note here that both the borrower’s and the lender’s participation constraints can also be esti-

19

To arrive at an econometric speciﬁcation of the model, we impose parametric structure
on C(Xi,j ), and on the distribution of the symmetric error ²i,j and on the broker’s proﬁts
ξi,j . In particular, we assume

C(Xi,j ) = γ0 +

∑

γk Xij,k .

k

We parameterize ²i,j as being normally distributed with mean zero and standard deviation
σi,j . We allow for heteroscedasticity in the cost function by assuming that

σi,j = c0 exp

(
∑

)
ck Xij,k

.

(9)

k

In our base model speciﬁcation, we parameterize the mean and the variance of the broker’s
cost as a function of dummies for the year and the geographic location, as well as loan
amount.
The proﬁt function ξi,j is parameterized as an exponential distribution with mean
parameter λi,j . The ﬁrst two moments of ξi,j are
E (ξi,j | Xi,j ) = λi,j ,
Std. dev. ( ξi,j | Xi,j ) = λi,j .

We estimate speciﬁcations in which the exponential term has as parameter λi,j a log-linear
function in our explanatory variables Xi,j :

λi,j = β0 exp

(
∑

)
βk Xij,k

.

k

If the parameter β0 equals zero, then the broker’s proﬁts are zero: the borrowers have
all the bargaining power and there is no asymmetric term. The asymmetric term can be
also be zero if there is little dispersion in the borrowers’ valuations and the yield spread
mated using stochastic frontier analysis.

20

premium schedule is zero so that even in a situation with symmetric bargaining power
there would be zero proﬁts. If the constant is non-zero, then there is evidence that the
brokers have bargaining power and that there are strictly positive gains to trade. The
gains from trade might be dispersed because the borrowers have dispersed valuations,
because the yield spreads are dispersed, or some combination of the two. Variables
that increase λi,j suggest higher broker bargaining power, higher borrower valuations
or higher yield spread premia, and therefore higher proﬁts for the brokers. Because of
the log-linear functional form, the coeﬃcients on the conditioning variables measure the
percentage change in proﬁts per unit change in the explanatory variable.
The stochastic frontier model is estimated from the right tail of the revenue distribution. Appendix B reports the moment conditions used in the model.
4.2.

Conditioning variables

Our explanatory variables include characteristics of the loans, borrowers, properties,
and brokers, variables that capture diﬀerences in the regulation, neighborhood characteristics, macroeconomic variables, as well as dummies for the year and the geographic
region. Table 1 lists the variables used in our empirical analysis with brief explanations.
The loan characteristics variables include indicators for hybrid, balloon, and piggyback loans; an indicator for loans with stated documentation; an indicator for loans with
a prepayment penalty; an indicator for loans obtained to reﬁnance an existing mortgage
and an indicator for cash-out reﬁnancing; and the combined loan-to-value ratio (CLTV).
The benchmark loan is a ﬁxed-rate loan obtained to purchase a property. The borrower
characteristics include the borrower’s Fico score and the back-end debt-to-income ratio
(DTI). The property characteristics include indicator variables for second home or investment properties and an indicator for multi-unit properties. The benchmark loan is
obtained to purchase a single-family home that serves as the borrower’s primary residence. The descriptive statistics reported in Table 2 indicate that loan applications for
second homes are rare. We include the type of property as alternative proxy for the

21

purpose of the loan.
The explanatory variables determine the asymmetric proﬁt component, ξij , in equation (8) which is the product of the broker’s bargaining power and the total gains from
trade. Because we can only model the product it is not possible to determine if diﬀerences
in proﬁts are driven by diﬀerences in the brokers’ bargaining power or diﬀerences in the
total gains from trade—with diﬀerences in the gains from trade arising from diﬀerences
in the borrowers’ valuations or the yield spread premium. This is further complicated
by the fact that we do not observe the complete schedules of yield spread premia, only
the points for the loans that were originated. Nonetheless this decomposition allows us
to learn more about what drives broker proﬁts.
Our regulation variables capture state or local laws that deviate from the applicable
federal laws. The 1994 Home Owners’ Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) sets a baseline for
federal regulation of the mortgage market. Reports of questionable practices in the subprime mortgage market in the late nineties led to new legislation that targeted predatory
lending practices starting with North Carolina in 1999.8 We apply the approach taken
by Ho and Pennington-Cross (2005) and Ho and Pennington-Cross (2006) to our sample
period, and use an index that measures the coverage of anti-predatory lending laws that
assigns higher positive values if the laws cover more types of mortgages than HOEPA.
In a similar fashion we construct an index that measures the restrictiveness of the antipredatory lending laws giving, for example, higher values to laws that put stricter limits
on prepayment penalties or balloon payments. Both indices capture diﬀerences between
states as well as diﬀerences over time as more states implemented anti-predatory lending
laws.
In some states, mortgage brokers are subject to diﬀerent types of occupational licensing laws and regulations.9 We use the index of mortgage broker regulations constructed
8

The impact and eﬀectiveness of anti-predatory lending laws has been studied by, among others, Ho
and Pennington-Cross (2005), Ho and Pennington-Cross (2006) and Li and Ernst (2007).
9
Pahl (2007) presents a compilation of all state laws and regulations between 1996 and 2006. Kleiner
and Todd (2007) study the impact of occupational licensing on employment and earnings of mortgage
brokers and the outcomes for borrowers.

22

by Pahl (2007). In addition, we use the minimum ﬁnancial requirement for mortgage
brokers. For example, states that require a surety bond of $45,000 are assigned a value of
4.5 for that year. Both indices capture diﬀerences between states and some changes over
time albeit these laws are more stable over time than the anti-predatory lending laws.
To capture more diﬀerences between markets we also include some regional and zipcode level variables. We include the percent of the population in a given zip code who
is white. Much of the evidence of predatory lending practices that spurred the new legislation came from areas with larger minority populations where subprime lending often
was more prevalent. We also use the census variable for the percent of the population
who is hispanic, and the percent of the population who holds a bachelors degree.
Goetzmann, Peng, and Yen (2009) report evidence of house price appreciation having
an eﬀect on both the demand and supply of mortgages in the subprime market. In our
setting, a positive demand eﬀect may increase the borrowers’ willingness to pay for a
mortgage which has the same eﬀect as increasing the broker’s bargaining power. We use
the FHA house price index to construct a variable that measures the lagged three-year
house price appreciation for each of the census divisions. We normalize the appreciation
relative to the national index and demean it.
4.3.

Estimates for baseline speciﬁcation

Table 7 reports estimates for our baseline speciﬁcations. We show results for two
formulations of the cost function: a base cost function and a cost function that includes
additional loan characteristics. We discuss the diﬀerences between the two cost functions
for all speciﬁcations below in Section 4.6 which covers robustness issues. Here we focus
on the base case cost function that allows the cost of intermediation to depend on the
loan amount and whether or not the loan is a piggyback loan. The cost is increasing and
concave in the loan amount. The negative marginal eﬀect for piggyback loans implies
lower cost of origination, holding the loan amount constant. The variance of the symmetric error term is increasing both in the loan amount and the indicator for piggyback

23

loans, implying more cost heterogeneity for larger loans and for piggyback loans.
The estimated marginal eﬀect on the loan amount is less than one and therefore the
broker proﬁt function is a concave function of the loan amount. The interaction terms
indicate that the slope changes for smaller and larger loan amounts but that the shape
remains the same. The mortgage rate relative to the 30-year benchmark rate is a strong
determinant of broker proﬁts, which is expected because the rate is a primary variable
that determines the yield spread premium. For example, a 25 basis point higher mortgage
rate, holding other things equal, implies an 8% increase in the broker proﬁts.
Based on the marginal eﬀects for the loan characteristics variables broker proﬁts are
substantially higher for hybrid and piggyback loans, for loans with prepayment penalties,
and for cash-out reﬁnance loans. The marginal eﬀect is close to zero for balloon loans
and for the CLTV, and the marginal eﬀect is negative for stated documentation loans.
The marginal eﬀects of property characteristics are negative for properties that are either second homes or investment properties, and positive for multi-unit properties. The
borrower’s credit score has a positive marginal eﬀect on proﬁts that is slightly lower for
borrowers with Fico scores above 620. Below 620, an increase in the Fico score of thirty
points translates into approximately a 5% increase in broker proﬁts.
By comparing the results in Table 7 with the results in Table 6 we can gains some
additional insights. For example, the higher proﬁts for hybrid and piggyback loans appear
to be driven primarily by higher yield spread premia whereas the proﬁts for loans with
prepayment penalties or cash-out reﬁnance loans are in no small part due to higher fees
for such loans. For balloon, stated documentation loans, and for CLTV, the fees tend
to be higher and yield spread premia lower, producing a net eﬀect on proﬁts which is
approximately zero except for stated documentation loans.
The estimated proﬁts are increasing in the borrower Fico score. The estimates in
Table 6 suggest that this results reﬂects the net eﬀect of higher yield spread premia and
lower fees for higher Fico score borrowers. This illustrates how the lender’s yield spread
schedule, which appears to favor higher credit scores, is partly oﬀset by diﬀerences in
24

direct fees. The broker’s bargaining power may be greater when dealing with borrowers
with lower credit scores or borrower’s with lower Fico scores may have worse outside
option and hence put a higher value on obtaining the loan. The results for the borrower’s
debt to income ratio are consistent with this interpretation because higher fees appear
to be oﬀset by lower yield spread premia with the net eﬀect being zero.
4.4.

Estimates for speciﬁcation that adds regulation and neighborhood characteristics

Table 8 reports estimates for speciﬁcations of the frontier model that adds regulation
and neighborhood characteristics. The estimated marginal eﬀects for the race and ethnicity variables are consistent with greater broker proﬁts in neighborhoods or zip codes
with greater minority populations with potentially greater marginal eﬀects in areas with
a larger hispanic population. The estimated marginal eﬀects for the education variable is
negative suggesting that, holding other things equal, broker proﬁts are smaller in neighborhoods with a more educated population. The results imply that either brokers have
more bargaining power in zip codes with higher minority or less educated populations,
or that the total surplus from the loans in such zip codes are higher.
The marginal eﬀects for both the anti-predatory lending laws and the broker regulation variables are negative, consistent with lower proﬁts in years and states with regulations that were stricter than the federal HOEPA laws or stricter broker regulations.
Based on the summary statistics reported in Table A.1 in Appendix A, the average level
of both regulation indices increases from zero to approximately two between the 1997-99
and 2000-03 periods, which based on our estimates would have been associated with a
drop in the broker proﬁts by six to ten percent.
4.5.

Estimates for speciﬁcation that adds broker variables

Table 9 reports estimates for speciﬁcations of the frontier model that includes broker variables. Brokers that have submitted loan applications in the previous month to
New Century earn higher proﬁts. The higher proﬁt could stem from such brokers being
awarded greater yield spread premia for loans with otherwise similar characteristics but
25

is is also consistent with greater broker bargaining power. The negative coeﬃcient for
the broker’s fund rate indicates that for a broker who has submitted multiple loan applications there is a trade-oﬀ between proﬁts and the lender’s funding decision, albeit a
fairly small one.
4.6.

Robustness

For each of the speciﬁcations discussed above we report results for two speciﬁcations
of the cost function. One speciﬁcation has a base cost function that includes relatively
few variables. A second speciﬁcation adds more loan, property, borrower and broker
characteristics as controls to the cost function to make it easier to assess the robustness
of our ﬁndings.
While the coeﬃcients on the additional loan characteristics are economically large
and estimated precisely, the results in Tables 7 though 9 show that the general pattern
of the coeﬃcients in the one-sided error is similar to results reported for the base case
cost function. Exceptions are the marginal eﬀects for loans to reﬁnance and loans with
a balloon payment, which drop signiﬁcantly. For loans to reﬁnance, the shift essentially
attributes the added revenue to costs rather than to the asymmetric error term, whereas
for balloons, high marginal eﬀects on costs are partially oﬀset by negative eﬀects on
proﬁts.
Adding property characteristics to the cost function leaves the marginal eﬀect of the
property type on the proﬁts large the same, but attributes the added revenue for multi
units to costs rather than to the asymmetric error term. Including the borrower credit
score to the cost function makes economic sense, for example, if the broker incurs greater
costs when dealing with borrowers with lower credit scores because such loan applications
require more work or are riskier for the broker’s reputation with New Century. Consistent
with this, the cost estimates in the second speciﬁcation decrease in the Fico score, and
decrease more for higher Fico scores.
Including broker characteristics in the cost function allows us to account for potential

26

diﬀerences in the cost structure across diﬀerent groups of brokers. While allowing for
broker ﬁxed eﬀects per se is not feasible, we create distinct broker proﬁles based on
a broker competition variable and the broker’s past origination activity and fund rate
with New Century, and let the cost function depend on these. Table 9 shows that loan
origination is more costly at the margin if there are less housing units per broker in
the zip code where the loan is orginated, and for brokers that submitted three or more
loan applications to New Century in the last month. For the extended cost function,
the positive coeﬃcient for the number of housing units per broker is consistent with
the interpretation that areas with relative many housing units per broker may have less
competition between brokers, supporting higher proﬁts.
The above discussion of the decomposition or broker revenues focused on the marginal
eﬀects. It is important to note, however, that often the total eﬀect of a change in a certain
loan characteristic is more interesting than the marginal eﬀect. This may be particularly
true here since many loan, borrower and property characteristics are correlated. We
provide some evidence on the total eﬀects of changing some key loan characteristics in
Tables 10 and 11.
One approach to make the structure of the cost and proﬁt functions even more ﬂexible
is to allow for interaction terms with certain loan characteristics. We test the merit of
such an extension by re-estimating the model in columns four through six of Table 9
for diﬀerent strata of loans. The results are reported in Table 12. They show a similar
distribution of estimated costs and proﬁts whether of not the model is estimated on the
full sample or on the stratiﬁed sample. This indicates that the full model speciﬁcation
in Table 9 is robust to including interaction terms with a number of loan and location
dummies as these are unlikely to have a major impact on our decomposition of revenues
into cost and proﬁt components.

27

4.7.

Broker proﬁt estimates based on frontier models

In order to further understand the results, Tables 10 and 11 report statistics for the
ﬁtted values based on the estimates reported in columns four through six of Table 9. We
select this speciﬁcation of the cost function because it produces conservative estimates of
the broker proﬁts. Tables 10 reports the mean and the median of the estimated proﬁts
based on the frontier model and the mean and median of the broker revenues by region
and year. Table 11 reports the mean and median of the estimated proﬁts, the revenue,
the fees, and the yield spread premium by diﬀerent loan types, borrower and property
characteristics, and regulation, neighborhood, and broker variables.
The ﬁgures in Tables 10 indicate that across all years and regions, the average broker
proﬁt is approximately $1,100 or 20% of the revenue. With the exception of 1997 the
average and median revenues tend to trend upwards and yet the proﬁts ﬂuctuate above
and below $1,100 consistent with the proﬁt margins declining somewhat over time. Across
the regions we observe a similar pattern in that revenues ﬂuctuate much more than the
proﬁts, consistent with a portion of the revenue diﬀerences stemming from cost diﬀerences
across regions.
The mean broker proﬁts for ﬁxed-rate mortgages in Table 11 is $800 compared to
$1,100 for hybrid loans $1,350 for balloon loans. The greater proﬁts for balloon loans
despite the negative marginal eﬀects in all frontier model speciﬁcations is explained at
least in part by greater loan amounts, higher credit scores, and by regional diﬀerences.
Piggyback loans generate on average a $1,200 proﬁt compared to $1,000 for free-standing
ﬁrst lien loans. Loans with prepayment penalties generate a proﬁt that is $150 higher
than loans without a prepayment penalty.
The neighborhood characteristics conﬁrm that brokers make more proﬁts on loans
originated in neighborhoods with greater minority populations. The education and regulation variables produce smaller diﬀerences in the proﬁts but the directions are all in
line with the marginal eﬀects discussed above. Active brokers make a $200 higher proﬁts
than inactive brokers. For the number of housing units per broker the total eﬀect re28

verses the marginal eﬀect. A greater density of brokers or fewer housing units per broker
is associated with higher broker proﬁts.
Overall, our decomposition of the broker revenues provides economically and statistically signiﬁcant evidence of broker proﬁts consistent with brokers having market power.
In principle, higher broker proﬁts can be driven by higher yield spread premia, higher
borrower valuations, greater broker bargaining power, or some combination of the three.
It is diﬃcult based on our information to distinguish between these explanations. But in
some cases, for example for hybrid and piggyback loans or loans with prepayment penalties, the main driver appears to be the yield spread premium. In other cases, for example
for loans to reﬁnance with or without cash being taken out, the driver is either greater
dispersion in the borrowers’ valuations for these loans or greater broker bargaining power.
We now turn to the relationship between the broker proﬁts and the loan performance.

5.

The Eﬀects of Broker Compensation on Loan Performance

The eﬀects of broker compensation on loan performance are illustrated by Figure 5 which
plots, for hybrid free-standing ﬁrst-lien loans with stated documentation originated in
California, the delinquency rate as a function of months from origination by year of
origination. As in Section 2.3, a loan is considered delinquent if payments on the loan
are 60 or more days late, or if the loan is reported as in foreclosure, real estate owned, or
in default. The left plot shows the delinquency rates for loans with low broker proﬁts, and
the right plot shows the corresponding rates for high-broker-proﬁt loans. Broker proﬁts
are estimated using the model described in columns four through six in Table 9. Highbroker-proﬁt loans are in the upper tercile of the conditional broker proﬁt distribution,
and low-broker-proﬁt loans are in the lower tercile of the proﬁt distribution. For each
origination year, the delinquency rate tends to be higher for higher-broker-proﬁt loans,
conditional on the loan type.
29

To more formally establish a link between broker compensation and the ex-post riskiness of loans, we perform a duration analysis with 60-day delinquency as non-survival.
Loans that leave the servicing data for reasons other than delinquency are treated as
censored observations.10 Let T denote the time at which a loan becomes at least 60 days
delinquent or defaults for the ﬁrst time, and let Si,j (t) denote the probability that a loan
with covariate values Xi,j survives until time t. That is,

Si,j (t) = Pr (T > t|Xi,j ) .

The hazard function for 60-day delinquency, hi,j (t), is the instantaneous rate of delinquency:
Pr (t + ∆t > T > t|T > t, Xi,j )
∆t
0
Si,j
(t)
= −
.
Si,j (t)

hi,j (t) = lim
t→0

We use the Cox (1972) proportional hazard approach to model hi,j (t) as:
(
hi,j (t) = hij,0 (t) exp

∑

)
bk Xij,k

.

k

Cox proportional hazard models provide estimates of the bk ’s, but provide no direct
estimates of the baseline hazard function hij,0 (t).
Table 13 reports parameter estimates for several Cox proportional hazard models
that relate 60-day loan delinquency to loan, borrower, and broker characteristics, and
macroeconomic variables. We ﬁnd that the size of the mortgage has a positive marginal
eﬀect on delinquency rates, and that the marginal eﬀect is larger for very small and
for large loans. If the initial rate on the mortgage increases relative to the benchmark
10

There is a vast empirical literature on mortgage termination, including Deng (1997), Ambrose
and Capone (2000), Deng, Quigley, and Order (2000), Calhoun and Deng (2002), Pennington-Cross
(2003), Deng, Pavlov, and Yang (2005), Clapp, Deng, and An (2006), Pennington-Cross and Chomsisengphet (2007), Demyanyk and Hemert (2009) and Jiang, Nelson, and Vytlacil (2009).

30

30-year mortgage rate, the loan’s delinquency rate increases, everything else being equal.
This is rather intuitive since a higher rate may indicate compensation for higher expected
delinquency risk. In addition, the higher the mortgage rate, the harder it may be for
the borrower to make the monthly payments. We observe a dramatic marginal eﬀect of
33-35% higher delinquency rates for hybrid versus ﬁx-rate loans, depending on the model
speciﬁcation. The eﬀect is still positive but somewhat less pronounced for mortgages
with a balloon payment at roughly 11-12%. We ﬁnd that the hazard rate increases
by about 30% for piggyback loans relative to free-standing ﬁrst liens, everything else
being equal. We also ﬁnd that loans with stated documentation have positive marginal
eﬀects consistent with the ﬁndings of Jiang, Nelson, and Vytlacil (2009). The results in
Table 13 show that hazard rates increase by about 20% if the mortgage is a stated-doc
loan, and by approximately 10% if it has a prepay penalty. Not surprisingly, a higher
CLTV leads to higher marginal delinquency rates. Reﬁnance, and especially reﬁnance
cash-out mortgages, have a negative marginal eﬀect consistent with the ﬁndings and
interpretation in Chomsisengphet and Pennington-Cross (2006).
Table 13 shows that, everything else being equal, borrowers with higher credit scores
and lower debt-to-income ratios default less frequently on their obligations, consistent
with the evidence in Demyanyk and Hemert (2009). We ﬁnd that loans that were originated in neighborhoods with a higher fraction of white population, higher fraction of
hispanic population, or higher educational attainment exhibit marginally lower delinquency rates. The marginal eﬀect for the regulation variables are mixed with lower
marginal delinquency rates for loans originated in states that cover a wider range of
loans with anti-predatory lending laws and states with a higher Pahl index of mortgage
broker regulation. Our results show that increased broker competition is consistent with
higher hazard rates. After controlling for these loan, borrower and broker characteristics, we ﬁnd that the adjusted delinquency rate increased throughout much of our sample
period, peaking in 2005.
The estimates in Table 13 also controls for the percentage direct fees and the per31

centage yield spread premia the broker receives. Speciﬁcation I shows that, holding all
else equal, abnormally high percentage fees and abnormally low yield spread premia are
associated with higher delinquency rates. In particular, after controlling for all observable conditioning variables, it appears that the lender paid higher yield spreads for loans
that turned out to be safer ex-post. Holding yield spreads the same, fees can diﬀer across
borrower-broker pairs with the same observable characteristics either due to a diﬀerence
in bargaining power, or due to unobserved information that accounts for diﬀerences in
borrower valuations and/or the broker’s cost, see equation (6).
Speciﬁcation II in Table 13 repeats the hazard rate estimation with additional temporal interaction terms for the percentage fees and yield spreads. For both the direct and
indirect compensation channel, we observe that during the second half of our sample,
from 2004 to 2006, mortgage brokers were compensated marginally better for loans that
turned out to be more risky ex-post. As a result, abnormal fees paid by the borrower
are even more indicative of higher future delinquencies during the second half of our
sample than they were prior to 2004. And while the lender, conditional on all observable
characteristics, paid higher abnormal yield spread premia for loans that turned out to be
safer ex-post prior to 2004, the overall eﬀect of abnormal yield spreads on delinquency
rates is no longer signiﬁcant during the 2004-6 period.
Speciﬁcations III and IV in Table 13 repeat the analysis after replacing percentage
fees with log broker proﬁts as estimated in columns four through six in the previous
speciﬁcations. The marginal eﬀects of loan, borrower and broker characteristics on loan
performance are similar to those in the previous table. Note, however, that an increase
in broker competition, measured as a decrease in the number of housing units per broker
in a zip code, now yields signiﬁcantly higher hazard rates. A one-standard-deviation
increase in the number of housing units per broker leads to a 1.3% decrease in hazard
rates, everything else being the same.
The marginal eﬀects for broker proﬁts are positive, suggesting that brokers earned
high proﬁts on loans that turned out to be riskier ex post. During the 1999-2006 period,
32

an increase in broker proﬁts by 10% was associated with roughly a 2% increase in delinquency rates, all else equal. This eﬀect was even more pronounced during the 2004-6
period. In the context of equations (6) through (8), this implies that as the fraction
of the total gains from trade that the broker is able to capture, ρi,j (νi,j + yi,j − Ci,j ),
increases, ex-post delinquency rates rise. Holding yield spreads the same, broker proﬁts
can diﬀer across borrower-broker pairs with the same observable characteristics either
due to a diﬀerence in bargaining power, or due to unobserved information that accounts
for diﬀerences in borrower valuations and/or the broker’s cost. This allows us draw
conclusions about the marginal eﬀect of bargaining power and borrower valuation on
delinquency rates similar to those based on the results in speciﬁcations I and II.

6.

Conclusion

The ﬁnancial crisis has led to new regulations for mortgage broker compensation and
consumer protection in the mortgage market. We contribute to the ongoing discussion
of the role of mortgage brokers by examining the incentives of mortgage brokers during
the runup to the subprime crisis. We ﬁnd statistically and economically strong evidence
of positive broker proﬁts, consistent with broker market power, that vary systematically
with loan, borrower, and broker characteristics. Broker revenues in our sample range
from an average of $3,700 in 1998 to $5,600 in 2005 and 2006. Approximately 70% of
that comes from the direct fees and the rest from the yield spread premia. We attribute
approximately $1,100 of the revenues to broker proﬁts.
The relative importance for proﬁts of direct fees and yield spread premia varies across
loans of diﬀerent types, borrower and broker characteristics. For example, greater proﬁts
for hybrid and piggyback loans appear to be driven by higher yield spread premia whereas
higher proﬁts on stated documentation and balloon loans appear to be driven more by
greater fees. Overall, our results point to a poor alignment of the mortgage brokers’
incentives and loan quality and performance during the runup to the subprime crisis.

33

We relate the estimated broker proﬁts to future loan performance and ﬁnd that after
controlling for other factors, loans associated with higher broker proﬁts have a greater
risk of future delinquency. Proﬁts that disproportionately stem from fees increase the risk
of delinquency further. While both fees and the yield spread premia contribute to high
proﬁts, these ﬁndings suggest that the incentives provided by the yield spread premia
may have left too much room for brokers to try to extract proﬁts from the fees.

34

References
Altunbas, Y., E. Gardener, P. Molyneux, B. Moore, 2001. Eﬃciency in European Banking. European Economic Review 45, 1931–1955.
Ambrose, B., C. Capone, 2000. The hazard rates of ﬁrst and second defaults. Journal of
Real Estate Finance and Economics 20, 275–293.
Berger, A., L. Mester, 1997. Inside the Black Box: What Explains Diﬀerences in the
Eﬃciencies of Financial Institutions. Journal of Banking and Finance 21, 895–947.
Calhoun, C., Y. Deng, 2002. A dynamic analysis of ﬁxed- and adjustable-rate mortgage
terminations. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 24, 9–33.
Campbell, J., 2006. Household Finance. Journal of Finance 61, 1553–1604.
Carlin, B., 2009. Strategic Price Complexity in Retail Financial Markets. Journal of
Financial Economics 91, 278–287.
Chomsisengphet, S., A. Pennington-Cross, 2006. Subprime Reﬁnancing: Equity Extraction and Mortgage Termination. Unpublished working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis.
Clapp, J., Y. Deng, X. An, 2006. Unobserved heterogeneity in models of competing
mortgage termination risks. Real Estate Economics 34, 243–273.
Cox, D., 1972. Regression Models and Life Tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
Series B 34, 187–220.
Demyanyk, Y., O. V. Hemert, 2009. Understanding the subprime mortgage crisis. Forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.
Deng, Y., 1997. Mortgage Termination: An Empirical Hazard Model with Stochastic
Term Structure. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 14, 309–331.
Deng, Y., A. Pavlov, L. Yang, 2005. Spatial heterogeneity in mortgage terminations by
reﬁnance. Real Estate Economics 33, 739–764.
Deng, Y., J. M. Quigley, R. V. Order, 2000. Mortgage Terminations, Heterogeneity and
the Exercise of Mortgage Options. Econometrica 68, 275–307.
El-Anshasy, A., G. Elliehausen, Y. Shimazaki, 2006. The pricing of subprime mortgages
by mortgage brokers and lenders. Unpublished working paper, George Washington
University.
Gabaix, X., D. Laibson, 2006. Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information
Suppression in Competitive Markets. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 505–540.
Garmaise, M., 2009. After the Honeymoon: Relationship Dynamics Between Morgage
Brokers and Banks. Unpublished working paper, UCLA.

35

Goetzmann, W., L. Peng, J. Yen, 2009. The Subprime Crisis and House Price Appreciation. NBER working paper #15334.
Green, R., B. Holliﬁeld, N. Schürhoﬀ, 2007. Financial Intermediation and the Costs of
Trading in an Opaque Market. Review of Financial Studies 20, 275–314.
Greene, W. E., 2002. Econometric Analysis. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Ho, G., A. Pennington-Cross, 2005. The impact of local predatory lending laws. Unpublished working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
, 2006. The Impact of Local Predatory Lending Laws on the Flow of Subprime
Credit. Journal of Urban Economics 60, 210–228.
Hunt-McCool, J., S. Koh, B. Francis, 1996. Testing for Deliberate Underpricing in the
IPO Premarket: A Stochastic Frontier Approach. Review of Financial Studies 9, 1251–
1269.
Iyengar, S., W. Jiang, G. Huberman, 2004. How Much Choice is Too Much?: Contributions to 401(k) Retirement Plans. in Pension design and structure: new lessons from
behavioral ﬁnance, ed. by O. Mitchell, and S. Utkus. Oxford University Press New York
chap. 5.
Jiang, W., A. Nelson, E. Vytlacil, 2009. Liar Loans? Eﬀects of Loan Origination and
Loan Sale on Delinquency. Unpublished working paper, Columbia Business School.
Keys, B., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, V. Vig, 2009. Financial regulation and securitization:
Evidence from subprime loans. Journal of Monetary Economics 56, 700–720.
Kleiner, M., R. Todd, 2007. Mortgage Broker Regulations That Matter: Analyzing Earnings, Employment, And Outcomes For Consumers. NBER working paper #13684.
Koop, G., K. Li, 2001. The Valuation of IPO and SEO Firms. Journal of Empirical
Finance 8, 375–401.
Kumbhakar, S., K. Lovell, 2000. Stochastic Frontier Analysis. Cambridge University
Press, New York, NY.
LaCour-Little, M., 2009. The Pricing of Mortgages by Brokers: An Agency Problem?.
Journal of Real Estate Research 31, 235–263.
Li, W., K. Ernst, 2007. Do State Predatory Lending Laws Work? A Panel Analysis of
Market Reforms. Housing Policy Debate 18, 347–391.
Mian, A., A. Suﬁ, 2009. The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from
the U.S. mortgage default crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1449–1496.
Pahl, C., 2007. A Compilation of State Mortgage Broker Laws and Regulations 19962006. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Community Aﬀairs Report #2007-2.
Palepu, K., S. Srinivasan, A. Sesia Jr., 2008. New Century Financial Corporation. HBS
case #9-109-034.
36

Pennington-Cross, A., 2003. Credit history and the performance of prime and nonprime
mortgages. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 27, 279–301.
Pennington-Cross, A., S. Chomsisengphet, 2007. Subprime Reﬁnancing: Equity Extraction and Mortgage Termination. Real Estate Economics 35, 233–263.
Purnanandam, A., 2009. Originate-to-distribute model and the subprime mortgage crisis.
Unpublished working paper, University of Michigan.
Woodward, S., R. Hall, 2009. The Equilibrium Distribution of prices Paid by Imperfectly
Informed Customers: Theory and Evidence from the Mortgage Market. Unpublished
working paper, Stanford University.

37

Table 1: List of Variables The table describes the conditioning variables used in the empirical
analysis.
Variable

Description

Loan amount
Log loan amount
Hybrid
Balloon
Piggyback
Stated doc
Prepay penalty
Reﬁ
Reﬁ cash-out
CLTV

Loan Characteristics
Initial mortgage rate minus 30-year conventional mortgage
rate in %
Loan amount in thousands of dollars
Natural logarithm of loan amount in thousands of dollars
Indicator for hybrid mortgages
Indicator for mortgages with a balloon payment
Indicator for a matched pair of a 1st and a 2nd lien loan∗
Indicator for a stated documentation loan
Indicator for a loan with a prepayment penalty
Indicator for a reﬁnancing
Indicator for a cash-out reﬁnancing
Combined loan to value ratio in %

Fico
Debt-to-income
Monthly income

Borrower Characteristics
Fair, Isaac and Company (Fico) credit score at origination
Debt to income ratio (back-end ratio) in %
Combined monthly borrower income in thousands on dollar

Rate-benchmark 30yr rate

2nd home/investment property
Multi unit
Planned unit development (PUD)

Property Characteristics
Indicator for second home or investment property
Indicator for 2-4 unit properties
Individual ownership of unit, shared ownership of common
areas

Benchmark 30yr rate
Slope of yield curve
House prices

Market Conditions
30-year conventional mortgage in %
10-year minus 1-year Treasury rate in %
Lagged abnormal 3-year cumulative house price
appreciation (OFHEO)

Regulation (coverage)
Regulation (restrictions)
Broker regulation-Pahl
Broker regulation-KT
Race
Ethnicity
Education
Housing per broker
Active broker
Broker fund rate
∗

Regulation Variables∗∗
Index of coverage of anti-predatory lending laws
Index of restrictions of anti-predatory lending laws
Index of mortgage broker regulation
Financial requirements for mortgage brokers
Neighborhood Characteristics∗∗
% white population in zip code
% hispanic population in zip code
% of population with a BA degree
Broker Variables
Number of housing units in zip code (in thousands) divided
by the number of brokers with loan applications in zip
Indicator for brokers with three or more loan applications
in previous month
Ratio of funded loans to loan applications for active brokers
in %

Details on the matching algorithm are provided in Appendix A.
We provide more details and summary statistics in Appendix A.

∗∗

38

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics The table reports descriptive statistics for our sample of
broker originated loans. The sample period is 1997 to 2006. We provide details on how we
constructed the sample in Appendix A. Due to rounding, the percentages may not add up to
one hundred.

Number of loans
Avg loan amount
Number of brokers

1997

1998

4

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

All

15

Number of funded broker loans (×1000)
19
19
30
67
113
142
157

150

715

105

100

Loan Amount (×$1,000) for funded broker loans
109
123
146
156
175
196
215

219

189

1

3

Number of brokers with funded loans (×1000)
5
5
6
10
15
21
25

27

58

21
11
8
12
14
17
17
90
10

27
10
6
13
12
18
14
91
9

CA
FL
TX
West w/o CA
South w/o FL, TX
Midwest
Northeast
Metro areas
Non-metro areas

26
5
3
20
3
40
3
91
9

Geographical location (percent of funded broker loans))
19
19
26
32
30
31
31
27
8
9
9
8
9
9
9
12
5
7
7
4
5
6
6
5
14
13
13
12
11
10
14
14
14
15
13
12
12
11
10
11
32
27
25
25
23
19
15
15
8
12
8
7
10
14
15
16
90
89
90
91
92
92
91
91
10
11
10
9
8
8
9
9

Reﬁ, cash out
Reﬁ, no cash out
Purchase

55
23
22

49
17
34

Loan purpose (percent of funded broker loans)
56
56
60
63
62
56
47
18
18
18
17
12
6
9
26
25
21
20
26
38
44

46
9
44

54
11
36

Primary residence
Second home
Investment property

83
1
16

79
1
21

Occupancy type (percent of funded broker loans)
86
91
90
91
93
92
89
1
0
0
0
1
1
2
13
9
9
8
7
7
8

87
3
10

90
1
9

Single family
2-4 unit
Condo
PUD

84
8
3
5

82
9
4
4

75
7
7
12

76
7
6
10

Property type (percent of funded broker loans)
83
81
80
79
78
75
8
6
7
8
7
8
4
5
5
5
6
7
5
8
8
8
9
11

39

74
7
8
11

Table 3: Loan Characteristics at Origination by Vintage Year The table reports descriptive statistics for the loans in our sample. We provide details on our sample construction
in Appendix A. The majority of second lien loans in our sample can be matched precisely
on loan, property, borrower, and broker characteristics with a ﬁrst lien loan using a matching
scheme that we describe in Appendix A. A piggyback mortgages is deﬁned as a matched pair
of a ﬁrst and second lien for the same borrower and property. Any unmatched second lines are
dropped so our sample contains free-standing ﬁrst liens and matched piggyback loans (1st+2nd
liens).
1997

2005

2006

All

15
0

Number of funded broker loans (×1000)
19
19
30
66
107
117
112
0
0
0
1
6
25
45

109
41

598
117

100
-

Loan Amount (×$1,000) for funded broker loans
109
123
146
156
174
194
209
231
258
288

211
298

182
282

24
76
0

36
64
0

Loan program (percent of funded broker loans)
31
18
19
28
32
23
19
69
82
81
72
68
77
75
0
0
0
0
0
0
7

15
45
40

22
68
10

30-year FRM
Other ﬁxed-rate

87
13

Fixed-rate loans (percent of funded ﬁxed broker loans)
88
86
85
87
86
85
85
84
12
14
15
13
14
15
15
16

64
36

82
18

2/28
Other hybrid

65
35

85
15

34
66

66
34

All
Fixed-rate
Hybrid
Balloon

70
68
70
-

Full or limited documentation (percent of funded broker loans)
63
65
65
60
60
59
52
56
59
64
68
72
64
64
67
64
73
74
63
64
64
59
59
56
49
52
56
50
52

58
68
55
52

All
Fixed-rate
Hybrid
Piggyback, 1st lien
Piggyback, 2nd lien

9.9
9.9
9.9
-

10.0
10.2
9.9
-

Prepay penalty

63

71

Free-standing 1st lien
Piggyback
Free-standing 1st lien
Piggyback
Fixed-rate
Hybrid
Balloon

4
0
104
-

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Hybrid loans (percent of funded hybrid broker loans)
88
80
96
95
94
73
50
12
20
4
5
6
27
50

10.3
10.5
10.2
-

10.9
11.4
10.8
-

Mortgage
9.6
9.7
9.6
-

rate (percent)
8.5
7.5
7.1
8.4
7.5
7.1
8.5
7.6
7.3
6.6
6.4
- 10.5 10.3

7.4
7.3
7.7
6.9
10.4

Prepayment penalty (percent of funded broker loans)
75
84
83
80
80
78
73

40

8.5
8.3
8.8
7.9
11.2

8.0
8.0
8.3
7.2
10.7

71

76

Table 4: Borrower Characteristics by Vintage Year The tables reports descriptive statistics for the borrowers at the time of origination. The mean credit score (Fico), combined
monthly income, combined loan-to-value ratio (CLTV), and the debt-to-income ratio (backend ratio) are reported along with the percent of borrowers with Fico scores at or above 620
for diﬀerent groups of loans. The bottom part of the table reports the average monthly income,
CLTV, loan amount, and debt-to-income ratio for borrowers by borrower credit score—at or
above 620 versus below 620.
1997

1998

1999

2000

Fico score
Fico ≥ 620 (%)
Monthly income
CLTV
Debt-to-income

602
38
6
74
37

600
40
6
78
36

594
35
5
77
37

581
26
5
77
39

Fico score
Fico ≥ 620 (%)
Monthly Income
CLTV
Debt-to-income

597
34
5
75
38

Full or limited documentation, free-standing 1st liens
596
588
572
571
579
597
603
599
35
30
20
17
23
33
37
35
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
79
78
78
79
79
81
81
80
38
39
40
40
40
39
40
40

Fico score
Fico ≥ 620 (%)
Monthly income
CLTV
Debt-to-income
Fico score
Fico ≥ 620 (%)
Monthly income
CLTV
Debt-to-income
Monthly income
CLTV
Loan amount
Debt-to-Income
Monthly income
CLTV
Loan amount
Debt-to-income

615
47
6
70
35
6
74
114
37
5
74
99
38

2003

2004

2005

2006

All

606
41
6
82
39

621
51
6
85
40

623
53
7
86
40

615
47
8
86
40

611
45
7
83
40

591
28
7
81
40

593
31
6
80
40

617
46
9
82
39

617
48
8
80
38

655
78
8
100
42

653
77
9
100
42

655
78
8
100
42

6
80
108
35

Fico ≥ 620, all loans,
6
6
7
80
82
81
118
136
166
36
38
38

all documentation types
7
7
7
8
82
85
89
90
182
204
233
266
38
39
40
40

9
91
276
41

8
88
236
40

5
77
95
37

Fico < 620, all loans,
5
5
6
76
76
77
105
118
140
38
39
39

all documentation types
5
6
6
6
78
79
81
81
145
159
175
193
39
39
40
40

6
82
198
40

6
80
168
40

609
46
6
77
34
-

2001

2002

All
582
24
6
78
39

loans
591
31
6
79
39

Stated documentation, free-standing
605
597
597
607
613
43
35
34
42
47
6
7
7
7
7
76
77
78
78
80
35
37
37
37
39

1st liens
624
626
54
54
7
8
82
81
39
39

All documentation types, piggyback loans
647
658
73
80
7
7
100
100
42
42

41

Table 5: Broker Compensation The table reports the mean and the skewness coeﬃcient for
the yield spread premium, the direct fees, and the broker’s total revenue with the mean on the
ﬁrst and skewness on the second row. The top of the table reports the statistics by origination
year, the middle part reports them by loan type, and the bottom part reports them by loan
amount and borrower credit score.
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

1.0
0.3

0.8
0.3

0.7
0.5

1.8
-0.3

1.3
0.2

1.1
0.6

Percent of loan amount
1.0
0.9
1.0
0.9
0.3
0.3
0.1
0.1

Direct fees

3.3
0.9

3.3
1.0

3.5
1.0

3.3
0.7

3.0
0.6

2.8
0.6

2.4
0.8

2.1
0.9

2.0
0.8

2.1
0.4

Revenue

5.0
0.8

4.6
0.9

4.5
0.9

4.3
0.7

3.8
0.6

3.7
0.6

3.3
0.6

3.0
0.8

2.8
0.8

2.8
0.4

Dollars per loan (×$1,000)
1.1
1.1
1.4
1.5
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.4

1.9
1.3

1.7
1.3

1.4
1.6

YSP

YSP

1.8
2.3

1.2
2.3

1.0
2.3

Direct fees

2.7
1.2

2.6
1.6

3.0
1.6

3.4
1.5

3.7
1.4

3.6
1.3

3.5
1.2

3.6
1.2

3.9
1.2

4.3
1.2

Revenue

4.3
1.6

3.7
1.8

4.0
1.6

4.4
1.4

4.8
1.3

4.9
1.2

5.0
1.2

5.4
1.1

5.6
1.0

5.6
1.0

Loan program
Full or limited doc?

All loans
Yes
No

FRM
Yes
No

Hybrid
Yes
No

Balloon
Yes
No

Dollars per loan (×$1,000)
0.9
1.6
1.8
1.2
2.1
1.5
1.3
1.6

YSP

1.4
1.6

1.7
1.3

0.9
2.0

Direct fees

3.6
1.5

4.0
1.2

3.5
1.6

3.8
1.3

3.7
1.4

4.0
1.2

Revenue

5.0
1.3

5.7
1.0

4.3
1.4

4.6
1.3

5.2
1.2

5.7
0.9

Loan amount/Fico score
Full or limited doc?

(0, $100]
Yes
No

Loan amount
($100, $300)
Yes
No

[$300, ∞)
Yes
No

1.5
1.4

1.8
1.2

2.0
1.0

4.9
1.0

5.2
0.8

3.5
1.4

4.3
1.0

6.1
0.9

6.7
0.6

5.3
1.3

6.3
0.8

Fico score
≥620
<620
Yes
No
Yes
No

Dollars per loan (×$1,000)
1.6
2.7
2.8
1.5
0.7
0.6
0.5
1.5

YSP

0.8
0.4

0.8
0.4

1.5
0.7

Direct fees

2.3
0.7

2.2
0.7

3.8
1.0

3.9
0.9

5.9
0.5

5.8
0.4

Revenue

3.0
0.7

2.9
0.7

5.3
0.9

5.4
0.8

8.6
0.2

8.6
0.1

42

Piggyback
Yes
No

1.8
1.2

1.4
1.6

1.6
1.4

3.7
1.4

4.0
1.2

3.5
1.5

4.0
1.2

5.2
1.2

5.7
0.9

4.9
1.3

5.5
1.0

Table 6: Direct Fees and YSP Regressions The table reports the parameter estimates for
Tobit regressions with the broker direct fees and the yield spread premia in percent and in
thousands of dollars as dependent variables. All estimates are statistically signiﬁcant at the 5%
level except for Fico×1(Fico ≥ 620), debt-to-income, 1998, 2001 (fees, %), for piggyback, 1998,
2001 (fees, $), for non-metro areas (YSP, %), and for Fico×1(Fico ≥ 620) (YSP, $).
Direct fees
%
$
Constant
Rate-benchmark 30yr rate
Loan amt ($1,000)
Loan amt × 1(loan amt ≤ $100K)
Loan amt × 1(loan amt ≥ $300K)
Hybrid
Balloon
Piggyback
Stated doc
Prepay penalty
Reﬁ
Reﬁ w/ cash out
CLTV
2nd home/investment property
Multi unit
Fico
Fico × 1(Fico ≥ 620)
Debt-to-income
Benchmark 30yr rate
Slope of yield curve
House prices
Non-metro areas
FL
TX
West
South
Midwest
Northeast
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
σ
Number of observations

5.097

YSP
%

$

4.373
-2.728
-6.840
Loan Characteristics
-0.030
-0.216
0.491
0.886
-0.006
0.009
0.001
0.010
0.003
-0.002
-0.0004
-0.003
0.002
-0.001
-0.0002
-0.001
-0.170
-0.180
0.588
1.117
0.165
0.436
-0.207
-0.461
-0.196
0.010
0.214
0.815
0.072
0.296
-0.416
-0.752
0.306
0.513
0.129
0.216
0.258
0.486
-0.181
-0.300
0.231
0.382
0.050
0.068
-0.004
0.007
-0.010
-0.019
Property Characteristics
0.0640
-0.185
-0.346
-0.591
0.162
0.633
-0.020
-0.069
Borrower Characteristics
-0.002
-0.004
0.004
0.007
0.00001 -0.0001 -0.000001 -0.0002
0.00006
0.008
-0.003
-0.004
Market Conditions
-0.021
-0.089
0.188
0.230
-0.056
-0.179
0.198
0.373
0.014
0.022
-0.003
-0.015
Location Dummies
0.010
-0.100
0.006
-0.031
-0.104
-0.538
0.111
0.238
-0.396
-0.748
0.570
0.858
-0.256
-0.628
0.120
0.251
-0.014
-0.356
0.107
0.211
-0.133
-0.790
0.182
0.311
-0.101
-0.316
0.125
0.314
Year Dummies
-0.007
0.009
-0.495
-0.661
0.217
0.302
-0.896
-1.125
0.116
0.386
-1.048
-1.311
-0.011
0.600
-1.236
-1.705
-0.166
0.379
-0.801
-0.930
-0.412
0.059
-0.630
-0.629
-0.558
-0.161
-0.345
-0.098
-0.500
-0.059
-0.355
-0.166
-0.482
0.171
-0.719
-0.825
1.174
2.106
0.827
1.762
715,011

43

Table 7: Broker Revenue Decomposition – Baseline Speciﬁcations The table reports parameter
estimates for the stochastic frontier model developed in Section 3. The dependent variable is broker
revenue in $1,000. The estimates for the cost function and the symmetric error variance function are
reported in the ﬁrst two columns. The third column shows the estimated speciﬁcation of broker proﬁts.
Estimates for yearly dummies, which are included in all equations, are omitted from the table. Columns
4-6 report the results for an extended cost function. The benchmark set contains all CA ﬁxed-rate
mortgages originated in 1997.
Base Cost Function

Constant

Extended Cost Function

Cost

Std. Dev.

Proﬁt

Cost

Std. Dev.

Proﬁt

1.3740

0.0280

0.0072

1.5370

0.0231

0.0100

(0.0345)

(0.0009)

(0.0008)

(0.0588)

(0.0010)

(0.0012)

Loan Characteristics
Rate - benchmark 30yr rate

Loan amt
Loan amt × 1(loan amt ≤ $100K)
Loan amt × 1(loan amt ≥ $300K)

0.3125
(0.0031)

0.0184

0.0182

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

0.0030

0.0046

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

-0.0038

-0.0042

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

Log loan amt
Log loan amt × 1(loan amt ≤ $100K)
Log loan amt × 1(loan amt ≥ $300K)

0.8365

0.6180

0.8470

0.5845

(0.0051)

(0.0135)

(0.0054)

(0.0148)

0.0273

-0.0860

0.0413

-0.1490

(0.0013)

(0.0037)

(0.0014)

(0.0058)

-0.0032

0.0352

-0.0094

0.0530

(0.0011)

(0.0034)

Hybrid

Balloon

Piggyback

0.3025
(0.0027)

(0.0012)

(0.0032)

0.3895

0.1840

0.0297

0.2140

(0.0060)

(0.0063)

(0.0034)

(0.0092)

0.0391

0.0581

0.0431

-0.0201

(0.0083)

(0.0119)

(0.0053)

(0.0122)

-0.0849

-0.0115

0.5600

0.0632

-0.0096

0.4085

(0.0093)

(0.0039)

(0.0117)

(0.0101)

(0.0046)

(0.0119)

Stated doc

Prepay penalty

Reﬁ

Reﬁ w/ cash out

CLTV

-0.2080

-0.0070

0.0017

-0.2120

(0.0049)

(0.0059)

(0.0029)

(0.0075)

0.5985

0.2790

0.0410

0.3080

(0.0070)

(0.0063)

(0.0033)

(0.0086)

0.2210

0.2140

0.0630

-0.0033

(0.0082)

(0.0099)

(0.0049)

(0.0138)

0.2960

0.1420

-0.0263

0.2000

(0.0074)

(0.0090)

(0.0045)

(0.0126)

-0.0076

0.0017

0.0004

-0.0092

(0.0002)

(0.0002)

(0.0001)

(0.0003)

Continued on next page

44

Table 7 – continued from previous page
Base Cost Function
Cost

Std. Dev.

Extended Cost Function
Proﬁt

Cost

Std. Dev.

Proﬁt

Property Characteristics
2nd home/investment prop

Multi unit

-0.2815

-0.0504

0.0895

-0.3045

(0.0081)

(0.0091)

(0.0047)

(0.0154)

0.2340

0.0948

-0.0412

0.1955

(0.0085)

(0.0117)

(0.0057)

(0.0123)

Borrower Characteristics
Fico
Fico × 1(Fico ≥ 620)

Debt-to-income

0.00069

-0.00132

0.00008

0.00163

(0.00007)

(0.00008)

(0.00004)

(0.00010)

-0.00008

-0.00005

0.00002

-0.00004

(0.00001)

(0.00001)

(0.00001)

(0.00002)

-0.0003

0.0008

-0.0013

0.0001

(0.0002)

(0.0003)

(0.0001)

(0.0004)

Market Conditions
Benchmark 30yr rate

Slope of yield curve

House prices

0.1035

0.0980

(0.0082)

(0.0083)

0.0770

0.0765

(0.0060)

(0.0060)

0.0013

0.0023

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

Location Dummies
Non-metro areas

FL

TX

West w/o CA

South w/o FL and TX

Midwest

Northeast

-0.0371

-0.0182

-0.0042

-0.05400

-0.02455

0.0173

(0.0079)

(0.0048)

(0.0118)

(0.00777)

(0.00473)

(0.0120)

-0.1840

0.1110

0.0580

-0.27300

0.08600

0.1310

(0.0134)

(0.0053)

(0.0148)

(0.01330)

(0.00540)

(0.0148)

-0.2350

-0.0850

0.2845

-0.17800

-0.08700

0.2050

(0.0128)

(0.0068)

(0.0164)

(0.01330)

(0.00695)

(0.0171)

-0.4010

-0.0845

0.1185

-0.41100

-0.09250

0.1195

(0.0122)

(0.0050)

(0.0119)

(0.01240)

(0.00510)

(0.0125)

-0.2810

-0.0334

0.2065

-0.29800

-0.05200

0.2350

(0.0119)

(0.0054)

(0.0134)

(0.01200)

(0.00550)

(0.0134)

-0.1850

0.0301

-0.0474

-0.21000

0.03390

-0.0825

(0.0114)

(0.0047)

(0.0134)

(0.01210)

(0.00497)

(0.0161)

-0.2790

-0.0266

0.1785

-0.31800

-0.05050

0.2195

(0.0132)

(0.0051)

(0.0139)

(0.01260)

(0.00520)

(0.0125)

Included but not reported: Year dummies for 1998-2006
Number of observations

715,011

45

715011

Table 8: Broker Revenue Decomposition – Adding Neighborhood and Regulation Variables
The table reports parameter estimates for the stochastic frontier model developed in Section 3. The
dependent variable is broker revenue in $1,000. The estimates for the cost function and the symmetric
error variance function are reported in the ﬁrst two columns. The third column shows the estimated
speciﬁcation of broker proﬁts. Estimates for yearly and regional dummies, which are included in all
equations, are omitted from the table. Columns 4-6 report the results for an extended cost function.
The benchmark set contains all CA ﬁxed-rate mortgages originated in 1997.
Base Cost Function

Constant

Extended Cost Function

Cost

Std. Dev.

Proﬁt

Cost

Std. Dev.

Proﬁt

1.3520

0.0274

0.0101

1.4960

0.0229

0.0119

(0.0340)

(0.0009)

(0.0011)

(0.0586)

(0.0010)

(0.0014)

Loan Characteristics
Rate - benchmark 30yr rate

Loan amt
Loan amt × 1(loan amt ≤ $100K)
Loan amt × 1(loan amt ≥ $300K)

0.2965

0.3060

(0.0027)

(0.0029)

0.0185

0.0182

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

0.0028

0.0036

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

-0.0040

-0.0041

(0.0001)
Log loan amt
Log loan amt × 1(loan amt ≤ $100K)
Log loan amt × 1(loan amt ≥ $300K)

(0.0001)
0.8370

0.7575

0.8460

0.7410

(0.0050)

(0.0133)

(0.0053)

(0.0145)

0.0245

-0.0805

0.0330

-0.1180

(0.0013)

(0.0035)

(0.0013)

(0.0044)

-0.0061

0.0402

-0.0087

0.0459

(0.0010)

(0.0030)

(0.0011)

(0.0031)

Hybrid

Balloon

Piggyback

0.4090

0.1720

0.0229

0.2470

(0.0060)

(0.0063)

(0.0034)

(0.0094)

0.0270

0.0632

0.0420

-0.0393

(0.0084)

(0.0117)

(0.0052)

(0.0127)

-0.0724

-0.0117

0.5805

0.0855

-0.0051

0.4200

(0.0088)

(0.0037)

(0.0114)

(0.0100)

(0.0046)

(0.0122)

Stated doc

Prepay penalty

Reﬁ

Reﬁ w/ cash out

CLTV

-0.2200

-0.0071

0.0026

-0.2235

(0.0049)

(0.0059)

(0.0029)

(0.0076)

0.5225

0.2790

0.0463

0.2425

(0.0066)

(0.0061)

(0.0032)

(0.0087)

0.2070

0.2020

0.0585

-0.0024

(0.0081)

(0.0099)

(0.0049)

(0.0139)

0.2605

0.1510

-0.0229

0.1555

(0.0073)

(0.0090)

(0.0045)

(0.0127)

-0.0095

0.0018

0.0005

-0.0111

(0.0002)

(0.0002)

(0.0001)

(0.0003)

Continued on next page

46

Table 8 – continued from previous page
Base Cost Function
Cost

Std. Dev.

Extended Cost Function
Proﬁt

Cost

Std. Dev.

Proﬁt

Property Characteristics
2nd home/investment prop

Multi unit

-0.2830

-0.0670

0.0840

-0.2750

(0.0081)

(0.0088)

(0.0046)

(0.0139)

0.0775

0.1420

-0.0310

-0.0068

(0.0086)

(0.0115)

(0.0055)

(0.0127)

Borrower Characteristics
Fico
Fico × 1(Fico ≥ 620)

Debt-to-income

0.00070

-0.00131

0.00005

0.00165

(0.00007)

(0.00008)

(0.00004)

(0.00010)

-0.00008

-0.00005

0.00002

-0.00004

(0.00001)

(0.00001)

(0.00001)

(0.00002)

-0.0010

0.0010

-0.0013

-0.0009

(0.0002)

(0.0003)

(0.0001)

(0.0004)

Market Conditions
Benchmark 30yr rate

Slope of yield curve

House prices

0.0705

0.1420

(0.0082)

(0.0083)

0.0860

0.1720

(0.0060)

(0.0060)

0.0030

0.0023

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

Neighborhood and Regulation Variables
Race

Ethnicity

Education

Regulation (coverage)

Regulation (restrictions)

Regulation (brokers, Pahl)

Regulation (brokers, KT)

-0.0050

-0.0052

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

0.0020

0.0022

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

-0.0122

-0.0118

(0.0004)

(0.0004)

-0.0464

-0.0444

(0.0015)

(0.0015)

-0.0257

-0.0261

(0.0014)

(0.0014)

-0.0081

-0.0061

(0.0020)

(0.0020)

-0.0113

-0.0131

(0.0015)

(0.0014)

Included but not reported: Location and Year dummies
Number of observations

715,011

47

715,011

Table 9: Broker Revenue Decomposition – Adding Broker Variables The table reports parameter estimates for the stochastic frontier model developed in Section 3. The dependent variable is broker
revenue in $1,000. The estimates for the cost function and the symmetric error variance function are
reported in the ﬁrst two columns. The third column shows the estimated speciﬁcation of broker proﬁts.
Estimates for yearly and regional dummies, which are included in all equations, are omitted from the
table. Columns 4-6 report the results for an extended cost function. The benchmark set contains all CA
ﬁxed-rate mortgages originated in 1997.
Base Cost Function

Constant

Extended Cost Function

Cost

Std. Dev.

Proﬁt

Cost

Std. Dev.

Proﬁt

1.3390

0.0286

0.0075

1.5200

0.0252

0.0081

(0.0338)

(0.0009)

(0.0008)

(0.0577)

(0.0010)

(0.0010)

Loan Characteristics
Rate - benchmark 30yr rate

Loan amt
Loan amt × 1(loan amt ≤ $100K)
Loan amt × 1(loan amt ≥ $300K)

0.3190
(0.0029)

0.0182

0.0178

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

0.0027

0.0037

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

-0.0038

-0.0038

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

Log loan amt
Log loan amt × 1(loan amt ≤ $100K)
Log loan amt × 1(loan amt ≥ $300K)

0.8245

0.7885

0.8265

0.7845

(0.0049)

(0.0130)

(0.0053)

(0.0144)

0.0237

-0.0785

0.0336

-0.1245

(0.0012)

(0.0035)

(0.0013)

(0.0045)

-0.0022

0.0314

-0.0038

0.0354

(0.0010)

(0.0029)

Hybrid

Balloon

Piggyback

0.3075
(0.0027)

(0.0011)

(0.0030)

0.4140

0.1820

0.0222

0.2470

(0.0060)

(0.0062)

(0.0034)

(0.0092)

0.0191

0.0497

0.0376

-0.0366

(0.0084)

(0.0116)

(0.0052)

(0.0124)

-0.0419

0.0039

0.5515

0.0908

-0.0020

0.4225

(0.0087)

(0.0037)

(0.0114)

(0.0099)

(0.0045)

(0.0123)

Stated doc

Prepay penalty

Reﬁ

Reﬁ w/ cash out

CLTV

-0.2220

-0.0076

0.0045

-0.2285

(0.0049)

(0.0058)

(0.0028)

(0.0075)

0.5305

0.2730

0.0412

0.2540

(0.0067)

(0.0060)

(0.0032)

(0.0087)

0.1960

0.1730

0.0427

0.0138

(0.0082)

(0.0096)

(0.0048)

(0.0136)

0.2480

0.1440

-0.0253

0.1520

(0.0073)

(0.0087)

(0.0044)

(0.0122)

-0.0097

0.0020

0.0007

-0.0117

(0.0002)

(0.0002)

(0.0001)

(0.0003)

Continued on next page

48

Table 9 – continued from previous page
Base Cost Function
Cost

Std. Dev.

Extended Cost Function
Proﬁt

Cost

Std. Dev.

Proﬁt

Property Characteristics
2nd home/investment prop

Multi unit

-0.2765

-0.0516

0.0900

-0.2960

(0.0081)

(0.0086)

(0.0045)

(0.0140)

0.0905

0.1470

-0.0261

0.0010

(0.0087)

(0.0114)

(0.0055)

(0.0128)

Borrower Characteristics
Fico
Fico × 1(Fico ≥ 620)

Debt-to-income

0.00077

-0.00136

0.00001

0.00179

(0.00007)

(0.00008)

(0.00004)

(0.00010)

-0.00008

-0.00005

0.00002

-0.00004

(0.00001)

(0.00001)

(0.00001)

(0.00002)

-0.0012

0.0009

-0.0013

-0.0009

(0.0002)

(0.0003)

(0.0001)

(0.0004)

Market Conditions
Benchmark 30yr rate

Slope of yield curve

House prices

0.0735

0.0755

(0.0083)

(0.0084)

0.0850

0.0860

(0.0060)

(0.0061)

0.0029

0.0022

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

Broker Variables
Housing per broker

Active broker

Broker fund rate

-0.0034

-0.0068

-0.0003

0.0049

(0.0006)

(0.0006)

(0.0004)

(0.0009)

0.4500

0.2090

0.0560

0.2755

(0.0087)

(0.0119)

(0.0060)

(0.0135)

-0.0014

-0.0003

-0.0005

-0.0012

(0.0001)

(0.0002)

(0.0001)

(0.0002)

Included but not reported: Neighborhood and Regulation Variables, Location and Year dummies
Number of observations

715,011

49

715,011

50

1.35
1.05

All years

∗

6.85
6.36

5.18
4.61
4.87
4.29
5.63
5.02
6.10
5.60
6.25
5.69
6.20
5.74
6.24
5.76
6.72
6.25
7.45
7.02
7.99
7.62
1.01
0.73

0.97
0.57
0.69
0.47
0.78
0.54
0.77
0.53
0.69
0.50
0.80
0.57
0.83
0.61
0.95
0.67
1.09
0.81
1.23
0.94
4.75
4.27

3.59
2.93
3.16
2.69
3.58
3.08
3.64
3.25
3.69
3.30
4.19
3.78
4.29
3.89
4.40
4.02
5.09
4.62
5.59
5.10

FL
Proﬁt Rev

0.75
0.49

1.11
0.63
0.69
0.44
0.86
0.52
0.77
0.51
0.76
0.48
0.66
0.42
0.71
0.47
0.74
0.49
0.74
0.50
0.79
0.53
3.81
3.38

3.60
3.13
2.83
2.36
3.23
2.59
3.13
2.65
3.65
3.00
3.70
3.20
3.82
3.34
3.90
3.44
3.92
3.52
3.95
3.55

TX
Proﬁt Rev

West does not include CA and South does not include FL or TX.

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1.37
0.95
1.21
0.88
1.33
0.99
1.45
1.09
1.41
1.05
1.22
0.94
1.11
0.87
1.23
0.98
1.49
1.19
1.65
1.31

1997

CA
Proﬁt Rev

1.06
0.76

1.16
0.79
0.88
0.62
0.95
0.66
1.05
0.73
1.07
0.70
1.03
0.69
0.95
0.69
1.00
0.73
1.08
0.79
1.18
0.86
5.00
4.47

4.46
3.99
3.99
3.60
4.24
3.72
4.47
3.95
4.73
4.19
4.72
4.19
4.68
4.22
4.96
4.43
5.18
4.64
5.51
4.98

West∗
Proﬁt Rev

0.96
0.61

1.28
0.70
0.86
0.53
0.90
0.57
0.91
0.58
0.88
0.58
0.93
0.58
0.91
0.58
0.98
0.63
0.98
0.63
1.02
0.65
4.42
3.72

4.02
3.20
3.34
2.74
3.57
3.04
3.69
3.19
3.94
3.41
4.23
3.60
4.28
3.61
4.61
3.91
4.59
3.89
4.67
3.91

South∗
Proﬁt Rev

0.67
0.49

1.01
0.69
0.71
0.51
0.74
0.54
0.79
0.56
0.69
0.50
0.70
0.51
0.68
0.51
0.71
0.52
0.63
0.47
0.60
0.44
3.94
3.55

3.99
3.43
3.49
3.09
3.57
3.18
3.76
3.40
3.88
3.53
4.11
3.73
3.98
3.59
4.22
3.82
3.94
3.57
3.78
3.34

Midwest
Proﬁt Rev

1.30
0.92

0.92
0.68
0.89
0.61
0.98
0.67
1.20
0.84
1.04
0.78
1.30
0.90
1.27
0.90
1.27
0.94
1.33
0.95
1.40
0.96
5.86
5.21

3.50
3.16
3.36
2.85
3.82
3.29
4.45
3.91
4.78
4.36
5.55
4.99
5.63
5.07
5.92
5.38
6.15
5.50
6.24
5.49

Northeast
Proﬁt Rev

1.07
0.76

1.14
0.77
0.86
0.59
0.94
0.64
1.04
0.71
1.01
0.70
0.99
0.69
0.97
0.70
1.05
0.77
1.14
0.83
1.17
0.83

5.27
4.58

4.35
3.78
3.73
3.21
4.04
3.42
4.44
3.80
4.79
4.14
4.95
4.35
5.03
4.44
5.38
4.76
5.63
4.93
5.64
4.85

All regions
Proﬁt Rev

columns four through six of Table 9, by origination year and region. For each year and region, we provide the same summary statistics for total broker
revenues. The proﬁts and revenues are measured in $1,000 dollars.

Table 10: Estimated Proﬁts by Year and Region The table reports the mean (ﬁrst row) and median (second row) broker proﬁts as estimated in

Table 11: Estimated Proﬁts for Diﬀerent Loan Types The table reports the mean and median
broker proﬁts as estimated in columns four through six of Table 9, for diﬀerent types of loans. For each
loan type, we provide the same summary statistics for total broker revenues, direct fees and yield spread
premia. All values are measured in $1,000 dollars.
Proﬁt
Mean
Median

Revenue
Mean Median

Direct Fees
Mean Median

Mean

YSP
Median

Loan Characteristics
Rate - benchmark 30yr rate < 2%
Rate - benchmark 30yr rate ≥ 2%

1.06
1.08

0.79
0.72

5.62
4.77

4.98
4.06

4.13
3.15

3.60
2.67

1.49
1.62

1.10
1.28

FRM
Hybrid
Balloon

0.82
1.14
1.35

0.59
0.82
1.00

4.45
5.52
6.36

3.84
4.83
5.70

3.56
3.78
4.91

3.02
3.23
4.31

0.89
1.75
1.45

0.54
1.43
0.98

Free-standing 1st lien
Piggyback

1.04
1.20

0.74
0.87

5.18
5.75

4.49
5.01

3.71
3.82

3.16
3.23

1.47
1.93

1.11
1.69

Full or limited doc
Stated doc

1.01
1.16

0.71
0.85

5.02
5.66

4.35
4.99

3.57
3.97

3.04
3.43

1.45
1.70

1.15
1.31

No prepay penalty
Prepay penalty

0.95
1.10

0.64
0.80

4.89
5.39

4.12
4.72

3.22
3.88

2.60
3.35

1.66
1.51

1.25
1.19

Purchase
Reﬁ, no cash out
Reﬁ, cash out

1.01
0.90
1.14

0.72
0.64
0.82

5.08
4.76
5.50

4.32
4.12
4.85

3.28
3.44
4.08

2.72
2.97
3.54

1.80
1.32
1.42

1.48
1.01
1.05

3.26
2.56
3.13
3.89

1.58
1.27
1.53
1.78

1.24
0.90
1.20
1.31

3.12
3.25

1.44
1.67

1.14
1.30

Property Characteristics
Primary residence
2nd home/investment property
One unit
Multi unit

1.10
0.79
1.04
1.42

0.79
0.56
0.75
1.00

5.38
4.34
5.19
6.31

4.69
3.62
4.51
5.61

3.80
3.07
3.66
4.54

Fico < 620
Fico ≥ 620

1.06
1.08

0.74
0.78

5.10
5.49

Race, ≤66.7% white
Race, >66.7% white

1.24
0.94

0.90
0.68

5.73
4.95

5.04
4.31

4.28
3.34

3.71
2.87

1.45
1.61

1.07
1.28

Ethnicity, ≤20% hispanic
Ethnicity, >20% hispanic

0.97
1.27

0.68
0.95

4.90
6.02

4.21
5.41

3.36
4.45

2.85
3.99

1.53
1.57

1.19
1.24

Education, ≤15% w/ BA
Education, >15% w/ BA

1.04
1.12

0.73
0.81

5.04
5.67

4.35
4.97

3.70
3.77

3.14
3.24

1.34
1.90

1.05
1.54

Baseline anti-predatory regulation
Stricter state anti-predatory regulation

1.02
1.10

0.71
0.80

4.63
5.65

4.04
4.96

3.28
3.99

2.83
3.44

1.35
1.66

1.08
1.30

Housing per broker, ≤4000
Housing per broker, >4000

1.14
0.94

0.83
0.64

5.63
4.67

4.98
3.99

4.04
3.21

3.50
2.70

1.59
1.47

1.26
1.13

Inactive broker
Active broker

0.96
1.19

0.68
0.86

4.95
5.64

4.25
4.98

3.37
4.14

2.85
3.59

1.58
1.50

1.24
1.16

Metro areas
Non-metro areas

1.09
0.80

0.79
0.54

5.38
4.21

4.69
3.61

3.80
3.03

3.25
2.55

1.58
1.18

1.24
0.98

Total

1.07

0.76

5.27

4.58

3.73

3.17

1.54

1.20

Borrower Characteristics
4.43
4.78

3.66
3.81

Regulation and Neighborhood Variables

Broker Variables

Location

51

52
4.03
1.01
4.56
1.13
4.07
1.02
4.37
1.03
4.32
1.08
3.37
0.86

Cost
Proﬁt

Cost
Proﬁt

Cost
Proﬁt

Cost
Proﬁt

Cost
Proﬁt

4.43
1.11

Cost
Proﬁt

Cost
Proﬁt

3.57
0.91

3.44
0.80

4.31
1.09

4.27
1.10

4.15
1.01

4.53
1.16

4.03
1.01

4.39
1.14

3.68
0.82

4.23
1.07

Cost
Proﬁt

Cost
Proﬁt

Mean

Median

FRM only, N = 168,338
1.56
1.51
1.47
3.19
0.78
0.11
0.13
0.59
Hybrid only, N = 546,673
1.67
1.78
1.82
4.11
1.04
0.17
0.16
0.81
4.08
0.82

3.21
0.59

Full Sample, N = 715,011
1.67
3.86
0.15
0.76

1st Percentile

Purchase only, N = 254,075
1.73
1.69
1.57
3.64
0.96
0.11
0.14
0.70
Reﬁnance only, N = 460,936
1.64
1.71
1.75
4.01
1.01
0.14
0.16
0.74

1.68
1.00

Metro areas only, N = 649,367
1.67
1.69
1.70
4.00
1.01
0.15
0.16
0.78
Non-metro areas only, N = 65,644
1.31 1.43
1.59
1.53
3.00
0.92 0.81
0.12
0.13
0.56

1.70
0.97

1.67
1.02

3.03
0.54

3.98
0.79

3.92
0.79

3.72
0.72

Full or limited documentation only, N = 435,737
1.58 1.59
1.67
1.66
3.60 3.60
0.97 0.95
0.15
0.15
0.71 0.71
Stated documentation only, N = 279,274
1.77 1.74
1.67
1.69
4.37 4.37
1.01 1.05
0.16
0.16
0.83 0.85

1.72
0.99

1.35
1.02

1.67
0.99

Std. Dev.

7.64
4.84

9.16
5.25

9.21
5.08

9.08
5.34

9.53
5.32

8.65
5.09

9.43
5.21

7.23
5.43

9.07
5.22

8.17
4.23

9.14
5.29

9.00
5.27

9.18
5.11

9.41
5.52

8.74
5.00

9.24
5.44

8.26
4.14

99th Percentile

of the estimated costs and proﬁts for the frontier model estimated on stratiﬁed samples versus the full sample. The full sample speciﬁcation results match
those reported in columns four through six of Table 9. Stratiﬁed samples are formed for ﬁxed-rate and hybrid mortgages, full or limited and stated
documentation loans, mortgages to purchase and reﬁnance, and mortgages originated in metro and non-metro areas. For each case and statistic, the ﬁrst
ﬁgure is for the model estimated on the stratiﬁed sample and the second ﬁgure corresponds to the value for the full sample speciﬁcation restricted to the
stratiﬁed sample. Costs and proﬁts are measured in $1,000 dollars.

Table 12: Estimated Costs and Proﬁts for Stratiﬁed Samples The table reports the mean, median, standard deviation, and 1st and 99th percentiles

Table 13: Broker Compensation and Loan Performance The table reports parameter estimates
for Cox proportional hazard models for 60-day delinquency. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
The benchmark set contains all CA ﬁxed-rate mortgages originated in 1999.
Cox proportional hazard model for 60-day delinquency
h(t) = h0 (t) × exp(Xb)
I

II

III

IV

Broker Compensation
Fees/loan amt (%)

0.066

(0.004)

0.055
0.030

(0.007)

-0.053

(0.008)

-0.105

(0.010)

0.108

(0.013)

Fees/loan amt (%) × 1(2004-06)
YSP/loan amt (%)
YSP/loan amt (%) × 1(2004-06)

(0.005)

Log brk proﬁt

-0.126

(0.008)

-0.162
0.077

(0.013)

0.214

(0.011)

0.195

(0.014)

0.024

(0.014)

Log brk proﬁt × 1(2004-06)

(0.010)

Loan Characteristics
Rate - benchmark 30yr rate

0.368

(0.006)

0.369

(0.006)

0.332

(0.006)

0.334

(0.006)

Hybrid

0.353

(0.015)

0.352

(0.015)

0.332

(0.015)

0.333

(0.015)

Balloon

0.110

(0.024)

0.117

(0.024)

0.118

(0.023)

0.121

(0.024)

Piggyback

0.344

(0.018)

0.366

(0.019)

0.264

(0.019)

0.271

(0.019)

Stated doc

0.197

(0.012)

0.198

(0.012)

0.221

(0.012)

0.221

(0.012)

Log loan amt

0.239

(0.019)

0.232

(0.019)

-0.021

(0.021)

-0.015

(0.021)

Log amt × 1(amt ≤ $100K)

0.026

(0.004)

0.024

(0.004)

0.046

(0.004)

0.046

(0.004)

Log amt × 1(amt ≥ $300K)

0.034

(0.004)

0.037

(0.004)

0.033

(0.004)

0.033

(0.004)

Prepay penalty

0.110

(0.013)

0.105

(0.013)

0.088

(0.014)

0.089

(0.014)

Reﬁ

-0.101

(0.018)

-0.099

(0.018)

-0.096

(0.018)

-0.093

(0.018)

Reﬁ w/ cash out

-0.083

(0.017)

-0.083

(0.017)

-0.094

(0.017)

-0.093

(0.017)

0.013

(0.001)

0.013

(0.001)

0.015

(0.001)

0.014

(0.001)

CLTV

Property Characteristics
2nd home/investment prop
Multi unit

-0.037

(0.0181)

-0.0348

(0.018)

0.001

(0.018)

-0.000

(0.018)

0.028

(0.0216)

0.0263

(0.022)

0.032

(0.022)

0.031

(0.022)

Borrower Characteristics
Fico (in 100)

-0.604

(0.016)

-0.605

(0.016)

-0.633

(0.016)

-0.633

(0.016)

Fico (in 100) × 1(Fico ≥ 620)

-0.025

(0.003)

-0.024

(0.003)

-0.023

(0.003)

-0.023

(0.003)

0.004

(0.001)

0.005

(0.001)

0.005

(0.001)

0.005

(0.001)

Debt-to-income

Market Conditions
Benchmark 30yr rate

0.362

(0.020)

0.372

(0.020)

0.360

(0.020)

0.369

(0.020)

Slope of yield curve

0.062

(0.015)

0.060

(0.015)

0.051

(0.015)

0.051

(0.015)

-0.006

(0.001)

-0.005

(0.001)

-0.006

(0.001)

-0.005

(0.001)

House prices

Continued on next page

53

Table 13 – continued from previous page
Cox proportional hazard model for 60-day delinquency
h(t) = h0 (t) × exp(Xb)
I

II

III

IV

Neighborhood and Regulation Variables
Race

-0.002

(0.000)

-0.002

(0.000)

-0.002

(0.000)

-0.002

(0.000)

Ethnicity

-0.005

(0.000)

-0.005

(0.000)

-0.005

(0.000)

-0.005

(0.000)

Education

-0.010

(0.001)

-0.011

(0.001)

-0.009

(0.001)

-0.009

(0.001)

Regulation (coverage)

-0.022

Regulation (restrictions)
Regulation (brokers, Pahl)
Regulation (brokers, KT)

0.0364
-0.020
0.0082

(0.003)

-0.019

(0.003)

-0.016

(0.003)

-0.014

(0.003)

(0.003)

0.035

(0.003)

0.040

(0.003)

0.039

(0.003)

(0.004)

-0.022

(0.004)

-0.022

(0.004)

-0.023

(0.004)

(0.003)

0.009

(0.003)

0.012

(0.003)

0.012

(0.003)

Broker Variables
Housing per brk (in 100,000)

-0.231

(0.130)

-0.254

(0.130)

-0.320

(0.130)

-0.325

(0.130)

Active broker

0.006

(0.023)

0.005

(0.023)

-0.019

(0.023)

-0.016

(0.023)

Broker fund rate (nominal)

0.005

(0.030)

0.007

(0.030)

0.020

(0.030)

0.019

(0.030)

(0.018)

-0.022

(0.018)

Location Dummies
Non-metro areas

-0.017

(0.018)

-0.019

FL
TX

(0.018)

-0.022

-0.176

(0.031)

-0.146

(0.031)

-0.191

(0.030)

-0.181

(0.031)

0.035

(0.030)

0.054

(0.030)

-0.002

(0.030)

0.010

(0.030)

West w/o CA

0.022

(0.025)

0.039

(0.025)

0.006

(0.025)

0.012

(0.025)

South w/o FL and TX

0.063

(0.027)

0.075

(0.027)

0.011

(0.027)

0.015

(0.028)

Midwest

0.152

(0.026)

0.164

(0.026)

0.140

(0.026)

0.143

(0.026)

Northeast

0.024

(0.025)

0.034

(0.025)

-0.039

(0.025)

-0.036

(0.025)

Year Dummies
2000

-0.118

(0.030)

-0.121

(0.030)

-0.111

(0.030)

-0.113

(0.030)

2001

0.218

(0.032)

0.211

(0.032)

0.253

(0.032)

0.251

(0.032)

2002

0.247

(0.048)

0.245

(0.048)

0.271

(0.048)

0.274

(0.048)

2003

0.261

(0.057)

0.252

(0.057)

0.272

(0.057)

0.276

(0.057)

2004

0.459

(0.052)

0.265

(0.057)

0.461

(0.052)

0.392

(0.054)

2005

0.669

(0.041)

0.478

(0.048)

0.665

(0.041)

0.598

(0.044)

2006

0.681

(0.033)

0.489

(0.041)

0.677

(0.033)

0.608

(0.037)

Number of observations

651,419

54

70

60

total
broker
retail

billions

50

40

30

20

10

0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Figure 1: Origination volume. Annual loan amount funded by New Century from 1997 to
2006. Loans are originated either through the standard wholesale channel (broker), the retail
channel (retail), or by correspondent brokers.

55

Direct fees

percent

6

4

2

0

0

2

4

6

8
10
$1,000

12

14

16

18

12

14

16

18

12

14

16

18

YSP
40

percent

30
20
10
0

0

2

4

6

8
10
$1,000
Broker revenues

5

percent

4
3
2
1
0

0

2

4

6

8
10
$1,000

Figure 2: Broker revenues Unconditional distribution of direct broker fees, yields spread
premia, and the total broker revenues for funded ﬁrst-lien broker loans.

56

Fix

Hybrid
6
percent

percent

6
4
2
0

0

10
15
$1,000
Stand−alone first lien
percent

percent

2
0

10
15
$1,000
Full/limited documentation
percent

percent

2
0

10
15
$1,000
No prepay penalty

10
15
$1,000
Stated documentation

4
2
0

5

10
15
$1,000
Prepay penalty

0

5

0

5

6
percent

percent

5

15

2

0

5

6
4
2
0

5

10
$1,000
FICO < 620

4
2
0

15

10
$1,000
FICO >= 620

15

6
percent

6
percent

0

10
$1,000
Piggyback

6

4

4
2
0

5

4

0

5

6

0

0

6

4

0

2
0

5

6

0

4

0

5

10
$1,000

4
2
0

15

10
$1,000

15

Figure 3: Broker revenues by loan and borrower types The unconditional distribution of
broker revenues for ﬁxed-rate, hybrid, free-standing 1st lien, piggyback, full or limited documentation,
stated documentation loans, and for loans without or with prepayment penalties, and for borrowers with
credit scores below 620 and for those with scores at or above 620.

57

Actual delinquency rate

Adjusted delinquency rate

45

45
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

40
35

40
35
30

25

percent

percent

30

20

25
20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

6
12
18
months since origination

1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

0

24

0

6
12
18
months since origination

24

Figure 4: Delinquency rates The ﬁgures show the fraction of loans delinquent as a function
of months from origination by year of origination. The actual delinquency rate (left panel) is
deﬁned as the cumulative fraction of loans that were past due 60 or more days, in foreclosure,
real-estate owned, or defaulted, at or before a given age. The adjusted delinquency rate (right
panel) is obtained by adjusting the actual rate for year-by-year variation in loan, borrower
and broker characteristics, census and regulation variables, mortgage rates, and house price
appreciation, based on the estimation results in Table 13, speciﬁcation III.

58

Low broker profits

High broker profits

25

25
2003
2004
2005

2003
2004
2005

15

15
percent

20

percent

20

10

10

5

5

0

0

6
12
18
months since origination

0

24

0

6
12
18
months since origination

24

Figure 5: Delinquency rates and broker proﬁts The ﬁgures show the fraction of loans
delinquent as a function of months from origination by year of origination, for free-standing
ﬁrst lien hybrid mortgages with stated documentation originated in California. The left plot
shows the 60-day delinquency rates for loans with low broker proﬁts, and the right plot shows
the corresponding rates for high-broker-proﬁt loans. Broker proﬁts are estimated using the
model described in columns four through six in Table 9. High-broker-proﬁt (low-broker-proﬁt)
loans are those in the upper (lower) tercile of the conditional broker proﬁt distribution.

59

A.

Sample Construction

We started from the approximately 3.2 million loans in the NCEN data base. We select all
wholesale loan applications between 1997 and 2006 that have a valid funding decisions,
that is, the decision was either “funded”, “declined”, or “withdrawn”. We require a
valid broker number, property zip code, a loan amount that is between $10,000 and
$1,000,0000, a combined loan-to-value ratio between 0 and 150, a Fico score between 300
and 850, we dropped loans with missing Fico score loans, a debt-to-income ratio between
0 and 100, and a mortgage rate greater than 0 and less than 25%. This step reduces the
sample by approximately 46% to approximately 1.5 million observations.
We use this “pre-sample” to compute broker variables such as the indicator for an
“Active Broker”, which depends on whether a given broker submitted a loan application
during the previous month and the Broker Fund Rate which takes the ratio of funded
loan applications to all applications. We identify brokers by the broker numbers and in
a second step we combine multiple broker numbers that appears to refer to the same
broker ﬁrm based on the broker name and the location of properties.
To identify piggyback loans among our funded loans we look for matching ﬁrst lien
loan for any valid funded second lien loan. We match on the funding date, the borrower’s
age, the Fico score, the appraisal value for the property, the purpose of the loans, the
occupancy status, and the property city and zip. Using this scheme we can match the
vast majority of the funded second lien loans in our sample
We construct regulation variables following the deﬁnitions used in Ho and PenningtonCross (2005), Ho and Pennington-Cross (2006), Pahl (2007), and Kleiner and Todd
(2007), and extending the variables when necessary to our sample period. All these
variables are deﬁned by year and state.
We collect zip code level census variables on race, ethnicity, and education. We
match these variables with our loan records and drop loan records that have no match
potentially because of an incorrect zip code.

60

In constructing our ﬁnal sample of funded loans we include only funded loans that
are either free-standing ﬁrst lien loans or a match of a ﬁrst lien and a second lien loan
that forms an observation of a piggyback loan. We drop any second lien loans that were
not matched. We trim the observations by dropping the observations with the lowest and
highest 1% of broker revenue. In our current version we focus on loans that are either
ﬁxed-rate, hybrid, or have a balloon payment. We drop interest-only, various agency,
and others type of loans that are less common. These steps generate a sample size of
715,011.

B.

Moment Conditions for the Frontier Model

The model is:
fi,j + yi,j ≡ wi,j
= Xi,j γ 0 + ²i,j + ξi,j ,

where ²i,j is normally distributed with standard deviation σ and ξi,j is exponentially
distributed with mean parameter λi,j = exp(Xi,j β 0 ).11 Both random variables ²i,j and
ξi,j are assumed to be independent of each other, conditional on Xi,j .
With qi,j = ²i,j +ξi,j , we derive the density of qi,j in order to compute the log-likelihood
function for our parameter estimation. Using the formula for the cumulative distribution
function (cdf) for sums of independent random variables, we obtain
∫
Pr(qi,j ≤ q) =

(

∞

Φ
0

q−s
σ

)

1 −s/λi,j
e
ds,
λi,j

where Φ denotes the standard normal cumulative distribution function. Letting φ be the
standard normal density, and omitting subscripts i, j to simplify notation, the density
11

To keep things simple, we assume a constant variance σ 2 for the symmetric error term ²i,j . Extensions
to the more general form of σi,j in equation (9) are straightforward.

61

function for q is:
1
σ

∫

(

∞

φ
0

q−s
σ

)

1 −s/λ
e
ds =
λ
=
=
=
=

∫

∞

(q−s)2 1
1
e− 2σ2 e−s/λ ds
λ
2πσ
∫0 ∞
2 s/λ
1 1 − q2 +s2 −2qs+2σ
2σ 2
√
e
ds
λ
2πσ
0
∫ ∞
1 1 − (s−(q−σ22 /λ))2 −q/λ+ 12 (σ/λ)2
2σ
√
e
ds
2πσ λ
0
(
( q
σ )) 1 −q/λ+ 1 (σ/λ)2
2
1−Φ − +
e
σ λ
λ
(q
σ ) 1 −q/λ+ 1 (σ/λ)2
2
Φ
−
e
.
σ λ λ

√

The third line follows from completing the square, the fourth line from the deﬁnition of
the normal cdf, and the ﬁnal line from the symmetry of the normal cdf.
Using the functional form for λi,j , the contribution to the log-likelihood for one observation therefore is:
))
( (
(
)
wi,j − Xi,j γ 0
0
−Xi,j β 0
− σe
+ log e−Xi,j β
Lij (γ, σ, β; wi,j , Xi,j ) = log Φ
σ
1
0
0
− (wi,j − Xi,j γ 0 ) e−Xi,j β + σ 2 e−2Xi,j β .
2
Let (γ̂, σ̂, β̂) be the maximum likelihood estimates and let q̂i,j be the empirical residuals for the model, that is, q̂i,j = wi,j − Xi,j γ̂ 0 . Diﬀerentiating the overall log-likelihood
∑
L = i,j Lij with respect to the parameters we arrive at the moment conditions for the
model:
 ( q̂
∑ φ σ̂i,j
∂L
 (
:
q̂
∂γk
Φ σ̂i,j
i,j
 ( q̂
φ σ̂i,j
∑
∂L

(
:
q̂
∂σ
Φ σ̂i,j
i,j
 ( q̂
∑ φ σ̂i,j
∂L
 (
:
q̂
∂βk
Φ σ̂i,j
i,j

− σ̂e−Xi,j β̂

0

− σ̂e−Xi,j β̂ 0
− σ̂e−Xi,j β̂

0

− σ̂e−Xi,j β̂ 0
− σ̂e−Xi,j β̂
− σ̂e−Xi,j

0

β̂ 0

)



0
) (−1/σ̂) + e−Xi,j β̂  Xij,k = 0,

)
)

(
−

q̂i,j
0
− e−Xi,j β̂
2
σ̂

)

)


0
+ σ̂e−2Xi,j β̂  = 0,



0
0
0
) σ̂ − eXi,j β̂ + q̂i,j − σ̂ 2 e−Xi,j β̂  e−Xi,j β̂ Xij,k = 0.

62

The properties of the joint distribution of ²i,j and ξi,j imply
0

E (qi,j |Xi,j ) = eXi,j β ,
and
(q
0)
φ σi,j − σe−Xi,j β
(q
) qi,j .
E (²i,j |qi,j ) =
Φ σi,j − σe−Xi,j β 0
Furthermore, we can interpret
(
φ
Φ

(

−Xi,j β̂ 0

q̂i,j
σ̂

− σ̂e

q̂i,j
σ̂

− σ̂e−Xi,j

β̂ 0

)
) (−1/σ̂) + e−Xi,j β̂

0

and
(
φ
Φ

(

q̂i,j
σ̂
q̂i,j
σ̂

−Xi,j β̂ 0

− σ̂e

− σ̂e−Xi,j

)
0

β̂ 0

) σ̂ − eXi,j β̂ + q̂i,j − σ̂ 2 e−Xi,j β̂

0

as generalized residuals for the model, which must be orthogonal to the conditioning
information.

63

Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics for Regulation and Census Variables The table reports
the means for the regulation and neighborhood variables in our sample. The coverage and restriction
variables are deﬁned as indexes that count the number of additional types of mortgages covered and the
additional number of restrictions impose over and above the HOEPA regulations. The mortgage broker
regulations variables are measured by the index developed in Pahl (2007) that aggregates several types
of mortgage broker regulations and the measure used by Kleiner and Todd (2007) that measures the
ﬁnancial bonding requirements for mortgage brokers. The regulations variables are measured by state
and by year. The census variables are measured by zip code and year. The household income variable
is the median household income. The means are reported for three periods, 1997-199, 2000-2003, and
2004-2006, by census divisions with CA, FL, TX broken out.
State(s)

California
Florida
Texas
Paciﬁc w/o CA
Mountain
West South Central w/o TX
East South Central
South Atlantic w/o FL
West North Central
East North Central
Mid Atlantic
New England
All
California
Florida
Texas
Paciﬁc w/o CA
Mountain
West South Central w/o TX
East South Central
South Atlantic w/o FL
West North Central
East North Central
Mid Atlantic
New England
All

Funded Loans
Num. of
Percent
Loans
7,265
2,994
2,098
1,730
3,529
444
834
3,674
2,396
8,960
2,220
1,363

19.4
8.0
5.6
4.6
9.4
1.2
2.2
9.8
6.4
23.9
5.9
3.6

37,507

100.0

Regulation
Anti-predatory
Broker
White
Cvrge
Restr
Pahl
KT
(%)
1997-1999
0.0
0.0
3.0
0.0
56.4
0.0
0.0
6.5
0.0
75.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
62.7
0.0
0.0
3.6
1.8
78.9
0.0
0.0
1.8
0.8
78.1
0.0
0.0
3.3
1.9
65.6
0.0
0.0
4.9
4.4
75.3
0.1
0.2
3.2
1.4
58.5
0.0
0.0
1.9
1.2
78.9
0.0
0.0
4.4
3.7
65.3
0.0
0.0
4.8
0.5
75.0
0.0
0.0
1.8
0.9
85.2
0.0

1.4

Hispanic
(%)

Census
Education
(%)

Household
Income

31.2
19.8
32.2
6.5
23.3
3.7
1.7
4.0
3.9
7.9
5.1
6.9

15.9
13.3
15.5
16.4
15.8
14.2
12.2
14.3
16.8
13.5
12.0
17.7

50.7
40.0
43.2
44.8
44.0
35.0
36.2
41.6
45.8
43.7
36.2
51.3

0.0

3.4

67.8

15.1

14.8

44.3

56.2
75.2
64.5
78.0
78.6
64.6
69.4
63.6
82.3
67.9
70.5
81.4

33.8
21.1
31.2
7.0
21.8
3.8
1.7
4.7
3.9
7.8
11.8
9.1

14.3
13.7
16.1
16.7
16.2
13.4
12.2
17.2
16.7
13.2
15.1
16.3

49.2
41.3
45.8
46.8
46.4
35.4
36.8
49.8
45.7
44.8
51.7
49.5

69,752
19,738
12,983
7,788
16,881
3,639
7,916
14,546
9,688
39,763
13,533
12,266

30.5
8.6
5.7
3.4
7.4
1.6
3.5
6.4
4.2
17.4
5.9
5.4

4.7
0.0
1.7
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
1.5
0.0
1.9
2.7
3.8

1.3
2.4
3.4
0.0
0.7
0.2
0.3
1.9
0.0
1.5
1.9
5.6

2000-2003
3.0
0.0
6.0
0.0
6.0
2.5
4.4
2.1
2.2
1.0
4.4
3.5
4.8
5.7
3.9
2.5
2.6
2.2
4.6
3.9
4.9
4.3
3.3
2.0

228,493

100.0

2.3

1.7

3.9

67.1

18.9

14.8

46.7

55.5
74.3
67.7
66.4
78.8
72.4
73.2
60.3
83.0
68.1
66.7
81.4

37.9
20.9
31.2
7.2
22.1
3.9
1.9
4.4
3.5
7.0
12.4
9.5

11.9
13.0
16.7
16.2
15.1
13.8
12.7
16.2
16.1
12.8
13.8
14.9

45.2
40.3
47.4
48.1
46.7
37.2
37.9
48.8
44.7
43.3
48.7
46.0

67.0

19.6

13.8

45.2

1.8

California
Florida
Texas
Paciﬁc w/o CA
Mountain
West South Central w/o TX
East South Central
South Atlantic w/o FL
West North Central
East North Central
Mid Atlantic
New England

118,383
47,691
27,287
21,697
39,028
6,123
12,405
34,341
15,554
54,864
46,711
24,927

26.4
10.6
6.1
4.8
8.7
1.4
2.8
7.7
3.5
12.2
10.4
5.6

7.0
0.0
2.0
0.0
0.9
2.8
0.0
3.4
0.0
3.6
5.2
4.0

2.0
4.0
4.0
0.0
1.8
4.6
1.1
4.4
0.0
4.2
4.3
5.9

2004-2006
3.0
0.0
6.0
0.0
6.0
2.5
4.6
1.9
3.2
1.3
5.7
4.1
6.2
7.2
4.0
3.0
2.7
2.7
5.5
4.6
5.8
4.8
3.5
2.0

All

449,011

100.0

3.5

3.1

4.4

64

2.1

Home | News | Technology | Markets | Personal Journal | Opinion | Weekend / Leisure | Portfolio | Markets Data
Center | Fund Research

DEBT DILEMMA

Getting to 'Yes'
December 3, 2007

Lenders use "rate sheets" to tell mortgage brokers the interest rates, terms and costs of different loans. These sheets helped brokers find ways to make
loans to borrowers who had blemished credit or wanted loan terms that traditional lenders were less likely to approve. Brokers could choose from a variety
of loan options for borrowers with high and low credit scores. (See related article.)

Write to WSJ.com news editors at newseditors@wsj.com

Return To Top

Subscribe Log In Take a Tour Contact Us Help Email Setup Customer Service: Online | Print
Privacy Policy Subscriber Agreement & Terms of Use Mobile Devices RSS Feeds
News Licensing Advertising About Dow Jones
Copyright © 2010 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

