                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         EVALUATING CONDITIONS IN MAJOR CHINESE HOUSING MARKETS

                                                Jing Wu
                                            Joseph Gyourko
                                            Yongheng Deng

                                         Working Paper 16189
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16189


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2010




We thank our discussants, Xudong An and Paul Anglin, and other attendees at the Symposium on
Urbanization and Housing in Asia held by the Institute of Real Estate Studies at the National University
of Singapore, as well as Ed Glaeser, for helpful comments on a previous draft. We also appreciate
the excellent research assistance of Derek Jia, Mingying Xu, and Yibo Zhao. Gyourko thanks the
Research Sponsor Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton for financial support.
Deng and Wu thank the Institute of Real Estate Studies at National University of Singapore for its
research support. Wu also thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support
(No. 70873072). Naturally, we remain responsible for any remaining errors. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jing Wu, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongheng Deng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Evaluating Conditions in Major Chinese Housing Markets
Jing Wu, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongheng Deng
NBER Working Paper No. 16189
July 2010
JEL No. P22,P25,R10,R21,R31

                                             ABSTRACT

High and rising prices in Chinese housing markets have attracted global attention, as well as the interest
of the Chinese government and its regulators. Housing markets look very risky based on the stylized
facts we document. Price-to-rent ratios in Beijing and seven other large markets across the country
have increased from 30% to 70% since the beginning of 2007. Current price-to-rent ratios imply very
low user costs of no more than 2%-3% of house value. Very high expected capital gains appear necessary
to justify such low user costs of owning. Our calculations suggest that even modest declines in expected
appreciation would lead to large price declines of over 40% in markets such as Beijing, absent offsetting
rent increases or other countervailing factors. Price-to-income ratios also are at their highest levels
ever in Beijing and select other markets. Much of the increase in prices is occurring in land values.
 Using data from the local land auction market in Beijing, we are able to produce a constant quality
land price index for that city. Real, constant quality land values have increased by nearly 800% since
the first quarter of 2003, with half that rise occurring over the past two years. State-owned enterprises
controlled by the central government have played an important role in this increase, as our analysis
shows they paid 27% more than other bidders for an otherwise equivalent land parcel.


Jing Wu                                             Yongheng Deng
National University of Singapore                    National University of Singapore
  and Tsinghua University                           NUS Business School
irswj@nus.edu.sg                                    Singapore 119613
                                                    ydeng@nus.edu.sg
Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu
1. Introduction

          The dramatic rise in Chinese house prices has generated global interest. Figure 1's

plot of an index of real and nominal constant quality house prices across 35 major cities

illustrates why. Real prices increased by about 225% over the past decade, with just over 60%

(or about 140 percentage points) of that rise occurring since the first quarter of 2007

(2007(1)). There is no sign as yet of any slowdown in appreciation rates, with prices growing

by a record 41% (annualized) during 2010(1). There also have been repeated price records

broken in Beijing land auctions in recent months.1

          This most recent escalation of the boom in China's housing markets comes amidst a 4

trillion yuan RMB (US $586 billion) economic stimulus program that was adopted at the end

of 2008 and has been credited with helping restore the country's economic growth rate to an

annualized 11.9% in 2010(1).2 Loan volume also increased sharply, with total loan balances

outstanding increasing by over 40% from the end of 2008 through 2010(1). 3 Balances

outstanding on residential mortgages and loans to real estate developers also expanded at

similarly high rates during the same period: by 38% and 50%, respectively, as shown in

Figure 2.

          All this has prompted questions about whether there is a bubble in China's housing

market. The Chinese government has indicated its own concern via a series of policy

interventions over the past few months that include the following: (a) increased equity down

payment shares from 20% to 30% for first homes of more than 90 square meters in size; (b)

increased equity down payment shares from 40% to 50% for second homes; (c) general

discouragement of the use of any leverage on third homes or by external buyers (i.e., those

1
  In mid-March of this year, record prices in Beijing’s residential land auction were established three times in one week. See
the reports from Reuters (http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE62F1K020100316) and the Wall Street Journal
(http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2010/03/16/land-sale-records-in-beijing/) for more details.
2
  Source: National Bureau of Statistics, China.
3
  The total bank loan portfolio in China is categorized into domestic or overseas loans, with the domestic portion including
loans to households and enterprises. Loans to households include both consumer loans (such as residential mortgages and car
loans) and operating loans to households. Loans to enterprises include loans to residential property developers and any other
non-financial enterprises.

                                                                   1
not living in the market of the intended purchase); (d) new rules to prevent developers from

hoarding housing units; and (e) preparation of the introduction of a local property tax, with

possible pilot implementations in Shanghai and Chongqing within the next one to two years;

this change could be very important because it would raise the cost of carry on speculative

investments in owner-occupied housing.4

          While China's government clearly is concerned about the state of its housing markets,

determining whether the level of prices in any given market is appropriate based on

fundamentals is very difficult for a variety of reasons, not the least of which is that economics

does not provide a well-specified model of bubbles. In the case of China, data limitations

make the issue even harder to study and interpret. Time series on prices and quantities are

little more than a decade long because it is only since 1998 that there has been a true private

market with competitive bidding and pricing of property. This means that it is not feasible to

compare prices across cycles in Chinese markets. Effectively, the available time series is one

of a boom period.5

          That said, there are some important strengths of the Chinese data. One is that we

observe sales of raw land, so that we can contrast what is happening to land versus the

improvements represented by the housing structure itself. Another is that the typical rental

and owner-occupied housing units tend to be similar in terms of size and their location within

dense, multiple story buildings in the same parts of metropolitan areas. This makes it more

straightforward to compare prices to rents than it is in the United States, where owner-

occupied housing tends to be low density, single family product concentrated in suburban

areas, while rental housing tends to be in high density, multi-family structures, often located

in central cities.
4
  See details in “Gazette of Executive Meeting of the State Council,” December 14th, 2009; and “Circular of the State
Council on Resolutely Containing the Precipitous Rise of Housing Prices in Some Cities” (Decree No. [2010] 10), April 17th,
2010.
5
  Flood and Hodrick (1990) were among the first to outline the onerous data requirements for formally determining whether
any type of systemic mispricing or bubble exists. It clearly is not feasible to conduct such a test with the available data on
Chinese housing markets.

                                                                   2
       Using micro data on over 300 recent residential land auctions in the capital city of

Beijing dating back to 2003, we are able to provide the first constant quality land price series

for a Chinese market.        The estimated growth in land values is nothing short of

extraordinary—almost an eight-fold increase since 2003. It is also clear that this is not

simply a function of prices escalating prior to the Summer Olympics in 2008. Beijing's land

prices nearly tripled since the end of 2007.

       We also are able to compare land prices to the values of finished home sales (i.e., land

plus the physical unit) in nearby transactions. From 2003 through 2007, the ratio of land to

house values among our matched pairs hovered between 30% and 40%. In 2008, 2009, and

early 2010, however, this ratio doubled to just over 60% on average.

       There also is a statistically and economically strong positive correlation between land

auction price in Beijing and the winning bidder being a state-owned enterprise (SOE)

associated with the central government. All else constant, prices are about 27% higher when

a central government-owned SOE wins a land auction, so these entities appear to be playing a

meaningful role in rising land values in Beijing.

       We also examine two traditional affordability metrics —price-to-income and price-to-

rent ratios—in Beijing and seven other large markets:         Chengdu, Hangzhou, Shanghai,

Shenzhen, Tianjin, Wuhan and Xian. Urban income growth has been quite strong in China,

and has exceeded house price appreciation in Chengdu, Tianjin, Wuhan and Xian over the

past few years. However, prices in the coastal markets and in Beijing have outpaced even the

high income growth enjoyed in those places. The most recent data show price-to-income

ratios have reached their highest levels ever in Beijing, Hangzhou, Shanghai and Shenzhen.

       Rents have not been rising as fast as house prices or incomes in any of the eight major

markets we study. Not only are price-to-rent ratios high in these places, they have increased

sharply in the past few years. The price-to-rent ratio in Beijing increased by almost three-


                                                    3
quarters just in the last three years, rising from 26.4 in 2007(1) to 45.9 in 2010(1). Hangzhou,

Shanghai, and Shenzhen also have seen their price-to-rent ratios rise sharply to over 40.

Prices also have risen faster than rents in the other major markets of Chengdu, Tianjin,

Wuhan and Xian, but they started from a lower base and remain in the 30s.

       Poterba's (1984) asset market approach to house valuation suggests that the annual

user costs of owning have to be very low—on the order of 2.5%-3.3% of house price—to

justify prices that are 30-40+ times rents. Given what we think are reasonable assumptions

about the other parameters determining user costs, it appears that home buyers are assuming

quite large capital gains on their homes. This is not incredible on its face, of course, as real

prices have risen significantly in China in recent years. However, home prices do not always

rise and certainly not consistently at the high rates recently experienced in China. Even

modest declines in expected price growth would lead to large, double-digit percentage

increases in user costs and similarly large declines in implied price-to-rent multiples and

price levels, absent a rise in rents or some other countervailing change.

       In this respect, our data also raise serious questions about the sustainability of home

values in Chinese markets other than Beijing. Increases of the magnitudes experienced in

most major markets over the past couple of years are sustainable only in presence of very

high on-going demand growth combined with limited supply. It is difficult to gauge whether

expected demand is outstripping supply because of very large internal migration flows and

limited data on long-run supply conditions in these markets.                However, most true

fundamentals just do not change so discretely or in such magnitudes as to be able to explain

the sharp changes seen in land price growth in Beijing or in price-to-rent ratios in most major

markets over the past few years.

       The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section provides background on the

history of housing reform in China, as well as the nature of its land supply system. This


                                                   4
material will be quite familiar to Chinese scholars, but we encourage others to read it before

turning to the data. Section 3 then turns to the micro data on land auctions in Beijing. This is

followed in Section 4 with a description and analysis of the price-to-rent and price-to-income

data. Section 5 then provides a brief summary and conclusion.



2. China's Housing and Land System

2.1. Housing Reform

       Urban residential housing units in the People's Republic of China (PRC) were

nationalized and owned by the State (the central government) at the founding of the PRC in

1949. In the following three decades, the State determined the national economic plan and

was the monopoly provider of housing. State-owned housing developments were financed by

an annual State Budgetary Funding, with the units built then allocated to individual

households at low rent through their work units (called “Danwei” in Chinese), which often

were state-owned enterprises (SOEs). During this period, the private housing market was

non-existent.

       The State's monopoly of the residential housing system started to change in the late

1970s, when China embarked on a series of economic reforms. In 1979, a trial privatization

of state-owned residential housing units was begun in several coastal cities, and was soon

expanded to over 100 cities and then the entire country. This reform led to the emergence of

a private housing market (called “commodity housing units”) in China. The first private

housing developer was founded in Shenzhen in 1980. However, in this early stage, the

development of the commodity housing sector mainly targeted foreigners or employees of

non-state-owned enterprises. Hence, it was limited in scope and grew slowly.

       An important impetus to change occurred in 1988 with the passage of the 1988

Constitutional Amendment, which provided a firmer legal foundation for development of


                                                   5
private sector housing. The government still retained ultimate ownership of urban lands, but

it permitted individuals to purchase the right of use of that land for urban residential purposes

for up to 70 years. Subsequently, in the 1990s, the central government issued a series of

housing reform measures and policies to accelerate the development of private housing

markets. Residents were encouraged to purchase the housing units in which they resided

from their state-owned work units at below-market prices.           Moreover, the work units

themselves were required to gradually terminate the direct housing allocation system under

which they provided housing to their employees.

       Finally in 1998, the State Council issued the 23rd Decree, which is regarded as a

milestone in Chinese housing reform. Work units were no longer allowed to develop new

residential housing units for their employees in any form. Instead, they had to integrate any

implicit housing benefits into employees' salary, and the households had to buy or rent their

residential housing units in the private housing market.

       We take this to be the start of the modern private housing market in China. As shown

in Figure 3, the amount of private housing built as a share of the total annual flow supply

more than doubled from about 13% in 1986 to about 33% in 1993. It then stabilized for the

remainder of the decade before resuming its upward march towards 72% by 2006. In terms

of the quantity of space supplied by the private market, that annual amount increased almost

20-fold, from about 25 million square meters in the mid-1980s to nearly 500 million square

meters in 2007. According to the results of the National Census (Table 1) for 2005, 16.3%

and 12.2% of urban households in China lived in owned or rented private housing units,

respectively, compared to only 9.2% and 6.9% in 2000.

       The public housing sector targeting low- and mid-income households also changed

and developed during the process of housing reform. It is designed so that the low-income

household can either rent low cost units (called “Lian Zu Fang” in Chinese) or purchase


                                                   6
special affordable units (called “Jing Ji Shi Yong Fang” in Chinese) at highly subsidized

prices from local governments. Moderate-income households can obtain subsidies to rent

public rental units (called “Gong Gong Zu Lin Fang” in Chinese) or to purchase price

controlled units (called “Xian Jia Fang” in Chinese). However, the construction of public

housing had been very limited in recent years because of financial bottlenecks at the local

government level. This changed only when the State enacted a series of policies to accelerate

the development of public housing in 2007. It also explains why the share of private housing

units in total volume kept stable in 2007 and even fell in 2008 (Figure 3).




2.2. Urbanization and Migration


         One of the key factors underpinning demand for housing in China's major markets is a

strong urbanization trend, as depicted in Figure 4's plot of urban population and the rate of

urbanization since 1990. Between 1996 and 2005, the urban population increased by over 50%

from 373 million to just over 562 million. The urbanization rate itself has been growing by

about 1.4 percentage points annually since 1996. Even with a slight slowing of growth in

urbanization since 2005, there are about 15 million new people entering urban areas each

year.

         The very large internal migration is regulated by the Household Register system

(called “Hukou” in Chinese). Households migrating to a new city without “Hukou” would

suffer from not being able to readily access various health, education and other public

services. The constraints imposed by the “Hukou” system have lessened in recent years,

although recent announcements by the State Council may signal some changes.6 There is no

doubt that many housing units are being purchased by people migrating from other areas. For
6
 For example, a recent State Council announcement indicated that mortgages should be denied to buyers who cannot
provide proof of local residence (Financial Times, April 20, 2010, “Beijing home-loans move hits shares”, by Robert
Cookson).

                                                                 7
example, Table 2 shows that in 2009, about one-third of the newly-built private housing units

sold were purchased by migrants, up from less than one-quarter in 2005.




2.3. The Urban Land Supply System and Land Market


            While the government still retains ultimate ownership of urban lands, it allows

individuals to purchase the right to use land for a certain number of years: 70 years for

residential uses, 50 years for industrial or mixed uses, and 40 years for commercial uses. In

the typical private housing project development process, local governments first lease land

parcels to developers. The developers then build housing units on the parcels, and sell those

units to households. Households have the right to live in, rent out or sell their housing units

during the leasehold period. Precisely what will happen regarding ownership of the land and

attached housing units when the leasehold expires is unclear at present.

            The first land auction was held in Shenzhen in 1987, even before the 1988

Constitutional Amendment. In subsequent years, most land parcels were not sold publicly

via auctions or biddings. Instead, the developer would contact the local government about a

land parcel in which it was interested, and then negotiate the price. Many such deals were

publicly criticized for resulting in below market prices, with the opaque process open to

corruption. Consequently, in 2004 the State required that all urban land for residential and

commercial use could only be transacted through public auction or bidding.7

            Another important point about this land supply process is that land auctions are an

important revenue source for local government. In fact, revenue from the land market is the

local governments' most important off-budget income source. As shown in Figure 5, the

local governments' gross income from land sales grew from 542 billion yuan in 2003 to 1.6


7
    See Cai, Henderson and Zhang (2009) for more details on China's land market auctions.

                                                                   8
trillion in 2009. As a benchmark, the local governments' budgetary income was 986 billion

yuan in 2003, and 3.3 trillion yuan in 2009. Naturally, as the monopoly supplier in the new

urban land market, local government behaviour clearly could affect the price and quantity of

housing.




3. Prices in the Beijing Land Market

          Because the local government owns all urban land and permits leasing of its use, one

can see land sales separate from housing units via the local land auction market. We obtained

data on all land parcels transacted in the Beijing market since the beginning of 2003 from the

web site of the local land resources authority.8

          From 2003(1) through 2010(1), there were a total of 815 parcels transacted by bidding

or auction in Beijing, of which 309 parcels were for residential use. The address, physical

characteristics, degree of development of each residential parcel, as well as its transaction

price and buyer are included in the dataset. The “Soufun Website-Based GIS” system is then

used to create other local traits including distance to the city center (D_CENTER) and

distance to the nearest subway (MRT) station in use (D_MRT).9

          The same GIS software is used to match each land parcel with nearby, newly-built

private housing projects. Two criteria are employed in the match. First, the housing projects

must have been on sale no more than one year prior to the relevant land parcel transaction.

Second, each housing project had to be no more than five kilometers from the relevant land

parcel. Using both constraints, we then matched up to five housing projects to each land

parcel. Some land parcels have less than 5 matched projects based on these two criteria,

while 13 land parcels do not match with any suitable housing projects. Ultimately, 907


8
  The Ministry of Land and Resources in China requires that data on all land parcels transacted be published on the web site
of the local land use authority. In the case of Beijing, the URL is www.bjtd.com.
9
  The system can be accessed at map.soufun.com.

                                                                   9
housing projects were selected and matched to 296 land parcels. The average distance

between matched pairs is 2.11 kilometers. For each housing project selected, its average

transaction price in the month before the matched parcel's transaction is recorded or

calculated.10 Finally the variable indicating the housing price level before the land parcel's

transaction (HP) is calculated as the average of the matched housing projects' prices,

weighted by the reciprocals of the projects' distances to the parcel.

          We also import information on the parcel buyers (i.e., the housing developers) from

the database of the municipal real estate authority in Beijing. The 309 residential parcels

were purchased by a total of 199 developers who can be classified into three groups

according to their type of ownership. The first two groups are state-owned enterprise (SOE)

developers of one type or another. If the SOE is owned by the central government, we label it

as a Central SOE developer (or C_SOE); if the SOE is owned by a subnational government,

we term it a Local SOE developer (or L_SOE).11 The last group is comprised of the non-SOE

developers.

          Table 3 provides a breakdown of winning developer types in the capital. Two-thirds

of winning bidders are not state-owned entities (133/199~67%), but Central SOE developers

tended to win the bigger parcels and pay the highest prices. For example, the 14 winning

Central SOE developers purchased 43 land parcels with an average size of 0.24 million

square meters at an average price of ￥8,354 yuan per square meter. In contrast, the 133 non-


SOE developers purchased 166 parcels with an average size of 0.11 million square meters at

an average price of ￥3,083 yuan per square meter.



10
   If the housing project did not have a transaction in that month, the latest transaction price is chosen and a constant-quality
housing price index for Beijing computed by the Institute of Real Estate Studies at Tsinghua University is applied to update
the price.
11
   In China, the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC) holds shares in the SOEs from
the different layers of government on behalf of the State. The SOEs whose shares are held by SASAC on behalf of the
central government are defined as central SOEs (C_SOE), while those whose shares are held by SASAC on behalf of sub-
national governments (including province, city and district government) are defined as local SOEs (L_SOE).

                                                                    10
          Within developer category, each entity also can be characterized along quality

dimensions. We do so in two ways. One is by whether the developer is listed (LISTED) or

not; the other is by the degree of qualification according to a government ranking system

(GRADE1 to GRADE5).12



3.1. Estimating Constant Quality Land Prices

          The real average price from our Beijing land auction data increased by 587% between

2003 and 2010(1), for a 31.7% compounded average annual appreciation rate over our

sample period. It is noteworthy that that mean masks a substantial acceleration over the past

couple of years, with real prices more than doubling since 2008. While appreciation of this

magnitude is extraordinary by any metric, variation in the quality of land prices over time

could be biasing the true change in price. For example, if the highest quality sites were sold

first, as seems likely to us, the change in the raw mean values would understate the constant

quality rate of price appreciation. However, it also could be that pressing revenue needs in a

given year lead the local government to release particularly high quality sites to the market.

Because we cannot be sure which effect is dominant, we control for location quality in a

simple hedonic model which is estimated via ordinary least squares (OLS). Definitions and

descriptive statistics on all variables used in our empirical analysis of the Beijing land market

are listed in Table 4. All monetary figures are in constant 2003 yuan.

          The dependant variable is the level of the real transaction price for each parcel in

logarithmic form 13             Local traits controlled for include distance to the city center

(D_CENTER), distance to the nearest functioning MRT station (D_MRT), the quality of how


12
   Each developer is rated by the real estate authorities, largely based on the company’s scale and experience. A grade of 1 is
the highest, with a 5 being the lowest.
13
   Note that in China, land parcels for residential use are always priced in terms of the floor area of housing permitted to be
built on the parcel, not in terms of the land area. That convention is followed in this paper, too. While this could bias
measured appreciation in land values per square meter of land in certain circumstances, that does not appear to be an issue
here. First, we include a control for permitted density, as discussed immediately below in the text. Moreover, there are no
trend changes (in particular, no trend decline) in permitted density during our sample period.

                                                                   11
well the site is prepared upon delivery (LANDLEVEL), the quality of the nearby infrastructure

(FULLINFRA), and the density permitted on the site when built (FAR). We also control for

whether the site is encumbered with requirements to provide public rental housing units (i.e.,

“Lian Zu Fang”; SHARE_PR) or to have some fraction of its units subject to price ceilings

(i.e., “Xian Jia Fang”; SHARE_PC). Finally the parcel's transaction form (transacted by

auction or bidding) is also considered (AUCTION).

          Column (1) in Table 5 reports the results of a specification that includes these

variables and year dummies. In general, the results are as expected. Land parcels closer to

the city center or a MRT station are worth more. Better prepared parcels in terms of the site

and local infrastructure also are worth more. Lower density also is associated with higher

price. The point estimates on the public and price controlled housing variables are negative

as expected, but they are not statistically significantly different from zero. Land parcels

transacted via auction tend to achieve a higher price, but this effect is insignificant. Finally,

the year dummies are quite powerful, both in economic and statistical terms.

          We use the coefficients on the year dummies as a proxy for what happened to constant

quality residential land prices in Beijing. These are common annual effects after controlling

for differential location quality of land parcels. The dark, upper line in Figure 6 plots these

estimates starting from a base of 100 in 2003. Overall, we find a 788% rise in constant

quality prices over our full sample period14, with a dramatic recent rise in real land prices

over the past couple of years. The nearly 330% increase from 2003 through 2009 implies an

average annual compound appreciation rate of about 28%. Following that very high rate of

price growth, land prices then doubled over the last year.15

          While a number of factors could have combined to account for this extraordinary
14
   Note that the numbers plotted are those implied by the raw coefficients themselves. That is, the value for 2010(1) is 888.2,
which is derived from e2.184=8.882. Given that our beginning value is set to 100, this implies the 788% price growth
mentioned in the text (i.e., [888-100]/100 = 788/100 or 788%).
15
   Note that our estimated constant quality prices are higher than the unadjusted series, which suggests that the quality of
sites available for bid was higher in earlier years. The time patterns are very similar, however, with both series showing a
sharp jump in prices over the past couple of years.

                                                                   12
price appreciation, we next explore the potential roles of two—sharply increased bidding

activity by certain state-owned enterprises and expectations of price growth—that we believe

are especially relevant in the Chinese context and most in need of deeper research if we are to

better understand this market.



3.2. Correlation with Central SOE Developer Winning Bids

            The past few years have seen a potentially important change in the institutional nature

of land purchasers—namely, a sharp increase in the proportion of Central SOE developers

buying land. During the process of fiscal decentralization in the 1980s and 1990s, the central

government in China transferred ownership of most SOEs to local governments (province,

city or district level), and retained control of very few enterprises (these are the “Central

SOEs”). According to the latest Economic Census in 2008, there were about 156,000 SOEs

in China, representing about 3.2% of nearly 5 million total enterprises. The number of

Central SOEs is much smaller—only 142 in 2008 as reported by SASAC. And, a more recent

SASAC report indicates that mergers reduced the number further to 129 by the end of 2009.

However, these few entities are the largest and among the most important enterprises in

China. As reported by SASAC, total sales revenue of the 129 remaining Central SOEs

reached 12.6 trillion yuan RMB in 2009, or nearly 100 billion yuan RMB per entity.

            Ninety-four of the 129 central SOEs owned or controlled real estate developers by the

end of 2009.16 Fourteen of these developers purchased residential land parcels in Beijing

during our sample period. SOE developers always have been active in Beijing, but their

share of activity has been growing as depicted in Figure 7's plot of the shares of floor area in

the Beijing market purchased by different groups of developers. The combined share of

Local and Central SOEs has expanded from about 37% in 2003 to nearly 71% in early 2010.


16
     Source: SASAC in State Council, China.

                                                      13
Note that the share of Central SOE developers' purchases increased from negligible in 2003

and 2004 to over 50% in 2010(1).

         The middle column of Table 5 adds controls to our baseline specification for the type

of developer, as well as quality attributes of the developer. The coefficient on the Central

SOE developer control is statistically significant and economically important.                                   All else

constant, the coefficient implies that the transactions price is 27.4% higher (e0.242-1=0.274,

since the dependent variable is in log form) if the parcel is purchased by a SOE developer

controlled by the central government.

         How to interpret this coefficient is not entirely clear. If these particular developers are

superior investors and are able to buy unobservedly high quality sites, then part of this effect

could be a proxy for quality. We certainly do not claim that our hedonic controls are perfect.

However, in other regressions not reported here, we also find that Central SOE developers

pay high prices relative to the values of nearby housing unit sales prices. That suggests these

particular buyers simply pay more and that this does not merely reflect omitted quality effects.

Moral hazard arising from these entities believing they are too important to fail, combined

with their access to low cost capital from state-owned banks, also could help explain their

bidding behavior, as we discuss below. It remains an open question as to why central SOE

developers became so much more active in housing development over the past few years.

Much more research clearly is needed on this matter.17

         Whatever the mechanism underlying this correlation, it is large enough to account for

a meaningful fraction of the rapid growth of residential land prices in capital city. The middle

line of Figure 6 plots the estimated year effects after controlling for developer type and

quality. Land prices certainly would be lower in Beijing if Central SOE developers did not

bid differently from other buyers, but the results still indicate a very steep rise in values over

17
   Yet another possibility is that the SOEs see land purchases as one of the few possible inflation hedges in a country where
the capital markets do not provide a securitized way to hedge. It remains an open

                                                                 14
the past seven years.



3.3. The Possible Role of Backward-Looking Expectations on Bid Prices

          The role of developer expectations amidst such a large trend increase in land values

surely is important, if very difficult to pin down. One obvious way to help explain the trend

would be if bidders had backward-looking expectations that were anchoring on recent price

growth. We certainly do not claim to know how expectations are being formed, but any

anchoring on the recent past necessarily is on a short boom period given that is the only

history available to Chinese investors in the residential market.

          The third column of Table 5 reports the results of adding a control to our baseline

specification from column (1) for the accumulated nominal house price change in Beijing

over the past 12 months (HPGROWTH), as a proxy for developers' expectations. While we

do not believe that this admittedly naïve construction reflects precisely what developers

themselves perceived, it does provide an indication of how important a role such expectations

could be playing. Importantly, including this variable materially changes the pattern and

magnitude of the estimated time effects. The third and lowest line in Figure 6 plots the

estimated year effects from column (3). In this case, constant quality land prices rise by only

40% of our baseline estimate, with the vast majority of that lower amount of appreciation due

to much depressed time effects over the past couple of years. At the least, this exercise

highlights the need to better understand the role of expectations in the Beijing market.18,19


18
   This makes China no different from the U.S. In the U.S. context, Shiller (2005, 2008) and Akerlof and Shiller (2009) have
argued that some form of irrational exuberance is needed to account for the behavior of house prices, and surveys conducted
by Case and Shiller (2003) report that U.S. residents tend to have very high expected rates of appreciation for their homes.
More recently, Glaeser, Gottlieb and Gyourko (2010) have shown that credit market conditions as reflected in interest rates,
mortgage approval rates, and initial loan-to-value ratios cannot explain most of the boom in U.S. house prices between 1996-
2006. They also suggest that some form of non-rational price expectations will be needed to account for what actually
happened to prices in the U.S.
19
   We also have estimated specifications including controls for developer type and quality, as well as this simple
expectations proxy. Both sets of variables retain their statistical and economic significance (i.e., the coefficient on the
Central_SOE variable falls from 0.240 to 0.206, but remains statistically significant at standard confidence levels). The year
effects are slightly weaker, too. Given limited data, our intention is not to claim some precise impact for one variable versus
another, but to identify at least two of the factors—changing institutional demand for land and expectations formation—that

                                                                  15
3.4. Land Share in House Value

          We also calculate the ratio of the land transaction price to the weighted average price

of matched housing projects. Figure 8 plots this ratio over time. The average for all 296

matched parcels is 0.37, but land's share in house values in Beijing clearly has risen sharply

since 2008. In early 2010, it constituted over 60% of house value on average. Clearly, land

is becoming more expensive relative to structure in the capital city.20



4. Housing Affordability Metrics for Eight Major Chinese Markets

4.1. Eight Major Chinese Markets: Summary Statistics

          We next investigate affordability conditions in eight large markets across China, using

two traditional metrics used in international studies of housing markets: the price-to-rent and

price-to-income ratios. The markets themselves are Beijing, Chengdu, Hangzhou, Shanghai,

Shenzhen, Tianjin, Wuhan and Xian. Each is marked on the map displayed in Figure 9.

Table 6 reports their population levels and growth rates over the past decade. Each market is

quite large and has been growing in recent years. None has fewer than 8 million inhabitants,

and aggregate population growth since 1999 has ranged from 10% to 50%+. Growth has

been particularly strong in Beijing, Shenzhen, and Tianjin.

          In terms of aggregate housing activity, these markets also represent a significant share

of total national sales and transactions value, as indicated by the series plotted in Figure 10.

The share of these eight large markets has fallen in recent years with the surge in building

activity around the country, but these eight still represent over one-third of all new housing

value sold in 2009 and 17% of the floor area of all new homes sold in the nation.


clearly are important and are in need much more study if we are to better understand the remarkably high house price
appreciation experienced in Beijing (and quite probably in other major Chinese markets).
20
   Our estimates are consistent with data provided in a recent, March 28, 2010, report of the Ministry of Land and Resources,
which arrived at similar land shares in Beijing (although calculated in a very different manner; see the report itself for more
details).

                                                                  16
4.2. Price-to-Rent Ratios

         We have detailed micro data on prices and rents of owned and rented units beginning

in 2007(1) for the eight major markets noted above. Comparing owner-occupied housing unit

prices to apartment rents is more straightforward in China than in many other countries,

including the United States. Owned and rented units tend to be more similar in nature in

China, as both tend to be in high rise buildings, are of similar size, and are located in many of

the same neighbourhoods.21 Even so, we are able to make further adjustments for quality by

estimating simple hedonic models on the underlying samples of owner-occupied and rental

units. This allows us to create constant quality price and rent series for the same typical

unit.22 We then create the ratio of price-to-rent based on those series.

         Figure 11 plots the price-to-rent ratios in the eight major markets. Even though the

series is short, prices clearly have been rising relative to rents in each of these markets, and

the changes are economically important. For example, the price-to-rent ratio in Beijing

increased by almost three-quarters over the past three years, rising from 26.4 in 2007(1) to

45.9 in 2010(1).

         The largest increase is in Hangzhou, where the price-to-rent ratio started off at a

relatively high level of 31.8 in 2007(1), and then doubled to 65.5 in the first quarter of 2010.

The Shanghai market looks much like Beijing, with the price-to-rent ratio being 45.5 in

2010(1), although its growth has been less since it started from a higher base of 32.7. Of the




21
   This often is not the case in the United States, among other countries. See Glaeser and Gyourko (2010) for an analysis of
the differences between owner-occupied and rental units in the U.S. and a critique of comparisons of prices to rents based on
such data.
22
   The underlying data are from the Institute of Real Estate Studies, Tsinghua University. Using the transaction data
provided by a leading national-wide broker in China, price and yearly rent for a typical housing unit are calculated using
hedonic models each month in each city, and then the price-to-rent multiple is calculated based on these two indicators.
Quality controls in the underlying hedonic include the distance to the center of the city, the distance to the nearest
functioning public transit stop, the age of the unit, the size of the unit, the number of rooms, the number of bathrooms, a
dummy for whether the unit faces the south, and dummy for whether the unit was furnished.

                                                                 17
other major markets, Shenzhen also has a price-to-rent ratio above 40. It has reached that

level for the past two quarters, increasing by about 46% since the beginning of 2007.

            Chengdu, Tianjin, Wuhan and Xian have lower price-to-rent ratios than the other four

big markets, but they have been increasing over time, too. Chengdu's ratio rose by 48%,

Tianjin's by 78%, Wuhan's by 28%, and Xian's by 29%. Only Wuhan had a price-to-rent

ratio below 30 as of 2010(1), while at the beginning of 2007, only Shanghai and Hangzhou

had ratios above 30.

            Rents that are no more than 2-3% of house value require very low user costs of

owning for house prices to be sustainable. User costs of owning can be computed using the

standard formula pioneered by Poterba (1984) and implemented recently by Himmelberg,

Mayer and Sinai (2005) in the U.S. That is, user costs (UC) per dollar of house value equal

the following:

                                        UC  1    r  p   m       e ,                                          (1)

where τ is the owner's marginal income tax rate, r is the interest rate at which we implicitly

presume people can both borrow and lend, p is the local property tax rate, m is maintenance,

δ is depreciation, β is the required risk premium for investing in housing, and πe is expected

appreciation the following year. Owner-occupied housing is not tax advantaged in China in

the sense that one cannot deduct mortgage interest expenses. Hence, that term falls from the

equation. In addition, there are no local property taxes in China (yet), so p=0. We use the

five-year deposit rate to proxy for the long rate in China. This got as low as 2.8% in 2003

and as high as 5.6% in 2008, so this series is volatile. We follow the standard in the user cost

literature in presuming that maintenance and depreciation amount to about 2.5% per year (i.e.,

m + δ = 0.025).23 We do the same regarding the risk premium for illiquid, owner-occupied

housing, so that β equals 2 percent.


23
     See Poterba and Sinai (2008) for more on this in the U.S. context. We know of no similar studies using Chinese data,

                                                                   18
          Given the most recent price-to-rent ratio in each market from 2010(1) and the

assumptions just discussed regarding interest rates, maintenance costs and the risk premium,

the first column of Table 7 reports how low expected capital gains can be for the user costs of

owning not to exceed the implied costs of renting the same unit.24 Expected appreciation

rates of from 4.5% to 6.6% are needed to keep the costs of ownership no higher than the costs

of renting as of 2010(1). These amounts are below the average annual appreciation rates

actually achieved over the 1998-2009 period, as indicated by the figures reported in column 2

of Table 7, for seven of the eight large markets (Shenzhen is the exception).

          These realized average annual appreciation rates are based on highly skewed series,

however, as house price growth has escalated sharply in most Chinese cities in recent years.

This is indicated in the final two columns of Table 7. The third column reports the number of

years, out of the eleven possible since 1998, that actual house price growth in a given year

was less than the amount indicated in column 1. In each of these eight large markets,

experienced appreciation was lower in at least four years. Most of those years tend to have

been in the very late 1990s or early 2000s, as indicated by the results in the final column

which signify the number of years in the past five during which experienced appreciation was

less than the amount necessary to make it financially worthwhile to own over the coming

year. House price appreciation tends to have been relatively high in recent years. In Beijing

and Tianjin, there are no recent cases in which actual price growth has been less than the

amount needed next year to justify owning at current price-to-rent ratios.

          The riskiness of owning seems quite high at these price-to-rent ratios. Unless rents

are rising commensurately, an increase in equilibrium user costs from 2% to 3% implies a

dramatic decline in prices—pretty much equal to the reversal of what happened in many

making this another area in need of further research.
24
   For Beijing, the 5.9% figure is arrived at as follows. We start with the latest available five-year deposit rate, which was
3.6% in 2010(1). To this we add the 2.5% maintenance and depreciation annual cost, plus a 2% risk premium. Those three
annual costs sum to 8.1%. For owning to make sense financially compared to renting given Beijing’s latest price-to-rent
ratio of 45.9 implies that user costs can be no higher than 2.2% (or 1/45.9). To get user costs down to that level requires
expected capital gains of 5.9% for the coming year.

                                                                  19
Chinese markets from 2007 to the present. What would it take to generate user costs above

3%? Even if interest rates were to remain at their currently low levels (3.6%), user costs in

Beijing would be 4.1% if expected appreciation in that market (πe in the formula above) were

to fall only to 4%. By no means is this an inconceivable outcome, as actual annual price

appreciation in Beijing was well below 4% for five consecutive years from 1999-2003. The

implied price-to-rent ratio would be 24.4 in that case (1/0.041~24.4). Absent an offsetting

increase in rents, that would imply nearly a 50% drop in prices (the drop in price-to-rent ratio

from 45.9 to 24.4 is about 48%). Thus, it would only require a moderation in likely price

growth to generate potentially large declines in prices, absent sharply rising rents or some

other countervailing factors.

       Finally, it should be noted that growth rates of 4% still imply very large increases in

price levels over time: 48% over ten years and 119% over twenty. So, declines in expected

appreciation rates to this level do not imply stagnation in home values. This is yet another

indication of how important a role that expectations of continued high price appreciation

appear to be playing in Chinese housing markets. As noted above in the discussion of the

Beijing land market, achieving a better understanding of what those expectations truly are

and how they are formed clearly is an area in need of urgent research. The fact is that there is

a very limited sample period available for people to use in informing their judgment on this

matter, and it happens to have been a period of high average appreciation in the major

markets, with there being a positive trend to that rate over the past decade. If people are

backward-looking in some way, their anchoring on very high recent appreciation would help

explain why the annual costs of ownership look very low.



4.3. Price-to-Income Ratios




                                                  20
          Prices have been rising sharply relative to rents in all major markets in China, but the

same is not the case with respect to income. Here we see some significant differences by

region, with the markets in the interior off the coasts tending to have experienced income

growth as high as or higher than their considerable house price appreciation.

          Figure 12 plots price-to-income ratios over time for our eight major markets. These

data are available further back in time, but are computed differently from traditional measures

reported in the U.S. and other countries. For example, the standard formula for the price-to-

income ratio in the housing literature is:

                                average total price of housing unit
price-to-income ratio =
                                    average household income        .                                                     (2)

However, neither the total price indicator nor the household income indicator is regularly

reported in China, so we must re-write the formula as:

                               average housing price per sq.m floor area  housing unit size
price-to-income ratio =
                                        average per capita income  household size
                               average housing price per sq.m floor area
                             =                                            housing size per person
                                      average per capita income                                    (3)

Both the average unit sales prices of houses in yuan per square meter and the per capita

disposable income are reported by the National Bureau of Statistics in China, and the unit

size is presumed to be 30 square meters per person in the household in our calculations.25

          Over the past few years, urban incomes have been rising faster than house prices in

Chengdu, Tianjin, Wuhan, and Xian. In these markets, price-to-income ratios were no higher

in 2009 than they were 3-5 years earlier, have not trended up since 1999, and did not

experience a sharp jump in 2010(1). Prices fell relative to incomes in Shenzhen between

2007 and 2009, but the level of this ratio jumped discretely in 2010(1).

25
   The 30 square meter assumption is based on the following data and conclusions. First, according to the statistics published
by the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development, per capita living space in urban areas increased from 20.3 square
meters in 2000 to 27.1 square meters in 2006. Extending the positive trend yields our presumed figure of around 30 square
meters. Second, since 2006 the State requires that no less than 70% of newly-built private housing units in each market be
no larger than 90 square meters. This suggests that the average size of newly-built private housing units would be around 90
square meters in size, with the average household size in China being about 3 persons.

                                                                  21
          In the other markets, including the biggest coastal areas, house price appreciation has

been outpacing even rapid income growth in the past few years. House prices have hovered

between 14 and 15 times incomes in Beijing for the past three years, but this level is sharply

higher than that experienced earlier in the decade, and it rose discretely to 18.5 in early 2010.

Shanghai and Hangzhou also are experiencing rising price-to-income ratios, with their 2009

values being the highest those markets have seen since our data series begins. Unlike Beijing,

they did not experience a sharp rise in prices relative to incomes in the first quarter of 2010.

          These levels of the price-to-income ratios themselves will seem high to those more

familiar with U.S. data, but direct comparisons are problematic. For example, gauging their

appropriateness should be made at the household level, while our measure uses per capita

income. The presence of multiple earners within the household would lower the reported

ratios. In addition, some households may be consuming less than 30 square meters of

housing per person. In that case, our measure overestimates the share of income going to

housing. Even with these caveats, it is clear that many Chinese households are spending

considerable fractions of their incomes on housing.26 Plus, we believe the changes over time

are more informative, with the discrete jumps in Beijing and Shenzhen in 2010(1) being

especially noteworthy.



5. Interpretation and Concluding Discussion

          Economics does not have good predictive models of bubbles, and we could not

provide a definitive test with our limited data, in any event. However, multiple parts of the

evidence presented in this paper suggest the potential for substantial mispricing in Beijing

and other Chinese housing markets. Pricing seems very risky in the sense that only modest

26
  There well could be cultural factors why Chinese households might be willing to spend more of their incomes on housing
than (say) Americans. Many Chinese appear to have a strong preference for home ownership, partly because owning is
viewed as an important sign of personal success and social status. Some researchers have linked this to the marriage market,
where owning a home can be an important factor in achieving success in that market (Wei and Zhang, 2009). In addition,
relatively undeveloped capital markets provide few alternatives for investing the large household savings that exist in China.

                                                                  22
declines in expected appreciation seem needed to generate large drops in house values absent

offsetting changes in rents or other factors.

         The magnitude of the increase in land values over the past 2-3 years in particular in

Beijing is unprecedented to our knowledge.                       Not only do these increases post-date the

Summer Olympics, but the recent price surges in early 2010 suggest a relationship to the

Chinese stimulus package which itself is temporary.27 More broadly, the sharp rises in price-

to-rent and price-to-income ratios since 2008 in Beijing and many of the other large coastal

markets look to be very difficult to explain fundamentally.

         Some combination of strongly growing demand with limited supply is needed to

account for and maintain these conditions in Chinese housing markets.                                      Demand-side

fundamentals tend not to change so discretely or with such force. Moreover, urban economic

history teaches us that the fortunes of big cities tend not to wax and wane so quickly or

steeply--in peacetime, at least. We are aware of no sound estimates of supply elasticity akin

to those available for U.S. cities (Saiz, 2010), so we cannot use the supply side of the market

to inform us about the appropriateness of prices as in Glaeser, Gyourko and Saiz (2009).

However, we do know that there is new supply being provided in all the major Chinese

markets.

         Whether the flow supply of new units is sufficient to satisfy the demand, which is

strong because of the on-going rural-to-urban migration documented above, is more difficult

to determine. Doing so requires a number of assumptions, and Table 8 reports back-of-the-

envelope calculations of the ratio of net new housing units delivered to the local market over




27
  More generally, it is the case that land value is rising in most cities across China. Simple calculations using data on the
growth in average land costs, physical construction costs, and sales prices of residential units from the Chinese Real Estate
Statistics Yearbooks readily confirm that house price increases cannot be explained by rising physical production costs.
These data and analysis are available upon request.

                                                                 23
the past 11 years (from 1999-2009) to the increase in the number of households in the same

market over the same time span.28

            In five of the eight large Chinese markets, we estimate that the net new number of

housing units provided since 1999 is at least as large as the net increase in the number of

households. Of course, this does not necessarily mean that housing was being sufficiently

supplied at the beginning of our time series or that latent demand is not higher than that

indicated by actual growth in households, but it does indicate that we can find no evidence

that actual population growth has been outstripping new construction on average over the

past decade in Chengdu, Shanghai, Tianjin, Wuhan, or Xian.

            The ratio of new supply to demand is below one in Beijing, Hangzhou, and Shenzhen.

In Beijing, the number of net new households exceeded the net increase in the number of

housing units (rental plus owner-occupied) by about 16%. Assuming this deficit accumulated

in a linear fashion annually implies that demand exceeded supply by about 1.5% per year.

The analogous figures for Hangzhou and Shenzhen are 3.4% and 4.5% per year, respectively.

            In sum, local governments in the eight major Chinese markets we track have made

quite a bit of land available for development over the past decade. In five of these large

markets, enough new housing units (owned plus rental) appear to have been delivered to

provide shelter for each net new household created in each market. In Beijing, Hangzhou and

Shenzhen, there appears to be unmet demand for units. Hence, upward pressure on prices is

to be expected in those places, although it is by no means clear that gaps of the type we

estimate could account for the dramatic rise in home prices they experienced.

            It is in this context that one can appreciate the Chinese government's worries about its

markets. We do not know if its policy responses are sound, but the willingness of the

Chinese government to intervene in response to possible mispricings is quite different from


28
     See the notes to the table for details on the methodology used to compute these ratios.

                                                                     24
the announced policy of the leadership of the American Federal Reserve in this respect. As

such, economists interested in both regulatory and monetary policy should be prepared to

carefully monitor the behaviour and effectiveness of the Chinese State Council's interventions.

At the least, there will be international comparison data for analysis.

       We also need to better understand how a major correction in Chinese house prices,

should it occur, would impact the Chinese economy. While that issue obviously is well

beyond the scope of this paper, there are a few obvious questions for researchers. Given the

U.S. financial crisis, that was driven by the subprime market, one naturally thinks about the

potential for a broad banking crisis that generates systemic risk. Chinese home buyers appear

to have much more equity than the typical subprime borrower in the U.S. After all, the recent

announcements by the Chinese State Council increased the down payment requirements for

first home buyers from 20% to 30%. That still begs the question of whether that rule actually

has been enforced in recent years. And, a large enough price drop can wipe out any amount

of equity. However, it appears as if there is much more of an equity cushion among Chinese

owners that would shield the banking system from considerable risk.

       What is less clear is how the recent spike in lending associated with the national

stimulus has affected the risk position and capital structures of the banks. Even less is known

about the capital structure of developers, especially the central government-owned SOEs.

The strong correlation of central government-owned SOE winning bids with land prices in

Beijing suggests that moral hazard could be a real concern. These entities may be operating

with subsidized costs of capital and believe that they are 'too big to fail'. At the very least, we

need to begin calculating the exposure of these entities to the different land markets across

China as a first step towards measuring their risk from a fall in house prices.

       Beyond financial contagion matters is the issue of how a decline in the housing

market might directly affect the real economy in China. During the last decade, investment


                                                    25
has been a key driver of China's economic growth.                                In 2009, gross capital formation

contributed over 90% of China's GDP growth29, greatly offsetting the negative impacts of the

decrease in net exports that occurred during the global recession. Private housing investment

accounted for 15.1% of total investment volume in urban areas in 2008, and 13.2% in 2009.

The private housing sector currently accounts for over one third (37.1% in 2007 and 36.9% in

2008) of the buildings completed by the construction industry, and the construction industry

is one of the most important industries in China. Its output constitutes 5.7% of Chinese GDP;

it employs 14.3% of all workers in urban areas; and it consumes about 40% of all steel and

lumber produced in China.30 Estimating the impacts of a decline in housing production is

well beyond the scope of this paper, but these data suggest they could be economically

meaningful. Perhaps as important would be the impact of a significant price decline on the

household sector. Both are yet more issues in need of further research.




29
     Numbers in this paragraph are reported by National Bureau of Statistics, unless otherwise specified.
30
     Source: Minister of Housing and Urban-Rural Development, 2008.

                                                                    26
References

Akerlof, George and Robert Shiller. Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the
  Economy, and Why It Matters for Global Capitalism, Princeton: Princeton University
  Press, 2009.

Cai, Hongbin, Vernon Henderson and Qinghua Zhang. "China's Land Market Auctions:
  Evidence of Corruption," NBER Working Paper 15067, June 2009.
Case, Karl and Robert Shiller. "Is there a Bubble in the Housing Market?" Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity, No. 2 (2003): 299-362.
Flood, Robert and Robert Hodrick. "On Testing for Speculative Bubbles," Journal of
   Economic Perspectives, Vol 4, No. 2 (Spring, 1990): 85-101.
Glaeser, Edward, Joshua Gottlieb and Joseph Gyourko. "Can Interest Rates or Easy
  Mortgage Credit Explain the Housing Boom?" Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton
  Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania, July 2010..
Glaeser, Edward and Joseph Gyourko. "Arbitrage in Housing Markets," In Housing Markets
  and the Economy. Essays in Honor of Karl Case. Ed. Edward Glaeser and John Quigley.
  113-148. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, 2010.
Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko and Albert Saiz. "Housing Supply and Housing Bubbles,"
  Wharton Real Estate Center Working Paper, 2009.
Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer and Todd Sinai. "Assessing High House Prices:
  Bubbles, Fundamentals and Misperceptions," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 19,
  no. 4 (Fall 2005): 67-92.
Poterba, James. "Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset Market Approach,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 94, No. 4 (November 1984): 729-752.
Poterba, James and Todd Sinai. "Tax Expenditures for Owner-Occupied Housing:
  Deductions for Property Taxes and Mortgage Interest and the Exclusion of Imputed Rental
  Income”, American Economic Review, Vol. 96, no 2 (May 2008): 84-89.
Saiz, Albert. "The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply," Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, forthcoming, 2010.
Shiller, Robert. Irrational Exuberance (2nd edition), Princeton: Princeton University Press,
  2005.
Shiller, Robert. The Subprime Solution: How Today's Global Financial Crisis Happened,
  and What to Do about It, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008.
Wei, Shang-Jin and Xiabo Zhang. "The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from Rising
  Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China," NBER Working Paper 15093, June 2009.




                                                27
 Figure 1: Constant Quality Price Index for Newly-Built Private Housing in 35 Major
                          Chinese Cities, 2000(1)-2010(1)

       2000Q1=100
       300


                                           Nominal Index
       250

                                           Real Index
       200



       150



       100



        50
             00Q1
                    00Q3
                           01Q1
                                  01Q3
                                         02Q1
                                                02Q3
                                                       03Q1
                                                              03Q3
                                                                     04Q1
                                                                            04Q3
                                                                                   05Q1
                                                                                          05Q3
                                                                                                 06Q1
                                                                                                        06Q3
                                                                                                               07Q1
                                                                                                                      07Q3
                                                                                                                             08Q1
                                                                                                                                    08Q3
                                                                                                                                           09Q1
                                                                                                                                                  09Q3
                                                                                                                                                         10Q1
Source: Institute of Real Estate Studies, Tsinghua University.


Notes: Hedonic models are used to control for quality changes in underlying samples of newly-built,
private homes in 35 major markets in China. Real indices are created by deflating with the CPI series
for each market. Aggregate indices are computed as the weighted average of the local market series,
with transactions volume between 2000-2008 as the fixed weight.




                                                                                    28
                Figure 2: Outstanding Loan Balances in China, 2000(1)-2010(1)

 Balance of Housing
                                                                                                                                  Total Loan Balance
    Related Loans
                                                                                                                                  (trillion yuan RMB)
 (trillion yuan RMB)
     6                                                                                                                                                      45

                              Balance of Developer Loans (left)                                                                                             40
     5
                              Balance of Residential Mortgage Loans (left)
                                                                                                                                                            35
                              Total Loan Balance (right)
     4                                                                                                                                                      30

                                                                                                                                                            25
     3
                                                                                                                                                            20

     2                                                                                                                                                      15

                                                                                                                                                            10
     1
                                                                                                                                                            5

     0                                                                                                                                                      0
         00Q1
                00Q3
                       01Q1
                              01Q3
                                     02Q1
                                            02Q3
                                                   03Q1
                                                          03Q3
                                                                 04Q1
                                                                        04Q3
                                                                               05Q1
                                                                                      05Q3
                                                                                             06Q1
                                                                                                    06Q3
                                                                                                           07Q1
                                                                                                                  07Q3
                                                                                                                         08Q1
                                                                                                                                08Q3
                                                                                                                                       09Q1
                                                                                                                                              09Q3
                                                                                                                                                     10Q1
Source: People's Bank of China (the central bank in China).




                                                                                      29
Figure 3: Floor Area of Private Housing Units Supplied and the Share in Total Volume,
                                     1986-2008
                                                                                                                                                         MillionSQ.M.
   80%                                                                                                                                                                     500
                        Floor Area of Private Housing Units Completed (right)
                                                                                                                                                                           450
   70%
                        Share in All Housing Completed (left)
                                                                                                                                                                           400
   60%
                                                                                                                                                                           350
   50%
                                                                                                                                                                           300

   40%                                                                                                                                                                     250

                                                                                                                                                                           200
   30%
                                                                                                                                                                           150
   20%
                                                                                                                                                                           100
   10%
                                                                                                                                                                           50

    0%                                                                                                                                                                     0
          1986
                 1987
                        1988
                               1989
                                      1990
                                             1991
                                                    1992
                                                           1993
                                                                  1994
                                                                         1995
                                                                                1996
                                                                                       1997
                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                     1999
                                                                                                            2000
                                                                                                                   2001
                                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                                                 2003
                                                                                                                                        2004
                                                                                                                                               2005
                                                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                                                             2007
                                                                                                                                                                    2008
Source: National Bureau of Statistics, “Statistics Yearbook of China”.




                                                                                              30
                                     Figure 4: Urbanization in China, 1990-2009
     Million
   700                                                                                                                                               50%

                              Urban Population (left)                                                                                                45%
   600
                              Urbanization Rate (right)                                                                                              40%
   500                                                                                                                                               35%

                                                                                                                                                     30%
   400
                                                                                                                                                     25%
   300
                                                                                                                                                     20%

   200                                                                                                                                               15%

                                                                                                                                                     10%
   100
                                                                                                                                                     5%

     0                                                                                                                                               0%
         1990
                1991
                       1992
                              1993
                                     1994
                                            1995
                                                   1996
                                                          1997
                                                                 1998
                                                                        1999
                                                                               2000
                                                                                      2001
                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                    2003
                                                                                                           2004
                                                                                                                  2005
                                                                                                                         2006
                                                                                                                                2007
                                                                                                                                       2008
                                                                                                                                              2009
Source: National Bureau of Statistics, “Statistics Yearbook of China”.




                                                                                      31
                      Figure 5: Local Goverments' Revenues, 2003-2009

   Billion Yuan RMB
   3500

                     Gross Income from Land Market
   3000

                     Local Governments' Budgetary Income
   2500


   2000


   1500


   1000


     500


       0
              2003         2004        2005        2006        2007         2008        2009

Sources: National Bureau of Statistics, “Statistics Yearbook of China”; Ministry of Land and
Resources, “Yearbook of Land and Resources”.




                                                     32
Figure 6: Constant Quality Residential Land Real Price Index for Beijing, 2003-2010(1)

  Year 2003 = 100 (in real price)
  900

  800               Controlling for Normal Hedonic Attributes

  700               Controlling for Effect of Central SOEs

                    Controlling for Effects of Past Housing Price Change
  600

  500

  400

  300

  200

  100

    0
           2003        2004         2005    2006       2007       2008     2009   2010(1)


Source: Authors' calculations.




                                                     33
 Figure 7: Share of Floor Area of Land Purchased by Various Group of Developers in
                                Beijing, 2003-2010(1)

   100%



    80%



    60%



    40%



    20%



     0%
              2003      2004     2005   2006      2007   2008     2009    2010(1)
                     Non-SOE            Local SOE           Central SOE
Source: Authors' calculations.




                                              34
          Figure 8: Average Land Share in House Value, Beijing, 2003-2010(1)

              0.7

              0.6

              0.5

              0.4

              0.3

              0.2

              0.1

                0
                     2003    2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010(1)

Source: Authors' calculations.




                                                  35
Figure 9: Eight Major Chinese Housing Markets




                        36
    Figure 10: Share of Eight Major Cities in Chinese Newly-Built Housing Market,

                                             1999-2009

    60%


    50%


    40%


    30%


    20%

                      Transaction Volume in Floor Area
    10%
                      Transaction Volume in Total Value

     0%
           1999    2000    2001    2002   2003    2004    2005   2006    2007       2008   2009


Source: National Bureau of Statistics, “Chinese Real Estate Statistics Yearbook”.




                                                     37
        Figure 11: Price-to-Rent Ratio in Eight Major Chinese Cities, 2007(1)-2010(1)
 65.0

                    Beijing         Chengdu          Hangzhou        Shanghai

 55.0               Shenzhen        Tianjin          Wuhan           Xian




 45.0




 35.0




 25.0




 15.0
           07Q1   07Q2   07Q3   07Q4   08Q1   08Q2    08Q3   08Q4   09Q1    09Q2   09Q3   09Q4   10Q1

Source: Institute of Real Estate Studies, Tsinghua University.




                                                      38
   Figure 12: Price-to-Income Ratios in Eight Major Chinese Markets, 1999-2010(1)
 25.0

                  Beijing               Chengdu               Hangzhou           Shanghai

                  Shenzhen              Tianjin               Wuhan              Xian
 20.0




 15.0




 10.0




  5.0
         1999    2000    2001    2002      2003   2004    2005     2006   2007     2008     2009 2010(1)


Source: Authors' calculations.




                                                         39
                   Table 1: Housing Sources of Urban Households

                Type                                        2000                    2005

          Self-Built Housing                              26.8%                    28.5%

          Commodity Housing                                9.2%                    16.3%
Own
          Affordable Housing                               6.5%                     6.5%

          Privatized State-Owner Housing                  29.4%                    24.4%

          State-Owner Housing                             16.3%                     8.1%
Rent
          Commodity Housing                                6.9%                    12.2%

          Others                                           4.8%                     3.9%


  Source: National Bureau of Statistics, “Reports of National Census”, 2000 and 2005.




        Table 2: Composition of Commodity Housing Unit Purchasers

                   From Local         From Local          From Other          From Other
                   Urban Area         Rural Area        Domestic Areas   Countries/Regions

 2005                 70.1%                5.8%               22.7%               1.5%

 2006                 62.1%                8.2%               28.4%               1.3%

 2007                 62.4%                10.3%              26.5%               0.8%

 2008                 64.8%                10.2%              24.4%               0.7%

 2009                 54.1%                11.8%              33.5%               0.6%


  Source: Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development.




                                                   40
                  Table 3: Developer Groups Winning Beijing Land Auctions
                          Central SOE          Local SOE           Non-SOE
        Type
                           Developers          Developers          Developers

Number of Developers          14                    52                133



  Number of Parcels
                              43                    100               166
     Purchased


 Total Floor Area of
  Land Purchased             10.11               15.94               18.25
   (million sq.m.)

Average Price of Land
Purchased (Yuan RMB         8353.58             3610.66             3082.78
 per sq.m. floor area)




                                               41
                 Table 4: Definition and Descriptive Statistics of Variables
   Variable                                Definition                       Mean      Std dev.
                     Transaction price of the parcel; in constant 2003
      LP                                                                   4094.73    4035.91
                     Yuan RMB per square meter of floor area.
                     Average price of the parcel's nearby housing
                     projects, weighted by the reciprocals of distances
      HP             between parcel and housing project; in constant       11653.04   7729.12
                     2003 Yuan RMB per square meter of floor area.
                     See text for details.
                     Distance to the city center (Tian An Men
  D_CENTER                                                                  28.56      19.62
                     Square); in kilometers.
                     Distance to the nearest MRT station in use; in
    D_MRT                                                                   14.40      15.93
                     kilometers.
     FAR             Ratio between the floor area and the land area.         2.08      0.94
                     The parcel is leveled when delivered to the buyer
 LANDLEVEL                                                                   0.89      0.31
                     or not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
                     The parcel has full infrastructure when delivered
  FULLINFRA                                                                  0.51      0.50
                     to the buyer or not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
                     Share of public rental housing required in the
  SHARE_PR                                                                  0.002      0.02
                     total floor area of the parcel.
                     Share of price-controlled housing required in the
  SHARE_PC                                                                   0.02      0.16
                     total floor area of the parcel.
                     The parcel is transacted by auction or not;
  AUCTION                                                                    0.77      0.42
                     1=auction, 0=bidding.
                     The parcel is purchased by a developer with
GRADE1-GRADE5        qualification of first (second…fifth) grade or not,      -          -
                     1=yes, 0=o/w
                     The parcel is purchased by a SOE owned by the
    C_SOE                                                                    0.14      0.35
                     central government or not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
                     The parcel is purchased by a SOE owned by the
    L_SOE                                                                    0.33      0.47
                     local government or not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
                     The parcel is purchased by a listed company or
    LISTED                                                                   0.33      0.47
                     not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
                     The nominal housing price growth rate between
 HPGROWTH            the parcel's transaction month and one year             0.23      0.19
                     before.
                     The parcel is transacted in the year or not; 1=yes,
 T2003 – T2010                                                                -          -
                     0=o/w.




                                                        42
                      Table 5: Results of the Land Price Hedonic Model
                                                                                 Dependants: log (LP2003 prices)
                                     (1)                              (2)                                (3)
                                                ***                              ***
Constant                    8.652     (33.43)                8.243     (30.14)                  8.515     (34.37)***
log (D_CENTER)             -0.556     (-7.76)***         -0.475        (-6.63)***              -0.532     (-7.79)***
log (D_MRT)                -0.137     (-4.16)***         -0.137        (-4.27)***              -0.151     (-4.82)***
FAR                        -0.102     (-2.88)***        -0.0828        (-2.33)**               -0.100     (-2.96)***
LANDLEVEL                   0.272     (2.54)**               0.276     (2.64)***                0.239     (2.34)**
FULLINFRA                   0.274     (4.39)***              0.204     (3.27)***                0.255     (4.28)***
SHARE_PR                   -2.528     (-1.39)            -2.982        (-1.68)*                -2.312     (-1.33)
SHARE_PC                   -0.182     (-0.95)            -0.237        (-1.25)                 -0.209     (-1.15)
AUCTION                   0.0619      (0.76)                 0.133     (1.62)                   0.139     (1.75)*
C_SOE                                                        0.242     (2.27)**
L_SOE                                                  -0.00567        (-0.08)
GRADE1                                                   0.0840        (0.61)
GRADE2                                                       0.356     (3.41)***
GRADE3                                                       0.202     (1.91)*
GRADE4                                                       0.126     (1.27)
LISTED                                                  -0.0297        (-0.37)
HPGROWTH                                                                                        1.432     (5.56)***
   T2004                    0.251     (1.64)                 0.196     (1.32)                   0.221     (1.51)
                                               ***                              ***
   T2005                    0.523     (3.24)                 0.428     (2.71)                   0.429     (2.77)***
   T2006                    0.553     (3.61)***              0.459     (3.05)***                0.376     (2.52)**
   T2007                    1.143     (7.21)***              1.008     (6.46)***                0.594     (3.29)***
   T2008                    1.085     (6.92)***              0.919     (5.91)***                0.823     (5.26)***
   T2009                    1.455     (9.84)***              1.276     (8.47)***                1.216     (8.25)***
   T2010                    2.184     (11.76)***             1.951     (10.43)***               1.296     (5.43)***
        Obs                         309                              309                                309
                 2
    Adjusted R                      0.709                            0.727                              0.736

Notes: (1) t statistics are reported in parenthesis.
       (2) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 1% level;*: significant at the 10%
       level.




                                                        43
                  Table 6: Population in Eight Major Chinese Markets, 1999-2009
                                                                                     Compound Annual
                        1999 Population      2009 Population     % Change,
                                                                                       Growth Rate,
                            (1000s)              (1000s)         1999-2009
                                                                                        1999-2009
Beijing                      9,717               14,918             53.5%                 4.4%
Chengdu                      11,044              12,866             16.5%                  1.5%
Hangzhou                     6,753                8,100             19.9%                  1.8%
Shanghai                     15,888              19,213             20.9%                  1.9%
Shenzhen                     6,326                8,912             40.9%                  3.5%
Tianjin                      6,834                9,598             40.4%                  3.5%
Wuhan                        8,259                9,100             10.2%                  1.0%
Xian                         7,280                8,435             15.9%                  1.5%


Source: Statistics yearbooks in corresponding cities.




  Table 7: Breakeven Expected Appreciation Rates Equalizing Implied User Costs and Rents

                                               Mean annual      # of years actual     # of years below
                        Πe equalizing user
                                               appreciation,   appreciation below      Col. 1 in last 5
                           cost & rent
                                                1998-2009       Col. 1 (out of 11)    years (out of 5)

        Beijing               5.9%                10.1%                6                     0

       Chengdu                5.3%                 6.8%                7                     2

       Hangzhou               6.6%                 8.5%                5                     1

       Shanghai               5.7%                 9.3%                4                     1

       Shenzhen               5.6%                 5.1%                6                     2

        Tianjin               4.9%                 6.1%                5                     0

        Wuhan                 4.5%                 5.5%                5                     1

          Xian                4.9%                 5.1%                6                     1


Source: Authors' calculations.




                                                          44
              Table 8: Ratios of New Housing Supply to Demand, 1999-2009
                         City                                          Ratio
                        Beijing                                        0.86
                       Chengdu                                         1.62
                      Hangzhou                                         0.73
                       Shanghai                                        1.12
                      Shenzhen                                         0.67
                        Tianjin                                        1.04
                        Wuhan                                          1.53
                         Xian                                          1.04


Notes: The numerator of the ratio reported is our estimate of the increase in households in each city
between 1999-2009; the denominator is our estimate of the net new supply of housing units in each
city over the same time period.

The number of households is estimated as follows. We begin with the reported population in each
year, as provided by the statistic bureaus in corresponding Chinese cities. The number of households
is determined by dividing the population number by average household size, as also reported by the
statistic bureaus in corresponding cities. From this, we compute the change in urban households each
year. To compile the ratio reported in the table, the numerator is the sum of the annual changes from
1999-2009.

The net number of housing units supplied is estimated as follows. We begin with the amount of
housing delivered to the market, measured in square meters, as reported by the statistic bureaus in
corresponding cities. Because each of these markets has an informal housing sector, we also try to
control for its presence by subtracting the volume of housing removed each year, as reported by the
construction bureaus in corresponding cities. This yields a net flow of housing measured in square
meters. The number of housing units is arrived at by dividing by average unit size, which we presume
to equal 100 square meters in all cases. This assumption is based on data obtained on average unit
size of private housing delivered by developers. Those data indicate unit sizes above 100. We use the
lower number to reflect the fact that public housing is smaller on average. While this is an ad hoc
assumption, experimentation showed that it did not affect the results reported in a material sense.




                                                     45
