                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       GROWING STATE-FEDERAL CONFLICTS IN ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY:
                 THE ROLE OF MARKET-BASED REGULATION

                                     Roberton C. Williams III

                                       Working Paper 16184
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16184


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2010




For their helpful comments and suggestions, I thank Julie Cullen, Roger Gordon, Michael Keen, Monica
Singhal, and participants in the NBER Conference on Fiscal Federalism. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Roberton C. Williams III. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Growing State-Federal Conflicts in Environmental Policy: The Role of Market-Based Regulation
Roberton C. Williams III
NBER Working Paper No. 16184
July 2010
JEL No. D62,H23,H77,Q58

                                             ABSTRACT

In recent years, cases in which state governments chose to override federal environmental regulation
with tighter regulations of their own have become increasingly common, even for pollutants that have
substantial spillovers across states. This paper argues that this change arose at least in part because
of a shift in the type of regulation used at the federal level, from command-and-control regulation
toward more incentive-based regulation. Under an incentive-based federal regulation, a state imposing
a tighter regulation will bear only part of the additional cost, and thus has more incentive to tighten
regulation than it does under federal command-and-control. This difference helps to explain observed
patterns of regulation. In addition, it has implications for the choice of regulatory instruments. For
a pollutant that causes both local and spillover damage, a federal pollution tax is likely to yield a more
efficient outcome than federal command-and-control policy or a federal system of tradable permits.


Roberton C. Williams III
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of Maryland,
Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
rwilliams@arec.umd.edu
       Early in the history of U.S. environmental regulation by the federal government, cases in

which state governments chose to override federal regulation with tighter regulations of their

own on the same pollutant were quite rare. In recent years, however, these cases have become

more common, even for pollutants that have substantial spillovers across states (and thus for

which one would expect the federal government to regulate more aggressively). Moreover,

when California attempted in the mid-to-late 2000’s to impose its own car and truck fuel-

economy regulations, the federal government acted to block those rules. Why have these

conflicts in environmental regulation become more common?

       This paper argues that this change arose at least in part because of a shift in the type of

regulation used at the federal level, from command-and-control regulation toward more

incentive-based regulation. These two types of regulation at the federal level provide

substantially different incentives for state regulation. Under federal command-and-control, a

state that imposes a tighter standard than the federal government will bear the full cost of that

tighter standard. In contrast, under an incentive-based federal regulation, a state imposing a

tighter regulation will bear only part of the additional cost, because of an offsetting reduction in

emissions taxes paid or emissions permits bought within the state. Consequently, under

incentive-based federal regulation, states will be much more inclined to impose their own tighter

policies than under federal command-and-control.

       Prior work on environmental federalism has not recognized this difference. Most models

in the environmental federalism literature assume that all regulations take the form of emissions

caps, rather than incentive-based policies. And the relatively small number of environmental

federalism papers that compare the effects of incentive-based and command-and-control

regulation (e.g., Wellisch, 1995) assume that regulation is done entirely by the federal



                                                  1
government or entirely by state governments, but do not consider the case in which both levels of

government can choose to regulate the same pollutant.

       By pointing out this difference and exploring its implications, this paper makes three

main contributions. First, this difference helps to explain observed patterns of regulation, and

thus improves our understanding of environmental regulation in a federal system. Second,

recognizing this difference helps to guide policy. One implication of these results is that for a

pollutant that causes local damage and also has inter-state spillovers, a federal pollution tax is

likely to yield a more efficient outcome than federal command-and-control policy or a federal

system of tradable permits.

       The third contribution is broader: the simple framework developed in this paper could

also be applied to look at issues of federalism in contexts other than environmental policy. For

example, the comparison between unfunded mandates and matching grants in the context of

public good provision is analogous to the comparison between command-and-control regulations

and environmental taxes.

       The next section of this paper introduces a very simple model of environmental

regulation in a federal system. The following three sections use that model to analyze cases in

which only the national government can regulate emissions, cases in which only the state

governments can regulate, and cases in which both levels of government can regulate the same

pollutant simultaneously. A final section concludes and discusses policy implications and

avenues for future research.


I. A Simple Model

       This section introduces a very simple model of environmental regulation in a federal

setting. It considers one large jurisdiction made up of N smaller jurisdictions. Throughout the


                                                  2
paper, I will refer to the large jurisdiction as a nation and the smaller jurisdictions as states. But

this is just convenient terminology: the model is general, and could just as easily represent

nations within a larger federation, as in the European Union, or towns within a state.

         Emissions from state i are denoted as ei . The cost of emissions reductions in state i is

given by the function

(1)      Ci ( ei ) ,

which is decreasing and concave in ei , or in other words, achieving a lower level of emissions

implies a higher cost, and the marginal cost of reducing emissions rises as the level of emissions

falls. For simplicity, assume that the second derivative of Ci ( ei ) is constant and is equal across

all states (i.e., the marginal cost of emissions reductions is linear and has the same slope for

every state).1

         This cost function could represent many different methods for reducing emissions, from

reducing output from polluting industries or consumption of polluting goods to installing end-of-

pipe emissions control equipment.

         One key implicit assumption embodied in this function is that the cost of achieving a

given reduction in emissions is the same under command-and-control as under incentive-based

regulation. There are many reasons why this might not be the case. For example, incentive-

based regulations induce a cost-effective allocation across different methods of reducing

emissions, whereas achieving a similarly cost-effective allocation under command-and-control

requires the regulator to know the details of firms’ cost functions. But assuming away any such

cost differences allows this paper to focus on other important differences between command-

and-control and incentive-based regulation.
1
 This assumption produces substantially simpler expressions for many of the paper’s results, but is not qualitatively
important.


                                                          3
        A second key implicit assumption in (1) is that the cost of emissions reductions in one

state does not depend on emissions reductions in any other state, thus ruling out any cost-side

spillovers. This assumption will be relaxed later in the paper.

        Pollution damage in state i is determined by the function

(2)      Di ( ei , E ) ,

where E is the aggregate nationwide level of emissions, given by

(3)      E = ! ei .
                i


This damage function is weakly increasing in both arguments, and the second derivatives are

non-negative.

        Making damages a function both of local emissions and of national emissions allows this

model to represent a pollutant with strictly local effects (in which case !Di !ei > 0 and

!Di !E = 0 ), one with strictly national effects (in which case !Di !ei = 0 and !Di !E > 0 ), or

the most interesting case, a pollutant with both local and national effects (in which case both

partial derivatives are positive). This last case could be a single pollutant with both local and

national effects, or could be two different pollutants, one local and one national, which are

identically affected by efforts to reduce emissions.2

        This model considers two general classes of regulations: command-and-control

regulation and incentive-based regulation. And it considers three cases for the division of

regulation between the two levels of government: a case in which only the national government



2
  For example, reducing motor vehicle use will reduce emissions of local air pollutants such as nitrogen oxides
(NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and will simultaneously reduce emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2),
which contributes to global climate change. Because other methods of reducing emissions will affect these
pollutants differently (e.g., a catalytic converter reduces NOx and VOCs, but has no effect on CO2 emissions), the
assumption that these pollutants are perfectly correlated is not strictly realistic. But it represents a convenient
simplification.


                                                         4
regulates emissions, a case in which only the state governments regulate emissions, and a case in

which both levels of government regulate simultaneously.

       Under command-and-control regulation, the government chooses a cap on emissions.

The emissions cap set by state i is denoted qi . The cap set by the national government on

emissions from state i is denoted Qi . For the cases in which only one level of government

regulates emissions, under command-and-control regulation ei will equal the emissions cap qi

or Qi . For the case in which both levels of government simultaneously regulate emissions using

command-and-control, emissions will be determined by the tighter standard, and thus

(4)     ei = min ( qi ,Qi ) .

       Under an emissions tax, the tax rate imposed by the state government is denoted ! i , and

the tax rate imposed by the national government is Ti . Consumers and firms respond to the tax

by reducing emissions up to the point where the marginal cost of reducing emissions equals the

combined tax rate, so emissions are determined by

            "Ci
(5)     !       = # i + Ti .
            "ei

       Each state government returns all emissions tax revenue lump-sum within its state. The

national government also returns emissions tax revenue lump-sum, allocated across states such

that state i receives the share ri of a marginal dollar of national-level emissions tax revenue, with

these shares adding up to one:

(6)     !r = 1. i
            i


       Regulation via a system of tradable permits would look very similar, but ! i and Ti would

represent permit prices rather than tax rates, and government would indirectly determine that



                                                  5
permit price by setting the number of permits. The share ri then represents the fraction of

permits allocated to state i. For the cases in which only one level of government regulates

emissions, tradable permits will yield the same result as taxes. However, when both levels of

government regulate emissions, permits may yield a different result, as will be shown later in the

paper.


II. Regulation by the National Government

           This sub-section considers regulation only by the national government. Many of the

results in this case are fairly obvious and duplicate some results from the existing literature on

environmental federalism, but going through them first makes it easier to follow some of the

less-obvious results that come later.

           The national government sets regulations to minimize the sum over all states of pollution

damage plus the costs of reducing emissions, given by

(7)         % !"C ( e ) + D ( e , E )#$ .
                   i   i     i   i
             i


Note that emissions taxes (state or national) do not appear in this objective. Those taxes

represent a cost for polluters, but that cost is exactly offset by the value of the lump-sum return

of tax revenue.3 This objective assumes that the national government is attempting to maximize

efficiency. Various positive political economy models might suggest alternative objectives, but

this paper focuses only on cases in which all levels of government aim to maximize welfare for

their constituents.

           Under command-and-control, to get the national government’s first-order condition for

Qi (the emissions cap on state i), substitute (3) and ei = Qi into (7), take the derivative with


3
    A similar argument applies to tradable permits.


                                                      6
respect to Qi , set the result equal to zero and rearrange. This gives

             "Ci "Di      "D j
(8)      !       =     +#      .
             "ei   "ei  j "E



Thus, the emissions cap will be set such that the marginal cost of emissions reductions in state i

equals the marginal damage from pollution emissions in state i (which in turn equals the local

damage in state i plus the national-level effects on all states). This is the first-best level of

emissions.

         Under the emissions tax, the national government’s first-order condition will be the same.

To show this, substitute (3) into (7), take a total derivative of the result with respect to Ti , divide

                dei
through by          , set equal to zero, and rearrange to get (8). The government can then satisfy this
                dTi

first-order condition by setting the tax equal to marginal damage:

                !Di    !D j
(9)      Ti =       +"      .
                !ei  j !E



Similarly, the national government could use tradable permits to satisfy (8) by setting up a permit

system that produces permit prices that follow (9).4 Thus, any of the instruments can achieve the

first-best level of emissions in each state, a result that is not at all surprising.

         Of course, all of this assumes that the national government can set different policies for

different states. Suppose instead that it must set policy such that the marginal cost of emissions

reductions is not differentiated across states: that is, it must set emissions caps such that each

state faces the same marginal cost of emissions reductions, set the emissions tax to a single




4
  Note though that this will in general require either that permits cannot be traded across state lines – in which case
under this model’s assumptions it is identical to a set of emissions caps – or that such trades occur at a ratio other
than one-to-one.


                                                           7
national rate, or allow one-for-one permit trading among all states.5 In this undifferentiated case,

the first-order condition for can be shown (following the same steps used to derive (8)) to be

             "Ci 1 $ "D j      "D ' 1   "D j    "D j
(10)     !      = #&        +# k) = #        +#      .
             "ei N j % "e j  k "E ( N j "e j  j "E



         In this case, marginal cost equals the average marginal damage across states. Not

surprisingly, this generally will not yield the first-best level of emissions, because the

government has only one policy instrument with which to regulate N different externalities. The

                                                                                                         !D j
only exception would be the case in which the marginal damage from local pollution                              is the
                                                                                                         !e j

same for all states. In that case, there is no need for a differentiated policy, because marginal

damage is the same everywhere.

         This undifferentiated case could also represent a case in which the government can

differentiate policy, but knows only the aggregate distribution of damage functions and is

uncertain about any particular state’s damage function. This would also lead to the first-order

condition in (10).


III. Regulation by State Governments

         In the absence of federal regulation, each state government sets regulations to minimize

the cost to that state of reducing emissions plus pollution damage to that state:

(11)     Ci ( ei ) + Di ( ei , E ) .


5
  The constraint that national policy cannot be differentiated across states is commonly assumed in the
environmental federalism literature, and parallels similar assumptions in the broader fiscal federalism literature (see
Oates, 1999). Often for an emissions cap this assumption requires that the cap be equal across states. But this is
highly unrealistic: command-and-control policies are applied at the firm or facility level, and thus it seems more
reasonable to assume that they equalize marginal costs across states than that they equalize the quantity of emissions
across states. It also means that in the absence of state policy, an undifferentiated national emissions cap achieves
the same allocation of emissions as an undifferentiated tax or permit system. Equalizing costs in this way makes it
easier to focus on other differences among instruments.


                                                           8
         Just as in the national case, state-level emissions taxes don’t appear in the objective

function, because the value of the returned revenue exactly offsets the cost of the tax. Note also

that the incidence of emissions taxes and emissions control expenses in state i is assumed to fall

entirely on the residents of that state.6

         Following the same set of steps as in the national government case shows that the first-

order condition for command-and-control regulation at the state level is

             "Ci "Di "Di
(12)     !       =     +    .
             "ei   "ei   "E

Thus, states will set emissions such that marginal cost equals marginal damage, but including

only damage within the state, not damage to other states. As in the national government case, the

first-order condition under the emissions tax or emissions permits is the same as under

command-and-control, and can be satisfied by setting the tax rate equal to marginal damage (the

right-hand side of 12) or setting the quantity of permits such that the permit price equals

marginal damage. Under any type of regulation, state regulation will generally not achieve the

first-best, because state-level regulation fails to take into account damage to other states. Only in

                                                           !Di
the case of a strictly local pollutant (for which              = 0 ) will state-level regulation yield a first-
                                                           !E

best outcome. This is an example of the well-known result that local regulation is not efficient

when there are inter-jurisdictional spillovers.


IV. Regulation by Both National and State Governments

         This sub-section considers the cases in which both the national and state governments

simultaneously regulate the same pollutant. For simplicity, this is modeled as a one-shot,

6
 There are many reasons why some portion of the costs of emissions taxes or control expenses might fall on those
outside the state (e.g., if pollution-intensive production uses a fixed factor owned in part by out-of-state residents).
But it is useful to focus on the case in which the cost is borne entirely within the state.


                                                            9
simultaneous-move game. That is, this section focuses on the Nash equilibria (or refinements

thereof) of games in which the national government and all state governments simultaneously set

environmental policy.


A. Simultaneous Regulation under Emissions Caps

        First, consider the case in which the states and national government choose emissions

caps simultaneously. The Nash equilibrium strategy for the national government will minimize

its objective (7), taking state policies as given. If the national government chooses a higher

emissions cap than the state does (i.e., Qi > qi ), then the national cap won’t bind, and a marginal

change in Qi will have no effect. If the national cap does bind, then the national government’s

first-order condition is the same as when only the national government regulates emissions,

which is equation (8). Therefore, setting the national caps based on (8) is a weakly dominant

strategy.

        The equilibrium strategy for each state government will be similar. If the state cap is

looser than the national cap, then it won’t bind. If the state cap does bind, then the state

government’s first-order condition is the same as when only the state government regulates,

which is equation (12). Thus, setting the state cap based on (12) is a weakly dominant strategy. 7

                                                                    !D j
        Examination of (8) and (12) shows that if            # !E          > 0 , or in other words, if there are
                                                             j "i



harmful spillovers to other states, then the national cap for state i will be set more tightly than the

state cap. Thus, the Nash equilibrium allocation of emissions will be the same as if only the


7
  Because these strategies are only weakly dominant, there are many Nash equilibria: one in which all governments
choose weakly dominant strategies, plus many others in which one or more non-binding caps are set at levels other
than the weakly dominant level. A trembling-hand refinement eliminates the latter type of equilibrium. More
importantly, all of these equilibria yield the same allocation of emissions.


                                                        10
national government were regulating emissions, which achieves the first-best, as shown earlier. 8

The same outcome will occur if the national government imposes emissions caps and the state

governments use emissions taxes (or tradable permits).

            Now consider the case in which the national government is constrained to use an

undifferentiated cap (again, this does not imply that each state is constrained to the same amount

of emissions, but that the marginal cost of emissions reductions is constrained to be equal across

states). Just as in the differentiated case, only the tighter emissions cap will bind. In this case

the national first-order condition is

                 "Ci   1            % "D j           "Dk (   1                  "D j        "D j
(13)         !       =
                 "ei N #
                             $ '& "e         +$          * =
                                                     "E ) N #
                                                                         $ "e          +$
                                                                                            "E
                                                                                                   ,
                             j +#        j      k                        j +#      j    j



where ! is the set of states for which the national cap will bind and N ! is the number of states

in that set. This condition is similar to the analogous condition for the case in which only the

national government regulates emissions, equation (10), except that rather than averaging

marginal damages over all states, the average covers only those states in which the national cap

will bind, because those are the only states in which the national cap has any effect on emissions.

            The equilibrium strategy for each state government remains the same as in the

differentiated case: the weakly dominant strategy is to set the state cap based on (12), the same

first-order condition as in the case in which only the states regulate emissions. And as before,

the state first-order condition would be the same if the national government uses an emissions

cap and the states use emissions taxes.




                                                          !D j
8
    If the net spillovers are positive (i.e.,       # !E         < 0 ) for at least one state, then this equilibrium will not achieve the
                                                    j"i

first-best, because that state will set too tight a cap. But in that case, the national government could restore the first-
best outcome by setting an emissions floor for that state.


                                                                            11
         Comparing (12) and (13) shows that in equilibrium, the national cap will bind in every

state i for which

         !Di   1             !D j           !D j
(14)         <
         !ei N "
                      $ !e          +$
                                            !E
                                                   .
                      j #"      j    j %i



That is, the national cap will be set more tightly than the state cap if local damages in state i are

less than the average local marginal damages in states where the national cap binds plus the total

over all states other than i of the marginal damage from aggregate emissions. The intuition is

that spillover damages push the national government to set the cap tighter than what individual

states would choose, but because the national cap is set based on the average marginal damage

for states affected by that cap, a state with relatively high local marginal damages may want to

set a tighter cap.9

         This equilibrium will generally not yield the first-best emissions allocation, except if

local marginal damages are equal for all states in which the national cap binds, and spillovers are

zero for all states in which the state cap binds. Nonetheless, as long as spillovers aren’t positive,

this equilibrium will be at least as efficient as the case in which the national government uses an

undifferentiated policy and states don’t regulate, because in any case in which the state caps

bind, they will move the level of emissions closer to the efficient level.

         The national cap will bind on all states (i.e., (14) will hold for every state) if

         !Di   1        !D j       !D j
(15)         "    $
         !ei N " 1 j #i !e j
                             <$                        %i,
                              j #i !E




9
  Note that again there may be multiple Nash equilibria, and in this case they can lead to different emissions
allocations, because the right-hand sides of (13) and (14) depend on the set of states in which the national cap binds.
A trembling-hand refinement eliminates nearly all of these, because it rules out any equilibria in which a state
chooses a weakly dominated level of its emissions cap. Even with this refinement, there may be multiple levels of
the national cap that satisfy (13), each with a different set of states in which the national cap is binding. However,
the national government will generally prefer one of these over the others, leading to a unique equilibrium.


                                                             12
that is, if for every state, the difference in local marginal damages between that state and the

average is smaller than the marginal damage aggregate emissions cause in other states. This will

tend to occur when there is relatively little heterogeneity across states in local marginal damage

or when spillovers are relatively large.

       Expression (15) suggests that cases in which states impose tighter standards than the

federal cap may well be relatively rare. And it also suggests that these cases will appear most

often for pollutants that are primarily local and for which the local marginal damages vary

substantially across states.

       Cases in which U.S. states have set tighter regulations than the federal standards do

appear to be relatively rare, but Oates (2001, p. 15) cites a few examples. These include the

Toxic Substances Control Act, the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, and

hazardous waste disposal rules under the Resource Conservation and Recovery act. In each case,

these are largely local pollutants. And it is quite plausible that local marginal damages could

vary significantly across states. Thus, these cases seem consistent with the model’s results.


B. Simultaneous Regulation under Emissions Taxes

       Next, consider the case in which both state and national governments regulate emissions

via emissions taxes. In the differentiated case, the national government’s first-order condition

will again follow equation (8), the same first-order condition as in all of the differentiated cases

considered thus far. In this case, though, satisfying (8) requires setting the emissions tax equal to

marginal damage minus the state emissions tax rate:

               !Di    !D j
(16)    Ti =       +"      # $i
               !ei  j !E




                                                 13
        The state government’s first-order condition will differ from previous cases because the

state’s objective changes somewhat in the presence of a national emissions tax. The national

pollution tax appears in the state’s objective, because the national taxes paid by that state are not

necessarily offset by the revenue returned to that state. Just as before, the objective includes the

cost to that state of reducing emissions plus pollution damage in that state. But in this case it

also adds the national emissions tax paid by that state net of the national emissions tax revenue

returned to it. Thus, state i’s objective becomes

(17)    Ci ( ei ) + Di ( ei , E ) + Ti ei ! ri " T j e j .
                                                j



        To get the first-order condition for state i, follow the same set of steps used to derive the

state first order condition in previous cases (equation (12)). This yields

            "Ci "Di "Di
(18)    !       =     +    + (1 ! ri ) Ti ,
            "ei   "ei   "E

This equates the marginal cost of reducing emissions with the marginal pollution damage within

the state, plus the national emissions tax rate (net of return transfers to the state). This first-order

condition can be satisfied by setting the state emissions tax rate equal to the right-hand side of

(18) minus the national emissions tax rate Ti :

               "Di "Di
(19)    !i =       +    # riTi .
               "ei   "E

        The unique Nash-equilibrium tax rates are then defined by the intersection of the two

reaction functions (16) and (19), which yields

                 1         "D j
(20)    Ti =          $
               1 ! ri j #i "E

and




                                                             14
                "Di "Di    r         "D j
(21)     !i =       +   # i %             .
                "ei   "E 1 # ri j $i "E

The national emissions tax is set so that the tax rate, net of return transfers to the state, equals the

spillover marginal damage to other states, thus fully internalizing the inter-state externality. The

state tax rate then fully internalizes the intra-state externality: the tax rate equals marginal

damage within the state minus the increase in transfers to the state caused by a marginal increase

in emissions. This yields a first-best allocation of emissions. And in general, it will entail non-

zero tax rates from both levels of government.10

         Now consider the undifferentiated case. The national government’s first-order condition

in this case is

                1   % !Di    !D j      (
(22)     T=       " '
                N i & !ei
                          +"      # $i * .
                           j !E        )

This sets the tax equal to the average across states of marginal damage minus the state tax rate.

         The states’ first-order conditions are the same as in the differentiated case, so the state

emissions taxes follow (19). Again, the unique Nash-equilibrium tax rates are defined by the

intersection of the reaction functions (in this case, (19) and (22)). This gives

                    !D j
(23)     T ="
                j   !E

and

                "Di "Di         "D j
(24)     !i =       +    # ri $      .
                "ei   "E      j "E



In equilibrium, the national tax rate is set equal to the marginal damage from aggregate

emissions E. If national emissions tax revenue were not returned to states, then this would over-

10
 For sufficiently high ri, this equilibrium will yield a state-level subsidy rather than a tax, though in practice, this
might be politically infeasible.


                                                            15
                                                       !D j
correct the inter-state externality (which is   # !E          ). When the effect of that returned revenue is
                                                j "i



taken into account, this rate net of revenue returned equals the inter-state externality for the

average state, though it may over-correct or under-correct for any particular state. And as in the

differentiated case, the state tax rate fully internalizes the intra-state externality: the tax rate

equals marginal damage within the state minus the increase in transfers to the state caused by a

marginal increase in emissions.

        Unlike in the case of emissions caps, in this case it is very likely that states will want to

impose their own emissions taxes in addition to the national tax. The second and third terms on

the right-hand side of (24) will sum to zero for the average state, suggesting that for a pollutant

that causes any local damage, the average state will want to impose its own emissions tax.

        It is difficult to find an example of a U.S. tax that is a pure environmental tax, but the

taxes on gasoline and other motor fuels are probably the closest. If one broadens the definition

to include other externalities, then this class would also include various “sin taxes” such as taxes

on alcohol and tobacco. In every one of these cases, there is a federal tax and nearly every state

government adds an additional tax of its own.

        Equations (23) and (24) together (along with (5)) imply that

            "Ci              "Di "Di                "D j
(25)    !       = Ti + # i =     +    + (1 ! ri ) $      .
            "ei              "ei   "E             j "E



If the fraction of marginal emissions tax revenue returned to a state is the same as that state’s

                                                                               !Di         !D j
share of marginal damages from aggregate emissions (that is, if ri =
                                                                               !E
                                                                                     " !E         ), then this
                                                                                       j



undifferentiated tax will yield the first-best level of emissions in state i. In this case, the national




                                                        16
tax net of returned revenue exactly equals the inter-state externality, thus fully internalizing that

externality.

         If ri is higher than this, then the combined tax rate will be less than marginal damages,

and the level of emissions will exceed the first-best level. With a higher share of national

emissions tax revenue being returned, the state has too little incentive to cut back emissions, and

thus the combined tax rate is too low. For a lower value of ri , the opposite logic applies: the

state has too much incentive to reduce emissions and thus the combined rate is too high.

         Note that this case may in some cases be less efficient than the earlier case in which the

national government uses an undifferentiated tax and states do not regulate at all. If local

                       !Di                                       !D j !Di
marginal damage            varies little across states, but ri "     #    varies widely, then if the
                       !ei                                     j !E    !E

national government uses an undifferentiated tax it will be more efficient not to allow states to

impose their own emissions taxes. Nonetheless, in most cases it will be more efficient to have

                                                                                              !D j       !Di
simultaneous taxation by both levels of government, particularly if ri "                             #       is relatively
                                                                                          j   !E         !E

                                                                                                !Di            !D j
close to zero for all states. Indeed, if the national government can set ri =
                                                                                                !E
                                                                                                          " !E        , then
                                                                                                           j



simultaneous taxation can achieve the first-best.11

         These results also suggest a potentially major problem with proposals for an

internationally-harmonized carbon price, such as those in Nordhaus (2006) or Cramton and Stoft

(2010). These proposals are equivalent to an undifferentiated global carbon tax with the revenue

raised in each country returned in full to that country (which in this model is equivalent to having


11
  Note that if the national government can freely choose the values of ri, then the national policy is not really
undifferentiated: the national tax rate is the same for all states, but policy can still be differentiated through the
choices of ri.


                                                            17
ri = 1 ). The results here suggest that in this case, each country would choose to impose a local

subsidy on carbon emissions to bring down the shadow price on emissions to equal the damage

just within that country (which for the case of carbon is a very small fraction of the total

damage). The proposals would not allow local emissions subsidies, but this incentive would

remain and thus one would expect countries to adopt policies with similar effects (e.g.,

subsidizing carbon-intensive industries or under-regulating emissions of other pollutants that are

strongly correlated with carbon emissions). This problem goes away if the carbon tax revenue is

pooled across all nations and then divided up, which would give an ri much less than 1, but

unfortunately that would also eliminate a number of the advantages of these proposals.


C. Simultaneous Regulation under Tradable Permits

         Next, consider the case in which both state and national governments regulate emissions

via tradable emissions permits.12 In the differentiated case, the national government can achieve

the first-best with a system that doesn’t allow permit trading across state lines, by setting the

number of permits in each state to satisfy (8), the same first-order condition that applies in the

differentiated case under emissions caps or emissions taxes. The equilibrium then is exactly the

same as the equilibrium under differentiated emissions caps discussed earlier in the paper.13

         For the undifferentiated permit policy, start by considering the case in which at least one

state does not impose a binding state-level permit system. In this case, the national

government’s first-order condition is the same as (13), the first-order condition in the case with

an undifferentiated emissions cap together with state regulation, with one subtle difference: here,

12
  All of the results in this section also hold if the national government uses tradable permits and states can impose
emissions caps.
13
  The equilibrium is substantially more complicated under a differentiated permit system that permits trading across
state lines, but at ratios other than one-to-one. But that case will also produce a first-best allocation of emissions.


                                                          18
! is the set of states for which the state regulation does not bind and thus emissions are

determined by the national permit system (in that previous case, ! was described as the set for

which the national cap binds, but here because of trading the national permits will bind either on

all states or on none). The intuition is also the same as in that previous case: the quantity of

permits will be set such that the permit price will equal marginal damage, averaged over the

states where emissions are determined by the national permit system.

        To get the state first-order condition, take a total derivative of the state objective (17)

with respect to ei , set equal to zero, and note that as long as the national permit system binds, the

total level of emissions won’t change, but the national permit price T will. Rearranging the result

gives

            "Ci "Di                       dT
(26)    !       =     + T + ( ei ! ri E )     .
            "ei   "ei                     dei

Lowering emissions raises emissions control costs, but also lowers local damages and reduces

the amount spent on emissions permits. That tradeoff gives the left-hand side of (26) and the

first two terms on the right-hand side. The last term recognizes that the state may gain or lose

from decreasing the price of national emissions permits, depending on whether it is a net buyer

or seller of permits.

        Rewriting that last term using ! , the elasticity of demand for national emissions permits

with respect to the permit price, and substituting in the national first-order condition (13) give an

expression for the resulting shadow price on emissions in states with binding state permit

systems:

            "Ci   1            "D j        "D j       "Di & ei    )T
(27)    !       =
            "ei N #
                        % "e          +%
                                           "E
                                                  +      + ( ! ri +
                                                      "ei ' E     *,
                        j $#      j    j




                                                             19
        Note that this case can easily be less efficient than if states were not allowed to impose

their own emissions regulations. The national permit price already corrects for marginal damage

in the average state without a binding state permit system, and thus adding an additional state

constraint will tend to push emissions below the efficient level. The second and third terms on

the right-hand side of (27) together equal the efficient shadow price on emissions. Therefore,

unless the fourth term is sufficiently negative to offset the first term, emissions will be held

below the efficient level.

        This suggests that when the national government uses a tradable permit system, it may

well want to forbid states from imposing their own tighter regulations. And unlike in the case of

emissions taxes, setting ri can’t entirely solve the problem: there is no way to set ri such that (27

) yields the efficient level of emissions for every state.

        These results also suggest a likely conflict with states. The state first-order condition can

be rewritten to show that the state permit price will follow

               "Di $ ei    'T
(28)    !i =      + & # ri ) .
               "ei % E     (*

State i will impose a binding state-level permit system (i.e., ! i > 0 ) as long as the effect of

lowering the national permit price (the second term in (28)) is not sufficiently negative to offset

the gain from lowering local pollution damage (the first term). For the average state, the second

term will be zero, so for a pollutant that causes any local damage, there will necessarily be at

least one state for which ! i > 0 .

        It is possible for the right-hand side of (28) to be positive for all states, indicating that all

states would choose to reduce pollution below what the national system alone would do. But this

would create a contradiction, because in that case the national permit system would not bind, and



                                                   20
the derivations of (26) through (28) assume that it does. In this case there is a complicated set of

equilibria in which the national government and all states impose permit systems, with the

quantity of national permits exactly equaling the total number of state permits, and thus all are

binding. If the second term on the right-hand side of (28) is sufficiently small for all states, then

there is a unique trembling-hand-perfect equilibrium that yields the first-best allocation of

emissions. Nonetheless, this equilibrium is quite complex and fragile, and seems unlikely to

occur in practice. Thus, the case already considered, in which at least one state does not impose

its own permit system, seems much more realistic.

       The most prominent example of a national permit-trading system in the U.S. is the sulfur

dioxide (SO2) trading program imposed by the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. Appendix A

of Potoski (2001) provides a table showing for each of six criteria air pollutants (SO2,

particulates, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, carbon monoxide, and lead) which states have imposed a

tighter standard than the federal government. Of these six, only SO2 is currently covered by a

national-level permit trading system, while the others are covered by federal standards. This

model would then suggest that it is more likely for states to impose tighter limits on SO2 than on

the other five pollutants.

       Indeed, this is what the data show. Nine states have imposed their own tighter standards

on SO2, and for four of those states, SO2 is the only one of the six pollutants for which the state

set a tighter standard. In contrast, only one state (Hawaii, which is not covered by the SO2

trading program) set its own tighter standard for any of the other five criteria pollutants but did

not also set a tighter standard for SO2. This pattern is particularly notable because of these six

pollutants, SO2 is the least localized, and thus if all six were regulated in the same way at the

national level, SO2 would be the one least likely to face more stringent state standards.



                                                 21
       Another notable national example of pollution trading was the phase-out of leaded

gasoline. That program allowed trading among gasoline refiners from 1982-87. But it was

effectively a trading program even before that, because the standard required each refiner to keep

the average level of lead in the gasoline it produced below a given level, thus effectively

allowing trading within each firm. If each refining firm sells gasoline in multiple states, this

produces state-level incentives that are essentially the same as under a full trading program. The

national-level regulations on leaded gasoline were announced in 1973 and took effect (after

being delayed by litigation) in 1976. And in 1976, California imposed its own tighter standard

on lead in gasoline.

       Similarly, the Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards do not allow trading

across different manufacturers, but do average across the vehicles produced by a given

manufacturer, and thus provide state-level incentives very similar to those under a tradable

permit program. Thus, this model would predict that one or more states would choose to impose

their own tighter fuel economy regulations. However, the national CAFE rules specifically

forbid states from imposing their own fuel economy rules. But to the extent that states can get

around that rule by imposing other regulations that improve fuel economy, this model would

predict that at least some would do so.

       That is exactly what California tried to do by imposing a greenhouse-gas-per-mile limit,

which was then copied by thirteen other states. And that limit was challenged by the federal

government because it was effectively equivalent to a fuel economy standard. Goulder et al.

(2009) argues that this effort was misguided and not in those states’ best interest. The model




                                                 22
suggests that the opposite may be true: those states’ mistake may not have been in imposing

those rules, but in not having imposed them sooner.14


V. Conclusions

         This paper has shown that state governments are much more likely to set their own

binding environmental regulations when federal regulation uses emissions taxes or tradable

permits than when it uses emissions caps. Under an undifferentiated federal emissions cap,

tighter state regulations will necessarily improve welfare. Under a tax, state regulations may

reduce welfare, but will be more likely to improve it (and to produce an outcome that is more

efficient than under a federal emissions cap), particularly if each state’s share of federal

emissions tax revenue is relatively close to its share of marginal damages from aggregate

national emissions. Under emissions permits, however, the opposite is true: while state

regulations can improve welfare, they are more likely to reduce it (and produce a resulting

outcome that can easily be less efficient than under either taxes or command-and-control).

         These results provide yet another argument in favor of emissions taxes over command-

and-control regulation, at least at the federal level, because the incentives under a federal

emissions tax make states more likely to impose efficiency-enhancing regulations of their own.

Conversely, it provides an argument against tradable permits at the federal level, as well as a

potential argument for not allowing states to impose their own regulations on a pollutant that is

covered by a national tradable permit system.

         Given the strong simplifying assumptions made in this paper’s model, a natural direction

for future research would be to relax some of those assumptions. In particular, allowing cost
14
  This is not to say that this conflict was caused entirely by the factors considered in this paper. For simplicity, this
model leaves out many factors that may be important in the real world. In particular, it assumes that each level of
government acts to maximize welfare for its citizens, an assumption that many people might question in this case.



                                                           23
spillovers (cases in which the cost of reducing emissions in one state depends on emissions

reductions in other states) could be quite interesting. Such cost spillovers could result from

many factors, including technological innovation or interstate trade in polluting inputs or outputs.

Another natural extension would be to consider how the results would change if firms and/or

consumers are mobile.

       And, as noted earlier, the general framework developed in this paper could be used to

consider federalism in contexts other than environmental policy, such as public good provision

or income redistribution. Extending the model in that direction could generate useful insights.




                                                24
References

Adler, Jonathan, 2005. “Jurisdictional Mismatch in Environmental Federalism.” New York
University Environmental Law Journal 14:130-178.

Cramton, Peter, and Steven Stoft, 2010. “Price Is a Better Climate Commitment,” The
Economists' Voice: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, Article 3.

Goulder, Lawrence H., Mark R. Jacobsen, and Arthur A. van Benthem, 2009. “Unintended
Consequences from Nested State & Federal Regulations: The Case of the Pavley Greenhouse-
Gas-per-Mile Limits.” NBER working paper no. 15337.

Nordhaus, William D., 2006. “After Kyoto: Alternative Mechanisms to Control Global
Warming.” American Economic Review 96(2):31-34.

Oates, Wallace, 1999. “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism.” Journal of Economic Literature
37(3):1120-1149.

Oates, Wallace, 2001. “A Reconsideration of Environmental Federalism.” Resources for the
Future discussion paper 01-54.

Oates, Wallace E., and Paul R. Portney, 2003. “The Political Economy of Environmental
Policy.” In K.-G. Mäler and J. R. Vincent (eds.), Handbook of Environmental Economics, vol. 1.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Potoski, Matthew, 2001. “Clean Air Federalism: Do States Race to the Bottom?” Public
Administration Review 61(3):335-342.

Wellisch, Dietmar, 1995. “Locational Choices of Firms and Decentralized Environmental Policy
with Various Instruments.” Journal of Urban Economics 37:290-310.




                                              25
