                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     IS THE DISTANCE TO DEFAULT A GOOD MEASURE IN PREDICTING BANK
                         FAILURES? CASE STUDIES

                                         Kimie Harada
                                          Takatoshi Ito
                                        Shuhei Takahashi

                                       Working Paper 16182
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16182


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2010




We are also grateful for helpful discussions with Ryuzo Miyao, Kiyotaka Nakashima and Toshiyuki
Souma and for insigutful comments from participants in Japanese Economic Association in 2008.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Kimie Harada, Takatoshi Ito, and Shuhei Takahashi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is the Distance to Default a Good Measure in Predicting Bank Failures? Case Studies
Kimie Harada, Takatoshi Ito, and Shuhei Takahashi
NBER Working Paper No. 16182
July 2010
JEL No. G19,G21

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the movements of the Distance to Default (DD), a market-based measure of
corporatedefault risk, of eight failed Japanese banks in order to evaluate the predictive power of the
DD measurefor bank failures. The DD became smaller in anticipation of failure in many cases. The
DD spread,defined as the DD of a failed bank minus the DD of sound banks, was also a useful indicator
for deteriorationof a failed bank’s health. For some banks, neither the DD nor the DD spread predicted
the failures.+RZHYHUWKRVHUHVXOWVZHUHSDUWO\GXHWRODFNRIWUDQVSDUHQF\LQILQDQFLDOVWDWHPHQWV
and disclosedinformation.


Kimie Harada                                       Shuhei Takahashi
Graduate School of International Accounting        Department of Economics
Chuo University                                    The Ohio State University
Ichigaya-Tamachi 1-18                              410 Arps Hall
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8478                        1945 N High Street
Japan                                              Columbus, OH, 43210
kimieh@tamacc.chuo-u.ac.jp                         takahashi.35@osu.edu

Takatoshi Ito
Graduate School of Economics
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033
JDSDQ
and NBER
ITOINTOKYO@aol.com
1. Introduction
Until the late 1980s, failing banks were rescued by mergers arranged by Ministry of
Finance（MOF）with healthier banks without any financial subsidies but regulatory
favors. After the bursting of the bubble economy in the beginning of the 1990s, the
profitability of Japanese banks steadily worsened, and many smaller Japanese banks
had been failing. The Deposit Insurance Corporation (DIC) was used to assist mergers.
Toho Sogo Bank, a regional bank, failed (i.e., became insolvent) in 1992 was absorbed
by Iyo Bank with financial subsidies from DIC to Iyo Bank. This became the case of
DIC assisted merger, and became a typical formula for dealing with a failing bank.1
Then, a size of failing bank gradually increased. In 1995, Hyogo Bank became the first
stock exchange-listed bank to fail. Market participants reacted to the failure, but judged
the failure as an isolated event as it did not bring impacts to the entire banking industry
(Ito and Harada (2005)). There was only few bank failure in 1996.
         A false sense of calm was broken abruptly in November 1997, when two large
financial institutions and two smaller ones failed triggering a full-fledged banking
crisis. Credit risk of Japanese banks became one of the major concerns in the global
financial market (The list of failed banks is in Table 1). The so-called Japan premium
became substantially higher in November 1997, and continued to be high. In reaction
to failure in banking policy, the supervision power was taken away from MOF and a
new supervision agency, Financial Supervisory Agency (FSA) was established in 1998.
This was a major change in separating supervisory function from the fiscal authority
and nurture specialized human capital for supervision.2
            Despite capital injection of March 1998, two additional large banks failed in
the latter half of 1998. DIC faced revenue shortfalls, and additional funds were
injected.
            After the banking crisis of November 1997, large banks and some regional
banks decided to merge for survival as their capital bases were damaged by
nonperforming loans (NPLs).


Table 1 is about here



1 This formula is described as hougacho (subscription list) in Hoshi and Patrick (2000). It implies
that the Ministry of Finance solicits healthy banks for funds to prop up a weak bank.

2   The agency was later renamed as Financial Services Agency (FSA)


                                                  2
           There are several general measures of bank vulnerability and more specific
measure for the probability of bank failure. A first candidate would be credit ratings.
However, how credit rating is done is a black box to outsiders, and there have been
persistent criticism that downgrades often lag behinds other obvious signs rather than
foretelling what would come. This was the case for Japanese banks in the mid-1990s.
Crucial downgrades came only weeks before banks’ failures. Capital adequacy ratio
(CAR), adopted by Basel Committee on Bank Supervision, provides how much capital
is prepared for risk-weighted assets. However, it was not particularly a good measure
predicting bank financial health, as there are many ways for “window dressing.” In
particular, Japanese banks in the mid-1990s were struggling to maintain a high CAR
using various provisions to boost capital and to compress loan loss reserves based on
optimistic assumption.3 For example, the Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan had more
than 11% CAR in March 1998, but became insolvent in October 1998.
           Hanajiri (1999) and Ito and Harada (2005) showed that Japanese banks had to
pay the so-called “Japan premium”, in the interbank borrowing from western banks.
They showed that the Japan premium reflected fragility of Japanese banks from
mid-1990s to spring of 1999, when capital injection made Japanese banks good buffer.
Related indicators showing market participants’ evaluations of bank health are
premiums of the Credit Default Swaps (CDS). The CDS is a rather new indicator and
prevails in analyzing Japanese banks after the Japan premium disappeared. Ito and
Harada (2004, 2006), Ueno and Baba (2006) and Okada (2007) used the CDS in order
to see fragility of Japanese banks.4 Premiums in the interbank money market and the
CDS are observed in the markets. However, market participants of CDS for Japanese
banks are said to be limited to particular financial institutions and the market is
shallow.
           The Distance to Default (DD) is a market-based measure of corporate default
risk. It is based on evaluation of assets in the stock markets, where participants are
heterogeneous and diversified, and book values of short-term debts. It measures both
solvency risk and liquidity risk. This is an alternative measure for financial

3  See Ito and Sasaki (2002) on how Japanese banks issued subordinated debts to boost
tier 2 capital in response to shrinking tier 2 component, unrealized capital gains of
their equity holdings.
4 The CDS is not traded for banks and institutions that are already in financially bad shape.

Government-affiliated companies and relatively small companies are not traded in the CDS market,
either. With the DD, we can evaluate banks which are government-affiliated and which are not
traded in the CDS market.



                                               3
vulnerability of a corporation. As stock prices are available almost every business days,
the measure is continuously available. Harada and Ito (2008) applied the measure to
banks to analyze merged banks to answer a question whether mergers made merged
banks financially more robust than the pre-merger individual banks. This paper applied
the DD to failed Japanese banks in order to see whether the measure was suitable for
assessing default risks of banks.
           The DD in this paper is based on a structural approach of the Merton
(1974)’s model and Black and Scholes (1973)’s option pricing model. This paper
examines whether the DD is useful in predicting failure of a bank in the near future.
          The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the history of
bank failures and the rescue system. Section 3 describes the DD methodology and
reviews the DD application to banks. We create the DD in section 4 and compare the
DDs of failed banks and the benchmark bank. Section 5 concludes the paper.


2. History of Bank Failures
2.1 Bank Failures in Japan
The Japanese bank supervision could be characterized as a no-failure policy (or the
convoy system) until the end of the 1980s. Any failing bank could be arranged to be
merged with a stronger bank that were eager to expand.              Although DIC was
established in 1971, no merger case emerged for two decades, and collected insurance
premia were accumulated as a fund in DIC. In 1991, the first case of DIC assisted
take-over merger of a weak bank by a healthier bank took place. A small bank, Toho
Sogo Bank (213 billion yen in assets) was determined to have failed and Iyo Bank was
given subsidies worth 2 billion yen to take over assets and liabilities of Toho Sogo
Bank. Between 1992 and July 1994, there were 4 cases of similar small bank failures.
In 1995, the Tokyo Kyodo Bank was established by DIC and Tokyo metropolitan
government to take over two relatively large credit cooperatives in Tokyo, Tokyo
Kyowa and Anzen, reflecting the fact that it became difficult to find a white knight
quickly. In July, another large credit cooperative, Cosmo Credit Coop, failed and taken
over by Tokyo Kyodo Bank (See Table 2 for detailed history of failures and DIC in the
1990s).
          In August 1995, Hyogo Bank (assets, 3,400 billion yen) and Kizu Credit Coop
(assets, 1,200 billion yen) failed and DIC assistance, amounting to 100 billion yen, for
the two institutions almost exhausted the DIC fund. The failure of Hyogo Bank was
significant because it was the first listed bank to fail in the Japanese postwar history.


                                             4
(See Ito (2000) and Cargill, Hutchison and Ito (1997, ch. 6) for a more detailed
explanation).


Table 2 is about here


          Although there were no bank failures in 1996, that was calm before the storm.
In November 1997, four financial institutions failed, of which two of them were quite
large. Hokkaido Takushoku Bank was one of the Big 20 large banks, which the
Ministry of Finance had promised to protect earlier, but it failed for possible insolvency.
The business was divided and sold to other financial institutions after being declared
failure, with very distressed assets were purchased by the public bad bank, Resolution
and Collection Bank that was enhanced Tokyo Kyodo Bank. Yamaichi Securities, one
of the Big 4 securities firm at the time, also failed and liquidated in the same month.
          Following the November 1997 shock, western banks started to charge the
“Japan premium” which reflected the distrust of Japanese banks and bank supervision
by foreign banks. Since DIC fund had been exhausted, the new funding was proposed
and established. Capital injection for remaining banks from the newly obtained fund
was hastily arranged in March 1998. (See Cargill, Hutchison and Ito (2000, ch. 2) for
detailed for the financial distress during this period).
          As the size of capital injection of March 1998 was too small to stabilize the
financial system, instability and uncertainty persisted in 1998. In the summer of 1998,
special legislation was prepared, which authorized the regulator to take over financial
institutions if they are systemically important and near insolvent. The new financial
regulator, Financial Supervisory Authority, was established in June 1998.
          Two laws were passed in October 1998; one is the Law Concerning
Emergency Measure for the Reconstruction of the Functions of the Financial System
(The Financial Reconstruction Act), which allows the authorities to deal with a failed
bank without finding a healthy receiving bank; the other is the Financial Function
Early Restoration Law, which permitted the authorities to provide funds for bank
resolution. Soon after these laws were enacted, two major banks were nationalized.5
          Using the new authority and legislation, Long-Term Credit Bank (LTCB) of
Japan and Nippon Credit Bank (NCB) were taken over by the government in October

5 Details of the two acts and the impacts of the acts on the stock market are examined in Spiegel

and Yamori (2003).



                                                  5
and December, respectively, 1998. These were in the category of long-term credit
banks, providing long-term development loans to large corporations. Business model
and strict entry limit to the category made those banks very profitable in the 1960s-80s.
However, distressed assets mainly from construction and real estate companies
overwhelmed their capital. The failure of LTCM was long rumored in the market, and
the stock prices had steadily declined in the spring and summer, until its failure on
October 23, 1998. The failure of NCB was rather surprise as the stock prices were
stable until the day before the announcement of failure and takeover by the regulator.
The second capital injection in 1999 amounted to 7.6 trillion yen, four times as much
as the first injection.
         Between 1999 and 2002, the Japanese banking system appeared to have
regained stability, as no major bank failed. Capital injection and the power to
nationalize a bank, if near insolvency, seemed to have worked. However, the calm was
deceptive, as tax-deferred assets (TDA) had become a relatively large component of
tier 1 capital, although the TDA had no tangible value unless future profits materialize.
If loss continues, TDA could suddenly disappear. As this accounting problem became
well-known to the public, Japanese banks suddenly looked very vulnerable in 2002. As
FSA Minister changed from Mr. Yanagisawa to Mr. Takenaka, regulatory policy of
FSA became very tough. Mr. Takenaka demanded on banks to raise more equities to
fatten regular tier 1 capital instead of TDA, with a threat to cancel TDA qualifying for
tier 1 capital. The plan was commonly called as the Takenaka plan. Recognition of a
problem with TDA became wide-spread in 2003, and accounting firms started to deny
full attribution of TDA to tier 1 capital. Two more banks—Resona and
Ashikaga—failed and were de facto nationalized in 2003.


2.2 Related Literature
What had happened in the Japanese banking sector during the 1990s and 2000s was
described in many papers and books. Hoshi and Kashyap (2001) painted a bleak picture
of the problematic relationship between Japanese banks and corporations from the
viewpoint of corporate governance. Chapters in Cargill, Hutchison, and Ito (1997, 2000)
give detailed descriptions of the earlier stage of Japanese bank failures. Hoshi and Ito
(2004) review the evolution of the regulatory system in Japan from 1998 to 2004.
Sakuragawa and Watanabe (2007) evaluate the Takenaka plan of 2002, which has been
credited for revival of the Japanese banking sector after 2003.
         Brewer et al (2003) examined the stock market’s response to failures of banks


                                            6
and securities firms by using the event study approach. They find that share prices of
surviving banks responded unfavorably to the failures and that financially weaker
survivors were more adversely affected. Similar findings are suggested in Ito and
Harada (2006). Spiegel and Yamori (2004) analyzed share values of banks in order to
find evidence of the “too big to fail”. In terms of the Japan premium, Peek and
Rosengren (2001) investigated the effect of bank failures on the premium.
         The DD is known as a market-based measure for assessing the default or
credit risk of non-financial corporations. The indicator has recently been used to
monitor risks of financial institutions by international organizations and financial
authorities. For example, European Central Bank (2005) treats the DD as an important
forward-looking indicator that can provide early signs of financial fragility. In the case
of cross-border contagion, the DD can be used as a comprehensive measure of default
risk (Gropp, Lo-Duca and Vesala (2006), De Nicolo and Tieman (2006)). Chan-Lau
and Sy (2007) introduce the concept of distance to capital, which accounts for
pre-default regulatory actions, such as the prompt-corrective-action framework. The
distance to insolvency is introduced and applied by Danmarks National Bank (2004).
The DD is the base from which these new measures were derived and it is used to
analyze various risks, such as contagion risk (Duggar and Mitra (2007) and Chan-Lau,
Mitra and Ong (2007)). Chan-Lau and Sy (2007) use a case study approach for two
Japanese banks (Resona and Ashikaga Banks) with two different measures, the
distance to default and the distance to capital. Chan-Lau and Sy (2007) is the closest to
our paper as they examine failed Japanese banks with the DD. However, their paper
focuses on the calculation of the distance to capital. The case studies are
complementary. This paper thoroughly examines most failed Japanese banks and
comprehensively evaluates the DD. We use the DD rather than related measures as the
DD is a basic and widely used measure of credit risk assessment in literature.


2.3 Cases of Three Large Bank Failures
By March 2002, 180 deposit-taking institutions had failed in Japan (the DIC annual
reports 2005 and 2006). Among, those, we examine eight bank failures, of which
Hokkaido Takushoku Bank, Long-term Credit Bank of Japan (LTCB), and Nippon
Credit Bank (NCB), were among the group of largest banks in terms of the asset sizes.
The financial assistance given to them in total exceeded 40 trillion yen. Five smaller
banks--regional banks and second-tier regional banks—will also be examined.
         Resona bank, Japan’s fifth-largest bank, was virtually nationalized in May


                                            7
2003,6 as the bank’s capital adequacy ratio fell below the 4% level, However, the Bank
is not included in our analysis. Resona bank was formed by the merger of Daiwa Bank,
Asahi Bank and three smaller banks in 2002 and the time span between its creation in
2002 and its failure in 2003 is too short to calculate DD.


Hokkaido Takushoku Bank (HTB)
HTB was established in 1899 as a “Special Bank” to promote economic development
of Hokkaido Prefecture by providing long-term, low-interest loans.7                 In 1939, HTB
increased its scale of operations after being allowed to handle bank accounts by an
amendment to the law. HTB became an ordinary bank in 1950 and a city bank in 1960.
HTB, however, opened branches in urban areas, such as Tokyo and Osaka, around
1985 and started to provide real estate loans.
           At the time of the asset price bubble in the second half of the 1980s, almost all
banks increased their real estate-related loans. Also, it was widely believed that the
loan-to-value ratio increased in almost all banks as the real estate priced skyrocketed.
HTB was no exception in increasing real estate loans, but HTB had disadvantage
compared to other city banks (top 20 banks). As the bank was headquartered in
Hokkaido, their expertise in real estate loans in Tokyo and Osaka area was much less
than other banks. HTB was a newcomer in Tokyo and Osaka and its expansion in loans
meant that they lent to inferior borrowers, or to compromise to be a low-ranked lien
holder. The recovery ratio for HTB was believed to be less than other banks, once the
bubble burst in the 1990s. HTB was long considered to be the financially weakest as
well as smallest among the city banks.
           It turned out that NPLs of HTB reached more than 13% of its total lending in
March 1997. The ratio was the highest among city banks. The Ministry of Finance,
which earlier declared “no bank among the top 20 banks would fail,” proposed a plan
to merge HTB with Hokkaido Bank, a regional bank and the second largest bank in
Hokkaido. The plan of merger was announced on April 1, 1997, to be completed within

6 In early 2003, Resona Holdings (the parent company of the bank)’ capital adequacy ratio fell
critically low and the value of deferred tax assets was denied by the accounting firm. Without being
able to count the deferred tax assets as the tier one capital, the bank was near insolvent. On May 17,
2003, the government decided to inject 1.96 trillion yen of public funds into Resona Group through
Resona Bank, not the holding company. This injection was not nationalization although the
government emerged as the largest shareholder, holding 68.25% of voting rights of the holding
company.

7   The bank was established under “The Agriculture and Industry Banking Law” of 1896.


                                                  8
a year.
          Then the merger plan was virtually called off on September 12, 1997,
although the announcement said a half-year postponement to complete the merger, due
to a disagreement over the amount of NPLs. On the same day, HTB also announced a
restructuring program including the disposal of NPLs. After these announcements, the
stock price declined and deposit levels started to drop. Deposits decreased to 5.9
trillion yen in September 1997 although the bank had 8.7 trillion yen deposits in 1994.
The stock price fell to 100 yen in mid-September, which was then considered to be a
level for a bankruptcy warning. The stock price continued a decline and became 65 yen
the day before the announcement of failure.
          Sanyo Securities, a midsized security company, failed on November 4, 1997
and it defaulted on the call loan from a small size trust company, Central Gunma Trust
Fund. This was the first ever default in the call market. The call market seized up, and
HTB faced great difficulty in borrowing in the call market. Under such circumstances,
HTB had no choice but asked for help from the regulators. On November 17, HTB
failed. It was the first failure of a city bank in postwar Japan. It was de facto
nationalized and to be liquidated.
          November 1997 began with the failure of Sanyo Securities on November 3,
followed by the failure of HTB on November 17, the failure of Yamaichi Securities,
one of the “big four” securities companies, on November 24, and the Tokuyo City
Bank on November 26. November 1997 has been remembered as the darkest month of
in the Japanese financial trouble in the 1990s.
          One year later, the operations in Hokkaido of HTB were transferred to the
North Pacific Bank, while operations outside Hokkaido were transferred to Chuo Trust
and Banking Co. Its bad loans were sold to the DIC. Monetary grants provided by the
DIC were 1.795 trillion yen and asset purchase by the DIC was 1.617 trillion yen.
          Since the stock prices were declining, difficulties of HTB were well-known.
So its failure was not total surprise to any investor, given its balance sheet and
non-performing loans. However, the failure of the government to rescue it was a
surprise, since the Minister of Finance had said, “no city bank would fail”. Hence, it
would be interesting to check with the data how the market was evaluating the DD
before its ultimate failure.


Long-term Credit Bank of Japan (LTCB)
LTCB was founded in 1952 to provide long-term financing to large manufacturing


                                              9
industries in Japan. Along with other two long-term credit banks—Industrial Bank of
Japan and Nippon Credit Bank—LTCB played an important role for postwar economic
development. LTCB had been listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) since 1970.
           In 1989, the bank was the ninth-largest bank in the world in terms of assets,
and the largest dealer of yen-denominated foreign debt (Samurai Bonds). However,
with the burst of the asset price bubble, LTCB faced a great deal of NPLs, mainly from
loans to companies in the real estate, construction and housing finance businesses.
           In spite of capital injection by the government in March 1998 to all major
banks, the stock price of LTCB started to drop in the spring of 1998, and the pace had
accelerated in the summer. The authorities tried to rescue it by another injection of
public capital along with forcing a merger with Sumitomo Trust and Banking Co., one
of the few stable banks at that time. The plan did not succeed because Sumitomo Trust
and Banking was skeptical about the true size of LTCB’s NPLs. The government was
worried about the large size of LTCB if it were to fail, so that the Diet attempted to
introduce a new law to nationalize a bank.
           The Financial Reconstruction Act and the Financial Function Early
Restoration Act passed the Diet in October 1998. The Financial Recovery Act
established the framework for dealing with failing banks and its first case was the
nationalization of LTCB. Later, the same law was used to nationalize the Nippon
Credit Bank and five second-tier regional banks. The Rapid Revitalization Act allowed
for the injection of public funds for solvent Japanese banks that became short of
capital.
           LTCB voluntarily applied for nationalization shortly after the passage of these
laws and its NPLs at the time were removed under the application of the laws. Losses
were covered by scrapping the existing shareholders’ value and new capital injected by
the DIC. LTCB’s stock price was 210 yen at the beginning of 1998 which dropped to
below 60 yen by the end of June. It was 1 yen by the time the bank was nationalized.
Nationalization of LTCB was anticipated by the market participant in the protracted
debate in the Diet.
           In the spring of 2000, the government decided to sell LTCB back to the
market. Ripplewood had competed against Chuo Mitsui Trust and Banking Co., for the
acquisition of LTCB and won the bid. Ripplewood Holdings, a US investment fund,
bought the LTCB for 1 billion yen (9.5 million dollar) in March 2000, with “Defect
Warranty Provision,” a put option to return assets to the government even after the



                                             10
purchase.8 This provision was used extensively by Ripplewood to get rid of the bad
assets. The new bank then began operations as a private commercial bank on March 1,
2000 and was renamed as Shinsei Bank on June 5, 2000. Shinsei Bank had a successful
initial public offering in 2004 after being relieved of bad assets carried over from
LTCB balance sheet.
         Anecdotal evidence in that the market had long anticipated the failure of
LTCB should be also confirmed by the DD measure of LTCB.


Nippon Credit Bank (NCB)
NCB was another long-term credit bank in Japan. Japan Real Estate Bank (Nihon
Fudosan Ginko), a predecessor to NCB, was established in 1957 by the government
from balance sheets of Chosun Bank and Taiwan Bank in order to provide long-term
finance related to real estate businesses. With real estate financing being one of main
businesses, the bank had financial difficulty during the economic slump after the first
oil crisis in 1973-74 and was renamed NCB in 1977 with its shift in main business line
from real estate businesses to more diversified lending. Hence, when the larger bubble
burst in the 1990s, it was no surprise that NCB was again in trouble.
         NCB had their first deficit in March 1996. A former administrator of the
National Tax Agency and a former senior general manager of the Bank of Japan were
installed as bank executives in 1996. The capital adequacy ratio dipped below the
critical 4% level in March 1997. Immediately, the MOF then took a central role and
prepared restructuring for NCB. The restructuring plan had two major parts; selling all
branches of NCB and raising about 300 billion yen in subscription to new shares in
fundraising campaign. The fund-raising was implemented in the spirit of the convoy
system, that is, other banks were forced to assist the weakest financially in the name of
protecting financial systemic stability.
         NCB had a capital deficit of 94 billion yen at the end of March 1998.
Although NCB survived by receiving a capital injection by the Bank of Japan in 1997
and public funds of 60 billion yen from the DIC in March 1998, its asset values further
deteriorated in 1998.
         NCB abandoned a previously announced merger with Chuo Trust and

8 Defect Warranty Provision (kashi tanpo joko) was protection that the seller (government) gave to

the buyer (Ripplewood for LTCB). The buyer can demand that the government buy back any loans
whose prices declined by more than 20% within three years of purchase. This provision was also
given to the buyer of Nippon Credit Bank.



                                                11
Banking on December 9, 1998. Shortly after, it was reported that NCB was insolvent.
On December 12, 1998, the government urged NCB to apply for nationalization and
the bank had to comply the following day, under the Financial Reconstruction Law.
(Asset purchase by the DIC was 299 billion yen in 1999 and 82 billion yen in 2000. In
addition, monetary grant of 3,243 billion yen in 2000 was made before its sales to
potential investors). The involuntary nationalization of NCB was sudden and took
investors by surprise. The stock price of NCB had been reasonably high and stable
prior to nationalization. However, the stable stock price did not mean that the bank was
secure. This was partly due to one of the guidelines of TSE on the allocation of new
shares to third parties. NCB issued new stocks in 1997. The TSE guideline prohibits
selling privately allocated stocks during the first two years after their issuance.9
          The bank was sold to a Japanese Fund led by SOFTBANK Corp., ORIX
Corporation, Tokio Marine and Fire Insurance Co. and other financial institutions. The
new bank began operations on September 1, 2000 and was renamed as Aozora Bank in
January 2001.
          The case of NCB is interesting. Although the bank’s weak and constantly
deteriorating portfolio was well-known in the market, the bank was regarded to be too
connected to be resolved. The fact that the Ministry of Finance forced a convoy-system
plan in March 1997 gave an impression that something will be orchestrated in 1998.
But this time was different under the newly established law that gave an option to
nationalize it. How it is viewed in the DD measure is an interesting point.


2.4 Smaller Regional Bank Failures
Hyogo Bank
Hyogo Sogo Bank was formed through the merger of three local banks in Hyogo
prefecture in 1944 and it changed its name to the Hyogo Bank in 1989. It operated
mainly in Hyogo prefecture.
          Hyogo Bank failed in August 1995.           The failure of Hyogo Bank was the first
listed bank failure since World War II. The bank had already been in trouble in the first
half of the 1990s due to declining land price and damages from a huge earthquake in
Hyogo prefecture. The Ministry of Finance identified Hyogo bank as insolvent through
its inspection, on August 31, 1995. The stockholders of Hyogo bank lost their equity

9 The guidelines are listed under paragraph 422 of the rules for listing and paragraph 428 of the

rules of practice.



                                                 12
value. The successor bank was Midori Bank.


Taiheiyo Bank
Taiheiyo Bank was established in 1911 as a mutual bank. The bank changed its name
from Daiichi Sogo Bank in October 1989 when it changed from a "Sogo", mutual bank
to an ordinary bank (second-tier regional bank).
         Taiheiyo bank failed on April 1 1996. Then, the DIC contributed 117 billion
yen to the resolution of the bank. Four city banks of Sakura, Fuji, Tokai and Sanwa
took hair cut in their claims to Taiheiyo Bank, but set up a receiver bank, Wakashio
Bank. Remaining assets of Taiheiyo Bank was transferred to Wakashio Bank. Later,
Wakashio Bank became a subsidiary of Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group. Through
the merger of its main banking subsidiary, Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Co., Wakashio
Bank was renamed Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Co. .


Hanwa Bank
Hanwa Bank was the second largest regional bank in Wakayama Prefecture. It became
apparent that the bank's financial condition deteriorated and the amount of debt
exceeded the capital through an inspection by the Ministry of Finance. On November
11, 1996, the MOF ordered to suspend business operations except for the repayment of
deposits, pursuant to Article 26 of the Banking Law. Unlike previous failures, the
Ministry of Finance did not attempt to find a rescue bank, but liquidated the bank, by
shifting balance sheets to the DIC. At that time, the Bank of Japan and the MOF
repeatedly indicated that prompt measures to deal with insolvent financial institutions
would be taken. The DIC set up Kii Yokin Kanri Bank as the bank for deposit payback
so that depositors were protected. The bank was liquidated in March 2002 after almost
all deposits were repaid.


Tokyo Sowa Bank
The FSA revealed that Tokyo Sowa Bank's negative net worth was about 119 billion
yen at interim period of 1998. After the revelation, the stock price took a sharp decline
and about 200 billion yen in deposits were withdrawn.
         The bank received an order from the Financial Reconstruction Commission to
be placed under the management of the government by the Financial Reconstruction




                                           13
law, i.e., bank failure, in June 1, 1999.10 Later, Lone Star, a US private equity firm,
bought failed Tokyo Sowa Bank in June 2001 for 40 billion yen. Tokyo Sowa Bank
was listed and renamed as Tokyo Star Bank, in late 2005.


Ashikaga Bank
Ashikaga Bank was the 10th largest regional bank and major bank of the Ashigin
Financial Group. Ashikaga Bank received a total of 135 billion yen in capital injection
in 1998 and 1999. Public money was supposed to be injected into viable banks, but
Ashikaga Bank could not pay dividends after the injections. Ashikaga Bank issued 60
million preferred shares, which was equivalent to 30 billion yen in 1999 and again
another 30 billion yen was raised in ordinary stocks in 2002. In terms of deposits, the
bank experienced a near bank run in 1997. Total deposits were about 5,374 billion yen
at the end of September 1997, of which 300 billion yen was withdrawn within a year.
         The FSA inspection had revealed that Ashikaga Bank had a negative net worth
at the end of March 2003. Pursuant to Article 102-3 of the Deposit Insurance Law, the
bank was nationalized. Depositors were protected but shareholders lost their stakes.
         Ashikaga Bank, as a temporarily nationalized, carried out its operations and
the DIC sought to transfer its business to an assuming financial institution. In March
2008, Nomura Holdings, the largest securities firm, bought the Bank from the
government.


3. Application of the DD to Banks11
3.1 Data
In order to calculate the DD, the following data are needed; the risk-free rate, the market
value of equity, total assets (book value), stock holders’ equity (book value), and
short-term liability (book value). For the risk-free rate, the 3-month Saiken Gensaki rate
(or the 3-month bond repurchase rate) is used from April 1, 1985 to May 31, 1992,
while the 3-month Financial Bill (FB) rate is used after June 1, 1992.12 This is because

10 Official name of Financial Reconstruction Law is The Law Concerning Emergency Measures
for the Reconstruction of the Functions of the Financial System.

11 Programs used in the paper were originally written by Dr. Kelly Wang and then modified by the

authors. Kelly Wang was a coauthor of the authors’ related work, Harada and Ito (2008).

12 A related paper, Nakajima and Souma (2008), uses the yen swap rate whose maturity is one year

as the risk-free rate. We give consideration to the maturity of the short-term debts assumed in the
model and choose the above mentioned risk-free rate.


                                                14
the FB rate is available only after June 1992.13 The market value of equity is defined by
a daily stock price (closing price) times the number of issued stocks. When stock prices
are not available, they are linearly interpolated. For the balance sheet data,
unconsolidated statements are preferred since they represent stand-alone bank’s
financial health.14 The data, from April 1, 1985 to the day of each bank’s delisting,
were obtained from the Nikkei Financial Quest database.15 We follow Harada and Ito
(2008) in defining what constitutes “short-term” liability.
           For comparison, the DD of the “benchmark” bank was defined by the average
of the five largest regional banks’ DD; Chiba Bank, Yokohama Bank, Shizuoka Bank,
Hiroshima Bank, and Fukuoka Bank.16 News which affects the entire banking sector is
reflected in the benchmark bank as well as failed banks. The DD spread of each failed
bank is defined by the DD of the failed bank minus the DD of the benchmark. The
spread is considered to be reflecting bank-specific news.


3.2 The Model
           The DD is calculated by a structural model of credit risk assessment pioneered
by the option pricing theory of Merton (1974) and Black and Scholes (1973). The model
defines a bank default when the market value of assets becomes below the book value
of liabilities (the default point). The DD is defined by the number of the standard
deviation of the market value of assets away from the default point.17 The larger the
DD, the greater is the distance of a company from the default point, and the lower is the


13 In the 1980s, the 3-month Saiken Gensaki rate was not available for several days. In this case,

the most recent value is used instead.
14 For Ashikaga Bank, the unconsolidated data of Ashikaga bank is used until March 2003. The

balance sheet data in March 2004 is not available for both the consolidated and unconsolidated data,
and of both Ashikaga Bank and Ashigin Financial Group. Hence, the consolidated data of Ashigin
Financial Group in March 2003 is used as the balance sheet data in March 2004 instead.

15   The exception is Hanwa Bank. The bank was listed on December 1, 1989.

16 These five banks were selected because their asset sizes were the largest among regional banks

and they were regarded as sound banks. Large banks in asset size are not included in the benchmark
bank as all large banks merged and were affiliated with financial holdings. Large banks are
excluded due to the discontinuity in data and complicated merger process. See Harada and Ito
(2008).

17 The definition of bank failure and types of measures for avoiding serious disruptions are

officially defined in Article 102 of Deposit Insurance Law of May 2000. See Fukao (2007) and the
Deposit Insurance Corporation Annual Reports.



                                                15
probability of default. For example, a DD of 2.0 means that default within a year is a
two-standard deviation event, presuming the fluctuation of the market value of assets
follows the recent historical value, using the current market value of assets as a starting
point. Even if the DD becomes zero, it does not mean that the bank fails at that point of
time. If short-term debts (liabilities with maturity less than a year) are not rolled over,
then the bank would need to exhaust assets in order to repay within a year. The DD
being 0.0 or even negative means that the bank will be highly likely to fail unless the
asset value improves. However, if the short-term debts are rolled over, then the bank
survives on the cash flow basis, although it is technically insolvent. In contrast, if
short-term debts are called (time deposits withdrawn in a bank run), then it may fail at
once. If and when the DD of a bank approaches zero, it implies the bank is in an
extremely vulnerable position. In the event of a bank run, a sudden death may happen
for the shortage of liquidity.
         The option pricing theory determines the asset value and its volatility of a
company from the observed stock prices and their volatility. Specifically, the value and
the volatility of assets are calculated with Black and Scholes (1973)’s model by using
the value and volatility of stock prices. Once the market value of assets and its volatility
are known, it is possible to calculate the probability with which the asset value declines
to the default point within a specified time. This probability is the probability of default
and it corresponds one to one with the DD.
         Since the DD is a market-based measure of distress, it contains expectations of
market participants and it is forward-looking. Gropp, Vesala and Vulpes (2006) and
Gropp amd Moerman (2004) argue that the DD may be a particularly suitable and
all-encompassing measure of default risk for banks.
         The DD is defined as follows:
          V    
                   A   A2 T
                           1
      log t
DDt       Lt           2 
                                     ,                                                (1)
                  A T
where Vt is the market value of the bank’s assets at time t, Lt is the bank’s liability at
time t (the default point),  A is the mean growth rate of Vt ,  A is the standard
deviation of  A , and T is a time horizon, which is set to one year.18 This assumption

18 The DD can be given either by using calculated  A or using the risk-free rate instead of  A .
Papers, such as Duffie et al.(2007), Vassalou and Xing (2004), Crosbie and Bohn (2003) and
Harada and Ito (2008), estimate  A and use the value in the calculation of the DD. On the other
hand, Gropp, Vesala and Vulpes (2006) and Nakashima and Souma (2008) use the risk-free rate


                                                16
is common when information about the maturity structure of liabilities is not available.
If Lt does not change until t  T (i.e. Lt  Lt T ), we can interpret the numerator of
DDt as Et log Vt T  log Lt T  . This is because V t follows a geometric Brownian
motion with mean μA and standard deviation σA , and hence log Vt T is distributed
                         1               
as    N  log Vt    A   A2 T ,  2T  .19
                         2               
            Therefore, the DD is also expressed as follows:
          Et logVt T   log Lt T
DDt                                 ,                                                    (2)
              std logVt T 
where std         is the standard deviation. Hence, DDt and the default probability of the
structural model correspond to each other one for one. These assumptions and the
model’s structure mean that a negative DD implies E t log Vt T   log Lt T . As the
market value of the assets follows the logarithmic normal distribution, a negative DD
means that the probability of default Vt T  Lt T  at time t+T is greater than 0.5.
           The DDt is calculated from the data as follows; Lt is obtained from the
bank’s balance sheet and T is set equal to one year. In order to estimate Vt ,  A , and  A ,
we use Black and Scholes’s option pricing model.

Wt  Vt  d 1   Lt e  rT  d 2                                                     (3)

 A  std ln Vt   lnVt 1                                                         (4)
where
         V         
                      r   A2 T
                             1
     log t
d1       Lt              2 
                                                                                         (5)
                     A T

d 2  d1   A T                                                                         (6)


(See Appendix A for detail). Using  A is more suitable as assets are managed at a fluctuating
interest rate rather than the risk free rate. This is why we use  A .

19  Et log Vt T  log Lt T  is derived as follows;
E t log V t  T  log L t  T   E t log V t  T  log L t 
                                                   1   
                                log V t    A   A2 T  log L t
                                                   2   
                                      V            1     
                                log  t     A   A2 T .
                                       Lt          2     


                                                          17
Here, r is the risk-free rate, Wt is the market value of equity (stock prices times the
number of shares outstanding),  is the standard normal cumulative distribution
function. In order to estimate Vt ,  A , and  A , we use the following steps. First, we
                                0     0             0
set the initial guess for Vt ,Vt 1 ,...,Vt T 1       (the previous year’s data), then calculate

                                                          1    1           1
 0 A , using equation (4). We next calculate Vt ,Vt 1 ,...,Vt T 1 with            0 A . We then

                                                                   2   2        2
calculate     1 A , using equation (4) and estimate Vt ,Vt 1 ,...,Vt T 1 using  1 A . We

repeat these steps until the values converge.
          In order to compute the DD of a bank, we need the book values of short-term
and long-term debts. The banking sector, however, has a balance-sheet structure that is
different from non-financial companies. We take industry-specific variables into
consideration to classify a bank’s debts into the short-term and long-term debts (See
Appendix table 1). Items are in principle selected in terms of their maturity.
Nevertheless care is needed. For example, even term deposits (of maturity more than a
year) can be withdrawn if depositors forego a part of accrued interest, and so it could
become short-term debt in the case of a bank run. 20 We have to make several
judgments in defining short-term debts.


4. Empirical Results
4.1 Movements during the 6 Months Prior to Failure
This subsection reports the DD of failed banks and illustrates how they have fluctuated
since the late 1980s, in particular, for the last 6 months before the respective bank
failure. Our interest is whether the DD is a good measure in predicting bank failures.
The DD of failed banks over the whole period is illustrated in Figures 1 to 8, including
the DD spread, the DD of failed banks minus the DD of the benchmark. Before
examining those figures, the banks are divided into two groups, the banks explained by
the DD and banks not explained by the DD, based on Tables 3 and 4, which show both
the DDs and the DD spreads of the last 6 months before each failure, respectively.
          Our explicit criterion is whether the DD has been gradually falling and


20 Interim (a minor of the semi-annual) financial statements of Japanese companies do not contain

detailed sub-items of time deposits and hence it is impossible to treat total debt minus time deposits
as short-term debt.



                                                    18
became very low before the news of the failure came out. Looking at the DD of the last
6 months in Table 3, the DD is a good measure for the cases of HTB, LTCB, Hyogo
Bank and Hanwa Bank. The DD spreads implied that failed banks had been weaker
than the benchmark banks and became weaker towards the failure as the DD spread of
failed banks became negative and was falling steadily towards the failure.
        HTB, LTCB, Hyogo Bank and Hanwa Bank are classified in the banks
explained by the DD and the rest are in the banks not explained by the DD although
the DD spread predicted most of the failures.


Tables 3 and 4 are about here


4.2 Banks Explained by the DD
The DDs are illustrated in Figures 1, 2, 4 and 6 for the banks explained by the DD. The
DDs of those banks were positive and relatively stable during the bubble period in the
late 1980s. What is interesting is that the DDs of failed banks were higher than that of
the benchmark during the period. This finding suggests that failed banks performed
very well during the bubble period.


Figures 1, 2, 4 and 6 about here


       After the bubble period, the DD of the banks that would fail later declined
sharply and became negative. Although the DD of the benchmark also declined, the
DD of failed banks dropped more significantly than the benchmark. This implies that
the failed banks were damaged more severely by the bursting of the bubble economy.
While they experienced a recovery in their DD in 1993, they declined again after that.
The DD of HTB (Figure 1) started to fall in the second half of 1993, whereas the DD
of LTCB (Figure 2) started to dropped significantly only after 1997. Two regional
banks, Hyogo Bank and Hanwa Bank, showed different patterns. Hyogo Bank (Figure
4) did not show a recovery in 1993 and the DD kept falling during the 1990s until the
bank ultimately failed. Hanwa Bank (Figure 6) was listed in the second section of the
Osaka Stock Exchange in December 1989 and their DD was close to zero from the
beginning and did not show any improvement (there was a slight recovery period in
mid 1995 but this was short-lived).
       The DD seems to be a good measure in predicting failures for banks in this
subsection. As for HTB, the bank announced its failure on November 17, 1997 and


                                           19
then the DD dropped sharply, but it had been gradually falling before the
announcement. Although the DD improved slightly during 1995-1996, it had started to
decline in 1993 and reached below -2 at the time of the announcement. The same
pattern is observed for LTCB. The bank announced its failure on October 23, 1998, but
the DD had been gradually declining since 1996. The DDs of Hyogo Bank and Hanwa
Bank also kept falling during the 1990s until they failed. From these observations, we
may conclude that for HTB, LTCB, Hyogo Bank, and Hanwa Bank, the DD was a
good measure in predicting the failure.


4.3 Banks Whose Failures were Not Explained by the DD
Banks in this group are illustrated in Figures 3, 5, 7 and 8. The DD was not a good
measure in predicting their failure; the DD did not fall or become significantly low
before the news on their failure was made public. These banks are NCB (Figure 3),
Taiheiyo Bank (Figure 5), Tokyo Sowa Bank (Figure 7), and Ashikaga Bank (Figure
8). Those banks have unique reasons for unreliable DD as a predictor of bank failure.


Figures 3, 5, 7 and 8 about here


       The DD of NCB (Figure 3) fluctuated widely, but did not decline sharply until
the announcement of the bank failure. NCB announced a temporary nationalization on
December 12, 1998, but the DD had been increasing during the days before the
announcement day. The market was not aware of the process of inspection by the
regulatory authorities. Moreover, as we explained, selling pressure was less due to a
restriction in that newly issued stocks could not be sold.
       As for failed regional banks, the DD had not fallen significantly before the
announcement. For Taiheiyo Bank (Figure 5), Tokyo Sowa Bank (Figure 7) and
Ashikaga Bank (Figure 8), the DDs and the DD spreads of the banks fluctuated widely
and the DDs were almost always lower than that of the benchmark but no other
common pattern was found. For Taiheiyo Bank, the DD spread, the DD of failed banks
minus that of the benchmark, seemed to be a reliable measure in predicting their failure.
The DD spread had become negative prior to the announcement day. In the cases of
NCB, Tokyo Sowa Bank, and Ashikaga Bank, the DD spread, as well as the DD itself,
was not a good measure in predicting their failure; neither the DD nor the DD spread
declined sharply before the announcement of their failure. However, the result is not
surprising. For instance, both NCB and Ashikaga Bank were inspected by the FSA,


                                            20
who then found that these banks were insolvent. This implies that the banks did not
disclose important information and thus the market was not able to respond
appropriately. The DD is a market-based measure of default risk, so lack of
predictability of bank failure implied lack of public information in the market. Hence,
the lack of transparency was to blame for market participants’ surprise.
      It is suggested that the DD could be a helpful measure in predicting bank failures
although the DD cannot deal with exceptional cases that arise from lack of timely
information. In addition, the DD spread also helps to predict bank failures.


5. Conclusion
This paper examines the DDs of failed Japanese banks. Investigating eight Japanese
failed banks, it is found that the DD was generally a reliable measure in predicting
bank failures. The DD spread was also a helpful measure. For some banks neither the
DD nor the DD spread predicted the failures. However, those results were partly due to
lack of transparency in financial statements and disclosed information.
       The following task is left for future research. Since some studies examine other
indicators, such as credit ratings, outstanding of NPLs and the capital adequacy ratio,
in order to evaluate bank health, it is important to examine whether and how the DD
and these indicators are related. In addition, it should be examined whether reforms in
the banking regulating policy and the supervisory system during the 1990s have
affected the behavior of the DDs. In order to compare the DDs of failed banks, the
benchmark, the average DD of regional banks, is used in this paper. It might be
desirable to calculate the DD of many other banks, including banks that experience
organizational restructuring or capital tie-ups in order to draw a stronger conclusion.
Bank failures are examined in many papers, but research using DD seems to be a
promising direction, based on this paper.




                                            21
Reference
Black, Fisher and Myron Scholes (1973), "The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,"
Journal of Political Economy 81(3), 637-654.


Brewer, Elijah III, Hesna Genay, Williamu C. Hunter, and George G. Kaufman (2003), “Does
the Japanese Stock Market Price Bank-Risk? Evidence from Financial Firm Failures,” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 35 (4), 507-543.


Cargill, Thomas F., Michael M. Hutchison, and Takatoshi Ito (1997), The Political Economy of
Japanese Monetary Policy, MIT Press.


Cargill, Thomas F., Michael M. Hutchison, and Takatoshi Ito (2000), Financial policy and
Central Banking in Japan, MIT Press.


Chan-Lau, Jorge A., Srobona Mitra, and Li Lian Ong (2007), “Contagion Risk in the
International Banking System and Implications for London as a Global Financial Center,” IMF
Working Paper 07/74.


Chan-Lau, Jorge A. and Amadou N.R. Sy (2007), “Distance-to-Default in Banking: A Bridge
Too Far?,” Journal of Banking Regulation, 9(1), 14-24.


Crosbie, Peter, and Jeff Bohn (2003), “Modeling Default Risk,” Moody’s KMV White Paper,
(San Francisco: Moody’s Investor Service) December 18.


Danmarks National Bank (2004), Financial Stability Report (Copenhagen). Available via the
internet at http://www.nationalbanken.dk


Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan, “Annual Report 2005,” “Annual Report 2006”.


De Nicolo, Gianni, and Alexander Tieman (2006), “Economic Integration and Financial
Stability: A European Perspective”, IMF Working Paper 05/296.


Duffie, Darrell, Leandro Saita and Ke Wang (2007), “Multi-period Corporate Default
Prediction with Stochastic Covariates,” Journal of Financial Economics, 83(3), 635-665.




                                                22
Duggar, Elena and Srobona Mitra (2007), “External Linkages and Contagion Risk in Irish
Banks,” IMF Working Paper 07/44.


European Central Bank (2005), Financial Stability Review, June (Frankfurt).


Fukao, Mitsuhiro (2007), “Financial Crisis and the Lost Decade,” Asian Economic Policy
Review, 2, 273-297.


Gropp, Reint, Marco Lo Duca and Jukka Vesala (2006), “Cross-Border Bank Contagion in
Europe,” European Central Bank Working Paper Series 662.


Gropp, Reint, Jukka Vesala and Giuseppe Vulpes (2006), "Equity and Bond Market Signals as
Leading Indicators of Bank Fragility," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 38(2), 399-428.


Hanajiri, Tetsuro (1999), “Three Japan Premiums in Autumn 1997 and Autumn 1998 – Why
Did Premiums Differ between Markets?” Financial Markets Department Working Paper, No.
99-E-1, Bank of Japan.


Harada, Kimie and Takatoshi Ito (2008), “Did Merger Help Japanese Mega-Banks Avoid
Failure? Analysis of the Distance to Default of Banks,” NBER Working Paper Series 14518.


Hoshi, Takeo and Hugh Patrick (2000), “The Japanese Financial System: An Introductory
Overview,” in Crisis and Change in the Japanese Financial System, Kluwer Academic
Publishers.


Hoshi, Takeo and Anil Kashyap (2001), Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan: The
Road to the Future, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.


Hoshi, Takeo and Takatoshi Ito (2004), “Financial regulation in Japan: a sixth year review of
the Financial Services Agency”, Journal of Financial Stability, 1, 229-243.


Ito, Takatoshi (2000), “The Stagnant Japanese Economy in the 1990s: The Need for Financial
Supervision to Restore Sustained Growth,” in Crisis and Change in the Japanese Financial
System, Kluwer Academic Publishers.




                                               23
Ito, Takatoshi and Kimie Harada (2004), "Credit Derivatives Premium as a New Japan
Premium," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 36(5), 965-968.


Ito, Takatoshi and Kimie Harada (2005), "Japan Premium and Stock Prices: Two Mirrors of
Japanese Banking Crises," International Journal of Finance & Economics, 10(3), 195-211.


Ito, Takatoshi and Kimie Harada (2006), "Bank Fragility in Japan: 1995-2003,” in Japan's
Great Stagnation: Financial and Monetary Policy Lessons for Advanced Economies edited by
Michael Hutchison and Frank Westermann, the MIT Press Inc.


Ito, Takatoshi and Yuri Nagataki Sasaki, (2002). “Impacts of the Basle Capital Standard on
Japanese Banks’ Behavior” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 16,
September: 372-397.


Merton, Robert C. (1974), “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: the Risk Structure of Interest
Rates,” Journal of Finance 29, 449–470.


Nakashima, Kiyotaka and Toshiyuki Souma (2008), “Firm Fragility Measures and the Effect of
Public Fund Injections in Japan,”   mimeograph


Okada, Tae (2007), “Consequences of Bank Mergers [Ginko gappei no kouka, in
Japanese], mimeograph.


Peek, Joe and Eric S. Rosengren (2001), “Determinants of the Japan Premium: Actions Speak
Louder than Words,” Journal of International Economics, 53(2), 283-305.


Sakuragawa, Masaya and Yoshitsugu Watanabe (2007), “Did the Japanese Stock Market
appropriately Price the Takenaka financial reform?” presented at the NBER 18th EASE
conference.


Spiegel, Mark and Nobuyoshi Yamori (2003), "The Impact of Japan’s Financial Stabilization
Laws on Bank Equity Values," Journal of Japanese and International Economies 17(3),
263-282.


Spiegel, Mark and Nobuyoshi Yamori (2004), "The Evolution of Bank Resolution Policies in


                                             24
Japan: Evidence from Market Equity Values," Journal of Financial Research, 1, 115-132.


Vassalou, Maria, and Yuhang Xing (2004), “Default Risk in Equity Returns”, Journal of
Finance, 59, 831-868.


Ueno, Yoichi and Baba Naohiko (2006), “Default Intensity and Expected Recovery of Japanese
Banks and “Government”：New Evidence from the CDS Market,” Bank of Japan Working
Paper, No.06-E-4.




                                             25
Table 1 Failed Banks
Bankruptcy date   Name of bank        Type of failure                               Transfer of business, contractual transfer or current name

1995/8/30         Hyogo Bank          Announcement of the failure by the Ministry of Midori Bank (later Minato Bank)
                                      Finance
1996/3/29         Taiheiyo Bank       Announcement of the disposal plan             Wakashio Bank (Newly-established bank by Sakura Bank)

1996/11/21        Hanwa Bank          Ordered suspension of business by the         Kii Deposits Management Bank
                                      authorities
1997/10/14        Kyoto Kyoei Bank    Transfer of business                          Kofuku Bank (later bankrupt)

1997/11/17        Hokkaido            Transfer of business                          Hokuyo Bank and Chuo Trust &Banking
                  Takushoku Bank
1997/11/26        Tokuyo City Bank    Transfer of business                          The 77 Bank and Sendai Bank

1998/5/15         Midori Bank         Transfer of business                          Hanshin Bank

1998/5/22         Fukutoku Bank       Transfer of business                          Namihaya Bank (Newly-established by the government. Later bankrupt.)

1998/5/22         Naniwa Bank         Transfer of business                          Namihaya Bank (Newly-established by the government. Later banklupt.)

1998/10/23        Long-Term Credit   Decision to commence special public            Transfer and purchase of shares to New LTCB Partners. Now Shinsei
                  Bank of Japan      management and the government purchase of      Bank
1998/12/12                           shares to commence special public
                  Nippon Credit Bank Decision                                       Transfer and purchase of shares to Softbank Group (consisted of
                                     management and the government purchase of      Softbank, Orix and Tokio Marine). Now Aozora Bank
1999/4/11         Kokumin Bank       shares
                                     Announcement   of failure                      Yachiyo Bank

1999/5/21         Kofuku Bank         File for disposal                             Kansai Sawayaka Bank

1999/6/11         Tokyo Sowa Bank     File for disposal                             Tokyo Star Bank

1999/8/6          Namihaya Bank       File for disposal                             Daiwa Bank and Kinki Osaka Bank

1999/10/1         Niigata Chuo Bank File for disposal                               Taiko Bank, Daishi Bank, Hachijuni Bank, Higashi-Nippon Bank,
                                                                                    Gunma Bank and Towa Bank
2001/12/28        Ishikawa Bank       File for disposal                             (Through Bridge Bank of Japan) Hokuriku Bank, Hokkoku Bank, The
                                                                                    First Bank of Toyama, Kanazawa Shinkin Bank and Noto Shinkin Bank
2002/3/7          Chubu Bank          File for disposal                             (Through Bridge Bank of Japan) Shimizu Bank, Shizuoka Chuo Bank
                                                                                    and Tokyo Star Bank
2003/11/29        Ashikaga Bank       Temporalily nationalized                       Nomura Financial Partners (Nomura Holdings) and Next Capital
                                                                                    Partners Co., Ltd., acquired all outstanding shares of Ashikaga Bank
                                                                                    from the DIC (July 2008)
Table2 : The DIC assisted mergers and loss-covers
Fiscal year                       Financial                             DIC (billion yen)
            Number of failed
(ending on                       assistance
              institutions                                                                         Reserves at the
March 31)                       (million yen)    Gross revenue   Expenditures      Net revenues
                                                                                                  end of fiscal year
   1992             2                 20,000        94,411         20,169             74,241          770,626

   1993             2                 45,900        96,081         46,137             49,944          820,570

   1994             2                 42,500        98,140         42,680             55,459          876,030

   1995             3                600,800       111,581         601,033           -489,452         386,578

   1996             6                1,316,000     532,743        1,314,428          -781,684         -395,106

   1997             7                152,400       464,317         163,228           301,089          -94,017

   1998            30                2,674,100    1,675,820       2,769,430         -1,093,610       -1,187,627

   1999            20                4,637,400    4,216,932       4,926,059          -709,127        -1,896,755

   2000            20                5,155,800    4,204,983       5,453,792         -1,248,809       -3,145,565

   2001            37                1,641,500    1,288,209       1,940,875          -652,666        -3,798,231

   2002            51                2,324,400    2,502,074       2,710,347          -208,273        -4,006,504

   2003             0                   0          742,728         230,070           512,657         -3,493,847

   2004             0                   0          656,581         139,783           516,798         -2,977,048

   2005             0                   0          740,157         218,034           522,122         -2,454,926

   2006             0                   0
Source: Annual reports of the DIC.
Table 3 The DD before Failures
The DD                  6 months 5 months 4 months 3 months 2 months 1 month Failure
Hokkaido Takushoku Bank     -2.27   -2.12    -2.35    -2.59    -2.83    -2.62    -3.29
LTCB                         0.44    0.20    -1.88    -2.34    -2.10    -3.29    -5.01
NCB                          1.21    1.10     1.35     1.69     1.88     2.54     2.38
Hyogo Bank                  -0.97   -0.01    -0.05    -0.17    -1.23     0.72     0.21
Taiheiyo Bank                1.22    0.49     0.77     0.82     0.68     0.72    -1.00
Hanwa Bank                  -0.22   -0.53    -0.78    -0.96    -0.89    -1.45    -1.99
Tokyo Sowa Bank              0.67    0.47     0.32     0.70     1.90     1.98    -0.68
Ashikaga Bank                2.04    3.32     2.35     2.27     2.43     1.15    -1.23
Average                      0.24    0.36    -0.03    -0.07    -0.02    -0.03    -1.33

Table 4 The DD Spread before Failures
The DD Spread           6 months 5 months 4 months 3 months 2 months 1 month Failure
Hokkaido Takushoku Bank     -3.28     -3.30  -3.71    -3.36    -3.34    -2.86    -3.35
LTCB                        -0.29     -0.45  -2.35    -2.78    -2.56    -3.83    -5.70
NCB                          0.73      0.57   0.95     1.09     1.49     1.64     1.15
Hyogo Bank                  -2.31     -1.88  -1.97    -2.03    -2.75    -1.36    -2.40
Taiheiyo Bank               -1.57     -2.05  -2.14    -2.27    -2.42    -2.39    -4.76
Hanwa Bank                  -3.98     -4.72  -4.57    -4.66    -4.51    -4.29    -4.93
Tokyo Sowa Bank             -0.55     -0.42  -0.51    -0.47    -0.28    -0.33    -2.80
Ashikaga Bank                0.48      1.64   0.89     0.84     0.73    -1.11    -3.45
Average                     -1.40     -1.37  -1.69    -1.72    -1.70    -2.01    -3.28
                  -8
                       -6
                                 -2


                            -4
                                      0
                                          2
                                              4
                                                  6
                                                      8




            -10
1986/3/31

1986/10/1

 1987/4/1

1987/10/1

 1988/4/1

1988/10/1

 1989/4/1

1989/10/1

 1990/4/1

1990/10/1

 1991/4/1

1991/10/1
                                                      Benchmark




 1992/4/1

1992/10/1

 1993/4/1
                                                                                                 Hokkaido Takushoku Bank




1993/10/1

 1994/4/1
                                                      Hokkaido Takushoku Bank minus




1994/10/1

 1995/4/1

1995/10/1

 1996/4/1
                                                                                                                           Figure 1 Hokkaido Takushoku Bank DD from 1986 to 1998




1996/10/1

 1997/4/1

1997/10/1
                                                                        News on Failure: Transfer of
                                                                        Business (November 17, 1997)




 1998/4/1
                                      0
                                          2
                                              4
                                                  6
                                                      8




            -10
                  -8
                       -6
                            -4
                                 -2
1986/3/31

1986/10/1

 1987/4/1

1987/10/1

 1988/4/1

1988/10/1

 1989/4/1

1989/10/1

 1990/4/1

1990/10/1

 1991/4/1
                                                          LTCB




1991/10/1

 1992/4/1

1992/10/1

 1993/4/1

1993/10/1
                                                                                 Figure 2 LTCB DD from 1986 to 1998




 1994/4/1
                                                          LTCB minus Benchmark




1994/10/1

 1995/4/1

1995/10/1
                                                          1998)




 1996/4/1

1996/10/1

 1997/4/1

1997/10/1
                                                          News on Failure: Temporal




 1998/4/1
                                                          Nationalization (October 23,




1998/10/1
                  -8
                       -6
                            -4
                                 -2
                                      0
                                          2
                                              4
                                                  6
                                                      8




            -10
1986/3/31

1986/10/1

 1987/4/1

1987/10/1

 1988/4/1

1988/10/1

 1989/4/1

1989/10/1

 1990/4/1

1990/10/1

 1991/4/1
                                                          NCB




1991/10/1

 1992/4/1

1992/10/1

 1993/4/1

1993/10/1
                                                                                            Figure 3 NCB DD from 1986 to 1998




 1994/4/1

1994/10/1
                                                          NCB minus Benchmark




 1995/4/1

1995/10/1

 1996/4/1

1996/10/1
                                                                                14, 1998)




 1997/4/1

1997/10/1

 1998/4/1

1998/10/1
                                                                                Nationalization (December
                                                                                News on Failure: Temporal
                  -8
                       -6
                            -4
                                 -2
                                      0
                                          2
                                              4
                                                  6
                                                      8




            -10
1986/3/31

1986/10/1

1987/4/1

1987/10/1

1988/4/1

1988/10/1

1989/4/1

1989/10/1

1990/4/1

1990/10/1

1991/4/1
                                                      Benchmark
                                                                                      Hyogo Bank




1991/10/1
                                                      Hyogo Bank minus




1992/4/1

1992/10/1

1993/4/1
                                                                                                   Figure 4 Hyogo Bank DD from 1986 to 1996




1993/10/1

1994/4/1
                                                                   (August 31, 1995)




1994/10/1

1995/4/1
                                                                   News on Failure: Liquidation




1995/10/1
                                      0
                                          2
                                              4
                                                  6
                                                      8




            -10
                  -8
                       -6
                            -4
                                 -2
1986/3/31

1986/10/1

1987/4/1

1987/10/1

1988/4/1

1988/10/1

1989/4/1

1989/10/1

1990/4/1

1990/10/1

1991/4/1
                                                                 Taiheiyo Bank




1991/10/1

1992/4/1

1992/10/1
                                                                 Taiheiyo Bank minus Benchmark




1993/4/1

1993/10/1
                                                          Figure 5 Taiheiyo Bank DD from 1986 to 1996




1994/4/1

1994/10/1
                                                                                                   (March 30, 1996)




1995/4/1

1995/10/1

1996/4/1
                                                                                                   News on Failure: Liquidation
                                                                     Figure 6 Hanwa Bank DD from 1990 to 1997
                                                                                      Hanwa Bank
                                                                                                                              News on Failure: Suspension of
                                                                                      Hanwa Bank minus                        Business (November 21, 1996)
                                                                                      Benchmark
  8


  6


  4


  2


  0


 -2


 -4


 -6


 -8


-10
      1990/11/30




                               1991/11/30




                                                        1992/11/30




                                                                                        1993/11/30




                                                                                                                 1994/11/30




                                                                                                                                           1995/11/30




                                                                                                                                                                    1996/11/30
                   1991/5/30




                                            1992/5/30




                                                                          1993/5/30




                                                                                                     1994/5/30




                                                                                                                               1995/5/30




                                                                                                                                                        1996/5/30
                                      0
                                          2
                                              4
                                                  6
                                                      8




            -10
                  -8
                       -6
                            -4
                                 -2
1986/3/31

1986/10/1

1987/4/1

1987/10/1

1988/4/1

1988/10/1

1989/4/1

1989/10/1

1990/4/1

1990/10/1

1991/4/1

1991/10/1

1992/4/1

1992/10/1
                                                                Tokyo Sowa Bank




1993/4/1

1993/10/1

1994/4/1

1994/10/1
                                                                Tokyo Sowa Bank minus Benchmark




1995/4/1

1995/10/1

1996/4/1
                                                          Figure 7 Tokyo Sowa Bank DD from 1986 to 1999




1996/10/1
                                                                                                      1999)




1997/4/1

1997/10/1

1998/4/1

1998/10/1
                                                                                                      News on Failure: Filing for




1999/4/1
                                                                                                      Protection under DIL (June 12,
                                      0
                                          2
                                              4
                                                      8


                                                  6




            -10
                  -8
                       -6
                            -4
                                 -2
1986/3/31
1986/10/1
1987/4/1
1987/10/1
1988/4/1
1988/10/1
1989/4/1
1989/10/1
1990/4/1
1990/10/1
1991/4/1
1991/10/1
1992/4/1
1992/10/1
1993/4/1
1993/10/1
1994/4/1
1994/10/1
                                                                                         Ashikaga Bank




1995/4/1
1995/10/1
1996/4/1
1996/10/1
1997/4/1
                                                          Ashikaga Bank minus Benchmark




1997/10/1
1998/4/1
1998/10/1
                                                                                   Figure 8 Ashikaga Bank DD from 1986 to 2004




1999/4/1
1999/10/1
2000/4/1
2000/10/1
2001/4/1
2001/10/1
2002/4/1
                                                                                                                        News on Failure: Temporal




2002/10/1
2003/4/1
2003/10/1
                                                                                                                        Nationalization (November 29, 2003)
Appendix A: Two Methodologies of Calculating the DD
The definition of the DD is

                                      æV     ö æ
                                             ÷÷ + ç m A - s A2 ö÷T
                                                         1
                                  logçç t
                            DDt =     è Lt    ø è        2 ø
                                                sA T

     There are two methodologies to calculate the DD. Vassalou and Xing (2004),
Duffie et al. (2007), Harada and Ito (2008) and this paper calculate the market value of
assets at time t, Vt,, using previous year’s balance sheet data. That is, one year’s
information of the previous year is needed in order to calculate μA andσA, which are
the mean growth rate of Vt and the standard deviation of m A respectively. Meanwhile,
Gropp et al. (2006) and Nakashima and Soma (2008) use the risk free rate instead of
calculating μA. ForσA, they use the following equation:

                                            æV     ö
                                     s E = çç t    ÷÷F(d1 )s A ,
                                            è Et    ø

where Et is the market value of equity capital (stock price times the number of shares
outstanding) andσE is its volatility. This calculation requires less historical data rather
than the other methodology. As an example, Nakashima and Soma (2008) use stock
price for 20 days prior to time t.
      Calculating the DD with our methodology is time consuming however we believe
it is better in terms of credibility. However, different types of the DDs and the DD
spreads are presented below for comparison. The example bank shown here is Hokkaido
Takushoku Bank. In the figure, “Standard” means the DD by the methodology used in
Vassalou and Xing (2004), Duffie et al. (2007), Harada and Ito (2008) and this paper.
“Gropp et al.” means the DD by the second methodology which is calculating σE
from previous year’s Et . In addition, “Compromise” is the DD using the risk free rate
instead ofμA as the second methodology, “Gropp et al.” does, but calculatingσA by
the same way with “Standard”.
      The DDs in the figure move in the same direction to a large degree. This means
that the usefulness of the DDs and the DD spreads do not improve significantly when
the new methods are used (see Tables 3 and 4). However, our methodology evaluates
the bank with strongest standard as the DD fell below zero in 1990 and in the middle of
1990s. The DD was negative for about a year ago before the bank bankrupted. While,
the other DDs were rather stable. Using “Gropp et al.”, we are not able to anticipate the
bankruptcy in the case of Hokkaido Takushoku Bank.
                                 0
                                     2
                                         4
                                             6




             -8
                  -6
                       -4
                            -2
1986/03/31

1986/09/30

1987/03/31

1987/09/30

1988/03/31

1988/09/30

1989/03/31

1989/09/30

1990/03/31

1990/09/30

1991/03/31
                                                 Standard




1991/09/30

1992/03/31

1992/09/30
                                                 Gropp et al.




1993/03/31

1993/09/30

1994/03/31
                                                 Compromise




1994/09/30
                                                                Appendix A Figure 1: the DDs of Hokkaido Takushoku Bank




1995/03/31

1995/09/30

1996/03/31

1996/09/30

1997/03/31

1997/09/30

1998/03/31
                                                0
                                                    1
                                                        2




             -7
                  -6
                       -5
                            -4
                                 -3
                                      -2
                                           -1
1986/03/31

1986/09/30

1987/03/31

1987/09/30

1988/03/31

1988/09/30

1989/03/31

1989/09/30

1990/03/31

1990/09/30

1991/03/31
                                                            Standard




1991/09/30

1992/03/31

1992/09/30
                                                            Gropp et al.




1993/03/31

1993/09/30

1994/03/31
                                                            Compromise




1994/09/30

1995/03/31
                                                                           Appendix A Figure 2: DD spreads of Hokkaido Takushoku Bank




1995/09/30

1996/03/31

1996/09/30

1997/03/31

1997/09/30

1998/03/31
Appendix Table1: Short term and long term liablity of banks

Short term liability                                         Long term liability
Deposits                                                     Debentures
Negotiable certificates of deposit                           Straight bonds
Call money                                                   Convertible bonds
Payables under repurchase agreements                         Due to trust accounts
Payables under securities lending transactions               Reserve for employee retirement benefit
Bills sold
Commercial papers
Trading liabilities
Borrowed money
Foreign exchanges
Short-term corporate bonds
Other liabilities
Reserve for employeeｓ' bonus
Reserve for directors' bonus
Other reserves
Reserves under special laws
Deferred tax liabilities
Deferred tax liabilities for land revaluation
Acceptances and guarantees

Note1: Deposits include Current deposits, Ordinary deposits, Savings deposits, Deposits at notice, Time deposits
and Installment savings.
Note2: Trading liabilities include Trading securities sold for short sales, Derivatives of trading securities, Securities
related to trading transactions sold for short sales, Derivatives of securities related to trading transactions and
Trading-related financial derivatives.
Appendix Table 2 Major Events
Hokkaido Takushoku Bank
April 1, 1997              Merger with Hokkaido Bank announced
September 6, 1997          Announcement revoked
October 1, 1997            Capital adequacy ratio as of September 1997 lowered
November 17, 1997          Bankrupt. Business transferred to Hokuyo Bank
November 18, 1997          Transfer to a special section, “the post for stocks under special
                           supervision”
May 27, 1998               Transfer to a special section, “the temporary post for stocks to be
                           delisted”
August 27, 1998            Removal from the Tokyo Stock Exchange


Long-term Credit Bank of Japan (LTCB)
June 26, 1998              Merger with Sumitomo Trust Bank announced.
August 25, 1998            Results of a self-assessment disclosed.
October 8, 1998            Merger negotiations with Sumitomo Trust Bank put on hold
October 23, 1998           Found to be insolvent and nationalized.
October 23, 1998           Announcement of removal from Tokyo Stock Exchange on
                           October 24, 1998 determined


Nippon Credit Bank (NCB)
October 20, 1998           Double disposal of non-performing claims announced
November 24, 1998          Estimated negative net worth for fiscal year ending March 1999
November 25, 1998          Bank’s NPL ratio increased to 37%
December 1, 1998           Approach Chuo Trust Bank with a merger talk
December 9, 1998           Merger with Sumitomo Trust bank abandoned
December 12, 1998          Temporally nationalization due to Insolvency
December 14, 1998          Announcement of and immediate removal from Tokyo Stock
                           Exchange


Hyogo Bank
April 10, 1995             Current account deficit for fiscal year ending March 1995
May 30, 1995               Unrealized capital losses revealed for fiscal year ending March
                           1995
August 31, 1995            Ministry of Finance announced failure. Transfer to a special
                     section, “the post for stocks under special supervision”
January 29, 1996     Operations absorbed by Midori Bank, newly set up bank for
                     Hyogo Bank


Taiheiyo Bank
March 30, 1996       Liquidation of Taiheiyo bank announced
March 31, 1996       Transfer to a special section, “the post for stocks under special
                     supervision”
September 31, 1996   Operations absorbed by Wakashio Bank, newly set up bank for
                     Taiheiyo Bank by Sakura Bank (Mitsui Sumitomo Bank)


Hanwa Bank
April 4, 1996        Earning estimate of fiscal year ending March 1996 lowered,
                     outstanding amount of non-performing loans announced
November 6, 1996     Earning estimate of fiscal year ending September 1996 lowered to
                     overall deficit
November 21, 1996    Ordered to suspend business, except for repayment of deposits
November 22, 1996    Announcement of removal from Osaka Stock Exchange on
                     February 22, 1997


Tokyo Sowa Bank
May 14, 1999         Confirmed as undercapitalized bank.
May 29, 1999         Bank’s risk adjusted capital fell to 2.42%
June 1, 1999         Prompt corrective actions taken
June 12, 1999        Filed for protection under Deposit Insurance Law
June 13, 1999        Announcement of removal from Tokyo Stock Exchange on
                     September 13, 1999


Ashikaga Bank
April 29, 2003       Estimated negative net worth for fiscal year ending March 2003.
                     The Bank’s risk adjusted capital fell lower than 5%
May 30, 2003         Negative net worth for fiscal year ending March 2003 reported.
                     The bank’s risk adjusted capital fell lower than 4.6%
November 14, 2003    Public capital injection planned
November 29, 2003    Found to be insolvent and nationalized
Appendix Table 3 Data Summary
Name of
                DD period              Stock price                Financial statement
bank
Hokkaido
                March 31, 1986 to      April 1, 1985 to August
Takushoku                                                         March 1985 to March 1998
                August 26, 1998        26, 1998
Bank
                March 31, 1986 to      April 1, 1985 to October   March 1985 to March
LTCB
                October 23, 1998       23, 1998                   1998*
                March 31, 1986 to      April 1, 1985 to           March 1985 to March
NCB
                December 11, 1998      December 11, 1998          1998*
Hyogo           March 31, 1986 to      April 1, 1985 to January
                                                                  March 1985 to March 1996
Bank            January 26, 1996       26, 1996
Taiheiyo        March 31, 1986 to      April 1, 1985 to
                                                                  March 1985 to March 1996
Bank            September 13, 1996     September 13, 1996
Hanwa           November 30, 1990 to   December 1, 1989 to
                                                                  March 1985 to March 1997
Bank            February 21, 1997      February 21, 1997
Tokyo           March 31, 1986 to      April 1, 1985 to
                                                                  March 1985 to March 1999
Sowa Bank September 10, 1999           September 10, 1999
Ashikaga        March 31, 1986 to      April 1, 1985 to January   March 1985 to March
Bank            January 23, 2004       23, 2004**                 2003***


*The data in March 1998 is used for March 1999.
**April 1, 1985 to March 4, 2003 (Ashikaga Bank) and March 11, 2003 to January 23, 2004
(Ashigin FG).
***The consolidated data of Ashigin FG in March 2003 is used for March 2004.
