                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ARE CONSUMERS AFFECTED BY DURABLE GOODS MAKERS' FINANCIAL
              DISTRESS? THE CASE OF AUTO MANUFACTURERS

                                             Ali Hortaçsu
                                            Gregor Matvos
                                            Chad Syverson
                                        Sriram Venkataraman

                                        Working Paper 16197
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16197


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2010




We thank Judith Chevalier, Alessandro Gavazza and the participants of the Chicago Booth finance
seminar and the NBER Industrial Organization and Corporate Finance meetings for comments and
feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Ali Hortaçsu, Gregor Matvos, Chad Syverson, and Sriram Venkataraman. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Consumers Affected by Durable Goods Makers’ Financial Distress? The Case of Auto
Manufacturers
Ali Hortaçsu, Gregor Matvos, Chad Syverson, and Sriram Venkataraman
NBER Working Paper No. 16197
July 2010
JEL No. D4,G3,L1,L6

                                                 ABSTRACT

The financial decisions of durable goods makers can impose spillovers on their consumers. Namely,
durable goods provide a consumption stream that frequently depends on services provided by the manufacturer
(e.g., warranties, parts, and maintenance). Manufacturer bankruptcy, or even the possibility thereof,
threatens this service provision and can substantially reduce the value of its products to their current
owners. We test this hypothesis in one of the largest durable goods markets, automobiles, using data
on millions of used cars sold at wholesale auctions around the U.S. during 2006-8. We find that an
increase in an auto manufacturer’s financial distress results in a contemporaneous drop in the prices
of its cars at auction, controlling for a host of other influences on price. The estimated effects are statistically
and economically significant. Furthermore, cars with longer expected service lives (those within manufacturer
warranty, having lower mileage, or in better condition) see larger price declines than those with shorter
remaining lives. These patterns do not seem to be driven solely by reduced demand from auto dealers
affiliated with the troubled manufacturers or by contemporaneous declines in new car prices. Our estimates
imply a potentially large indirect cost of financial distress on car manufacturers.


Ali Hortaçsu                                             Chad Syverson
Department of Economics                                  University of Chicago
University of Chicago                                    Booth School of Business
1126 East 59th Street                                    5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637                                        Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                                 and NBER
hortacsu@uchicago.edu                                    chad.syverson@chicagobooth.edu

Gregor Matvos                                            Sriram Venkataraman
University of Chicago                                    Goizueta Business School
Booth School of Business                                 1300 Clifton Road NE
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                               Atlanta, Georgia 30322 USA
Chicago, IL 60637                                        Sriram_Venkataraman@bus.emory.edu
Gregor.Matvos@chicagobooth.edu
1. Introduction
    Firms’ financial decisions have potential spillovers on consumers of durable goods. The
consumption stream that durable goods provide frequently depends on product warranties, the
availability of spare parts, maintenance and upgrades. For example, a car owner relies on
warranties to cover malfunctions early in the car’s life, on car parts to be available when the car
breaks down, and on the presence of a dealer who can service the car.
    As is the case in the car industry, the provision of these and similar services is frequently
vertically integrated into the manufacturer. 1 If a car manufacturer were to go bankrupt, they may
not honor the warranties or provide parts and services in the future, reducing the consumption of
the durable goods owner. 2 In fact, the mere expectation of probable bankruptcy may reduce the
expected value of durable goods to a forward-looking consumer. Therefore, as firms experience
financial distress they impose potentially large spillovers on those who own their goods.
    Even though these spillovers are potentially important and large, we have little empirical
evidence on the relationship between firms’ financial distress and the value of durable goods. It
is important to understand this relationship because durable goods represent a significant fraction
of household wealth. Automobiles, the subject of our study, account for about 5 percent of
consumption in the US and are the nonfinancial asset most commonly held by households. They
represented roughly 3 percent of US household wealth in 2007 (Bucks et al. (2009)). Any
variation in the value of these assets can expose households to wealth and consumption shocks.
    Knowing how firms’ financial distress affects owners of durable goods is also critical to
understanding firms’ financial decisions. Forward-looking consumers understand that financial
distress decreases the probability that future warranties will be honored and parts and services for
their car will be available. This reduces demand for the cars of troubled manufacturers. In a
2006 survey, 23 percent of consumers who avoided the “Big 3” (more recently referred to as the
1
  Provision of car warranties is generally vertically integrated into the manufacturer, who bundles the warranty with
the car. Vertical integration may be natural in this case; it solves the asymmetric information problem present
because car manufacturers are best informed about likely future claims on the cars they make. Furthermore, it
effectively makes manufacturers the residual claimants on the effort expended toward increasing car durability.
2
  In bankruptcy, warranties are general unsecured claims, in priority after secured claims and other priority claims.
An example of this was seen in the marine engine industry with the Chapter 11 bankruptcy of former industry
stalwart Outboard Marine Corp. in 2000. According to an article on the case
(http://my.boatus.com/consumer/OMCBankruptcy.asp), the federal trustee assigned to the case said she had “never
seen funds set aside in other bankruptcy cases for possible warranty claims in the future” and that while consumers
with currently outstanding warranty claims would be able to file proof of claim forms with the court, even they
would probably not be paid in full. Further, the article notes that companies that buy assets sold in bankruptcy
auctions are not legally obligated to assume warranty liability for products made by the predecessor company.

                                                          1
“Detroit 3”) brands listed those companies’ financial conditions as a reason for avoidance (J.D.
Power (2006)). Because of these indirect costs of financial distress, firms may curb the amount
of debt used in financing despite the large tax advantages of debt financing. 3
    While the literature since Titman (1984) frequently appeals to indirect costs of financial
distress to explain why firms use little debt, there is little direct evidence of such indirect costs in
general or in durable goods demand in particular (Hotchkiss et al. (2008)). Measuring the effects
of financial distress on the demand for goods is empirically challenging because causality can
also operate in the opposite direction: negative demand shocks affect firms’ cash flows and
therefore can induce financial distress. This generic problem has plagued the literature on the
effects of financial distress and indirect costs of bankruptcy, whether these indirect cost are from
the consumer, supplier, or employee side. 4
    Our study, besides focusing on an inherently interesting set of products and firms, can avoid
many of these identification issues. We study the impact of financial distress on the prices of
used cars in car auctions conducted by a major car auction house in the United States from
January 1, 2006 to November 14, 2008. We compare shifts in the prices of a manufacturer’s cars
to a measure of that manufacturer’s likelihood of bankruptcy. As we discuss below, we believe
our data is rich enough to provide sources of identification of the links between cars’ values and
their manufacturers’ financial distress that are unlikely to be driven by reverse causation, where
price drops lead to distress rather than vice versa.
    Looking for such effects in used car auctions holds several advantages over new car markets.
Wholesale car markets are very liquid; prices can rapidly adjust to changes in the economic
environment. Their participants are knowledgeable about the product and the final demand
environment. Their decentralized nature makes them less exposed to strategic pricing.
    To measure firms’ financial distress levels, we use credit default swaps (CDS) spreads.
These are securities whose payoff is conditional on the firm defaulting on its debt, so their price


3
 See Titman (1984) for an early discussion of indirect cost of financial distress. Graham (2000) explores the size of
debt’s tax benefits.
4
 Despite the lack of evidence, the U.S. Treasury Department certainly believed such indirect cost of financial
distress have a large impact on car manufacturers, and through warranties in particular. On March 30, 2009, they
announced the Warranty Commitment Program, which guaranteed warranties of new General Motors and Chrysler
cars were the manufacturers to go bankrupt. They started the program to “help provide much needed certainty to
consumers, and a boost to the auto industry, during the restructuring period.” We evaluate this assertion in this
paper.

                                                          2
reflects the expected probability that a firm enters bankruptcy. Because they are much more
liquid than the bonds of the respective companies, they provide the most current measure of
companies’ financial distress.
   We use several sources of variation to address the identification issues plaguing efforts to
measure the effect of financial distress on product demand. Our core specification estimates the
car price-CDS spread relationship using variation within detailed model-by-region-by-week
categories. For instance, we compare the price difference between a 2005 Ford Focus ST sold at
an Atlanta auction on Monday and a 2005 Ford Focus ST sold in Ft. Lauderdale later that same
week to the change in Ford’s CDS spread during the intervening days. Using high-frequency
variation makes it less likely that shifts in consumers’ views of a particular manufacturer, which
presumably operate at a lower frequency, create simultaneous price shifts and financial distress.
That said, we observe the negative correlation between a manufacturer’s CDS spread and its
used car prices at lower frequencies as well. Our basic specification indicates that a 1000-point
increase in a manufacturer’s CDS spread (a large change, but some firms experience even larger
ones in the data) drops the average price of its used cars by $68, or about 0.5 percent.
   A further testable prediction of our setting is that financial distress should not affect all cars
to the same degree. Cars with longer expected remaining service lives should expectedly see a
greater price drop when a manufacturer risks bankruptcy, as their flow of lost services would be
greater. Further, if car owners worry that their warranties will not be honored upon bankruptcy,
then the value of these warranties (capitalized into the price of the car) will fluctuate with
manufacturers’ financial distress. These effects will imply that value of cars that are still covered
under manufacturer warranty or cars with lower mileage should be more affected by financial
distress. We find these patterns in the data. The interaction between a car’s mileage and its
manufacturer’s CDS spread is broadly negative, measured in several ways. We directly test for
warranty effects and find the CDS effect is significantly larger for cars in warranty.
   It is, of course, possible that changes in manufacturer CDS spreads could affect the supply of
used cars. In their analysis of a similar used car auction data set to identify how fluctuations in
gasoline prices are reflected in the prices and market shares of cars, Busse, Knittel, and
Zettelmeyer (2010) point out that both the demand and supply of used cars with different fuel
efficiencies may respond differentially to such shocks. Our specifications therefore include



                                                  3
controls supply-side movements. In particular, we show that the effect is not driven by
manufacturers’ fire sales of new cars or by the financial distress of the dealers.
      We use our estimates to approximate the effect that financial distress has on manufacturers
through a decrease in demand for new cars. Using GM as a example, we find the potential size
of the effect substantial: even the most conservative estimates yield an 11 percent drop in GM
car margins, or alternatively, a 7 percent drop in value of the General Motors North America
vehicles division for a 3000 CDS point increase relative to Ford, which is what we observe in the
data.


1.1 Related Literature
      Our paper touches on the previous literature in two distinct ways. First, it directly
contributes to the literature on firm capital structure and the indirect cost of financial distress.
Since Titman (1984), indirect cost have been used to rationalize the reluctance of firms to used
debt financing despite large tax benefits of debt. In their classic paper, Andrade and Kaplan
(1998) study thirty one leverage transactions to try to identify the impact of financial distress on
firm value. They estimate financial distress cost to be from 10 to 20 percent of firm value. Our
paper is closest to Chevalier (1995a, 1995b) and Chevalier and Scharfstein (1996). They also
use transaction-level data to study the interaction between financial distress and market
outcomes. Their focus is the relationship between supermarkets’ financial structures and the
pricing decisions in the industry, and in particular the strategic effects of financial distress on
entry and markups.
      Second, the paper delves into the nature of durable goods markets. Most of the literature on
these markets has focused on the interaction between the market for new and used goods, trying
to understand the competition a monopolist faces from used goods she sold in the past.5 Our
paper instead highlights the fact that much of the consumption stream from durable goods
depends on future commitments from the manufacturer and other providers of complementary
services. To understand the behavior of durable goods suppliers and consumers, we have to
understand the complex structure of services that accompany the consumption of durable goods.
      The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe the market for used cars and
how it is organized though wholesale auctions. We then describe the data we are using and
5
    See Coase (1972), Bulow (1982), and Stokey (1981) for early work on the Coase conjecture.

                                                          4
provide descriptive statistics. In Section 3 we discuss our empirical specification. Section 4
presents and discusses our estimates. In Section 5 we discuss the implications of our estimates
for the indirect cost of financial distress on the case of GM. Section 6 concludes.


2. Institutional Background and Data
       Each year, consumers in the United States buy close to 40 million used vehicles, three times
the number of new cars sold. In 2008, for example, there were 36.5 million used vehicle sales
(~$292 billion in revenues) and 13.2 million new vehicle sales (~$351 billion in revenues).
While a small fraction of the used vehicles are traded via private party transactions, the lion’s
share of the used car sales is transacted via the dealer networks. Of the 80,000 auto dealerships in
the U.S., nearly 60,000 sell only used cars, while the remaining dealers trade both new and old
cars.
       These dealers acquire the bulk of their used car inventory via weekly used car auctions
conducted at various locations. The auctions are typically wholesale buyers only—they exclude
the end consumer. 6 In general these transactions occur between purchasing dealers and other
firms that are car suppliers. Sellers include other dealers, auto manufacturers, rental car agencies
and corporate fleet resellers. Dealers often rely on such auctions to adjust their used car
portfolios to changing local market conditions. Manufacturers use these auctions sell fleet and
program cars. Car rental agencies use these auctions to trade-in their used cars before they get
out of factory warranty. Sellers may also be financial institutions who use the wholesale auction
to reduce their inventory of program and repossessed cars.
       The top five auctioneers cumulatively command approximately an 80 percent market share in
the US. While each auctioneer varies in terms of regional distribution and size of operations at
each location, physical auction sites managed by major auctioneers are quite large. Each can
have between 10 and 100 lanes where automobiles are wheeled through as auctions take place.
       Our wholesale auction data comes from a large multinational auctioneer. The firm is the
world’s largest provider of vehicle remarketing services and is one of the largest wholesale
automobile auctioneers in the US, operating eighty-three geographically dispersed auction sites.
We use data on over 6 million successfully completed transactions from January 1, 2006 through
November 14, 2008. The total value of these sales was about $89 billion, with an average
6
    Only licensed buyers and sellers who register with the auctioneer can participate in the auction.

                                                             5
transaction price of $13,000 per car. The auctioneer runs one or two auction sessions per week
at each site, each lasting approximately five hours. Our auctioneer’s sites are quite large (see
Figure 1a). Table 3 lists select sites and their respective traded volumes. They vary in size from
12 to 98 lanes and in their volume of successful transactions.
   On average about 3000 cars sell at each auction location in a given day. Buyers can inspect
the car the parking lot prior to the auction session. Each car is provided with a car condition
report issued by the auctioneer. This and other vehicle details are prominently displayed in the
windshield of each vehicle. Professional auctioneers lead the bidding process, often in the
presence of the seller representative (see Figure 1b). When bidding ends, the auctioneer consults
the seller’s representative or some previously communicated reservation price to determine
whether the winning bid is accepted or rejected. Sold or not, the car is then wheeled out and a
new vehicle is wheeled in. The entire process takes about thirty seconds per car. Sometimes
cars that aren’t sold are wheeled back in later in the day. Others are re-auctioned on a future date
or even transferred to another site. We observe in the data how many times a car was wheeled in
at any auction location before it is sold, as well as sequence in which it was wheeled in (i.e., its
run number).
   For buyers and sellers who cannot travel to the physical auction site, the firm also uses a
proprietary web-based technology that enables both sides of the market to participate in the live
physical auctions via real-time audio and video (Figure 1c). Physical auction lanes are equipped
with video cameras that allow online users to view the vehicle as it gets wheeled in, observe the
physical bidding activity and place their bids via the web. Online users’ bids are displayed on
the screen located in the physical lane. Large seller consignors like manufacturers and financial
institutions can also chose to sell their vehicles via an “upstream” channel that is operated and
managed by our market maker. This service gives sellers the ability to remarket their inventory
earlier in the remarketing cycle than physical auction lanes. Buyers save on time and travel
expenses with desktop access to “Bid or Buy Now” from the largest nationwide selection of
wholesale inventory available. Any unsold cars are moved to the physical auction site and sold
through the original process.
   In our data we know if the winning bid was placed by an online bidder or in-lane bidder or if
the car were purchased in the upstream channel. As can be seen in Table 3, approximately ninety
percent of the transacted cars were sold to in-lane bidders, eight percent via the upstream

                                                  6
channel, and the remaining to online bidders. Sometimes consignors restrict their sales to select
buyers only, referred to as “closed” sales. Closed marketplaces often serve to benefit a
manufacturer’s franchise dealer network. Unrestricted or open auctions attempt to allow for
maximum buyer participation. 75 percent of the transacted cars in our data were sold in
unrestricted auctions (Table 3).
    67 percent of the completed transactions are fleet/lease sales, 28 percent factory owned sales,
and five percent are dealer-to-dealer sales (Table 3). Each automobile is identified by
manufacturer issued unique vehicle information number (VIN). For each VIN we collected
information on a large set of vehicle characteristics including car make (Ford, Toyota, Honda,
etc.), model (Taurus, Explorer, Altima, etc.), body style (SUV V6, Midsize 4dr V6, 1500 Pickup
V12, etc.), and model year. Our data also include the odometer mileage reading and quality
condition of each vehicle as certified by the market maker. See Table 2 for details on the quality
rating scale.
    We obtain the daily time-series of credit default swap spreads with five year maturity (CDS)
from Thompson Financial DataStream for all publicly traded automobile manufacturers during
the corresponding time period as our auctions data. Figure 2 plots the CDS time series for four
manufacturers: General Motors, Ford, Honda and Toyota. The prices are in basis points, which
can be interpreted under risk neutrality as default probability. For example, a CDS of 1000 basis
points corresponds to 10 percent default probability.
    We then match the appropriate CDS series to the auction transaction data using the
manufacturer identities in the auction database. 7 The matching of CDS data and transactions
yields a matched database containing 6,188,759 auto sales. Table 4 contains the descriptive
statistics of select variables for our final matched data. The data reflect significant variation in
price (mean = $13,062, median = $12,300, and s.d. = $7560) and CDS (mean = 643.1 and s.d. =
856.1). The cars vary by mileage, age, and quality condition—from relatively pristine to useful
only for salvage. Table 5 describes the price and CDS variation by quality condition (with 0
being salvage ready and 5 being very good), while Table 6 contains descriptive statistics by



7
 This yields CDS series for the vast majority of brands in our data, including Acura, Audi, BMW, Buick, Cadillac,
Chevrolet, Chrysler, Daewoo, Dodge, Ford, Geo, GMC, Honda, Hummer, Hyundai, Infiniti, Isuzu, Jaguar, Jeep,
Land Rover, Lexus, Lincoln, Mazda, Mercedes Benz, Mercury, Mini, Mitsubishi, Nissan, Oldsmobile, Plymouth,
Pontiac, Porsche, Saab, Saturn, Scion, Suzuki, Toyota and Volkswagen.

                                                        7
mileage tiers. 8 As expected, transacted prices fall with quality and age. Note, however, that
significant variation exists in the cross-conditions of these two variables; there is significant
mileage variation within quality tiers and quality variation within mileage tiers.


3. Empirical Specification
    Our core specification to measure the effect of financial distress on used cars’ values is the
following:
                                    ‫݌‬௜௝௞௟௧ ൌ ߚ‫ܵܦܥ‬௜௧ ൅ ܺ௜௝௞௟௧ ߁ ൅ ܽ௜௝௞் ൅ ߝ௜௝௞௟௧ ,


where i indexes manufacturer; j indexes car model, trim, and model year (we will refer to any
unique combination of i and j as a “car type”); k indexes auction location (which in most
specifications will be one of eight regions in the US), l indexes the specific auction at which the
car is sold, t indexes day, and T indexes week. Our dependent variable is the transaction price of
the car at auction pijklt, though we will also estimate specifications below that use a normalized
price that divides the transaction price by the average sales price of the car type throughout the
entire sample. CDSit is the manufacturer credit default swap spread in period t, and β is the
coefficient of interest—the estimate of the effect of manufacturer CDS on the price of used cars.
The vector Xijklt contains other controls describing the car and auction characteristics. aijkT is a
car type-region-week fixed effect.
    The car-type-region-week fixed effects control for a great number of potentially confounding
influences on car prices that might be spuriously correlated with CDS spreads or reflect the
impact of reverse causation. This includes fundamental heterogeneity across car types, region-
specific demand and supply shocks for particular vehicles or types of vehicles, and aggregate
movements over time. Hence the specification estimates the relationship between car prices and
CDS changes only from changes in the auction prices of a given (detailed) type of car within a
given region and week.
    Intuitively, the regression compares within region-week price differences in cars of
manufacturers undergoing financial distress (reflected as an increase in their CDSit) with
contemporaneous price changes of cars sold in the same region that are made by more financially
8
  We use each car’s odometer reading to place it into one of twenty non-overlapping mileage bins. The bins divide
the sample into equal-sized parts and as such their breakpoints reflect the empirical mileage distribution. We use
these bins in some of the specifications below.

                                                         8
stable firms. (Of course, stability per se is not necessary for identification of β; all that is
required is differential changes in spreads across manufacturers.) The regression estimate of β
simply correlates the differential changes in models’ auction prices with the differential changes
in the respective manufacturers’ CDS spreads, controlling for any fixed or variable effects on
prices as captured in aijkT or Xijklt.
    Our choice to limit our identifying CDS price variation to within-week movements may in
some ways be overly restrictive, especially if the effects of changes in financial distress take
some time to diffuse into wholesale markets. However, restricting ourselves to high-frequency
variation in CDS spreads and prices increases the likelihood that we capture the causal impact
we seek to measure. It eliminates the possibility that lower-frequency shifts in consumers’ views
toward a particular manufacturer that both reduce the manufacturer’s used car prices and raise its
likelihood of bankruptcy are driving our results.
    We conduct several additional tests for distress-driven price effects. Each involves
specifications that interact the CDS effect with measures that plausibly reflect the extent to
which an owner could expect future flows of bundled services. That is, they have the following
canonical form:
    ‫݌‬௜௝௞௟௧ ൌ ߚ‫ܵܦܥ‬௜௧ ൅ γܼ௜௝௞௟௧ ൅ δ൫ܼ௜௝௞௟௧ ‫ܵܦܥ כ‬௜௧ ൯ ൅ ܺ௜௝௞௟௧ ߁ ൅ ܽ௜௝௞் ൅ ߝ௜௝௞௟௧ ,
where Zijklt is a car-specific measure of the expected future flows of services. If increased
financial distress decreases the expected availability of these services, financial distress should
have a larger effect on cars with greater remaining service lives. If service life is positively
correlated with Zijklt, then this would imply δ < 0.
        We use multiple measures for Zijklt. One is a set of indicators for 20 equal-sized mileage
quantiles. This allows us to flexibly capture the differential impact of financial distress across
cars of various mileage levels. Two measures focus on the provision of warranty services in
particular (we have gathered data on the coverage period of the cars’ original factory warranties).
One is an indicator for cars under warranty. This is equal to one if a car meets both its
warranty’s mileage and age requirements at the time of the auction (e.g., it has under 36,000
miles and is less than 3 years old) and zero otherwise. Specifications estimated using this
indicator reflect the average difference in CDS effects on prices for cars that are in and out of
warranty. Another warranty variable measures the fraction of the original warranty remains on
the car. This is computed as the minimum of two ratios: the difference between the warranty

                                                     9
mileage limit and the car’s current mileage, divided by the mileage limit; and the difference
between the warranty age limit and the car’s current age, divided by the age limit. Each of the
ratios is defined to be zero if the car’s current mileage (age) is greater than the warranty limit.
This specification imposes an effect of financial distress on prices that linearly changes as a car
gets closer to the expiration of its warranty. Still another measure of Zijklt that we use is the set of
indicators for the auction house’s condition rating for cars that were described in Table 2. Low
values for the rating indicate cars in poorer conditions, and as such those with shorter expected
service lives than other cars of the same make, model, trim level, and model year.
    Because our CDS measures do not vary across cars made by the same manufacturer and may
also be serially correlated, we cluster all standard errors reported below by manufacturer-month.
This allows an arbitrary error correlation structure across cars made by the same manufacturer as
well as intertemporally within months.


4. Results
    A first glance at the data suggests that there may in fact be a link between increases in a
manufacturer’s financial distress and the value of its used cars. The two panels of Figure 3
compare relative bankruptcy risks and wholesale prices of two manufacturers that experienced
considerable financial distress during our sample: Ford and GM. The top panel shows two time
series for Ford Motors, both constructed from our data. The solid line shows Ford’s CDS spread,
which we use to measure its financial distress. The dashed line is the price residual of all Ford
used cars sold at auction in our sample. 9 As is apparent in the figure, during 2008 in particular,
as Ford’s financial condition worsened, the values of its used cars dropped as well. There is also
some indication that as Ford’s relative financial condition was improving in late 2006, its
vehicles were also rising in relative value. The bottom panel repeats the exercise but replaces
Ford with GM, another manufacturer with obvious financial difficulties toward the end of the
sample. Again, we see the clear negative correlation in relative prices and financial strength in
2008, but the patterns are less clear prior to that year.


9
  We obtain cars’ price residuals from a regression that controls for a number of factors that are expectedly invariant
to financial conditions. We filter this series through a 12-week moving average in order to reduce statistical noise.
In order to remove common movements in price and CDS spreads across manufacturers over the sample, the plotted
series are actually the difference between Ford and Honda’s respective values. We chose Honda for no special
reason other than it was a reasonably financially stable company throughout the sample.

                                                          10
   These results are only expository—indeed, our core specifications below don’t even use the
aggregate, lower-frequency movements shown in the figure to identify the links between distress
and used car values—but they serve to motivate the possibility that such links exist.


4.1. Baseline Specification
   The patterns seen in Figure 3 suggest that there are negative correlations between
manufacturers’ CDS spreads and the values of their used cars. However, to try to eliminate as
many confounding factors as possible, we will focus below on our more saturated specification
that looks at differences within car type-region-week cells.
   The results from the first specification of this type are shown in Table 7, column 1. Not
surprisingly, given the extent of our included controls, our model does very well explaining the
substantial variation in car prices in our sample. The adjusted R2 is 0.986. The coefficient on
manufacturer CDS is -0.068, with a standard error of 0.021. The coefficient implies that a 1000
basis point increase in CDS spread leads to a drop in a car’s value of $68. That is roughly a 0.5
percent drop in value off the average $13,062 price of a used car in our sample.
   Note that besides the fixed effects, the specification controls for a number of other possibly
confounding factors in the data. We include a set of dummies for mileage bins to flexibly
capture the effect of mileage on prices. Not surprisingly, average prices decline in mileage. In
fact, prices monotonically decrease as one moves from low to high mileage bins. We include
dummies for the auction format the car was sold under (this does vary within a day at specific
auction locations) and the number of times the car was wheeled through the auction lane, which
could be a function of demand or supply factors affecting car price.
   One potential worry with our results is that car owners adjust the supply of cars in these
auctions when they are affected by the same shocks as the manufacturer. For instance, perhaps
rental car companies that have close ties with a particular manufacturer suffer financial shocks
that are correlated with those of the manufacturer and are forced to respond by liquidating
inventory. This would induce a negative correlation between CDS spreads and prices arising not
simply from the manufacturer’s financial distress but from supply effects as well. We control for
supply effects using two different measures. The first supply control is the number of cars of the
same model, trim, and model year being sold on that day in the particular auction location. The



                                                11
second measures how many cars of same model, trim, and model year had been sold up to this
point in the sample at the same location.
    The specification in column 1 of Table 7 uses the car’s auction price as a dependent variable.
This imposes that the effect of CDS movements has the same absolute size across all cars. Yet it
is possible that the absolute effect could be related to the price level of the car rather than
independent of it. To account for this possibility, we also run the same specification using as the
dependent variable the car’s auction price normalized by the average price of its car type (make,
model, trim, and model year) throughout the entire sample. In this case, the coefficient on CDS
can be interpreted as the size of the effect of financial distress in proportion to the average price
level of a car’s type.
    The results from this specification are shown in Table 7 column 2. Here, the coefficient on
manufacturer CDS is -6.07 x 10-6 (s.e. = 1.30 x 10-6). This implies that for each 1000 basis point
increase in CDS spreads, a car’s price falls by roughly 0.6 percent. This is essentially the same
as the implied percentage change in price from the previous specification using dollar-valued
prices. Thus our basic estimated effects are consistent across price measurements.


4.2. Interactions with Expected Service Lives
    An additional prediction of the financial distress/bundled services link is that the impact of
financial distress should vary across cars with different remaining service lives. For example,
cars with lower mileage have warranties, and within cars with warranties, have more coverage
remaining. They also have longer expected service lives even outside of warranty, so the value
of bundled services that their manufacturer provides is also greater. This would suggest that
owners of cars with lower mileage should be more exposed to the fluctuations in manufacturers’
financial distress.
    As discussed previously, we test for these service life effects in several ways. One is to
include interact manufacturer CDS spreads with our set of twenty mileage quantile indicators.
Table 7, column 3 shows the results of this exercise. We also present the implied relationship
between the effect of CDS and car mileage graphically in Figure 4. We can see that, with the
exception of the first mileage bin (the excluded category and thus reflected in the main CDS
coefficient), the estimated total effects of the interactions are significantly negative for the lowest
14 mileage bins (this corresponds to cars with no more than 50,035 miles). The point estimates

                                                  12
initially become more negative (i.e., larger in magnitude) as mileage increases, but after reaching
an interacted effect of -0.154 in the 8th bin (impling a $154 dollar price drop for a 1000-point rise
in CDS spreads; cars in this bin have 25,766 miles on average), they begin to become more
positive. They continue to rise throughout the rest of the mileage bins, and actually become
significantly positive by the 17th bin and remain so after.
    These results are echoed when we use normalized prices instead of price levels, as seen in
Table 7, column 4. There are negative and significant impacts of CDS on cars in the first 15
mileage bins (applying a test for the base effect plus interaction coefficients, the 2nd and 3rd bins
are only significant at the 10 percent level). The largest price impact is seen for the 9th bin, as in
the price levels specification, after which the interaction becomes more positive. Also in line
with the results above, the maximum estimated impact is a one percent price drop per 1000 point
CDS increase; the estimated $154 effect from the levels specification is about 1.2 percent of the
average price in the sample. Further, as above, cars in the highest mileage bin see significant
price gains when their manufacturer’s CDS rise.
    We obtain perhaps the most convincing results by focusing on the role of warranties in two
specifications. In one, we define an indicator variable denoting if a car is still under original
factory warranty. To be defined as such, it must meet both the mileage and age requirements of
the warranty. We then test whether the price effects of CDS increases are in fact larger in
magnitude (i.e., more negative) for cars under warranty than those out of warranty. In the second
warranty check, we compute the fraction of the warranty remaining for a car. (The minimum
fraction between the mileage and age limits is used; cars out of warranty receive a value of zero.)
We interact this variable with CDS to see if cars with different degrees of remaining warranties
see different price effects.
    The results using the dichotomous in-warranty indicator are in Table 8, column 1. The main
effect of CDS, and therefore the average impact for cars that are out of warranty, has a
coefficient of -0.006 (s.e. = 0.025). Thus the specification implies a negative but insignificant
impact on these cars’ prices. The interaction, however, has a negative and significant coefficient.
The full implied effect of CDS has a coefficient of -0.062 (s.e. = 0.020). This is roughly the size
of the main effect estimated above. This is consistent with the threat of the loss of warranty
coverage being an important driver of the CDS price effect.



                                                  13
       The second warranty specification, which interacts a measure of the fraction of the factory
warranty that remains on the car with the CDS spread, is in Table 8 column 2. The estimated
coefficient on the CDS main effect again represents the average impact for cars that are out of
warranty and is a statistically insignificant -0.010. The coefficient on the interaction of CDS and
the fraction of warranty remaining, however, is -0.129, and is significant at the 10 percent level.
The fully interacted effect of CDS is -0.139 (s.e. = 0.05), and this is significant at the 1 percent
level. This result implies that a car with its full factory warranty remaining (i.e., its fraction is
one) would see a price hit of $139 per 1000 point CDS change, and this then linearly declines
until the warranty expires at an insignificant $10 per 1000 point change. This result therefore
has the intuitive property that the effect of CDS on prices falls the shorter is the remaining period
over which the warranty applies and during which the car will be operational.
       If we linearly extrapolate our warranty estimates for a 10,000 point change in CDS spread,
that is, from no chance of bankruptcy to certain bankruptcy, we obtain an approximate valuation
of a full warranty in the used car market of $1390. 10 It is useful to compare this value to the
accounting accruals of warranties in the auto industry, which are between $400 to $2015 per
vehicle. 11 While these accruals reflect the approximate cost to the manufacturer, and do not take
into account the margins charged on the warranties, nor the consumer surplus from the insurance
value of warranties, the fact that they are the same order of magnitude suggest our estimates are
sensible, even when crudely extrapolated.
       We also interact CDS with a measure of the car’s physical quality. As mentioned above, the
auction house grades cars’ conditions on a six-point scale, ranging from 0 (useful for salvage
only) to 5 (no or minor defects). This specification tests whether financial distress has different
impacts across cars of varying quality by interacting our CDS spread measures with both the
car’s condition score and its mileage band. The results are presented in Table 8, Column 3. The
main CDS effect, which corresponds to the impact on cars in condition category 0 (salvage only)
is actually positive and significant. This is consistent with these cars, as a store of available
replacement parts, actually becoming more valuable when the manufacturer faces financial
distress. However, the size of the coefficient, 0.463, implies what is probably an implausibly
large point estimate of a $463 price gain when CDS spreads rise by 1000 basis points. Such cars

10
     This assumes no recovery on warranties in bankruptcy.
11
     http://www.warrantyweek.com/archive/ww20090723.html

                                                         14
represent less than 0.3 percent of the sample, however. Category 1 (poor condition) cars also
have a positive total effect of CDS, but this has a more modest (and realistic) coefficient of
0.121. The interactions between categories and CDS continue to fall monotonically as the car’s
condition improves, as would be expected if better condition cars have longer expected service
lives. Those in the best 3 condition categories (3, 4, and 5) all experience significantly negative
price effects when CDS rises, on the order of $56 to $78 price drops per 1000 point CDS
increase.
   The results from each of these alternative specifications are consistent with the notion that
the negative impact of a manufacturer’s financial distress is larger for cars with longer expected
remaining service lives, and therefore greater expected future flows of bundled services. There
seems to be a special role for warranty coverage in explaining these effects. We have also
conducted several robustness checks that we do not report in the paper. The interaction results
above are robust to excluding the data after September 15, 2008 (the Lehman Brothers
bankruptcy), including car type-auction location-week dummies instead of the car type-region-
week dummies, and estimating the specifications separately for SUV and non-SUV vehicles.
   These results also help address the alternative hypothesis that time-varying perceptions of a
manufacturer’s car quality drive both the manufacturer’s CDS spreads and car prices
simultaneously. For this alternative story to be true, these innovations in quality perceptions
would have to disproportionally affect lower mileage cars, and in particular cars that are under
their warranty thresholds. In other words, people’s perceptions of the quality of, say, a 2003
Ford Focus with 20,000 miles would have to change very frequently and be highly correlated
with Ford’s financial condition, while at the same time, there would be virtually no quality
updating for a 2003 Ford Focus with 90,000 miles.


4.3. Robustness Checks
   While it is difficult to imagine an omitted factor that would generate the results above, in
particular those regarding expected remaining service life (interactions with mileage, warranty
status, and quality), we present further tests to probe the robustness of our results.
   To see if, despite all of our controls, our results reflect a spurious correlation between a
manufacturer’s CDS spread and its used car prices, we conduct a “placebo”-type test. That is,
we run our basic specification after having randomly reassigned manufacturers’ CDS series

                                                  15
among one another. In particular, Ford and GM, which experienced CDS growth in 2008 far
beyond that of other companies, are assigned the CDS series of Mitsubishi and Toyota. Of
course, two more stable manufacturers, Hyundai and Mitsubishi, had, respectively, Ford and
GM’s CDS values reassigned to them. This placebo specification therefore compares the auction
prices of a manufacturer’s cars to the CDS prices of another manufacturer. Since reassignment
should expectedly destroy any causal link, the coefficient on CDS in this specification should be
informative.
   The results of this exercise (using the same set of controls as in Table 7 column 1) are shown
in Table 9. The coefficient on CDS is now positive and insignificant. Hence it appears that the
CDS-price correlations we observed above were tied to within-manufacturer relationships of
product values and financial distress.
   Our next robustness check investigates whether dealers’ (i.e., auto retailers’) financial
distress, not the preferences of final demanders for bundled services, actually drives the
relationship between used car prices and manufacturers’ CDS spreads. Namely, if dealers
become more concerned about their own business prospects when the manufacturer with whom
they are affiliated experiences financial distress, this may reduce their demand for used autos.
Moreover, since dealers disproportionately purchase used cars of the same makes that their
affiliated manufacturer producers, this could lead to a decline in the prices of that manufacturer’s
used cars. While one might imagine this is another way a manufacturer’s financial decisions can
have external effects, it is not the consumer-driven bundled-services channel that is of interest to
us here.
   To see whether this dealer based-mechanism is driving our results, we take advantage of the
fact that our data contains the full name of the winner of every auction. These are nearly always
car dealerships, as perusal of the names makes clear. Since dealerships that are affiliated with
manufacturers (i.e., those that sell new cars, not just used ones) almost invariantly have the name
of the make(s) that they sell new in their name, we can tell when, say, a Ford (or Mercury,
Lincoln, or Mazda—all makes that Ford owns partially or outright) dealer buys a used car. If the
dealer-based mechanism just described is driving our results, we should expect that Ford-
affiliated dealers are less likely to buy Ford cars when Ford’s CDS rises. We test whether or not




                                                 16
this is true for dealers affiliated with the two companies that experienced, by some distance, the
greatest amount of financial distress during our sample: Ford and GM. 12
     We do so by estimating a similar specification to our benchmark regression above, with a
few exceptions. First, most obviously, the dependent variable is now an indicator equal to one if
a Ford dealer (or a GM dealer, in the GM regression) buys the car. Second, we restrict the
sample to only cars with a Ford (GM) make. We keep the saturated fixed effect structure from
before. Therefore we are testing whether Ford-affiliated (GM-affiliated) dealers are less likely to
buy a used car with a Ford (GM) make when Ford’s (GM’s) CDSs are high, controlling for the
average probability across all sales of a particular car type in a region-week. If the dealer-based
mechanism is important, we should find a negative and significant coefficient on CDS in this
linear probability model.
     The results of this estimation are in Table 9, Columns 2 and 3. First off, the coefficient in the
GM equation is positive and significant: GM dealers are, if anything, more likely to buy GM-
make used cars when GM’s CDS rises. Any such effect is pretty small, however. The
coefficient implies a 1000-point increase in CDS raises the probability that a GM dealer wins an
auction for a GM car by 1.55 percentage points. In the entire sample, 31.6 percent of GM cars
are won by a GM-affiliated dealer (most of the rest are won by used-car specialists, though it is
not uncommon for new car dealers to purchase across makes when buying used). Thus even a
large CDS change doesn’t move the probability of purchase far from the baseline. The
coefficient in the Ford equation is negative, which is more consistent with a dealer-based
mechanism being at work. However, the estimate is marginally statistically significant and is
again small in magnitude. A 1000-point increase in Ford’s CDS reduces the probability that a
Ford-affiliated dealer wins an auction for a Ford-make used car by 1.79 percentage points. On
average, however, 38.1 percent of Ford cars are bought by Ford dealers. Thus the likelihood of
purchase drops only about 4 percent. It is difficult to know the implied price effect of this
reduction without knowing more about the supply of other bidders and their valuations, but this
does not seem to be a clear driver of our results above, particularly in light of the GM results.


12
   Chrysler was of course having serious troubles during much of our sample. However, they were sold to the
private equity firm Cerberus in early 2007, well before the financial crisis began and CDS spreads began to rise.
There were no Cerberus CDSs in the market, so we have no way to correlate the manufacturer of Chrysler’s
financial condition with the prices of its used cars. Thus we dropped all Chrysler cars from our sample from 2007
on.

                                                        17
    Our last robustness check addresses the possibility that the relationship between CDS and
used car prices is driven by “fire sale” pricing of new cars by car manufacturers. If
manufacturers drop prices precipitously as CDS increases, this could spill over into prices of
used cars as well. Since our identification comes from within week price variation, this effect is
unlikely, since the pricing of new cars would have to be responsive to high frequency variation
of CDS. We nevertheless test for this possibility by including the average retail new car price in
the region on the day of the sale as a control. The retail price in our new car sales data is
computed to reflect the rebates and incentives consumers obtain as well as taking into account
the trade in value of the used car. The results are presented in Table 10. The coefficient on new
car price is negative, but economically and statistically insignificant. More importantly, we
replicate our basic specification and our warranty specifications and find that the results are
quantitatively similar after including the new car price. The standard errors are higher and are
probably caused by the decreased sample size resulting from matching the used car transaction
sample with new car prices.


5. Discussion
    The results above indicate that auto owners do see a drop in the value of their vehicles when
those vehicles’ manufacturers are in financial distress. In this section, we do some simple
calculations to gauge what our estimates imply about the indirect costs of financial distress that
such effects impose back on the car manufacturers themselves. These profit effects act through
reduced sale prices for the manufacturers’ new cars, which are of course substitutes for the used
cars.
    To approximate the drop in demand for new cars from our used car estimates above, we
conservatively assume that the valuation hit taken by new cars is the same as the estimated drop
in the valuation of an (almost-new) used car under full warranty. (This essentially assumes away
any “drive off the lot” depreciation that might reduce the size of the effect on used cars.) The
estimated drop in valuation for a used car with a full factory warranty remaining is in column 2
of Table 8: every 1000 basis point increase in the manufacturer’s CDS spread leads to a $139
loss in value. For simplicity, and because it is a reasonable approximation to reality, we assume
that manufacturers’ short-run supply curves are inelastic, so this $139 drop in value is reflected
completely in reduced sales prices rather than fewer sales.

                                                 18
     Thus we estimate a car manufacturer can expect a reduction in margin per car of $139 per
1000 point increase in its CDS spread. To put this magnitude into perspective, we use GM as an
example. Between 2006 and 2009, the largest accounting margin that GM earned on its vehicles
was 7 percent. 13 Since estimates of margins in the car industry differ widely, we’ll also consider
potential margins of 2 and 15 percent. 14 Suppose the average wholesale (i.e., to-dealer) price of
a new vehicle is $25,000. At a 2 percent gross margin rate, a manufacturer’s per car margin is
$500; at 7 percent, it is $1750; and at 15 percent, it is $3750. A 1000 point increase in CDS
spread therefore wipes out 28 percent of the per car margin if the margin rate is at our lowest
assumed value, 8 percent of the per car margin at the rate observed in GM’s data, and just under
4 percent at the highest margin rate we consider. GM’s CDS spread had increased to 8000 points
by the end of 2008, and exceeded Ford's spread by 3000 points. Even if we assume only the
difference between GM and Ford is caused by GM’s financial decisions (that is, we let Ford’s
CDS increase proxy for common factors), the most conservative assumptions imply that GM lost
11.1 percent of its gross margin as an indirect feedback effect of its financial distress. At the
margin rate observed in GM’s data, the loss is 23.8 percent of gross margins.
     Alternatively, we can approximate the present value of cash flows lost to the vehicles
division of GM North America because of financial distress, and compare it to our estimate of
the enterprise value of the division. GM sold 4.65 million vehicles in North America in 2006.
Every 1000 point CDS increase therefore translates in lost cash flows of $646 million (= 4.65
million x $139) per year. At a cost of capital of 10 percent, this implies a loss of approximately
$6.5 billion in value. To approximate the enterprise value of the vehicles division of GM North
America in 2006, we would ideally add the market value of debt and equity of the division, and
subtract its cash holdings. However, we can only obtain the equity valuation and book value of
debt for GM as a whole, and the book value of debt at this point in time was a poor proxy for its
market value. So we instead first assume that GM’s book value of assets, which was $186.3
billion at the time, was the market value of the firm. (Given that the firm was headed toward

13
  We calculate the accounting margin as (automotive sales/automotive cost of sales) – 1, where the figures are taken
from Motors Liquidation Co. 10-K; March 5, 2009.
14
  15 percent is at the lower end of markups estimated by a number of empirical studies of the auto industry using
discrete choice demand models. For example, Berry, Levinsohn, Pakes (1995) find, using 1990 data, an average
markup of 23.9 percent, and Goldberg (1995) reports an average markup of 38 percent. Using micromoments,
Petrin (2002) estimates markups between 15 and 16.7 percent, and the Berry, Levinsohn, Pakes (2004) study with
“second-choices” data reports a mean price elasticity of -3.94, implying a markup of 25.4 percent .


                                                        19
bankruptcy, this likely overestimates its value.) We then assume that the vehicle divisions are
valued in proportion to their share of cars in GM’s overall world production. This will again
inflate the value of auto divisions, since it ignores the value of other parts of GM. In 2006 GM
sold approximately half of its cars in North America. 15
     This procedure gives an approximate value for GM’s North America auto division at $93.2
billion. Combining this with the $6.5 billion estimated loss in valuation for every 1000 point
CDS increase from above implies that a 3000 point increase would have cost GM North America
7 percent (= 6.5/93.2) of its value. Interestingly, these magnitudes are not far off from those
obtained by Andrade and Kaplan (1998) in their work on highly leveraged transactions.
     Our assumptions in these calculations are conservative and probably underestimate the
impact of financial distress. We should note, however, that as the manufacturer is deeper in
financial distress, the expected cost of the warranties that they are offering the customers also
declines. The indirect cost of financial distress that arises from warranty is then the difference in
the value customers ascribe to these warranties as a part of the bundle with the car and the cost of
the warranties to the manufacturer, which might still be significant. While these calculations
make many simplifications like ignoring strategic pricing behaviors and production and
financing decisions, they nevertheless serve as a useful benchmark in evaluating another
implication of our estimates.




6. Conclusions
     We have shown that durable goods manufacturers’ financial decisions can impose spillovers
on their consumers. Firms’ financial decisions therefore can impact real outcomes, in this case
the consumption of durable goods, and are not neutral in the spirit of the Modigliani-Miller
(1958). The proposed channel through which financial distress of manufacturers imposes
spillovers is that default can threaten the stream of complementary services (e.g., warranties,
spare parts availability, maintenance and upgrades) that the manufacturer provides. As a result,
shifts in financial health can impact the value of the manufacturer’s products to their current
owners.


15
  GM sold 4.65 million vehicles in North America and 9.18 million vehicles worldwide in 2008. (Motors
Liquidation Co. 10-K, March 05 2009.)

                                                      20
   We find evidence that this does in fact hold true for auto manufacturers. Using wholesale
auction price data for millions of used cars sold in the U.S. during 2006-8, we show that an
increase in an auto manufacturer’s financial distress (as measured by an increase in its CDS
spread) results in a contemporaneous drop in the prices of its cars at auction, controlling for a
host of other influences on price. The estimated effects are statistically and economically
significant. A one-point increase in CDS spread results in a 6.8 cent drop in prices. This implies
that a 1000 basis point movement in CDS spreads causes a price reduction of $68, about 0.5
percent of the average sales price in the sample.
   Furthermore, cars with longer expected service lives (under manufacturer warranty, lower
mileage or better condition cars) see larger price declines than those with shorter remaining lives.
This is consistent with manufacturers’ provision of bundled services being an important
component of the value of a durable good. There seems to be in particular an important role of
warranties in this regard. Additionally, there is some evidence that parts availability might also
move prices. High-mileage and low-quality cars actually see price increases when their
manufacturer experiences financial distress, and these vehicles might actually be net suppliers of
parts rather than net demanders.
   We show that these results are robust across a number of specifications with various
measurement strategies. They also do not appear to reflect the reduced demand from dealers
affiliated with manufacturers experiencing financial distress or a decrease in new car prices
driven by manufacturer “fire sales,” but rather from the impact on final consumers of the
potential loss of a flow of bundled services.
   This drop in car demand from financial distress also implies potentially large cost of indirect
cost of financial distress for car manufacturers. We hope that our results will motivate future
research into the effect of financial distress on new car sales, which has been the topic of much
discussion recently given the policy environment, and was explicitly the motivation behind the
U.S. Treasury’s Warranty Commitment Program.




                                                 21
References

Andrade, Gregor and Kaplan, Steven N., 1998, How Costly Is Financial (Not Economic)
       Distress? Evidence from Highly Leveraged Transactions That Became Distressed, The
       Journal of Finance, Vol. 53, No. 5, 1443-1493.

Bertrand, Marianne, Duflo, Esther and Mullainathan, Sendhil, 2004, How Much Should We
       Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119,
       No. 1, 249-275.

Berry, Steven, Levinsohn, James, Pakes, Ariel, 1995, Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,
       Econometrica, Vol. 63, No. 4, pp. 841-890.

Berry, Steven, Levinsohn, James, Pakes, Ariel, 2004, Estimating Differentiated Product Demand
       Systems from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The Market for New Vehicles,
       Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112, no. 1,1, pp. 68-105.

Bucks, Brian K., Kennickell, Arthur B., Mach, Traci L. and Moore, Kevin B., 2009, Changes in
       U.S. Family Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer
       Finances, Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 95, A1-A55.

Bulow, Jeremy I., 1982, Durable-Goods Monopolists, The Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
       90, No. 2, 314-332.

Busse, Meghan R., Knittel, Christopher R., Zettelmeyer, Florian, 2009, Pain at the Pump: The
       Differential Effect of Gasoline Prices on New and Used Automobile Markets, NBER
       working paper #15590.

Chevalier, Judith A., 1995a, Do LBO Supermarkets Charge More? An Empirical Analysis of the
       Effects of LBOs on Supermarket Pricing, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 50, No. 4, 1095-
       1112.




                                               22
Chevalier, Judith A., 1995b, Capital Structure and Product-Market Competition: Empirical
       Evidence from the Supermarket Industry, The American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No.
       3, 415-435.

Chevalier, Judith A., Scharfstein, David S., 1996, Capital-Market Imperfections and
       Countercyclical Markups: Theory and Evidence, The American Economic Review, Vol.
       86, No. 4, pp. 703-725.

Coase, Ronald H., 1972, Durability and Monopoly, Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 15, No.
       1 , 143-149.

Graham, John R., 2000, How big are the tax benefits of debt?, Journal of Finance, Vol 55,1901-
       1941.

Goldberg, Pinelopi K., 1995, Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets:
       The Case of the U.S. Automobile Industry, Econometrica, Vol. 63, No. 4, pp. 891-951.

Hotchkiss, Edith S., John, Kose, Mooradia, Robert M, and Thorburn, Karin S., 2008,
       Bankruptcy and The Resolution of Financial Distress, Handbook of Corporate Finance
       Empirical Corporate Finance, Vol 2.

J.D. Power and Associates, 2006, Domestic Vehicle Avoider Study, 2006 Detroit News,
       December 11.

Modigliani, Franco, Miller, Merton, 1958, The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the
       Theory of Investment, American Economic Review, Vol. 48, No. 3, 261–297.

Petrin, Amil, 2002, Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan, Journal
       of Political Economy, Vol. 110, No. 4, pp. 705-729.

Stokey, Nancy L., 1981, Rational Expectations and Durable Goods Pricing, The Bell Journal of
       Economics, Vol. 12, No. 1, 112-128.




                                              23
Titman, Sheridan, 1984, The effect of capital structure on a firm's liquidation decision, Journal of
       Financial Economics 13, 137-151.




                                                24
                                                Table 1
                                      Most Common Car Characteristics

The table presents the most common car characteristics by different variables in our sample. The % of Obs refers to the
% share of the category among observations for which information was available.

                     Brands                                                      Models
Rank     Car Make        # of Obs.    % of Obs.     Rank     Car Make                 # of Obs.         % of Obs.
    1   FORD             1,387,982      22.43           1   TAURUS                    227,158             3.67
    2   CHEVROLET         982,143       15.87           2   EXPLORER 4WD V6           123,892             2.00
    3   NISSAN            351,425        5.68           3   IMPALA                    118,306             1.91
    4   TOYOTA            313,965        5.07           4   ALTIMA                    112,353             1.82
    5   PONTIAC           285,381        4.61           5   GRAND PRIX                108,419             1.75
    6   JEEP              255,400        4.13           6   FOCUS                     99,004              1.60
    7   DODGE             216,632        3.50           7   F150 PICKUP 4WD V8        97,916              1.58
    8   HONDA             199,190        3.22           8   MALIBU V6                 66,717              1.08
    9   BMW               170,190        2.75           9   F150 PICKUP 2WD V8        65,494              1.06
   10   HYUNDAI           162,162        2.62          10   MUSTANG V6                64,639              1.04


                  Model Year                                                    Category
Rank     Year            # of Obs.    % of Obs.     Rank     Category                 # of Obs.         % of Obs.
    1   2006             1,278,944      20.67           1   SUV                      1,839,362            29.73
    2   2005             1,225,995      19.81           2   MIDSIZE CAR              1,486,014            24.02
    3   2004              833,631       13.47           3   LUXURY CAR                759,971             12.28
    4   2007              815,163       13.17           4   COMPACT CAR               706,807             11.43
    5   2003              660,975       10.68           5   PICKUP                    593,749              9.60
    6   2002              385,805        6.23           6   VAN                       464,510              7.51
    7   2008              250,785        4.05           7   SPORTS CAR                184,297              2.98
    8   2001              247,052        3.99           8   FULLSIZE CAR              124,620              2.01
    9   2000              183,006        2.96           9   EXCLUDED                  27,080               0.44
   10   1999              124,512        2.01

                 Car Condition
Rank     Condition       # of Obs.    % of Obs.
    1   3                3,622,619      58.54
    2   4                1,310,341      21.17
    3   2                 918,274       14.84
    4   1                 174,978        2.83
    5   5                 141,234        2.28
    6   0                  21,313        0.34
                                                          Table 2
                                                    Car Condition Levels
The table provides information on how the different car condition codes are constructed.

Grade                     0                    1                    2                   3                    4                   5
Paint & Body      Good for parts        Sustained major     Dents,               Conventional        Minor conven-       No or minor de-
                  only                  collision dam-      scratches            body and paint      tional body and     fects
                                        age, but may be     and body pan-        work needed         paint work
                                        drivable            els      require
                                                            replacement

                                        May be cost pro-    Parts    broken      Requires parts      Small dents that
                                        hibitive to ex-     and missing                              have not broken
                                        tensively recon-                                             the paint
                                        dition this vehi-
                                        cle by industry
                                        standards
                  Missing or dis-                           Multiple prior re-   Sustained cos-      High-quality
                  connected me-                             pairs performed      metic/light col-    conventional
                  chanical parts                            of substandard       lision damage       repairs of cos-
                                                            levels               and      repaired   metic/light
                                                                                 to       industry   collision dam-
                                                                                 standards           age

                  Operable,       but   Repaired      or    Windshield may       Minor pitting of
                  near the end of       unrepaired colli-   be damaged           glass
                  its useful life       sion damage


Interior          Mechanical and        Operability    of   Signs of excess      Signs of normal     Minimal   wear      Shows no signs
                  body parts may        accessories    is   wear                 wear and usage      and minor miss-     of wear
                  be inoperable,        doubtful                                                     ing or broken
                  disconnected,                                                                      parts
                  damaged       or
                  missing
                                                            Burns,    cuts,      Requires repair     No odors
                                                            tears and non-       or replacement
                                                            removable            of parts
                                                            stains


Frame/Unibody                                               Repaired or un-      No repairs or al-   No repairs or al-   No repairs or al-
                                                            repaired frame       terations           terations           terations
                                                            structure    or
                                                            frame damage


Mechanical                                                  Mechanical           Mechanically        Sound and op-       Mechanically
                                                            damage        that   sound               erable              sound
                                                            prohibits opera-
                                                            tion properly

                                                            Engine and or        Requires main-      Fluids may re-      Accessories are
                                                            transmission in      tenance or mi-      quire service       operable
                                                            poor condition       nor repair of ac-
                                                                                 cessories

                                                            Operability  of      Fluid    levels                         Fluid levels full
                                                            accessories is       low or require                          and clean
                                                            questionable         replacement


Tires                                                       Worn or      mis-    Average or bet-     Identical           Identical
                                                            matched              ter
                                                                                 Match by size       Good or better      Near new condi-
                                                                                 and style           condition           tion
                                                     Table 3
                                             Auction Characteristics

  Summary statistics of auction characteristics in our sample. The table contains information on the most common
  auction locations, whether auctions were closed to non-franchised dealers, the way purchases were transacted, and the
  source of the used vehicles.

         Auction Open/Closed                         Transaction Type                              Vehicle Source
  Closed?      # of Obs.     % of Obs.    Type             # of Obs.    % of Obs.    Source           # of Obs.     % of Obs.
         N     4,723,193      76.32       Lane         5,110,836         82.58       Fleet/Lease     4,140,882       66.91
         Y     1,465,566      23.68       Upstream      953,435          15.41       Factory         1,741,028       28.13
                                          Online        124,488          2.01        Dealer           306,849        4.96



             Top 10 Auction Locations
Rank   Auction Location      # of Obs.    % of Obs.
   1   Pennsylvania           474,288       7.66
   2   Orlando                269,173       4.35
   3   Riverside              225,562       3.64
   4   Nashville              207,583       3.35
   5   Dallas                 203,371       3.29
   6   Southern California    179,224       2.90
   7   Chicago                165,734       2.68
   8   New Jersey             157,914       2.55
   9   Georgia                155,448       2.51
  10   Milwaukee              154,819       2.50




                                                    Table 4
                                      Summary Statistics of Select Variables

                  Variable                           Min          Max        Mean     Median             Sd
                  Run #                                1        3,960       185.15       121          227.64
                  # of Wheel-ins                       0           80         0.30         0            0.92
                  Miles                                1      999,991    44,270.38    31,743       36,875.77
                  Price                                0      341,000    13,062.27    12,300        7,560.18
                  Manuf. CDS                         2.5     8,039.70       643.13       520          856.14
                  # of Same Trim Cars That Day         0          443         8.98         2           19.42
                  # of Same Trim Cars so Far           0          443         3.39         0            9.44
                    Table 5
Car Prices and Manufacturer CDS by Car Condition

          Condition   Avg. Price      Avg. Manuf. CDS
                 0     3,743.25                 834.06
                 1     6,753.09                 894.28
                 2     8,681.25                 635.18
                 3    13,111.68                 640.04
                 4    16,340.73                 640.99
                 5    19,085.67                 453.94




                     Table 6
Car Prices and Manufacturer CDS by Mileage Bands

 Mileage Band   Avg. Mileage       Avg. Price   Avg. Manuf. CDS
           1        4,818.98       19,823.08             614.32
           2       10,244.34       17,936.70             649.72
           3       13,244.71       17,111.88             625.50
           4       15,880.88       16,573.01             609.78
           5       18,459.50       16,143.92             603.33
           6       20,856.87       15,730.07             616.69
           7       23,214.74       15,149.07             627.93
           8       25,765.59       14,497.46             638.18
           9       28,215.15       13,917.72             701.23
          10       30,416.64       13,901.36             691.40
          11       33,417.61       14,193.16             644.36
          12       37,167.25       14,303.58             591.99
          13       41,836.43       13,882.19             570.29
          14       47,083.13       13,417.75             553.98
          15       53,753.09       11,985.07             578.45
          16       62,320.51       10,172.16             616.94
          17       73,232.08        8,152.84             678.44
          18       87,090.39        6,365.74             719.17
          19      106,344.00        4,744.05             747.39
          20      152,056.50        3,242.93             783.55
                                 Table 7
      Effect of Auto Manufacturers’ CDS Spread on Used Car Prices,
                         Baseline Specification

The dependent variable is the (raw or normalized) transacted price of the used cars in the
sample. Manuf. CDS refers to the credit-default swap (CDS) spread (in basis points) of the
manufacturers of the used cars. Manuf. CDS × Band 2-Band 20 denotes the interactions
of Manuf. CDS with a set of dummy variables indicating to which of the 20 mileage bands
a car belongs. Other controls not reported in the table include dummies for the auction
format the car was sold under, the number of times the car was wheeled through the auction
lane, and the number of cars of the same model, trim and model year being sold on the
same day in the particular auction location. Columns (1) and (3) also include car condition
controls. All regressions include car type-region-week fixed effects. Reported standard errors
are clustered on car manufacturers×month, and are reported in parentheses (*** denotes
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.)

                              (1)              (2)             (3)                (4)
Dependent var:               Price      Normalized price      Price        Normalized price

Manuf. CDS                -0.0679***      -6.07e-06***       -0.00514         -4.80e-06**
                           (0.0214)        (1.30e-06)         (0.0340)         (2.30e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 2                                           -0.0419*          -4.19e-08
                                                              (0.0233)         (1.48e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 3                                          -0.0608**          -5.68e-07
                                                              (0.0250)         (1.51e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 3                                         -0.0854***          -2.01e-06
                                                              (0.0296)         (1.71e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 4                                          -0.105***         -2.85e-06*
                                                              (0.0322)         (1.68e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 5                                          -0.119***         -3.44e-06*
                                                              (0.0350)         (1.83e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 6                                          -0.128***        -3.79e-06**
                                                              (0.0338)         (1.60e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 7                                          -0.143***        -4.65e-06**
                                                              (0.0382)         (1.90e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 8                                          -0.149***       -5.42e-06***
                                                              (0.0360)         (1.77e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 9                                          -0.147***       -5.33e-06***
                                                              (0.0381)         (1.56e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 10                                         -0.120***       -4.10e-06***
                                                              (0.0333)         (1.38e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 11                                         -0.132***       -5.40e-06***
                                                              (0.0296)         (1.47e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 12                                         -0.108***       -6.15e-06***
                                                              (0.0324)         (1.96e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 13                                         -0.0811**       -6.93e-06***
                                                              (0.0350)         (2.55e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 14                                         -0.00877           -5.60e-06
                                                              (0.0427)         (3.90e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 15                                           0.0429           -3.29e-06
                                                              (0.0420)         (5.35e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 16                                           0.107**           3.58e-06
                                                              (0.0450)         (6.23e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 17                                          0.151***          1.31e-05*
                                                              (0.0466)         (7.28e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 18                                          0.158***         1.93e-05**
                                                              (0.0482)         (9.48e-06)
Manuf. CDS × Band 19                                          0.173***        3.30e-05***
                                                              (0.0469)         (1.23e-05)
Constant                   10,768***        1.198***         10,720***           1.197***
                            (142.5)        (0.00317)           (135.3)          (0.00354)

Observations              6,188,759        6,188,725        6,188,759         6,188,725
R-squared                   0.986            0.883            0.986             0.883
                            Table 8
 Effect of Auto Manufacturers’ CDS Spread on Used Car Prices,
                     The Warranty Channel

The dependent variable is the transacted price of the used cars in the sample.
Manuf. CDS refers to the credit-default swap (CDS) spread (in basis points) of
the manufacturers of the used cars. “Car in warranty?” is an indicator variable
denoting if a car is still under original factory warranty. This is also interacted
with the manufacturer CDS. “Fraction of remaining warranty” is calculated as the
minimum fraction between the mileage and age limits; cars out of warranty receive
a value of zero. We also use the car condition indicators (0-6) defined in Table 2.
Other controls not reported in the table include dummies for the auction format the
car was sold under, the number of times the car was wheeled through the auction
lane, and the number of cars of the same model, trim and model year being sold
on the same day in the particular auction location. All regressions also include
car type-region-week fixed effects. Reported standard errors are clustered on car
manufacturers×month, and are reported in parentheses (*** denotes significance
at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.)

                                                   (1)          (2)          (3)
Dependent var.:                                  Price         Price        Price

Manuf. CDS                                     -0.00580       -0.0101     0.463***
                                                (0.0246)     (0.0322)     (0.0522)
Car in warranty?                                1,890***
                                                 (32.67)
Car in warranty? × Manuf. CDS                  -0.0565**
                                                (0.0233)
Fraction of remaining warranty                               4,145***
                                                              (89.42)
Fraction of remaining warranty × Manuf. CDS                   -0.129*
                                                             (0.0716)
Condition 1 × Manuf. CDS                                                  -0.342***
                                                                          (0.0358)
Condition 2 × Manuf. CDS                                                  -0.415***
                                                                          (0.0437)
Condition 3 × Manuf. CDS                                                  -0.518***
                                                                          (0.0510)
Condition 4 × Manuf. CDS                                                  -0.527***
                                                                          (0.0542)
Condition 5 × Manuf. CDS                                                  -0.540***
                                                                          (0.0690)
Constant                                        7,414***     7,283***     8,152***
                                                (124.9)      (132.5)       (99.80)

Observations                                   6,188,759    6,188,759    6,188,759
R-squared                                        0.982        0.982        0.979
                             Table 9
                        Robustness Checks

The dependent variable in the column (1) is the transacted price of the
used cars in the sample. “Placebo” Manuf. CDS refers to not the actual
manufacturer CDS, but the CDS of an unrelated manufacturer. In columns
(2) and (3), the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the buyer
is a GM or a Ford dealer, respectively. These regressions use the CDS of
the car’s manufacturer. Other controls not reported in the table are as
in Table 7, and include dummies for the auction format the car was sold
under, the number of times the car was wheeled through the auction lane,
and the number of cars of the same model, trim and model year being sold
on the same day in the particular auction location. All regressions also
include car type-region-week fixed effects. Reported standard errors are
clustered on car manufacturers×month, and are reported in parentheses
(*** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the
10% level.)

                            (1)             (2)                 (3)
Dependent var.:            Price      GM dealer buys     Ford dealer buys
“Placebo” Manuf. CDS       0.047
                         (0.0758)
Manuf. CDS                              1.55e-05***         -1.69e-05*
                                        (4.89e-06)          (1.03e-05)
Constant                 15447***         0.299***            0.397***
                          (33.10)        (0.00551)           (0.00982)

Observations             6,177,673       1,744,349           1,782,919
R-squared                  0.984           0.523               0.513
                              Table 10
           Robustness Check: Controlling for New Car Prices

Columns (2) and (3) of this table replicate Columns (1) and (2) of Table ??, but
controlling for the new car price on the day of the auction (note that sample size
is much smaller as we could not find new car transaction data for many auction
days). Column (1) estimates the main effect of manufacturer CDS. As in Table ??,
the dependent variable is the transacted price of the used cars in the sample.
Manuf. CDS refers to the credit-default swap (CDS) spread (in basis points) of
the manufacturers of the used cars. “Car in warranty?” is an indicator variable
denoting if a car is still under original factory warranty. This is also interacted
with the manufacturer CDS. “Fraction of remaining warranty” is calculated as
the minimum fraction between the mileage and age limits; cars out of warranty
receive a value of zero. Other controls not reported in the table include dummies
for the auction format the car was sold under, the number of times the car was
wheeled through the auction lane, and the number of cars of the same model, trim
and model year being sold on the same day in the particular auction location.
All regressions also include car type-region-week fixed effects. Reported standard
errors are clustered on car manufacturers×month, and are reported in parentheses
(*** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10%
level.)

                                                   (1)          (2)          (3)
Dependent var.:                                  Price        Price        Price

Manuf. CDS                                       -0.0775      0.0843       0.0677
                                                (0.0599)     (0.0647)     (0.0572)
Car in warranty?                                              2038***
                                                              (50.28)
Car in warranty? × Manuf. CDS                                -0.135***
                                                             (0.0326)
Fraction of remaining warranty                                            4721***
                                                                           (134.6)
Fraction of remaining warranty × Manuf. CDS                               -0.333**
                                                                           (0.152)
New car price                                   -0.0019      -0.0023      -0.0018
                                               (0.0032)     (0.0033)     (0.0033)
Constant                                       17,102***    13,337***    13,333***
                                                (88.47)      (83.34)       (78.52)

Observations                                   1,007,990    1,007,990    1,007,990
R-squared                                        0.980        0.975        0.977
                             Figure 1
           Illustrative Figures of Used Car Auctions




(a) Auction Site                              (b) Inside an Auction




                     (c) The Auction Online
                                                                           Figure 2
                                                                Auto Manufacturer CDS Spreads


                                 General Motors Corporation                                                                   Ford Motor Company
             8000




                                                                                                  5000
                                                                                     1000 2000 3000 4000
 Manufacturer CDS Spread




                                                                                       Manufacturer CDS Spread
 2000     4000
             0     6000




                                                                                                  0




                           06           07                    08               09                                06            07                    08           09
                  20                 20                    20               20                          20                 20                     20           20
     jan                          jan                   jan              jan             jan                            jan                    jan          jan
01                              01                    01               01           01                                01                     01           01
                                               Date                                                                                   Date



                                     Toyota Motor Corporation                                                                 Honda Motor Company
             150




                                                                                                  150
 Manufacturer CDS Spread




                                                                                     Manufacturer CDS Spread
                 100




                                                                                                     100
    50




                                                                                        50
             0




                                                                                                  0




                           06           07                    08               09                                06            07                    08           09
                  20                 20                    20               20                          20                 20                     20           20
     jan                          jan                   jan              jan             jan                            jan                    jan          jan
01                              01                    01               01           01                                01                     01           01
                                               Date                                                                                   Date
Figure 3
The panels compare the relative average used car prices and CDS series for Ford (top) and GM (bottom). Each series shows the
difference between the appropriate Ford (GM) series and the corresponding series for Honda. The price series are constructed
by taking the residual from a regression of cars’ auction prices on detailed car type fixed effects, sets of dummies for mileage
quantiles, auction location fixed effects, and week-of-year fixed effects. These residuals are averaged by week for every manu-
facturer, and the difference between Ford’s (GM’s) and Honda’s price series is shown, after smoothing using a 12-week moving
average, in the figure. The CDS series are computed by taking the car-weighted average CDS value for each manufacturer and
subtracting Honda’s series from Ford’s (GM’s). The log of this difference is shown in the figure to make visualization easier.




                         -&                                                                                                                                                              "#$&


                         ,&

                                                                                                                                                                                         "#"%&
                         +&


                         *&
                                                                                                                                                                                         "&
                         %&


                         )&
                                                                                                                                                                                         !"#"%&
                         (&


                         '&
                                                                                                                                                                                         !"#$&

                         $&


                         "&                                                                                                                                                              !"#$%&
                                $& *& $$& $*& '$& '*& ($& (*& )$& )*& %$& %*& *$& **& +$& +*& ,$& ,*& -$& -*&$"$&$"*&$$$&$$*&$'$&$'*&$($&$(*&$)$&$)*&
                                                                        !""#$%!""#$&'$()$*+,-+./$01123$




                                                                                                     (a) Ford



                          $"&                                                                                                                                                           "#"'&



                           -&                                                                                                                                                           "#"(&



                           '&                                                                                                                                                           "#")&



                           ,&                                                                                                                                                           "#"%&



                           (&                                                                                                                                                           "&



                           +&                                                                                                                                                           !"#"%&



                           )&                                                                                                                                                           !"#")&



                           *&                                                                                                                                                           !"#"(&



                           %&                                                                                                                                                           !"#"'&



                           $&                                                                                                                                                           !"#$&



                           "&                                                                                                                                                           !"#$%&
                                $& +& -& $*& $,& %$& %+& %-& **& *,& )$& )+& )-& +*& +,& ($& (+& (-& ,*& ,,& '$& '+& '-& -*& -,& $"$&$"+&$"-&$$*&$$,&$%$&$%+&$%-&$**&$*,&$)$&$)+&$)-&
                                                                                         !""#$%!""#$&'$()$*+,-+./$01123$




                                                                                                    (b) GM
                                                                         Figure 4
                                           Plot of Mileage Interaction Coefficients from Column (3) of Table ??




                                      .2
Effect of manuf. CDS on used car prices
                           .1




                                                   Main effect
       −.1        0−.2




                                            0                      50000                   100000               150000
                                                                 Mean car mileage within mileage band

                                                     Main effect + Mileage interactions          95% Confidence region
