NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREDIT RATIONING AND
EFFECTIVE SUPPLY FAILURES

Alan S. Blinder

Working Paper No. 1619

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1985

The research reported here has been supported by the National
Science Foundation, and was done in part while I was a visiting
fellow at the Institute for International Economic Studies,
Stockholm, Sweden. I am grateful for comments received at seminar
presentations at the Institute, Princeton, Harvard, Columbia,
Brown, the Center of Planning and Research in Athens, and the
National Bureau of Economic Research; and for discussions of these
topics with Rudiger Dornbusch, Stanley Fischer, Benjamin Friedman,

Michael Horgan, Leonard Nakamura, John Seater, Dennis Snower,

Robert Solow, Joseph Stiglitz and Lawrence Summers. Finally, it
was a remark made at a seminar some years ago by Robert Mundell
which first got me scratching my head about the concept of
"effective supply." The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #16 19
May 1985

Credit Rationing and
Effective Supply Failures

ABSTRACT

This paper presents two macro models in which central bank
policy has real effects on the supply. side of the economy due to
credit rationing. In each model, there are two possible regimes,
depending on whether credit is or is not rationed. Starting from
an unrationed equilibrium, either a large enough contraction of
bank reserves or a large enough rise in aggregate demand can lead
to rationing. Monetary (fiscal) policy is shown to be more (less)
powerful when there is rationing than when there is not.
In the first model, credit rationing reduces working
capital. There is a failure of effective supply in that
credit—starved firms must reduce production below national
supply. The resulting excess demand in the goods market may in
turn drive prices up and reduce the real supply of credit
further, leading to further reductions in supply and a
stagflationary spiral.
In the second model, credit rationing reduces investment,
whichcuts into both .aggregate demand and Supply. Despite the
effect on demand, stagflationary instability is still. possible•. A
rise in government spending crowds out investment in the rationed
regime but crowds in investment in the unraticrxed regime.
Alan S. Blinder
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
609—452—4010

Page 1

CREDIT RATIONING AND EFFECTIVE SUPPLY FAILURES

1. MOTIVATION AND BASIC IDEAS
The topic of this paper is among the oldest and most

fundamental in monetary theory: how and why does monetary policy
affect real economic activity? Traditional answers hold that the
central bank can raise (shrink) aggregate demand by engineering
an expansion (contraction) of the medium of exchange.
In its monetarist variant, this story posits a direct link

between something called M and aggregate spending. In its
Keynesian variant, the story holds that adjustments in asset
prices brought about by a change in M lead to more spending,
especially on capital goods.. In either case, short-run

stickiness of prices is needed to translate some of the changes
in demand into movements of real output.
In recent years, these conventional stories have become

increasingly implausible, as Stiglitz and I (1983) have argued

elsewhere. With more and more assets apparently serving as rnedia
of exchange, it has become increasingly difficult to define M,

much les to believe that the central bank can cause a recession
by contriving an artificial •shortage of whatever it calls M. Put

differently, the point seems both simple and compelling: if
there are ready substitutes for money, control of money will not
give the authorities much leverage over the real economy.

This paper develops a very different explanation for how

Page 2

central bank policy affects real economic activity: one based on
credit rationing. In order to make the credit—rationing
mechanism stand out in bold relief, most other channels of
monetary policy (such as interest elasticities and expectational

errors) are banished from the model. The reader should

understand that this is merely an expositional device. I would
not wish to deny that the interest—elasticity and expectational—

error mechanisms have some validity. But the spirit of this
paper is that those mechanisms do not seem important enough to
explain the deep recessions that are apparently caused by central

bank policy. There must be something else.
The idea that credit availability impinges on economic
activity isp. of course, hardly new. But it does seem to have
gone out of style in recent years under the pressure of the

classical revival. Stiglitz and I (1983) recently suggested that
this fashion change may have been a mistake; and this paper is an

attempt to give analytical substance to the ideas we sketched
there.

The basic principle is simple. Firms may have a desired or
"notional" supply based on relative prices, expectations, and

other variables. But they may need credit to produce the goods.
If the required credit is unavailable, there may be a "failure of
effective supply" in which firms fail, to produce as much as they

can sell. The idea of a supply failure contains a hint of what
is to come: if recessions are initiated by declines in supply,
rather than by declines in demand, then prices may rise, not

Page 3.

fall, as economic activity contracts.

Where, then, does money enter the story? The banking system
both connects credit to money and creates what I call the "credit

multiplier." Suppose demand rises. Firms, seeing higher
expected marginal value products, borrow more and expand

production. As economic activity expands, higher transactions
balances are required; so bank deposits rise. As funds flow into
the banking system, the supply of bank credit is expanded

further. This credit expansion fuels both the increase in demand
and the increase in supply by easing credit constraints, and so

the expansion is amplified. This "credit multiplier"-—whereby
more credit leads to more hiring of factors, more production,
more bank deposits, and then to more credit—-operates alongside
the standard Keynesian income—expenditure multiplier because
demand expands as firms pay out more factor. income. The

interaction of the Keynesian and credit multipliers is at the
heart of this paper.1

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the
essential elements of the model, including heuristic

microfoundations for some of the assumptions. Sections 3 and 4,
the bulk of the paper, present and analyse two simple models in

which credit rationing impinges on the behavior of firms. In the
first (Section 3), credit rationing restricts the use of working
capital and thus reduces aggregate supply. While this mechanism
is the focus of the paper, credit rationing in the real world
also has important effects on aggregate demand. Therefore, in the

Page 4.

second model (Section 4), credit rationing restricts investment
spending, which naturally cuts into both aggregate demand and

aggregate supply. In both models, I show that credit rationing
enhances the power of monetary policy but reduces the power of
fiscal policy. Section 5 is a brief summary.

2. ELEMENTS OF THE MODELS
While the two models considered in this paper differ in some
important ways, they share the following seven common elements:

(1) Firms need credit for working capital (and for other

purposes). They must pay their factors of production before they
receive revenues from sales, and must borrow in order to do so.
The role of this assumption——which is, of course, overly
strong—-is to make credit an essential ingredient in the

production process. Firms that cannot get. credit must cut back
their hiring, which is what I mean by an effective supply

failure. Naturally, there are other ways to introduce demand for
credit, such as for financing inventories (which will appear in
Section 3) or for fixed investment (which will appear in Section
4).

(2) There is no auction market for credit, •that is, no

commercial paper market. So firms wishing to borrow must borrow

from banks. The role of this assumption is to give banks primacy
in the credit market, albeit in a very stark way. As explained
in Blinder and Stiglitz (1983), this assumption may adequately
characterize the availability of credit to small firms whose

Page 5.

banks have certain informational advantages over other lenders.2

But it certainly is not realistic for large firms. A better
model would recognize the existence of two kinds of firms: large
firms that can borrow either at the bank or in the auction

market, and small firms that can borrow only at the bank. In
such a world, when bank credit is restricted, small firms may
borrow in the form of trade credit from large firms who can, in

turn, go to the open market and are rationed only by price.3 The
best way to think of this paper is as a stepping stone that

includes only the small firms.4 Subsequent models should include
the big ones as well.

(3) Credit expands as economic activity expands. This is
the idea behind the "credit multiplier't sketched above. A rough
justification is as follows.5 When banks receive deposit

inflows, they set aside some reserves, invest some of the

proceeds in government bonds, and lend the rest to customers. As
the economy expands, business loans become less risky. So banks
hold smaller excess reserves (thereby raising the deposit
multiplier) and also shift their optimal portfolio proportions
away from riskiess government bonds toward risky (but higher

yielding) business loans.6 Specifically, suppose that banks hold
real excess reserves, E/P, that are a decreasing function of real
income :

Cia) Et =

—

Page 6.

and y are constants. If M is bank deposits, the

where

reserve identity is:

(ib) Rt =

where

rM

+

Et

is bank reserves and r is the required reserve ratio.

The banks' balance sheet identity (ignoring net worth) is:

C + Bt

+

(ic)

=

where B is the banks' holdings of government bonds. As just
mentioned, I assume that desired portfolios shift toward customer
loans as economic activity expands:

(id) C, =

=

where

h(l_r)M

+

(1_h)(1_r)M

2t
—

> 0

2lt t

is the banks' notional demand for government bonds.7

Substituting from Cia) and (ib) into (Id) yields:
= h(l—r)

r

1h(l—r)

which can be written compactly &s:
C

Lt

(1)

t

t

-

—

Page 7.

where Lt/Pt is a linear function of real bank reserves, Rt/Pt.
For convenience, I hereafter treat Lti not Rt, as the central
bank's policy instrument.

(4) As mentioned already, all interest elasticities are
banned from the model, as are other responses to relative prices
such as input substitutions among labor, materials, and capital
in response to changes in relative factor prices.8

(5) A simple Keynesian income—expenditure multiplier
augmented by a real balance effect comprises the entire demand

side of the model. There are no explicit investment goods in the

model of Section 3. Investment appears in Section 4, but does
not depend on interest rates. These assumptions' are strictly
expositional——to close off the standard Keynesian channel for
monetary policy.
The real balance effect on consumption is included only as a

way to make the price level determinate when there is no credit
rationing; in several places I assume that it is 'tsmall."

(6) Money plays no essential role in the models. Firms hold

money to facilitate production. But money adjusts passively to
income, as in King and Plosser (1984), not the other way around.9
(7) In those places in which expectations enter the models,
I assuffie perfect foresight. So expectational errors also play no

role in the analysis.

3. CREDIT RATIONING AND WORKING CAPITAL

This section embeds in an otherwise conventional macro model
the idea that credit rationing might create a shortage of working

Page 8.

capital, and thereby force firms to cut back on production. I
begin with a preliminary "finger exercise' version of the model

which, while incomplete, aids our understanding by making the
linkages from credit rationing to working capital to output
completely transparent. There will be time for subtlety later.

3.1

Preliminary Model
Firms hire factors of production at constant relative prices

that are normalized to unity. Thus the quantity of factors hired
and real factor payments are represented by the same symbol, Ft,

which should be thought of as an amalgam of labor, materials, and

capital. Since relative prices do not change, neither should
factor proportions. It is important to note that, unlike many
other models of monetary policy, the expansions and contractions
of real output in this model do not stem, from any policy—induced

change in the real wage.
Factors hired at time t are paid immediately and go to work.

One period later they produce output. Assuming constant returns
to scale and fixed factor proportions, the production function
is:

(2) y = VFt_1
where

v is a measure of productivity (v > 1).

Aggregate demand comes from a simple linear consumption
function with a real balance effect:

Page 9.
L

(3) xt=a+byt+st
O<b<1, s>O,
t
where x is real final sales. Here "a" is Keynesian "autonomous
expenditure," "b" is the marginal propensity to consume, and "s"

indicates the wealth effect of outside money. I presume s to be
small.

Credit rationing is the critical element of the model.

Under the assumption that firms expectations are correct, firms

today expect to sell x1 next period. To produce this much
output, they must hire x+i/v factors today. Hence, if
unconstrained, their hiring today would be x1/v, which
constitutes the notional demand for credit:

(4a)

Cat= X+l
Pt

V

where P is the price level and C. is nominal credit° However,
as explained in Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), banks normally ration

credit, to a maximum volume C. Hence actual credit is:

(4b) Ca = min(Cdt,Ct).
Since factor hiring and borrowing are taken to be equal (Ft =
we have, in real terms:

xt+lCt
(4) Ft = minE V
Finally, the price level adjusts according to the "law of supply

Page 10.
and demandt':

—

= A(x

—

A

> 0

Consider the credit—rationed regime. If the credit
constraint is binding, then (1), (2), and (4) imply the following
difference equation for factor payments:

(6) Ft =

where u =

(L/P)t

v.

+

uFti

Subtracting Ft_i from both sides gives a dynamic

equation for real factor payments:

(7) Ft -

Fti

— (i—u)Fti

=

Substituting (2) and (3) into (5) gives the other dynamic
equation, for the price level:

(8) P1

=

X(

+ s

—

v(1b)Ft_i).

By setting both equations equal to zero, we obtain the

stationaries P = 0 and tK = 0 in Figure 1. (It is convenient to
put LIP rather than P on the vertical axis.) The LP = 0 locus is
steeper so long as:

(9) v(l—b) > s(l—u),

Page 1OA

L

P

LP

r

tF

41

Figure 1

0

0

Page 11.

which is assumed."
As can be seen by inspection, the credit—rationed
equilibrium, point R, is a saddle point. If LI'? starts at just

the right level (given Ft_i), the system will converge to point R
along the stable arm indicated in the diagram. Otherwise, the
system will explode. In sharp contrast to many modern models with
rational expectations, however, there is no optimizing agent to
set L/P at just the right level to put the economy on the

convergent path. Hence the convergent path is a knife—edge
solution, obtained only by coincidence; instability is the more
likely, and therefore the more interesting, outcome.
There-are two possibilities. Explosion in the northeasterly
direction means that output is rising while the price level is
falling (LIP is rising) -— a deflationary boom! With the supply
of real credit rising, you might expect that the credit
constraint would soon cease to be binding. When the model is

fleshed

-

out, this will, be shown to be the case.

Explosion in the southwesterly direction is stagflationary

output falls as prices rise CL/P falls). The dynamic mechanism
in this case is interesting and important enough to merit some
attention. Why is the model unstable?
-

Ignore the financial parameters s and u for the moment (that

is, set s = u =

0),

and suppose that, starting from equilibrium,

credit is reduced by one unit. Demand next period will fall by
by, but supply next period will fall by v, which is bigger.

Hence the restriction of credit causes excess demand as long as b< i.12

Page 12.

Excess demand drives prices higher, according to (5). But
with L fixed in nominal terms, rising prices lead to further

reductions in real credit, and the whole cycle repeats: less
credit leads to excess demand which leads to higher prices which
leads to less credit .

. •This chain of events, which may lead

to dynamic instability under credit rationing, is the basic
message of this paper.

Is this mechanism realistic? I think it is. Credit
restrictions do reduce effective supply in the real world (e.g.,

through investment). And if these effects are bigger than the
effects of tight credit on demand, inflationary pressures will

result. Section 4 will consider a model in which credit
rationing impinges on fixed investment, The rest of this section
elaborates the 'tfinger exercise" model based on working capital.

This elaboration is necessary because Figure 1 raises more
questions than it answers. What happens in the case of upward

explosion into the unrationedhl region? What factors determine
whether credit is rationed or not? Is the model still unstable
under alternative price—adjustment mechanisms?
We can answer the last question right away. Suppose we

rep1ae the law of supply and demand by a Phillips—curve equation
with a natural rate at F*, viz.:

(10) Pt — Pt

1(Ft —

F*).

Page 13.

Using (6), it can be seen that the P =

+ uF

0

locus is now:

=

which is the downward—sloping line shown in Figure 2. Evidently,
the credit-rationed equilibrium is now stable. What has changed?
Notice that the demand parameters b and s from (3) are now
irrelevant because demand no longer enters the picture. If
inflation is determined by (10), a reduction in credit reduces
factor hiring, which is deflationary. (By contrast, under (5) a
reduction in supply is inflationary.) The price level falls,
thereby raising the real supply of credit back toward its
original level. The equilibrium is stable. (See Figure 2.)
In the remainder of this section, as we elaborate and

complicate the model, the relative importance of price adjustment
according to (5) versus (10) will turn out to be critical to the
nature of the credit—rationed equilibrium (if one exists).
Figures 1 and 2 show, in the simplest possible terms, why this is
so.

3.2 Elaborating the Model

In the model just sketched, demand (sales) and supply
(production) can differ. If they do, then inventories must be
changing. In order to add inventories to the model while keeping
the dynamics to second—order (so as to permit graphical

analysis), I switch to continuous time, thereby eliminating the

lags present in the preliminary model.13 Hence, equations

Page 13A

Lt
Pt
tP

0

F=Q

li>

Figure 2
a

Page 14.
(1)—(4) become:

C.
Pt

Lt

(11) —=-----+uFt

(12)

Pt

=

vFt

(13) x=a+by+s()
(14) Ft =

mm

xt+e(H_Ht) C
[

V

Pt

—

(H

—

H) I ,

where H is the stock of inventories and H is the (constant)
desired stock.

Compared to equations (1) and (2) equations (11) and (12)
eliminate the lag of production behind factor payments,
effectively removing the previous short-period dynamics of Ft.

The dynamics now come exclusively from inventory change and

gradual price adjustment. Owing to the elimination of the
one-period production lag, the need for working capital now

becomes entirely allegorical. Those obsessed with a need for
precision should think of factor payments as being paid 'tjust
before" output is produced, so that credit is only for. a fleeting

instant. Those not so obsessed should think of the one—period
lag as still being present in spirit, but suppressed to allow a
convenient graphical exposition of the ideas.

Equation (14) requires explanation. As before, x is
assumed equal to expected sales. Now, however, a firm whose
initial inventories (Ht) differ from its desired inventory stock

Page 15.

(H) will not wish to produce what it expects to sell. Instead,
as indicated in Blinder and Fischer (1981) and in Blinder (1982),
it will produce expected sales plus some fraction, 8, of its

inventory shortfall. This explains the first term in (14, which
applies when credit is not rationed.
The second term recognizes that financing inventories is a
second use of credit, in addition to providing working capital.

The assumption is that the firm's equity is sufficient to finance
its steady—state inventory stock, H, but that bank credit is
needed to finance any inventories in excess of this norm.
Symmetrically, if inventory stocks are below normal, some of the
equity is freed to finance working capital, thereby easing

borrowing requirements. The available credit is still C/P, but
now (Ct/Pt) —

(Ht

—

H) is available to finance working capital,

and hence is the second term of (14).

Two further amendments to the model are needed. First, we
need the identity that inventory change is the difference between
production and sales:

(15) H = y

-

x

The price adjustment specification combines the "law of supply

and demand" (5)and the "Phillips curve" (10):
(16)

P =

X(x

—

y) + 'T'(y

—

y*),

where y is the (exogenous) natural rate of output. Obviously,

the special cases X= 0 and 1=

merit special attention, for

Page 16

the preliminary model suggests that they could lead to quite
different dynamics under credit rationing.
I proceed by analyzing the model separately in the two
regimes defined by (14), and then putting the two regimes
together.

3.3 The Keynesian Regime
I call the regime in which the credit constraint is not
binding "Keynesian" because it yields a familiar Keynesian
solution. From (15) and (16), it is clear that steady state

equilibrium requires that x =

y =

y'.

By (14) and (12); then,

H=H. Hence the Keynesian equilibrium is defined by the pair of
equalities:

(17)

=

L

a-i-s —

1-b

The first equality is the simple Keynesian multiplier formula.'
The second pins down the price level. (As mentioned earlier, this
is the only role of the real balance effect.) Obviously, one
requirement for a Keynesian equilibrium to exist is that:

(18)

y > a/Cl—b).

I assume throughout the paper that this condition holds; but

notice that it will be false if a is large enough relative to y.
Away from the steady state, output is given by:

Page 17

— e(H-Th
a + s
_________________
(19) y =
1—b

which follows from (13) and (14). Output is higher the higher is
autonomous expenditure, the higher are real bank reserves, and
the lower are inventories. Since, by (13) and (19), the

difference x —

y

is 8(1! —

if), it

follows from (15) that the ii

=0

locus is the vertical line at H in Figure 3. Similarly, Appendix

A shows that the

= 0 locus is a straight line which crosses H =

H at a positive value of L/P so long as a Keynesian equilibrium

exists (i.e., if (18) holds), and whose slope has the sign of:
(20)

P

y

— A(1—b)

(See the two panels of Figure 3.)

The sign of p depends on the relative sizes of A and y
If y = 0 (pure law of supply arid demand), P is negative; if A = 0

(pure Phillips curve), p is positive. The parameter p has the
following meaning. If higher inventories reduce prices, then p is
positive; if higher inventories raise prices, then 'P is negative.

In what follows, I will assume that P > 0 is the normal case, but
will allow for the possibility that P < 0 as well. Figure 3 shows
that the. Keynesian equilibrium is stable regardless of the sign
of P.

3.4 The Credit-Rationed Regime

Page 17A
cD

II

II

V

0.

1

It

r4

.

4;>

U

I'
Q.

rj

Page 18

Under credit rationing, (11), (12), and (14) imply that
output is given by:

(21) y =

lu

- (H -

B)]

Notice the differences between (21) and the Keynesian multiplier
formula (19). When credit is rationed, autonomous expenditure has
no effect on output, but bank reserves have a larger effect
(assuming that (9) holds). In terms of the issues that motivated

this paper, we see that monetary policy is more powerful, and
fiscal policy (a rise in "a" might represent a balanced—budget

rise in government purchases) is less powerful in the credit—
rationed regime than in the Keynesian regime. In fact, if the
real balance effect is absent (s =

0),

monetary policy has no

realeffects in the Keynesian regime while fiscal policy has no
real effects in the credit— rationed regimeL'4
Equations (15) and (16) continue to require that x =

in

y =

steady state equilibrium, but H need not be equal to H when

credit. is rationed. Specifically, with some algebraic effort (see

Appendix A) it can be shown that an equilibrium with credit
rationing exists only when H < H and:

a

1—b -

(l—u)

Since (18) continues to be the requirement for a finite price
level, there can be an equilibrium with credit rationing only if:

Page 19

__

a

*

1—b — —(1—u)
V

Appendix

A shows that the Ii = 0 locus in the credit—rationed

regime has a positive slope that exceeds unity (see Figure 4),

while the P = 0 locus is a straight line with slope:

V

(23)

— V [ y—X(1—b)1
—
—

pv+Xs(l—u)

xq

where

(24) q E v(l—b) — s(l—u) > 0

This is clearly positive if either A = 0 (pure Phillips curve)

or y =

0 (pure law of supply and demand). To avoid &

taxanornic

treatment, I will hereafter assume that (23) is positive

regardless of the sign of p
The two alternative phase diagrams for the credit—rationed
regime are shown in Figure 4. They are as follows:
*

Panel

(a): If p is positive, which must be so if A =

0,

then Appendix A shows that the slope of the 11=0 locus must exceed

that of the P=0 locus. The credit—rationed equilibrium (if one
exists) is stable.
*

Panel

(b): If both p and

pv + Xs(l—u) are negative (which

must occur if =O), the appendix shows that the slope of the P=O

P

L

(a)

p >
0

41

R

H

0

Figure 4

P

HO

L
P

(b)

p

< 0

4;

(hut "large")

R

Po

H

11:0

2age 20
locus is positive and larger than that of th H=O locus. In this
case, the credit—rationed equilibrium may be stable or unstable,
depending on initial conditions arid parameter values. The

unstable case here is the analog, in this more complicated model,
of Figure 1 above.

3.5 The Borderline between the Regimes
To complete the phase diagram, it only remains to locate the
border between the Keynesian and credit-rationed regions. This is
easily done. The demand for credit in the Keynesian regime is:
a + s

— 6(H - H)

v(l—b)

The supply of credit in the rationed regime is:

—

L

F-

(H - H)

1-u

These are exactly equal when:
(25)

L — (1—u)a ÷ (v(1—b)—8(l—ü)3(H—H)
q

which defines the border. Appendix A shows that the border and
the 1 = 0 locus of the credit—rationed region intersect at H = H,

with the former having the smaller slope. Since the slope of the
border can be either positive or negative, and is immaterial to
the analysis anyway, I will simply draw the border as horizontal
for convenience.

Given the equation for the border, it is straightforward to
show (see the appendix) that the Keynesian equilibrium (point E

Page 21

in Figure 3) occurs above the border if:

(26)y*>

a
1—b -

(1-u)

Similarly, some truly horrendous algebra shows that the credit—

rationed equilibrium (point R in Figure 4) lies below the border
if and only if (26) is reversed. Hence, we have the following
possibilities:
no equilibrium

(j) y* < a/(l—b) ———>

——> a credit—rationed equilibrium

a

(ii) a/(1—b) < y* <

(l—b)—--(l—u)

a

(111) * >

——> a Keynesian equilibrium

l—b—-(1-u)

Notice that if S, the real balance effect, is very small, there
is little "room" between the two bounds in (ii). This makes the
existence of an equilibrium with credit rationing unlikely. So
the likely case is that a Keynesian equilibrium, but no credit
rationed equilibrium, exists.

3.6 Dynamics when p> 0
I now put the two regions together and analyze the dynamics
of the complete system. Consider first the case p > 0 which, as

alreadymentioned, seems the more likely case. (It is the only
possibility if A =

0.)

Combining Figures 3a and 4a gives the phase diagram shown in

Page 22

Figure 5, which shows a Keynesian equilibrium but no equilibrium
with credit rationing. Should a decline in L lead to a period of

credit rationing (see point B) a process of deflation would
begin, thereby raising L/P. This deflation would continue until
the price level rose by enough to restore L/P to its original
value (see point E). Hence the model is globally stable, and
credit rationing is a self—curing rrialady.5

Let us consider the effects of central bank policy, starting
from equilibrium at point E. If L rises, real output will rise
(according to (19)), putting the economy in a position like D,

where the price level is too low. A period of inflation will

ensue, and will continue until L/P is restored to its equilibrium
level. During the inflationary adjustment, y will be falling

because L/P is falling.16 But all of this "action" induced by a
contraction àf bank reserves is presumably minor because the
impact multiplier for monetary policy is:
dY
d(L/P)

—

s
1—b

and s is assumed to be small.
The effects of a decline in L are symmetric unless the
decline is large enough to push the economy into the
credit—rationed region. In the rationed region, the impact
multiplier for monetary policy is much larger, according to (21).
Specifically, it is:

dY
—
d(L/P)

v

1-u

Page 22A

P=0

11=0
L
P

1c
E

4

f;ç

Border

I
I
H

H=O

Figure 5

H:

Page 23

If L is reduced starting from a point like B, prices and output
start to fall. Since output declines by more than sales,
inventories start to fall. Falling inventory stocks tend to push
output back up toward equilibrium. Eventually, inventories reach
a minimum and begin to be replenished. But deflation continues
until L/P is restored to its original level.
So we conclude that the effects of monetary policy, while
qualitatively similar in the two regimes, may be rather weak in
the Keynesian regime and rather strong in the credit—rationed
regime. Translated into real—world terms, a tightening, of

monetary policy may have strong effects on the real sector when
money is already tight, but weak effects when credit is initially
plentiful.

What happens if autonomous expenditure, a, rises? The
multiplier formula shows that y rises strongly if the economy is
in the Keynesian regime. Inspection of the equations that
underlie Figure 5 shows that (see Figure 6):
(a) the P = 0 locus shifts to the right in both regions, so

the equilibrium point, E, shifts down vertically (to a higher
equilibrium price level);
(b) the border shifts up;
Cc) the H = 0 locus shifts to the left in the credit—

rationed region, but does not move in the Keynesian region.
These shifts are depicted in Figure 6, in which the "old" lines
are drawn broken and the "new" lines are drawn solid. We see that
a rise in "a" leaves the economy at a point qualitatively similar

Page 23A

H 0
L

/

P

/
/

(shifts to
the right)

/
/
/

/

4
/

P= 0

/

/
/
(shifts to
the left)
Figure 6

__

it

Border
(shifts up)

Page 24
to point 0 in Figure 5. The adjustment procass from D to E ——

which entails rising P and falling y —— has already been
described.

Now consider the possibility that autonomous spending grows
so large that the Keynesian equilibrium depicted in Figure 5
ceases to exist, but that s is large enough so that an
equilibrium with credit rationing arises. This is shown in Figure
7.

If that happens, the economy initially finds itself at a
disequilibrium point like C or, if the border shifts up strongly
enough, like B in Figure 7. A substantial inflation ensues ——

enough to drive L/P down to the new equilibrium level indicated
by point R. As the economy moves from point C down.to point D, y
is falling (slightly). Once the border is crossed, it is no
longer clear whether y is rising or falling because the

contractionary effects of declining L/P are counteracted by the
expansionary effects of falling H.

3.7 Dynamics when P< 0
The case in which p < 0 must arise if I = 0.

As stated

earlier, I assume that I is, so small that the P = 0 locus in the

credit—rationed region is positively sloped. Since it must be
steeper that the H = 0 locus (see the appendix), there are again
two possibilities, depending on whether the equilibrium is
Keynesian or credit rationed.
(a) Figure 8 depicts a Keynesian equilibrium which combines

Page 2t.A

P=o

H=O
L
P

eJT
C

Border

.1

I
I

I

I
H

HO
Figure 7

H

Page 2B

P0

H0

L

E

Border

H
H

H=0
Figure 8

Page 25

Figures 3b and 4b. This case is qualitatively similar to Figure
5: the economy can be credit rationed for a period, but it
always returns to the Keynesian equilibrium. Nothing more need
be said.

(b) Figure 9, however, depicts a more interesting

possibility: the economy's only equilibrium is credit— rationed,
but it might not be stable. Following a perturbation, the economy
exhibits a cyclical adjustment period which might alternate

between periods of rationed and unrationed credit. The adjustment
process could be stable (spiralling in to point R) or unstable
(spiralling away). The unstable case tells a story that is
similar to that told by our preliminary model in Section 3.1.

4. CREDIT RATIONING AND FIXED CAPITAL

One valid objection to the model of Section 3 is that credit
rationing there affects only aggregate supply, whereas in reality
it is commonly believed that rationing has important effects on

aggregate demand (such as for housing and consumer durables). To
meet this objection, this section develops a model in which
credit rationing impinges on capital formation, and therefore
affects both aggregate demand (in the short run) and aggregate
supply (in the long run).

4.1 Structure of the Model
Since the capital stock adds an additional dynamic variable,

Page 25A

Po

H=O

L

P

I'>
Bordei
I
I

R

I
I

I

H

1

TI
H

Figure 9

Page 26

and since I want to keep the dynamics to second order, I
eliminate inventory changes by assuming that firms always produce
to meet demand (y=x).

To allow for capital accumulation, it is, of course,

necessary to distinguish between fixed capital, K, and other
factors of production -- which I call "labor, N. Hence the

simple production technology of Section 3 will no longer do. The
supply side of the investment model is best understood by
referring to Figure 10, which is a standard isoquant diagram. Ray
OE shows the expansion path of a firm with constant returns to

scale under the given wage—rental ratio. Since.the wage—rental
ratio is assumed constant throughout the analysis, the
cost—minimizing input combinations all lie along OE.

Suppose the firm wants to produce y0, because that is the
amount demanded. The optimal capital stock for this level of

output is 4y0 (point A). Suppose the firms actual capital stock
is only K0. Its short—run strategy, I assume, is to produce y0 by
using K0 units of capital and N0 units of labor (point B), where
N0 is, obtained from the production function. This is a

disequilibrium situation in two respects. First, output is above

normal "capacity —— which is most naturally defined as K0/4. The
firm is not producing y0 at minimum cost, and so will want to
acquire more capital. Second, while I assume that workers supply
as much (or as little) labor as is demanded in the short run, the
level of employment, N0, may not match the notional supply of
labor. If it does not, there will be either upward or downward

Page 26A

K

/

/
/

K*

+y0 — — —
K0

0
N0

Figure 10

N

Page 27

pressure on wages and prices. (The real wage is constant.)
The long—run equilibrium is determined by the notional
supply of labor, N* in the diagram. To employ the labor force

fully, output must be y (point F); and the capital stock must be
K* =

4y*,

Hence, while I assume that output is demand—determined

in the short run, it is supply—determined in the long run.
A set of equations that captures these ideas is:

(27)

y K/

(capacity)

(28)

N =

N(y,K)

(employment)

(29)

K =

I

=

(4y

—

K)

(investment)

where output is determined by (13) augmented by the addition of
investment:

y = a + by ÷

(30)

s(L/P)

+

I,

and the function NC.) in (28) is obtained by inverting the
production function.
Two factors influence prices (and wages): the pressure of

output Cy) on normal capacity (y), and the pressure of employment
(N) on the available supply of labor (N*). Hence the price
equation is:

(31) P =

A

(y —

y)

+

y (N —

Page 28

where N* is the (exogenous) natural level of employment and

is

the (endogenous) capacity level.
The model is completed by specifying the credit market. The
credit constraint now says that the volume of working capital, N,
and end—of—period fixed capital (K+I) cannot exceed the real
supply of credit:
(32) c/P > N + K ÷ I.

(Here the real wage is normalized to unity and the price of a
capital good is assumed equal to the price of a consumption
good.) The supply of credit is still given by:

(33) c/P =

L/P + y.

Equations (27)—(33) constitute the entire model. If(32) holds as
an equality, we are in the credit-rationed regime; if it holds as
an inequality, we are in the Keynesian regime.

4.2 The Keynesian Regime
When the credit constraint is not binding, output is
determined by the conventional Keynesian multiplier formula. From
(29) and (30):

(34) y =

a+s-p- K
1—b—

In the steady state, of course, y will be equal to the natural

rate, y, which is defined implicitly by N* =

N(y*,

$y*).

Similarly, K will be equal to K*= 4y*; so (34) becomes:

Page 29

(35)

L
a + Sp
y*=1...b

which determines the price level so long as the existence
condition (18) holds.
Using (29) and (34), investment in the model will be:

(36) K

I (l—b—)1 [(a + s(L/P))

—

(l—b)K)

so that each dollar of autonomous expenditure tlcrowds jfl

U—
aa

>0

dollars of investment. Equation (36), of course, defines the K=0
locus which appears in Figure 11.

The rest of the dynamics of the model follow by substituting

(34) into (31) to get a nonlinear equation for P. Appendix B
shows that the P = 0 locus can be linearized around equilibrium
to get a line whose slope is less than the slope of the K=O
locus. Hence the phase diagram for the Keynesian region looks
like Figure 11. The Keynesian equilibrium at E is stable (if it
exists).

4.3 The Credit-Rationed Regime

Two possible variants of credit rationing can be

accommoated within the structure of thismodel, depending on
whether it is fixed or working capital that is rationed. Since

Page 29A

K=O

L
P

Po
E

I
I

(1-b)y--a
S

I
I
I

I

Figure 11

K

Page 30

rationing of working capital was studied in Section 3, I assume
here that it is investment that gets rationed when the credit
constraint is binding. Hence, when (32) holds as an equality, we
have:

C/P =

N(y,K)

I,

+ K +

which, using (33), means that investment is rationed to:

I = L/P +

y

-

N(y,K)

— K.

Of course, a reduction of I will make y fall as well, as is

standard in Keynesian analysis. Substituting for I into (30)
gives an equation for the level of output under credit rationing:

y = a + by +

s(L/P)

+

L/P

+

ay - N(y,K) — K,

which implicitly defines:
(37) y =

Y(a,
+

with

LIP, K)

+

the signs of the partial derivatives as indicated.
?ppendix B shows that 3Y/3a is smaller than the

correspohding multiplier in the Keynesian •case (see equation

(34)), and that Y/3(L/P) is larger. These comparisons echo those
of Section 3, though the multiplier for autonomous expenditure is

Page 31

no longer zero when credit is rationed.

Using (37), the constrained rate of investment is found to
be:

(38) K =

I

=

L/P

- K +

cY(a,L/P,K)

-

N[Y(a,L/P,K),K].

Hence, using the expression for aY/aa derived in the appendix,
the degree of crowding out is:

N

31 — — y_—
l—b+N--cz
3a

which is between 0 and —1.
The k = 0 locus is defined by setting (38) equal to zero,

and the P =

0

locus follows from (31). Appendix B shows that, at

least locally, the slope of the P = 0 locus exceeds that of the I

= 0 locus. Hence the credit—rationed equilibrium, if one exists,
is a saddle point such as R in Figure 12.
To see whether a. credit-rationed equilibrium can exist, ie

need to consider how the Keynesian and credit—rationed regions
fit together.

4.4 The Borderline between the Regions
The borderline is easily determined. In the Keynesian
regime, the real demand for credit is:

N(y,K) + K +

(4y

-

K),

Page 31A

P=o

L
P

V.

4,>

Figure 12

—

Page 32

and the real supply of credit is:

L/P+czy,

where in both cases y is given by (34). Setting these two equal
defines the border. Even after linearization, the slope of the
borderline could have either sign.

4.5 Dynamic Analysis
Combining Figures 11 and 12 leaves two main possibilities,
depending on whether or not a credit—rationed equilibrium exists.
(I assume that a Keynesian equilibrium does exist.)

In Figure 13 there is no credit—rationed equilibrium because

the two stationaries intersect outside the positive quadrant. If
the model gets into the credit—rationed region, deflation

eventually forces L/P up until credit is no longer rationed. The
model always converges to the Keynesian equilibrium (point E).
Figure 13 looks much like Figure 5 for the working capital model.
Since its comparative dynamics are essentially identical, I will
not bother to repeat the analysis.
Figure '14 shows the other possibility. Here the economy has

two equilibria: a Keynesian equilibrium at E which is locally
stable, and a credit—rationed equilibrium at R which is (locally)

a saddle point. Depending on the initial value of L/P, the model
can converge to the Keynesian equilibrium, converge to the
credit—rationed equilibrium (a knife—edge possibility), or

Page 32A

L
P

S

p=o

4:

Border

.<It
K

Figure 13

Page 32B

K=O
L
P

P=o

'd1
Border

J
K
Figure 1L.

'age 33

explode in the southwesterly direction with prices rising and
capacity falling.

Some properties of the credit—rationed equilibrium are worth

mentioning. Since investment is rationed and is zero in
equilibrium, K is naturally below K*. K is also below y
("desired capital"),, but investment is inhibited byrationing.

Thus, output is above capacity, even though it is below the

natural rate: y < y < y.
The latter inequality means that there is unemployment in
equilibrium. This unemployment puts downward pressure on the
price level, but that is exactly offset by the inflationary
pressure caused by production beyond capacity. If that sounds
like a precarious equilibrium, it should——because the rationed
eçuilibrium is a knife—edge solution. Any departure from
equilibrium will lead either into the Keynesian region or to a
stagflationary explosion that is reminiscent of our first model
in Section 3.1.

The stagflationary mechanism is little different here than
it was in the working capital model. Here rising prices reduce
LIP, thereby making credit rationing tighter. This reduces
investment and causes capacity to shrink, which is inflationary.

5. EMPIRICAL RELEVANCE
Economics is not an art form, so a theoretical model like

this one needs to be justified. Precisely where is this model
applicable? There are several possible answers.

Page 34

In the contemporary U.S. economy, there seems to be a strong

a priori case that quantity rationing is important in the housing
sector——where builders are mostly small, undercapitalized firms

that rely on banks for working capital. Also, if we think of
households as producing services from durable goods (which they
buy on credit), a similar story would apply to consumer durables.
In addition, the story of firms curtailing their activities for
lack of credit rings true for the small business sector (but not

for giant corporations). The importance of housing and durable
goods industries in business fluctuations is well known; I am now
trying to assess the importance of small business in business
cycles.

It is also worth remembering that the complex, fluid
financial markets that exist in the United States (and perhaps in

England) are not typical of other industrial countries, where
securities markets may be rudimentary and much investment is

financed by banks. Indeed, the U.S. economy in the 1980s is
quite different in this regard from the U.S. economy in earlier

decades. In other times and places, close substitutes for bank
loans were not readily available.17

Finally, it is not only in the industrial countries that
business fluctuations are apparently linked to central bank

policy. There is a growing literature in development economics
that argues——on both institutional and econometric grounds——that
credit restrictions which reduce the supply of credit for either
working capital or investment are a major channel through which

Page 35
financial policies have real effects.18
Thus I think the approach followed here at least potentially
applies to several important sectors of the U.S. economy today,
to most of the economies of many other countries today, and to
almost all economies in earlier times.

6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
I have presented here two simple macro models in which
"money" plays no role, but in which central bank policy has

potentially strong real effects via its influence over the supply
of credit. The real effects of monetary policy do not derive from
interest elasticities, nor.from expectational errors, but rather
from credit rationing. And it is not hard (for me, at least) to
imagine that this channel of influence might be quite powerful.
The central conclusions from the two models are:
(1) Depending on the relative magnitudes of central

bank credit (here indicated by L/P) and autonomous expenditure
(here indicated by a), the economy may or may not be credit

constrained. Its behavior is qualitatively different depending
on whether or not the credit constraint is binding. For example,
when credit is rationed the effect of autonomous spending on
output is smaller, and the effect of monetary policy is larger,
than when credit is not rationed. In the investment. model,

autonomeus expenditure crowds out investment only when credit is
rationed (and then only partially); it crowds in more investment
when credit is not rationed.

.3b

(2) When the economy is credit constrained, it is subject
to a kind of instability owing to inflation. If it reduces
supply more than demand, a reduction in credit can be
inflationary and can thereby make the real supply of credit

shrink further. The inflationary impact of tight credit found
here is different from the more familiar cost—push mechanism (the
so—called "Patman effect").19
(3) Despite this destabilizing mechanism, dynamic

instability is by no means inevitable. Potential instability from
credit rationing may be overwhelmed by other stabilizing

influences in the model (represented here by the real balance
effect and the Phillips curve). If so, credit rationing is a
self—correcting malady.

I believe that these conclusions are likely to be quite
robust, and hence are more interesting than the particular models

used to derive them. The paper is, nonetheless, only a fragment
of a more complete model. Its most important contribution, I
hope, is to start down the road toward a theory of effective
supply based on credit rationing (and perhaps on other phenomena

as well). When more fully developed, the principle of effective
supply may take its place alongside the Keynesian principle of
effective demand as the twin pillars of non—classical
macroeconomics.

FOOTNOTES

1. Bernanke (1981) sketches a similar scenario.
2. Nakamura (1984) argues for an important economy of scope in
banking: banks get information from managing a firm's
deposit account that isnot available to others and that
enables banks to reduce the riskiness of their loans.
3. Empirically, however, we do not observe a negative
correlation between (detrended) bank loans on the one hand
and either (detrended) trade credit or (detrended) commercial
paper on the other. So this "escape hatch" may not be as
important as many economists have supposed.
4. Or as a model of an economy without a developed capital
market. In fact, after circulating a first draft of this
paper, I learned about several papers in development
economics that are based on the use of bank credit to finance
working capital. See, for example, van Wijnbergen (1983),
who attributes the idea to Cavallo (1977), or Leff and Sato
(1982).

5. Blinder (1984) constructs a precise micro model along these
lines, building on the foundations laid by Stiglitz and Weiss
(1981) and Jaffee and Russell (1976).
6. Banks sell the bonds to households, who pay with money.
(Households do not care how much money they hold.)
Presumably, interest rates would have to rise to clear the
bond money market. But interest rates play no role in the
model, so this is ignored..

7. If the rationing is effective, then Bt = Bt. If firms do not
take up all the available credit, then Bt is found residually
from (ic).
8. Of course, it is always:.possible to associate a shadow
price——in this case, a. shadow interest rate——with any
quantity rationed equilibrium and thereby translate the
quantity story into a price story. In general, I think
allowing interest rate channels would mainly reinforce the
phenomena discussed in this paper.

-

9.

If firms enlarge their holdings of money as output expands,
they must sell some other asset. Implicitly, this 'tother
asset" (whose market is surpressed by Wairas' Law) is
government bonds. Banks may buy some of these bonds, but
there are two conflicting effects: inflows of deposits lead
banks to expand their holdings of all assets (including
government bonds), but decreases in riskiness lead to
portfolio shifts away from bonds. The remainder of the bonds
are presumed to be bought by households, whose money holdings

are purely passive. See footnote 6.
10. Notice that "credit velocity," which I take to be constant,
is normalized to unity.

11. Recall: The real balance effect is assumed to be "small."
This is one specific definition of "small."
12. When s and u are not zero, excess demand eventually arises as
long as condition (9) holds.
13. Continuous time also reduces the mathematical complexities
caused by regime switching. See below, especially footnote
15.

14. The later would not be true if banks' assessment of risk was
more forward—looking than assumed in equations (1) (in which
only today's output matters).
15. The regime change creates problems in analyzing the dynamics.
However,. Honkapobja and Ito (1983) point out that, if the
directions of motion are the same on both sides of the border
(as is true here), the trajectory will pass through the
border. Under certain other conditions, the "patched" system
will be stable.if the component systems are. See Horikapohja
and Ito (1983).

16. In this model, there is perfect foresight and no lags. As a
result, inventories do not change during this adjustment
period. If production lagged, then the surge in demand would
lower inventories, creating an initial point somewhat to the
left of D and kicking off an inventory cycle.
17. For example, Bernanke's (1983) analysis of the Great
Depression is based on this idea.
18. See, for example, the references cited in footnote 4 above.
There are others.
19. But see footnote 8 above.

REFERENCES

Bernanke, Ben S., "Bankruptcy, Liquidity and Recession," American
Economic Review, May 1981, pp. 155-159.
Bernanke, Ben S., "Non—Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis
in the Propagation of the Great Depression," American
Economic Review, June 1983, Vol. 73, No. 3, pp. 257—76.

Blinder, Alan S., "Inventories and Sticky Prices: More on the
Microfoundations of Macroeconomics," American Economic
Review, June 1982, pp. 334—348.
Blinder, Alan S., "Notes on the Comparative Statics of a
Stiglitz—Weiss Bank," mimeo, Princeton, December 1984.
Blinder, Alan S. and Stanley Fischer, "Inventories, Rational
Expectations, and the Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary
Economics, November 1981, pp. 277-304.
Blinder, Alan S. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Money, Credit
Constraints, and Economic Activity," American Economic
Review, May 1983, pp. 297—302.
Cavallo, Domingo F., "Stagflationary Effects of Monetarist
Stabilization Policies," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Harvard University, 1977.
Honkapohja, S. and T. Ito, "Stability with Regime Switching,"
Journal of Economic Theory, 29, 1983, pp. 22—48.
Jaffee, Dwight M. and Thomas Russell, "Imperfect Information and
Credit Rationing," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November
1976, pp. 651—666.
King, Robert G. and Charles I. Plosser, "Money, Credit, and
Prices in a Real Business Cycle," American Economic Review,
June 1984, pp. 363—380.
Leff, Nathaniel and Kazuo Sato, "Macroeconomic Disequilibrium and
Short—Run Economic Growth in Developing Countries," in H,.
Syrguin (ed.), Trade, Stability, To).ooy, and Equity in
Latin America (New York Academic Press), 1982.
Nakamura, Leonard, "Bankruptcy and the Informational Problems of
Commercial Bank Lending," mimeo, September 1984.
Stiglitz, Joseph .E. an6 Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in
Markets with Imperfect Information," American Economic
Review, 3une 1981, pp. 393—410.

van Wijnbergen, Sweder, "Credit Policy, Inflation and Growth in a
Financially Repressed Economy," Journal of Development
Economics, 13, 1983, pp. 45—65.

