NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BEHAVIOR OF INTOXICATED INVESTORS:
THE ROLE OF INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS IN PROPAGATING THE CRISIS OF 2007-2008
Alberto Manconi
Massimo Massa
Ayako Yasuda
Working Paper 16191
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16191

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

We thank Brad Barber, John Chalmers, Joe Chen, Kent Daniel, Diane Del Guercio, Doug Diamond,
Roger Edelen, Ken French, Alessandro Gavazza, Gary Gorton, Zhiguo He, Clemens Sialm, Chester
Spatt, and the conference and seminar participants of the NBER Project on Market Institutions and
Financial Market Risk conference, the 2010 FIRS Conference (Florence), the 2010 WFA (Victoria),
European Central Bank, INSEAD, UC Davis, UC San Diego (Rady), and University of Oregon (Lundquist)
for suggestions and comments. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the INSEAD/Wharton
Alliance. An earlier draft of this paper was titled “The role of institutional investors in propagating
the financial crisis.” All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Alberto Manconi, Massimo Massa, and Ayako Yasuda. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Behavior of Intoxicated Investors: The role of institutional investors in propagating the
crisis of 2007-2008
Alberto Manconi, Massimo Massa, and Ayako Yasuda
NBER Working Paper No. 16191
July 2010
JEL No. G01,G11,G22,G23,G28
ABSTRACT
Using a novel data of institutional investors’ bond holdings, we examine a transmission of the crisis
of 2007-2008 from the securitized bond market to the corporate bond market via joint ownership of
these bonds by investors. We posit that, ceteris paribus, corporate bonds held by investors with high
exposure to securitized bonds and liquidity needs experience greater selling pressure and price declines
(yield increases) at the onset of the crisis. We further test predictions of a model of dynamic asset liquidation:
Investors with large enough future liquidity shocks retain liquid assets, and instead sell assets that
have relatively high temporary price impacts of trading. Mutual funds with higher sensitivity of pay
to performance held higher portions of their portfolios in securitized bonds prior to the crisis. After
the onset of the crisis, these funds did not sell securitized bonds on average and instead sold corporate
bonds to meet their liquidity needs. Sales rose and yield spreads widened more for those corporate
bonds whose mutual fund holders’ portfolios were more heavily exposed to securitized bonds, compared
to same-issuer bonds held by unexposed funds. Shorter-horizon mutual funds liquidated greater portions
of their corporate bond holdings and in particular lower-rated bonds. In contrast, insurance companies
sold little regardless of their exposure as long as they were above the minimum capital ratio threshold.
These findings suggest that short-horizon mutual funds with high exposure to securitized bonds played
a role in transmitting the crisis from securitized bonds to corporate bonds.
Alberto Manconi
Finance
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
FRANCE
and
alberto.manconi@insead.edu
Massimo Massa
INSEAD
Department of Finance
Blve de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau FRANCE
massimo.massa@insead.edu

Ayako Yasuda
Graduate School of Management
UC Davis
3206 Gallagher Hall
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616-8609
asyasuda@ucdavis.edu

Introduction
By August 2007, the souring of the subprime mortgage market that had begun some months
earlier turned from a bad taste in the mouth to a nearly heart-stopping assault on the financial
body of the U.S. economy.1 “Liquidity abruptly dried up for many firms and securities markets”
(Getter et al. 2007, p. 9), as securitized bonds – mortgage-backed securities (MBS), asset-backed
securities (ABS), collateralized debt obligations (CDO) and so forth – displayed sharp drops in
their resale values and became “toxic.”2 While much attention has focused on how these assets
“intoxicated” banks and left them staggering, much less attention has been paid to the possibility
of “intoxicated investors,” that is, nonbank, fixed-income investors, and, in particular, bond
mutual funds and insurance companies, which hold the majority of corporate debt securities.
Have they been heavily exposed to these toxic assets? Have their portfolio choices exacerbated
the impact of the financial crisis on the real economy? How did regulatory policy affect their
behavior? These are the questions we aim to explore in this paper.
The focus on these institutional investors seems well-warranted. By the time of the crisis,
bond financing had become a more common source of external financing for (especially large)
corporations. 3 Institutional investors, such as mutual bond funds and insurance companies
increasingly supplied the majority of capital—either directly through bond financing, or indirectly
through investing in securitized loans. In fact, some argue that these investors’ strong demand for
relatively safe debt instruments fueled the credit expansion and securitization boom in the U.S. in
2003-2006.4 Thus, their financial conditions and constraints could become as important financial
bottlenecks as those of traditional banks on the road to the economic recovery, at least for large
firms. For this reason, to fully understand the crisis and the way it has been transmitted to the real
economy, it is important to look at the role of institutional investors as holders of these assets. To
the best of our knowledge, there is very scarce evidence on this side of the equation.5
The primary goal of our study is to examine the role of institutional debt investors (e.g., bond
funds and insurance companies) in propagating financial market instability. More specifically, we
aim to study how the crisis episode in which one asset class (securitized bonds) experiences
1

See Gorton (2008), Gorton (2009), Gorton and Metrick (2009), and Brunnermeir (2009) for informative readings.
There is no exact agreed-upon definition of what constitutes a “toxic” asset in the discussion of crisis. We use the
definition “no-agency, securitized bonds” to capture a class of assets that have become impaired during the crisis.
3
For large representative firms, about two-thirds of their total debt is attributable to corporate bonds and less than onethird to bank loans (Massa, Yasuda, and Zhang, 2009).
4
See Holmstrom (2008), Caballero et al. (2008), and Nini (2009).
5
For studies that examine whether skewed incentives of originators or sellers (e.g., banks, mortgage banks, and
investment banks) contributed to the unsustainable boom and the subsequent collapse of the market for securitized
bonds, see Mian and Sufi (2008, 2009), Keys et al. (2010), Griffin and Tang (2009), and Jiang et al. (2009), among
others.
2

1

extreme market turmoil accompanied by very low liquidity affects the portfolio decisions of
institutional investors holding this and other classes of assets. We are among the first to provide
evidence for the transmission of the crisis via these investors’ joint ownership. We also provide
the first detailed empirical analysis of professional investor behavior in the securitized bond
market. We exploit a novel dataset that links individual corporate bond performances around the
onset of the crisis to their bondholders’ exposure to securitized bonds.
We focus on a potential transmission mechanism based on the effect of liquidity shocks on
“open-end” institutional investors investing in securitized bond markets. Institutional investors
that grant withdrawal rights to clients (e.g., mutual funds) are subject to runs, much like
traditional banks (see, e.g., Bernardo and Welch, 2005). The desire of these investors to hold
liquid – and potentially high-return – assets joint with the widespread belief that the secondary
markets for securitized bonds would remain liquid induced them to load up on these securitized
bonds prior to the onset of the crisis.6 Indeed, one private estimate puts these institutional
investors’ collective exposure higher than that of banks.7 Once the crisis hit, these investors, left
with significant exposure to the now more illiquid asset class, had to decide how to rebalance
their portfolios. Mutual funds, facing the possibility of massive withdrawals following bad
performance, would have to meet the redemption claims by liquidating some of their assets.
Reluctant to sell the more illiquid, “toxic” assets and book losses at fire sale prices (thereby
exacerbating the investor flight), they would instead sell other, more liquid assets, such as
corporate bonds.
In contrast, another class of institutional investors (e.g., insurance companies and pension
funds) — which face longer-term investors and are equipped with long lock-ups, penalties for
early withdrawals, and predictable payout schedules — were less pressured to sell than mutual
funds, especially in the event of temporary deviations of prices from fundamentals. However, for
these institutional investors, capital regulations made it expensive to hold lower-rated bonds.
Thus, we expect that, while the investor horizon influences the reaction of mutual funds,
regulatory capital constraints influence the portfolio decisions of insurance companies when/if
downgrades occur.

6

Shleifer and Vishny (2009), Gorton and Metrick (2009), and others describe an ecosystem of the so-called “shadow
banking system” where broker-dealer banks actively supported liquidity of securitized bonds by acting as market
makers and at the same time funded their balance sheets in the repo market using the same bonds as collateral.
7
Blundell-Wignall (2007) quotes a private investment bank estimate where insurance companies and asset managers
together are shown to have delta-adjusted exposure to 28.6% of existing CDOs, whereas hedge funds and banks split
the remaining exposure at 46.5% and 24.9%, respectively.

2

This distinction offers us a unique event to test how different classes of institutional investors
subject to different demand conditions and regulatory constraints would react to the crisis. More
importantly, it offers us a unique opportunity to look at the transmission mechanism from the
securitization market to other, seemingly unrelated, asset classes, such as corporate bonds. In the
case of mutual funds, a drop in the resale value of one subclass of assets in the portfolio and the
ensuing reduction in the value of the portfolio induces the investor to rebalance his portfolio, for
example, to prepare for potential redemption requests. In contrast, insurance companies are
expected not to respond unless the bonds are downgraded.
The key question is which assets the investor would choose to sell and who would put the
selling pressure on assets more than others. We posit that, ceteris paribus, corporate bonds held
by investors with high exposure to securitized bonds and liquidity needs experience greater
selling pressure and price declines (yield increases) at the onset of the crisis. The idea that an
investor who faces a liquidation problem and holds both liquid and illiquid assets in his portfolio
would first sell the more liquid assets is intuitive and is suggested by Scholes (2000) and others.
“A ‘systemic shock’ … is an event that causes [securitized] debt to become informationallysensitive, that is, sensitive to adverse selection” and “cause[s] the (inefficient) collapse of trading
in [such] debt.” (Gorton 2009, p.10)8 In response to this negative shock to their portfolios,
investors with liquidity needs would choose to retain the securitized bonds and sell other, more
liquid assets. As to which types of corporate bonds investors would choose to sell, we further test
predictions of a model of dynamic asset liquidation: Investors with large enough potential future
liquidity shocks retain “assets with a low temporary [price] impact of trading” (e.g., investmentgrade bonds), and instead sell “relatively illiquid assets” (e.g., junk bonds). (Brown et al. 2009, p.
3)
We collect information on mutual funds at the individual fund level and on insurance
companies at the company level. We use a novel dataset of quarterly portfolio holdings of
securitized bonds and corporate bonds by institutional investors from 1998Q1 to 2008Q1. The
empirical analysis is conducted both at the investor level and at the individual corporate bond
level. That is, we examine (i) investors’ portfolio choices as functions of their attributes (e.g.,
horizon, performance sensitivity of pay, and affiliation with banks and big financial groups), as

8

Gorton and Metrick (2009) find that collateral values of securitized bonds (reflected in repo haircut rates) collapsed
after the onset of the crisis across all collateral types, including even those that were not subprime-related. Gorton
(2009) also discusses how “market participants are not prepared to cope with the sudden information requirements for
understanding, valuing, and trading securities that are suddenly information-sensitive. … This makes them illiquid.” (p.
37)

3

well as (ii) the yield spread changes and net sales of individual corporate bonds as functions of
their current bondholders’ attributes, such as their exposure to now-illiquid, securitized bonds.
We start by examining whether and why institutional investors hold securitized bonds in the
first place. Indeed, theory suggests that institutional investors with short horizon will not invest in
undervalued assets that are not expected to recover in value soon. However, institutional investors
may have been attracted to hold securitized bonds prior to the crisis because these assets were
perceived to be liquid, and because they exhibited relatively high ratings and relatively attractive
yields. The practice of “rating at the edge” might also have understated the perceived riskiness of
these assets.
We find that institutional investors’ holdings of securitized bonds increased fourfold during
the sample period, totaling nearly $2 trillion in 2007. About 80% of these (with known ratings)
were AAA-rated. By comparison, only 10% of the institutional investors’ holdings of corporate
bond holdings (around $3 trillion as of 2007) were AAA-rated. Also, overall, the pool of AAArated corporate bonds grew much more slowly during the sample period. As a result, there was a
sharp increase in their holdings of securitized bonds as a percentage of AAA-rated assets during
the sample period. Among mutual funds, the funds with higher sensitivity of pay to performance
held larger portions of their portfolios in securitized bonds.
These results are consistent with the idea that, when general confidence in the enduring
liquidity of the securitized bond market was high, mutual funds with high pay-performance
sensitivity were incentivized to load up on these assets. And indeed, anecdotal evidence suggests
that highly rated securitized bonds were favored by institutional investors, which are constrained
to invest mostly in highly rated assets and which wanted to “spice up” their performance for
competitive reasons. The result is also consistent with empirical evidence on hedge fund behavior
at the top of the bubble (e.g., Brunnermeier and Nagel 2004). Funds affiliated with banks also
held more securitized bonds.
After establishing that institutional investors had significant exposure to the securitization
market before the crisis, we focus on the investors’ liquidation problem as the crisis impairs
liquidity and the resale values of their holdings. We predict that as the crisis hits, mutual fund
investors with prior holdings will choose not to sell these assets immediately, as fire sales and
realized losses may trigger large outflows and further exacerbate their liquidity problem. At the
same time, having significant exposure to these now highly illiquid assets may force them to
liquidate other assets in order to meet current withdrawal requests or in anticipation of future
withdrawal requests.

4

We consider both the traditional “static” Scholes approach and a more dynamic liquidation
model. Given the different implications of the dynamic liquidation model from the more
traditional framework for the transmission of the crisis, we first investigate the hypotheses
common to both models and then proceed with those more specific to each particular model.
Specifically, a common prediction of both the Scholes and the dynamic liquidation model is that
investors faced with a liquidation problem will not sell the most illiquid assets in the initial period.
And indeed, as theory predicts, we document a strong negative relationship between the net
percentage changes in portfolio holdings and the liquidity of the assets. In the last quarter of 2007,
the mutual funds reduced the holdings of corporate bonds in their portfolios by -15% (-6% of
total holdings), while they reduced their holdings of securitized bonds by -9% (-1.9% of total
holdings). During the same period, insurance companies are small net purchasers, increasing their
holdings of corporate bonds and securitized bonds by just 1.9% and 0.3% of their total holdings,
respectively.
When the subprime mortgage crisis hit the market in August 2007, mutual funds sold
corporate bonds to meet their increased demand for liquidity. Shorter-horizon mutual funds
liquidated greater portions of their corporate bond holdings. Affiliated funds also tended to sell
more corporate bonds and retain securitized bonds. This may be a signal of better (actual or
perceived) information as well as less fear about holding on to these toxic assets as these funds
may count on implicit guarantees from the groups they are affiliated with in case of future
liquidity needs. Among insurance companies, only the firms close to or below the risk-based
capital threshold engaged in selling the toxic assets.
We then try to differentiate between the traditional Scholes-type model and the dynamic
liquidation model by further examining the type of corporate bonds that were sold more around
the onset of the crisis. We find that, in line with the dynamic liquidation hypothesis, the average
investor tended to sell the junk bonds more than investment-grade bonds. The change in holdings
of the investors after the onset of the crisis also depended on the investor horizon. One standard
deviation shorter horizon translates to a 6% higher sale of junk bonds and to a significantly
smaller impact on the sale of investment-grade bonds.
Next we turn to the transmission of the shocks from the securitization market to the corporate
bond market via corporate bondholders’ exposure to securitized bonds. We show that bond yield
spreads widened more and net sales were larger for those bonds whose holders’ portfolios were
more heavily exposed to securitized bonds, and particularly more so for lower-rated bonds. An
increase in the holdings of securitized bonds in the portfolio of the average investor from 0% to

5

50% translates to a 70 bps increase in the yield spread of a corporate bond after the onset of the
crisis. In line with the dynamic liquidation hypothesis and the previous findings, the effect is
sharper for lower-rated bonds. Selling pressure on these lower-rated corporate bonds came
primarily from mutual fund investors with high exposure to securitized bonds, while insurance
company investors contributed to a lesser degree to the trading volumes during the second half of
2007.
It is important to stress that in our analysis of corporate bond yields (and trading volumes) we
include bond issuer dummy variables (firm fixed effects). This is crucial for identification.
Effectively, we compare the yield spread change of a bond held by exposed investors to another
bond issued by the same firm but held by non-exposed investors, holding constant any issuerspecific characteristics (both observable traits, such as credit ratings, as well as unobservable,
idiosyncratic traits). This drastically reduces the endogeneity concerns that inclusion of a bond in
exposed investors’ portfolios could be correlated with some unobserved characteristics about the
issuing firm.
Our findings support the view that the sharp increase in yield spreads of lower-rated bonds at
the start of the crisis is at least partly due to the contagion of the shock from (mostly AAA-rated)
securitized bond market to the lower-rated corporate bond market via the joint ownership of both
securities by mutual funds. Figure 1 illustrates this point.
Overall our results show that performance-sensitive and short-horizon mutual fund investors
loaded up on securitized bonds (which were highly rated and yielded higher returns than Treasury
bonds) during the boom years. When faced with liquidity shocks at the onset of the crisis, these
funds sold corporate bonds, thereby transmitting the crisis from securitized bonds to corporate
bonds.9 In the clearest evidence of the channel, the effects were manifested in greater spread
increases for individual corporate bonds that are held by investors with heavy exposure to
securitized bonds, compared to same-issuer bonds held by unexposed investors. Figure 2
illustrates this point.
Our results have important policy implications. In particular, they suggest that the initial
transmission of the crisis from the securitization market to the corporate bond market is primarily
caused by actions of short-horizon mutual funds, whereas long-horizon mutual funds and
insurance companies contributed less to the sales of corporate bonds. This implies that regulations

9
Longstaff (2010) finds that declines in subprime-related asset values forecast widening of corporate bond spreads with
a lag after the onset of the crisis, especially in 2007. The result is consistent with a liquidity channel of contagion. Our
results suggest that portfolio holdings of institutional investors provide one such channel.

6

intended to delay panic-induced withdrawals – e.g., lock-up clauses – may prevent the
transmission of the crisis. This is in line with anecdotal evidence suggesting that hedge funds
have been better able to withstand the withdrawal pressure. Our results also highlight the
vulnerability of companies that depend on mutual funds as primary bond investors.10
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the hypotheses.
Section 3 describes the construction of the sample, our key variables, and sample summary
statistics. Section 4 presents the analysis of investors’ demand for securitized bonds prior to the
crisis. Section 5 presents the analyses of mutual funds’ portfolio decisions around the onset of the
crisis in the summer of 2007. Section 6 presents the bond-level analysis of the effects of
investors’ exposure to securitized bonds on corporate bonds’ yields and trading volumes. Section
7 concludes.

2. Hypotheses
The idea that an investor who faces a liquidation problem and holding both liquid and illiquid
assets in his portfolio would first sell the more liquid assets is intuitive and is suggested by
Scholes (2000) and others. We posit that, given the negative shock to the securitization market at
the onset of the crisis, and the severity of the adverse selection problem in the secondary market
for securitized bonds, investors with liquidity needs would choose to retain them and sell other,
more liquid assets.
Hypothesis 1: Securitized bonds will not be prioritized for sales at the onset of the crisis.
Second, the larger the expected liquidity needs in the future, the more investors will liquidate
today in a precautionary manner. This implies that the more vulnerable the investors are to the
future liquidation problem, the more they will liquidate in the first period. To test this prediction,
we need to measure the future liquidity needs of the investors. We draw on the literature on limits
of arbitrage (e.g., Shleifer and Vishny, 1997; Coval and Stafford, 2007) and use the investment
horizon as our key measure of the investors’ anticipated liquidity needs. We argue that this is a
good measure for mutual funds, since short-horizon mutual funds are likely to receive larger
withdrawal requests as a result of their exposure to (now illiquid) securitized bonds. In this
context, the second hypothesis is thus that, the shorter the horizon, the larger the potential
liquidity shock, and thus the more they liquidate.
10

Massa, Yasuda, and Zhang (2009) find that corporations whose local bond investors are primarily mutual funds
depend less on bond financing and have lower leverage, compared to firms whose local bond investors are primarily
insurance companies.

7

Hypothesis 2: The investment horizon of the investors is negatively associated with the
magnitudes of their liquidation decision.
Third, and most importantly, we posit that, ceteris paribus, corporate bonds held by investors
with high exposure to securitized bonds and liquidity needs experience greater selling pressure
and price declines (yield increases) at the onset of the crisis. The magnitude of the transmission
should be a function of the stock of securitized bonds that the investors accumulated before the
crisis. Mutual funds seek to maintain relatively stable risk and style characteristics to satisfy their
objectives. The “shock” to the securitized bond market has left the funds with “toxic” holdings
that are riskier and less liquid than they had anticipated. To cut back the heightened portfolio risk
level, the funds with (now illiquid) securitized bond holdings would choose to liquidate corporate
bonds. We therefore argue that, the larger the exposure of investors holding corporate bonds, the
more they are sold, and the more negatively the prices of the bonds are impacted. We examine
this hypothesis by constructing holders’ exposure measures, yield spread changes, and trading
volumes at the individual asset (i.e., corporate bond) level.
Hypothesis 3: For a given corporate bond, mutual fund investors’ portfolio exposure to
securitized bonds is positively associated with yield spread changes (negatively associated with
asset price changes) and positively associated with trading volumes.
As to which types of corporate bonds investors would choose to sell, we build our secondary
hypotheses on a model of dynamic asset liquidation by Brown et al. (2009),11 which, in turn,
builds on the Scholes conjecture. The Scholes conjecture states that investors who face an
immediate liquidation problem in a one-period setting sell off the most liquid assets to exactly
meet the liquidity need. In such a myopic setting, investors do not consider the liquidity needs in
the future (second) period. Scholes himself points out that, as a result, the investor’s portfolio
becomes much more illiquid than it was at the beginning of the period. This implies a positive
correlation between the drop in the value of securitized bonds and the increase in the yields of
highly-rated corporate bonds. That is, it posits a direct transmission of a shock from securitized
bonds to the highly-rated bond segment.
The Brown et al. (2009) model points out a trade-off between selling the more liquid assets
first (and thus limiting the immediate loss) and holding on to liquid assets (and thereby protecting
against a future liquidity shock) when investors face a multi-period liquidation problem. The
main implication of the model is that, investors with large enough potential future liquidity
11

Also see Carlin et al. (2007).

8

shocks retain liquid assets (e.g., investment-grade bonds), and instead sell assets that have
relatively high temporary price impacts of trading (e.g., junk bonds). This leads to a subhypothesis that accompanies Hypothesis 2, as follows:
Hypothesis 2b: The investment horizon of mutual funds is positively associated with the
temporary liquidity of the assets they sell.12
The model also highlights the importance of differentiating between permanent and
temporary impacts of trading on prices. In particular, the model predicts that investors will not
sell assets with a high permanent price impact when faced with a liquidation problem. The
permanent (as opposed to temporary) price impact is defined in terms of the information
asymmetry about the value of the asset. This concept became very relevant during the crisis as the
information sensitivity of securitized bonds jumped dramatically at the onset of the crisis,
switching from seemingly information-insensitive (simple and transparent) debt that required
little research to information sensitive debt with structural, informational, and institutional
complexity that few holders were equipped to evaluate. Thus, the model’s prediction with respect
to securitized bonds is in line with Hypothesis 1.
The model also suggests a specific transmission of the shock from securitized bonds to the
lower-rated corporate bonds. The larger the exposure of investors holding a particular asset and
the higher the temporary price impact of trading, the more they will be sold in the first period, and
the more negatively the price of the asset will be impacted. This leads to a sub-hypothesis that
accompanies Hypothesis 3, as follows:
Hypothesis 3b: For a given corporate bond, the impact of mutual fund investors’ exposure to
securitized bonds on yield changes and bond sales is larger, the lower rated the bond is.
Note that this sub-hypothesis is not exclusive to the Brown et al. (2009)’s model. It is also
supported by our general idea of contagion, namely, that the shock to the securitized bond market
prompted re-balancing by exposed mutual funds to revert to their target risk levels, thus
triggering a transmission to lower-rated corporate bonds.13

3. Data
3.1 Data Sources
12

We will measure the temporary price impact of bonds using both bond ratings and actual trade-based metrics. In
Table VII we show that lower-rated bonds indeed trade in significantly smaller numbers.
13
For related studies that examine the role of international investors in spreading crises through re-balancing of their
cross-country asset holdings, see, e.g., Boyer et al. (2006) and the papers cited therein.

9

We construct our sample by merging a number of different data sources: the Lipper EMAXX
institutional bond holdings database, Thomson Financial’s 13f Institutional Holdings,
CDA/Spectrum, the CRSP Mutual Funds dataset, and the Mergent FISD Corporate Bond Dataset.
The Lipper EMAXX database contains details of corporate bond and securitized bond
(mortgage- or asset-backed securities, collateralized debt, mortgage, or loan obligations, and their
variants) holdings for nearly 20,000 U.S. and European insurance companies, U.S., Canadian, and
European mutual funds, and leading U.S. public pension funds. It provides information on
quarterly ownership of more than 50,000 fixed-income issuers with over $7 trillion in total par
amount from 1998Q1 to 2008Q1. We focus on U.S. institutional investors in the EMAXX
database, and their holdings of corporate bonds and structured products (about 15,000
institutional investors every quarter, holding in aggregate a total face value of about $300M per
institution on average in any given quarter). For these institutions, Lipper EMAXX reports the
holdings based on regulatory disclosure to the National Association of Insurance Commissioners
(NAIC, for insurance companies) and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC, for mutual
funds), and on voluntary disclosure by the major pension funds.14 Thomson Financial’s 13f
dataset contains information on the equity positions of investment companies holding U.S.
equities.

3.2 Empirical Proxies
To conduct our analyses, we need empirical proxies for investment horizons. An investor has a
short investment horizon if his ability to stay invested in the long run is perceived to be low. One
reason for a short horizon may be an investor’s uncertainty about the potential for redemption
calls, which would require him to liquidate his position (e.g., Edelen 1999); that is, the more
volatile the fund flows, the shorter the average investment horizon of such a fund will be.
Therefore our first proxy of horizon is the volatility of flows, where the higher the flow volatility,
the lower the horizon should be.
An alternative way to measure the investment horizon is by focusing on the actual trades by
the investors. The standard literature (e.g., Q. Chen et al., 2007, Gaspar et al., 2006) suggests that
investors who turn over their portfolios more often have a shorter investment horizon. This may
be due to the need to face redemptions as well as tax considerations. Long-term investors dislike
high turnover portfolios as this can result in undesirable short-term taxable capital gains (Jin

14

Importantly, EMAXX provides par amount holdings, which enables us to measure quantity changes (as opposed to
market value changes) in investors’ holdings of various bonds.

10

2006). Conversely, short-horizon investors are more likely to be matched with portfolio managers
with high turnover. Therefore, portfolio turnover is our second proxy of investment horizon,
where the higher the turnover of the portfolio, the shorter the investment horizon of the investor
should be. We measure flow volatility as the standard deviation of the fund’s flow, over the
previous 12 months. We use as the fund’s turnover ratio the CRSP Mutual Funds turnover ratio.
We also construct proxies for investor relationships. Relationships could affect investors’
portfolio decisions through either pure information effects or additional incentive effects. The
first relationship variable, Affiliated with commercial banks, captures the affiliation with financial
conglomerates that also own the banks that participate in the securitized debt markets and
perform due diligence on the instruments. This implies that these investors have an informational
advantage over unaffiliated investors. This variable may also capture the fact that affiliated
investors are less risk averse than unaffiliated investors as they receive implicit buyback
guarantees from their affiliate banks in case of market turmoil. It may also capture any pressure
the funds receive from originating affiliate banks to buy their securitized bonds, especially if the
banks, unable to sell the bonds to third parties, used their affiliate funds as dumping grounds. The
second relationship variable captures affiliation with large asset management groups (Log(Family
size)). In contrast to the first measure, this is a pure information measure.

3.3 Descriptive Statistics
We report summary statistics in Table I. Panel A reports the securitized bond and corporate bond
holdings by mutual funds and insurance companies. Institutional investors’ holdings of
securitized bonds increased fourfold during the sample period, totaling nearly $2 trillion in 2007.
While asset holdings grew steadily for both classes of institutional investors over most of the precrisis period, mutual funds’ holdings of securitized bonds in the 2004-2007 period grew
particularly rapidly, doubling in just 3 years; in contrast, insurance companies’ holdings grew
more gradually. There is also a large contraction in the mutual funds’ holdings of corporate bonds
in the last quarter of 2007.
Panel B reports the securitized bond and corporate bond holdings of mutual funds by ratings.
It is striking that nearly 80% of securitized bonds (with known ratings) held by the sample mutual
funds are AAA-rated, with just a handful of non-AAA, investment-grade tranches, and virtually
no junk-rated tranches (statistics for insurance companies are similar). In contrast, the majority of
corporate bonds held by mutual funds are investment-grade but lower than AAA-rated. This is
not surprising, as the number of AAA-rated corporate issuers steadily dwindled over the years,

11

from more than 60 in the 1980s to just 6 as of the end of 2008. As we argued above, institutional
investors had great appetite for securitized bonds because the securitization methodology enabled
the creation of informationally insensitive, highly rated debt in vast quantities. The summary
statistics reported here corroborate this view. Mutual funds also hold a higher percentage of their
corporate bond portfolios in junk-rated bonds than insurance companies. This is consistent with
the fact that risk-based capital regulation makes it expensive for insurance companies to hold
low-rated bonds (see, for example, Herring and Schuermann, 2003).
Panel C reports AAA-rated bond holdings as a percentage of the total portfolio. For both
classes of institutional investors, holdings of AAA-rated bonds grew sharply, both as percentage
of their total portfolios and in absolute value, during the sample period. For mutual funds, it grew
from about 3% of the total to 12%, and for insurance companies it grew from about 6% to 16%.
In both cases, the growth came disproportionately from the growth in securitized bond holdings.
Panel D presents securitized bond holdings by collateral type (residential mortgage-backed
securities (RMBS), commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), other asset-backed
securities (ABS), and government agency-backed securities (Agency)). Panels D-1 and D-3 show
all securitized bonds, and Panels D-2 and D-4 show AAA-rated bonds only. In general, RMBS is
the most common collateral type throughout the sample period, though the portfolios become
more diversified among the four collateral types over time. CMBS appears to be more popular
among the insurance companies than among mutual funds. The opposite is true for ABS, which
can be backed by a wide variety of assets, including credit card debt, student loans, auto loans, etc.
Finally, Agency is not a dominant fraction of portfolios; i.e., investors primarily invested in
privately issued securitized bonds.
Panel E reports the summary statistics for the main variables used in the analysis. Note that
the unit of observations (with N.Obs = 16252) for Tables II and IV is a fund-quarter, whereas the
unit of observations (with N.Obs = 8148) for Tables III (Panel A) and V-VII is a corporate bond.
For example, Turnover ratio and Flow volatility in Panel E-1 report the sample statistics (across
fund-quarters) for the two proxies of investment horizons for our sample of mutual funds. There
is a great amount of variability in these measures; e.g., flow volatility ranges from 0.0031 to
0.3987.
Another variable in Panel E-1, Affiliated with Commercial Bank, indicates that about onequarter of the sample funds are affiliated with banks. The variable No equity (which equals 1 if
the fund does not hold equity), indicates that about four-fifths of our sample mutual funds are
pure bond funds that do hold no equity, while the remaining one-fifth are blend funds with some

12

holdings of equity. Other variables are standard mutual fund characteristics used in the literature:
for definitions of other variables in the table, see the Appendix.
In contrast to Panel E-1 in which the variables are defined at the fund level, the variables in
Panel E-2 are defined at the level of the individual corporate bonds that are held by our sample
funds. For example, the first two variables, LogSale (Jul-Oct 2007) and LogSale (Jul-Dec 2007),
measure the log of net sales of a given corporate bond by the sample mutual funds. The next two
variables, ∆YS, measure the change in yield spreads of corporate spreads between the pre-crisis
2007 Q2 and the crisis (periods of) 2007 Q3 and 2007 Q4, respectively. On average, bond yield
spreads increase by approximately 1% in the first 3 months of the crisis, and nearly 2% in the first
6 months, as indicated by the mean of these variables. The average masks the great variability,
however, in that the yields of some bonds hardly change, while others shoot up sharply.
The variable Holders’ Exposure (to Securitized Bonds) is of significant interest. It measures
how much an average mutual fund investor holding corporate bond i is exposed to securitized
bonds that become illiquid and impaired at the onset of the crisis. The sample statistics indicate
that investors’ exposure varies widely from none to very high (over 90%). We similarly measure
and report the exposure of the average insurance firm investor holding corporate bond i to
securitized bonds. It appears that the average exposure is higher for insurance company investors
than for mutual funds, but the variance is not larger. In Section 6, we will examine whether the
exposure of existing investors to securitized bonds explains some of the increases in corporate
bond yields at the onset of the crisis. Other variables are standard bond characteristics used in the
literature. The definitions of the other variables are provided in the Appendix.

4. Investor Demand for Securitized Bonds Before the
Crisis
What determines the overall levels of holdings of securitized debt by institutional bond investors
in general and mutual funds in particular? As we argued, one of the main features of these
securitized debt tranches (especially AAA-rated tranches) was the fact that they offered slightly
more attractive yields than Treasury bonds of similar ratings and maturity. Indeed, the prevailing
rating system understated their risk relative to corporate bonds,15 while the promised yield made

15

“’Rating at the edge’ might also have contributed to favorable ratings of structured products versus corporate bonds;
while a AAA-rated bond represents a band of risk ranging from a near-zero default risk to a risk that just makes it into
the AAA-rated group, banks worked closely with the rating agencies to ensure that AAA tranches were always sliced in
such a way that they just crossed the dividing line to reach the AAA rating.” (Brunnermeir 2009, p.81) For studies that

13

these instruments attractive especially for investors for whom a higher performance would have
been more valuable, e.g., the investors with short horizons, and those with high flowperformance sensitivity. And there appeared to be little illiquidity penalty associated with holding
these securities prior to the crisis, in light of the fact that investment banks frequently used them
as collateral in accessing the repo market, and banks kept them in their off-balance sheet SIVs,
which were financed using short-term asset-backed commercial paper.16
We therefore expect that, among mutual funds, the funds with shorter horizons and funds
with higher flow-performance sensitivity would hold more securitized debt. The former
prediction may be counterintuitive in a simplified, limits-of-arbitrage story, as the investors who
hold more illiquid assets should be the ones with longer horizons. However, participants may not
have anticipated that securitized bonds would become highly illiquid and might have found these
bonds attractive since they exhibited relatively high credit ratings and relatively high yields.
Alternatively, participants, even if aware of a liquidity bubble, may have decided to ride the wave
rather than betting against it,17 loading up on potentially riskier assets (e.g., Brunnermeier and
Nagel 2004).18
We estimate the effects of mutual funds’ flow-performance sensitivity and investment
horizon on their portfolio holdings by estimating the following model:

H it = α + β Flow - Performance Sensitivity (alternatively Horizon) it + γ ' x it + εit (1),
where each observation represents the portfolio composition of a given mutual fund in a given

€

quarter. The dependent variable H is alternatively the fraction of the fund’s portfolio invested in
either securitized bonds or corporate bonds. 19 We define the variable Flow-performance
sensitivity based on Huang et al. (2007) and discuss its construction in the Appendix. Horizon is
one of the two proxies for the investment horizon of the fund – Flow volatility or Turnover ratio.
X is a set of fund characteristics (Affiliated with commercial bank, Log(Family Size), the fund’s
flow in the previous quarter (Past Flow), the fund’s return in the previous quarter (Fund return),
examine how various tranches of securitized debt (e.g., CDOs) were priced, see, e.g., Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2008)
and Longstaff and Myers (2009).
16
See Gorton and Metrick (2009).
17
“When the music stops, in terms of liquidity, things will be complicated. But as long as the music is playing, you’ve
got to get up and dance. We’re still dancing.” (Chuck Prince, former CEO of Citigroup, quoted on July 10, 2007, in
Financial Times shortly before the onset of the crisis)
18
Also note that we do not expect mutual funds to hold more securitized bonds than insurance companies, since the
mechanism governing insurance companies’ decisions to hold securitized bonds is expected to be distinct from that
governing mutual fund decisions, as we posit above. Thus, we examine the effect of pay-performance sensitivity, flow
volatility, etc., on holdings using only the mutual fund sample. Indeed, as shown in Table I, insurance companies in the
aggregate held a higher percentage of their portfolios in securitized bonds than did mutual funds.
19
They are not mere complements of each other, because there is a third component, namely, equity.

14

the equity holdings of the fund’s family (Family equity holdings), management fees (Mgmt fee),
Expense ratio, Actual 12b1, Average maturity (of the fund’s fixed income holdings), an indicator
variable for whether the fund holds equity or not, and the return on the fund’s equity holdings
(Equity return)).
We estimate the model using both Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regression (with NeweyWest standard errors with lag length parameter equal to 4), and a pooled OLS with quarter fixed
effects and standard errors clustered around each fund (Petersen 2009). The sample includes all
the mutual funds belonging to the merged Lipper eMAXX-CDA/Spectrum data set over the
period 1998Q1-2007Q2.2021
The results are reported in Table II. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the fraction of the
fund’s portfolio represented by securitized bonds. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the
fraction of the fund’s portfolio represented by corporate bonds. In columns (1)-(3) the model is
estimated using the Fama-MacBeth; in columns (4)-(6), it is estimated as a pooled OLS.
The results show a strong correlation between the investors’ horizons and their investments in
securitized bonds. The effect is not only statistically significant, but also economically relevant.
All else equal, a fund in the top decile of Turnover (Flow volatility) holds 49% (40%) of its
portfolio in securitized bonds, while a fund in the bottom decile holds only 36% (37%). Funds
with high flow-performance sensitivity also hold significantly higher portions of their portfolios
in securitized bonds.
The fund affiliation also plays a significant role. Funds that are affiliated with commercial
banks display a higher percentage of securitized bond ownership. This finding is consistent with
both (i) inside/higher quality information received by the funds thanks to their affiliation and (ii)
implicit guarantees by their affiliate banks that effectively subsidize these funds’ holdings in the
event of market turmoil. The anecdotal evidence about Citigroup’s infusion of cash into its own
money market funds to keep them afloat is consistent with this latter interpretation.22

20
The merged dataset consists of both pure bond funds (about 80% of the sample) and blend funds, which hold some
equity (about 20%). In unreported analysis, we re-estimate the models reported in Tables II and IV using only pure
bond funds and find that the results are qualitatively unchanged.
21
While many observers of the crisis point to August 2007 as the first month in which financial contagion or systemic
risk surfaced (as reflected, e.g., in the sharp rise in the LIBOR-OIS spread, shown in Figure 1), subprime market
indicators (e.g., ABX) exhibited localized disruptions as early as 2007Q1. Thus, as a robustness check, we also re-run
the model using data up to 2006Q4 rather than 2007Q2 and find that results are qualitatively unchanged.
22
Tangentially, we examine fund performance following the onset of the crisis and find that bank-affiliated funds
underperform because their portfolios are heavy in securitized bond holdings. This result is consistent with the view
that affiliated mutual funds exercised less scrutiny when increasing their holdings of securitized bonds; however, the
sample period is quite short after the onset of the crisis, and we stress the need for caution in drawing definitive
conclusions from this evidence.

15

Among the control variables, it is interesting to note that funds with higher expense ratios
hold more in corporate bonds and less in securitized bonds. One possible interpretation is that a
corporate bond is considered more information-sensitive than a securitized bond because its
default risk contains more idiosyncratic risk about the firm. Therefore, funds with more active
investment strategies (and higher expenses) gravitate towards corporate bonds, whereas funds
with lower expenses choose to hold securitized bonds. The equity focus of fund families is
negatively associated with portfolio weights of both corporate bonds and securitized bonds. This
may be because prominent pure bond funds tend to be part of fund families that are focused on
fixed-income securities (e.g., PIMCO).
Overall, these results show that the performance sensitive and shorter-horizon mutual funds
loaded heavily on securitized bonds prior to the crisis. We now turn to examining their behavior
after the onset of the crisis.

5. Selling Behavior after the Onset of the Crisis
5.1 Who sells and what gets sold after the onset of the crisis?
We now consider the first prediction regarding the mutual funds’ liquidation problem: They will
not sell the most illiquid assets first. We test this prediction by focusing on the sales of securitized
bonds and corporate bonds around the time of the onset of the crisis and relate them to the
liquidity of the asset.
As described in the Introduction, the crisis started in August 2007. Since our observations are
quarterly, we examine changes between (i) the second quarter of 2007 ending in June and the
third quarter of 2007 ending in September, and also between (ii) the second quarter of 2007
ending in June and the fourth quarter of 2007 ending in December. Unreported statistics show
that, on average, securitized bonds were not sold and that most of the sales took place in
corporate bonds. The mutual funds reduced the holdings of corporate bonds in their portfolios by
$253B (-15%) in the last quarter of 2007, while they reduced their holdings of securitized bonds
by $82B (-9%). This is consistent with Hypothesis 1, namely, that securitized bonds were not
prioritized for sale in the initial period of the crisis. During the same period, insurance companies
are small net purchasers, increasing their holdings of corporate bonds by $60B (3%) and
securitized bonds by $10B (1%). The contrast between mutual funds and insurance companies
are also consistent with Hypothesis 2, namely, that short-horizon investors liquidated greater
portions of their portfolios.

16

Next we examine whether the net sales of corporate bonds and securitized bonds are related
to the contemporaneous fund flows.23 Unlike hedge funds and investment banks that were highly
leveraged and were forced to de-leverage when the values of securitized bonds that they posted as
collateral plunged, mutual funds are generally un-levered. Thus, the posited propagation of
shocks from securitized bonds to corporate bonds via the joint ownership of the assets (and
liquidity-motivated trades) by mutual funds has to come from either contemporaneous or future
expected fund flows.

24

Given our data constraints, we examine this question using

contemporaneous flows only.25 We predict that funds with the most negative flows are the main
sellers of corporate bonds, and that their sales of corporate bonds dominate their trades of
securitized bonds.
The results are reported in Table III, Panel A. We use just the pure bond funds that held both
corporate bonds and securitized bonds in their portfolios prior to the crisis and use their portfolio
changes in the last two quarters of 2007 as the dependent variable. In columns (1)-(4) the
dependent variable is the percentage net purchases of corporate bonds (odd-numbered columns)
and securitized bonds (even-numbered). In columns (5)-(8) the dependent variable is the Log$ Sales and columns are organized analogously. The cross section of sample funds are then sorted
by their contemporaneous fund flows into four bins. In columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6), the net
position changes are regressed on just the four category dummies; in columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8),
the model also includes additional fund characteristics, such as Affiliated with bank and
Log(Family size). As expected, there is a monotonic relationship between the fund flows and net
sales: funds with the most negative flows have significantly more negative net position changes,
and vice versa. Importantly, funds that experience the most negative flows significantly reduce
corporate bond holdings but retain securitized bonds, consistent with them needing to meet
liquidity needs and deciding to sell more liquid part of portfolios. The F-stat for the hypothesis
that the funds with the most negative flows sold significantly more corporate funds than
securitized bonds is significant at the 5% level in three out of the four specifications. Interestingly,
funds affiliated with banks also reduce corporate bond holdings significantly but retain

23

We thank Ken French for suggesting this exercise.
As discussed in Section 2, funds could decide to sell corporate bonds for allocation reasons even in the absence of
contemporaneous outflows. Mutual funds seek to maintain relatively stable risk and style characteristics to satisfy their
objectives. The “shock” to the securitized bond market has left the funds with “toxic” holdings that are riskier and less
liquid than they had anticipated. To reduce the risk level, so as to avoid future outflows, the funds with securitized bond
holdings would liquidate (particularly low-grade) corporate bonds.
25
Ideally, we would also like to run experiments where we would observe the impact on not re-balancing funds’
portfolios in response to the crisis shock on their future outflows. However, this is not observable for two reasons. First,
in equilibrium rational fund managers would avoid such outcome by re-balancing their portfolios. Second, we are
limited by our data, which last only until the first quarter of 2008.
24

17

securitized bonds. Overall, these preliminary results support the idea that the liquidity-motivated
trades by funds most desperate to raise cash contributed to the propagation of shocks from
securitized bonds to corporate bonds.
To further investigate the determinants of corporate bond sales at the bond level, for a crosssectional sample of corporate bonds we estimate multivariate regressions of the following form:
,

(2)

where LogSalei is the log-net sales (in thousands of dollars) of corporate bond i by institutional
investors between July 2007 and December 2007, LogHoldi denotes the log-dollar holding of
corporate bond i by institutional investors as of June 2007, and x is a vector of standard bond
characteristics, which are: the logarithm of the amount outstanding (Bond face value), the
logarithm of the number of months to maturity (Log(Months to maturity)), an indicator variable
for whether the bond has covenants (Covenants), a covenant protection index (CovIndex),26 an
indicator variable equal to 1 when the bond does not have a rating, 0 otherwise, an indicator
variable equal to 1 when the bond is not held by institutional investors in our data set as of June
2007, as well as bond issuer and issuance year fixed effects. Including issuer fixed-effects implies
that we control for any unobserved firm characteristics that may affect the sales of all bonds
issued by a given issuer.
Quality denotes one of three proxies for the quality of the bond, which we include one at a
time (in specifications (1) –(3)), as well as all three (in specification (4)). The first proxy is the
InvRating, defined as:
,
where Rating is a numerical variable measuring the bond’s rating, ranging from 0 (no rating) to
24 (AAA rating or above); the lower the rating, the higher the temporary price impact of trading,
and the larger InvRating. The other two proxies are directly related to how thinly traded the bond
is. They are constructed by using data on actual transactions from TRACE. The first is InvTrades,
the natural logarithm of the inverse of the number of trades from TRACE. For each bond, we
consider the mean number of trades per day between January 2007-June 2007; the more illiquid,
the larger this variable. The second is the bond’s Amihud illiquidity ratio.27 The Amihud ratio is

26
27

The construction of the covenant index follows Billet et al. (2007).
Amihud (2002).

18

defined as the average daily

, where

is the daily percentage change in price

(“return”) and $V is the bond’s dollar volume of trade. This most directly measures the price
impact of daily trading, as normalized by trade volume; again, the more illiquid the bond, the
larger this variable. We compute the average ratio over the period January 2007-June 2007.
The results are reported in Table III, Panel B. They show that the sales by institutional
investors are concentrated on bonds with lower ratings, as well as on the more liquid bonds. One
standard deviation increase (decrease) in the bond’s InvRating (Amihud ratio, InvTrades) is
associated with a 22% (5%, 3%) higher selling pressure.
These findings are (at least partly) consistent with both the Scholes conjecture and the
dynamic liquidation hypotheses. The positive relationship of sales with liquidity is consistent
with the Scholes conjecture as well as with the dynamic liquidation hypotheses á la Brown et al.
(2009). In contrast, the negative relationship of sales with ratings is consistent with the dynamic
liquidation hypothesis and is inconsistent with the Scholes conjecture.

5.2 Selling and Investment Horizon after the onset of the crisis
We now link sales to the horizon of the investors and test whether investors with shorter horizon
liquidate more in the initial phase of the crisis (Hypothesis 2) and also whether they sell lowerrated bonds more (Hypothesis 2b). We therefore relate the changes in holdings of mutual fund
investors around the onset of the crisis to their investment horizon. For Hypothesis 2, we estimate
for a sample of mutual funds:
,
where

(3)

is the change, between 2007Q2 and 2007Q4, in the fraction of the fund’s portfolio

represented by either securitized bonds or corporate bonds. Horizon is our proxy for the fund
horizon – Turnover ratio or Flow volatility28 – while x is a set of fund characteristics including
the control variables from Equation (1), as well as the fraction of securitized (or corporate) bonds
in the fund’s portfolio as of 2007Q2. Both Horizon and x are expressed in values as of June 2007
in column (1)-(4). As described earlier, there were some signs of disruptions in the subprime28

Our results reported in Tables IV-VI are robust to using the flow performance sensitivity as a third proxy of horizon.
We are however concerned with two potential issues. First, the extreme performance may be more likely for equity
than bonds, and more likely for lower grade corporate bonds than AAA-rated securitized bonds. Second, the sensitivity
could also capture how well fund manager incentives are aligned with fund investors. These concerns make clean
interpretations of results using the sensitivity proxy difficult. Thus we rely instead on the turnover and flow volatility
proxies for our inferences. The results are available from the authors upon request.

19

mortgage markets as early as 2007Q1; hence it is possible that funds that held more securitized
bonds experienced disruptions in their performance and flows in the first two quarters of 2007.
Thus, to ensure that our measures of fund investment horizon are not driven by these early
episodes of the crisis, we repeat our analysis using horizon measures as of December 2006,
instead of June 2007, and report the results in columns (5)-(8).29
The results are reported in Table IV, Panel A. In columns (1)-(2), the dependent variable is
the fraction of the fund’s portfolio represented by securitized bonds, while in columns (3)-(4), the
dependent variable is the fraction of the fund’s portfolio represented by corporate bonds. The
results show a significantly negative (positive) correlation between the horizon length of the
investor and the net change in the representation of securitized bonds (corporate bonds) in the
portfolio; that is, the shorter the horizon, the more the institutional investor reduces his stake in
corporate bonds. In terms of magnitude, one standard deviation increase in the Turnover ratio
(Flow volatility) is related to a 6% (2%) higher reduction in corporate bond holdings. Funds that
are affiliated with commercial banks or are part of big financial groups tend to sell more
corporate bonds and to retain securitized bonds.
We further examine whether the short-horizon investors sell low quality bonds more by
examining their sales of corporate bonds separately for investment-grade and subinvestmentgrade corporate bonds (Hypothesis 3). We repeat the specification presented in Equation (3) and
simply replace the dependent variable with ΔC, the changes in portfolio representations of (i)
investment-grade corporate bonds and (ii) sub-investment grade corporate bonds.
The results are reported in Table IV, Panel B. In the odd-numbered columns, the dependent
variable ΔC is the fund’s excess sales of investment grade bonds, as a fraction of the value of the
fund’s portfolio as of June 2007. In the even-numbered columns, the dependent variable is the
fund’s sales of junk bonds. The estimates are broadly supportive of the dynamic liquidation
hypothesis in that the propensity to liquidate is more sensitive to the investment horizons of the
investors for low-rated bonds. The impact of investor horizon on the sales of corporate bonds is
concentrated among the below-investment-grade bonds. A one standard deviation increase in
Turnover ratio (Flow volatility) tends to increase the sale of junk bonds by 6% (6%), whereas it
has a significantly smaller impact on the sales of investment grade bonds (F-stat p-values for the
statistical significance of the two coefficients are provided at the bottom of the table). Note also

29
We thank Kent Daniel for suggesting this exercise. In unreported analysis, we also re-estimate the models reported
in Tables V-VI (Panel B) and VIII using horizon measures as of December 2006 and find that the results are
qualitatively unchanged.

20

that R-squared is three to five times larger for the junk bonds (even-numbered columns) than for
investment-grade bonds (odd-numbered columns).
Overall, the results in Tables II and IV show that (i) short-horizon mutual funds loaded up on
securitized bonds and ended up with a higher exposure to them by the onset of the crisis, and (ii)
when the crisis hit in August 2007 and securitized bonds became illiquid, they liquidated more
than longer-horizon investors in the first months of the crisis, and, in particular, they reduced their
holdings of lower-rated corporate bonds. The result on lower-rated corporate bonds being sold
more is consistent with the predictions of the dynamic liquidation model, where vulnerable
investors optimize over multiple periods and as a result may retain relatively liquid assets when
faced with sufficiently large expected future shocks. Alternatively, investors with exposure to
securitized bonds may have perceived securitized bonds to have become permanently riskier, and
wished to reduce the elevated risk of their portfolios by selling riskier corporate bonds.
As reported earlier, we find that the insurance companies overall were small net purchasers of
both asset classes at the onset of the crisis. The only exception is a small subset of insurance
companies whose risk-based capital ratios (RBC ratio) were below the threshold level of 2 as of
2007Q2 — these insurance companies sold securitized bonds.30 Given that downgrades did not
occur for most of these bonds until after our sample period, this behavior is consistent with the
view that insurance companies’ portfolio decisions are based on capital regulation constraints.

6. Effects of Investors’ Exposure to Securitized Bonds on
Corporate Bonds
The previous sections show that, as the crisis hits the market, institutional investors with a short
investment horizon retain their (now) most illiquid assets – the securitized bonds – and sell the
others. In particular, they prioritize the sale of junk bonds. We now examine whether corporate
bonds that are held by investors with heavy exposure to securitized bonds experience negative
shocks at the onset of the crisis. We start by focusing on changes in corporate bond yield spreads
(prices) and trading volumes (Hypothesis 3). We then test whether the size of the impact is
related to the bond rating (Hypothesis 3b). Finally, we examine whether insurance companies act
as strategic liquidity providers to offset the sales by short-horizon mutual funds.
6.1 Effects on Corporate Bond Yields
For a cross-sectional sample of corporate bonds, we estimate the following model:
30

The NAIC states that insurance companies with an RBC ratio below 2 are subject to supervision by state regulators.

21

ΔYSi = α + βHoldersExposurei + γInvRatingi + δ (HoldersExposurei × InvRatingi )+ ϕ ' x i + µ j + εi

(4),

where each observation corresponds to a corporate bond with data in the FINRA TRACE data set.
The dependent variable

is the change in corporate bond i’s yield spread around the time of

€

the onset of the crisis. The yield spread is the difference between the bond’s yield in the
secondary market, as reported by TRACE, and the yield of a Treasury bond of comparable
maturity.31 Data on Treasury bond yields are from the Federal Reserve Statistical Release.
We empirically gauge the magnitude of potential future shocks by creating an exposure
measure at the individual bond level (HoldersExposurei). This measure is constructed by first
calculating the exposure of the portfolio of each institutional investor to the securitized bonds at
the individual mutual fund level, and then weight-averaging this exposure across all the funds
holding a particular corporate bond i.32 The larger the exposure of the mutual fund investors
holding bond i, the more bond i is expected to be sold today.
What about insurance company investors? We expect the mechanism governing their
portfolio decisions to be distinct. As we argued, they are not subject to runs like mutual funds,
because they have longer lock-up periods and heftier early withdrawal penalties. This makes them
less subject to selling pressure in the initial period of the crisis. At the same time, they are subject
to rating-based capital regulation. Downgrades of securitized bonds would thus predict sales by
insurance companies. However, in the second half of 2007 — the focus of our analysis — there
were only a very small number of downgrades of securitized bonds. Thus, we do not expect
insurance companies to liquidate as much as mutual funds during this period. To verify this
prediction, we also construct an analogous HoldersExposure measure for insurance companies
and include this variable in one of the specifications.
The dynamic liquidation model predicts that, for a sufficiently large expected future liquidity
shock, investors optimizing over multiple periods may choose to liquidate assets that have
relatively high temporary price impacts in the initial period (e.g., junk bonds) and to retain assets
with low temporary price impacts (e.g., investment-grade bonds) to hedge against future shocks.
We thus interact the exposure measure (HoldersExposurei) with InvRatingi (as defined before)
and include this interaction term as well as InvRatingi itself in the model. The lower the rating,

31
For related literature on determinants of credit spreads and fixed-income returns, see Litterman and Scheinkman
(1991), Knez et al. (1994), Colin-Dufresne et al. (2001), Chen et al. (2008), and Gutierrez et al. (2010).
32
In the results reported in Tables V-VII, the exposure measures are as of June 2007. In unreported analyses, we reestimate the models in Tables V-VII with exposure measures as of December 2006 and find that the results are
qualitatively unchanged.

22

the higher the InvRatingi is, and the more the bond is expected to be sold as a function of the
bondholders’ exposure to securitized bonds.
We also include a standard set of bond characteristics x, which includes the level of the yield
spread of bond i as of June 2007, the bond’s liquidity measures (Amihud ratio or InvTrades, as
defined before), an interaction term between HoldersExposure and bond liquidity, as well as
issuer and issuance year fixed effects. In all specifications, the standard errors are clustered
around bond issuers.
There may be concerns that the inclusion of a given corporate bond in a portfolio of highexposure investors is endogenous. The inclusion of a bond issuer dummy µ j (firm fixed effect)
allows us to mitigate these concerns. Effectively, the use of a firm fixed-effect model enables us
to compare the yield spread change of a bond held by exposed investors to another bond issued by

€

the same firm (firm j) but held by non-exposed investors, holding any issuer-specific
characteristics (both observable traits, such as credit ratings, as well as unobservable,
idiosyncratic traits) constant.
Further, since we construct the dependent variable, yield spread, as the yield of the bond in
excess of the Treasury bond of the same term structure, we are also able to control for any term
spread difference that might be present between the exposed and non-exposed bonds of a given
issuer. That is, we are able to isolate the variations in spread changes and selling pressures across
bonds (holding issuer risk and term structure constant) as functions of bond-specific exposure
measures.
We report the results in Table V. In columns (1)-(4)

is defined as the change in the

bond’s yield spread over the period from the last week of June through the last week of October
2007, while in columns (5)-(8) it is the change in the bond’s yield spread over the period from the
last week of June through the last week of December 2007. The sample includes all bonds in the
FINRA TRACE data set with available data on bond characteristics from the Mergent FISD data.
The first coefficient, HoldersExposure, is positive and significant, which means that the
higher the exposure of the investors holding bond i, the more the yield spread goes up in the
months after the onset of the crisis. Comparing the coefficients on HoldersExposure between the
left- and the right-hand side panel, we also note that they are two to three times larger in the righthand side panel, which is consistent with the worsening effect of investors’ exposure on yields
over time. The results are consistent with Hypothesis (3). An increase in HoldersExposure from
0% to 50% is associated with a 70 bps higher increase in the yield spread in the first two quarters

23

of the crisis. Recall (Table I) that corporate bond yield spreads increased by approximately
100bps on average in the first quarter of the crisis, and about 200 bps in the first two quarters of
the crisis. This suggests that our findings are large but reasonable.
The third coefficient, the interaction term of HoldersExposure and InvRating, is also positive
and significant. This implies that the lower the rating of the bond, the more its yield increased as a
function of its holders’ exposure to securitized bonds. The result is consistent with Hypothesis
(3b) and suggests that the sharp increase in yield spreads of lower-rated bonds at the start of the
crisis, as depicted in Figure 1, is at least partly due to the contagion of the shock from the (mostly
AAA-rated) securitized bond market to the lower-rated corporate bond market via the joint
ownership of both securities by mutual funds.
We separately control for the effect of a rating itself on the yield spread change by including
InvRating itself in the model (second row). The positive and significant coefficient suggests that
the lower the rating of the bond, the more the bond yield increased during this period independent
of the investors’ exposure to securitized bonds. This may be due to overall increased fear of risk
or investor panic that is unrelated to the transmission mechanism we examine here. The
interaction term between HoldersExposure and the bond’s overall liquidity measures (Amihud
ratio, InvTrades), on the other hand, is generally insignificant.
We also augment specification (4) by adding the fraction of securitized bonds held by the
insurance companies and the corresponding interaction term with the ratings. Neither coefficient
is significant (though positive). This is in line with our expectations, since insurance companies
are not expected to be under pressure in the initial period of the crisis when bond ratings are still
largely intact.
Overall, these results show that there is an incremental effect that comes from the
transmission channel that we identify over and above the general unconditional increase in
corporate bond yields during this period. The increase in bond yield spreads around the 2007
crisis is most pronounced among the low-rated bonds held by mutual funds with heavy exposure
to securitized bonds.
As a robustness check, in Panel B, we estimate an alternative model specification:

ΔYSi = α + βShortExposedi + γInvRatingi + δ (ShortExposedi × InvRatingi )+ ϕ ' x i + µ j + εi (5),
where ShortExposedi is an indicator equal to 1 if bond i’s short-horizon mutual fund holder’s

€

exposure to securitized bonds is above the sample median. The idea is to isolate the effect on
short-horizon investors’ exposure (to securitized bonds) on yield spread changes, rather than the

24

average holder’s exposure. We use two proxies of investor horizon, and examine the model using
both the change in yield spread between July and October 2007 (columns (1)-(2)), as well as
between July and December 2007 (columns (3)-(4)). Positive coefficients on ShortExposedi itself
as well as positive coefficients on its interaction term with InvRatingi indicate that presence of
high exposure for these investors with liquidity needs is associated with greater yield spread
changes, and this is especially so for lower-rated bonds.
In Figure 2, we provide an illustration of the econometric results presented in Table V. We
plot the cumulative monthly return on a portfolio that is short on corporate bonds whose mutual
fund holders have “high exposure” to securitized bonds, and long on a set of issuer- and durationmatched bonds without the exposure. We place a “high exposure” bond in the short portfolio if
and only if it has a matching bond without a high exposure satisfying the following criteria: (i)
the matching bond is issued by the same issuer firm; and (ii) the time to maturity of the matching
bond is between 50% and 150% of the time to maturity of the shorted bond. These matched bonds
are then placed in the long portfolio. We then construct the return of a portfolio based on the
difference between long portfolio’s monthly return minus the short portfolio’s monthly return.
The cumulative return on the long-short portfolio hovers around zero from 2004 to 2006, but
rises sharply in 2007. Given that the return on this portfolio is, by construction, independent of
changes in firm-specific risk, we can interpret this sharp rise as due to selling pressure on the
exposed bonds by their investors.33 While this plot is for illustrative purposes only, the issuer
fixed effect models presented in Tables V-VII allow us to draw inferences about the statistical
significance of this effect.
6.2 Effects on Corporate Bond Trades
While the positive relationship between investors’ exposure to securitized bonds and an increase
in the yield is consistent with selling pressure being exerted on the bond by mutual funds in need
of liquidation, we have so far not directly studied whether individual bond sales by mutual funds
are a direct function of their exposure. Therefore, we now focus on whether mutual funds’
relative trading impact increased after the onset of the crisis and whether this increase is related to
the fraction of securitized bonds they held. We estimate
ΔTri = α + βHoldersExposurei + γInvRatingi + δ (HoldersExposurei × InvRatingi )+ ϕ ' x i + µ j + εi , (6)

€

33
There may be concerns that the term spread differences between the exposed bond and the matched bond may drive
some of these results. In the results reported here, the exposed bonds have on average slightly longer duration (about
8.75 years) than the matched bonds (8.13 years) by the same issuers. To address these concerns, we repeated the
exercise with a restricted sample where the matched bonds had longer duration than the exposed bonds, and the results
were qualitatively unchanged.

25

where the dependent variable is defined as:

for corporate bond i, over the periods July-October 2007 and July-December 2007. This variable
proxies the weight of the mutual funds’ sales out of all the trades for bond i. We hypothesize that
the selling pressure from mutual funds on a bond is higher the more the funds are exposed to
securitized bonds and the lower the bond rating is. The other variables are defined as in the
previous specification.
The results are reported in Table VI. The interaction term coefficient is positive and
significant. Thus, the lower the rating of bond i and the higher the exposure of its investors to
securitized bonds, the higher the mutual funds sales as a percentage of the total trading volume
for the bond in the initial months of the crisis. A one standard deviation increase in
HoldersExposure is associated with a 26% higher increase in mutual funds’ selling pressure for a
junk bond (rated BBB- or below) than for a AAA-rated bond.
In Panel B, we estimate an alternative model specification based on the following:

ΔTri = α + βShortExposedi + γInvRatingi + δ (ShortExposedi × InvRatingi )+ ϕ ' x i + µ j + εi

(7) .

This specification is analogous to Equation (5) in Table V, Panel B.

€

We find a positive relationship between trading volume and both ShortExposed itself as well as
its interaction with InvRating. This indicates that the presence of high exposure for the investors
with liquidity needs is associated with more selling pressure, and especially for lower-rated bonds.
Finally, as a robustness check, we re-estimate specification (6) using as a dependent variable
LogVol, defined as: LogVol = log(1 + Vol) where Vol is the bond’s average daily trading volume,
expressed in thousands of trades. This variable proxies for the overall trade in the market.
HoldersExposure and InvRating are defined as above, and x is a set of standard control variables,
including the average weekly log-trading volume as of June 2007, as well as issuer and issuance
year fixed effects.
The results are reported in Table VII. The first row coefficient, HoldersExposure, is positive
and significant, implying that the higher the bondholders’ exposure to securitized bonds, the
higher the trading volume of corporate bond i. The second row coefficient, InvRating, is negative
and significant, implying that unconditionally lower-rated bonds are traded less and thus more

26

illiquid. This finding validates our use of a bond’s rating as a measure of a temporary price
impact of trading. More importantly, the third coefficient, the interaction between the first two, is
positive and significant. This implies that, even though lower-rated bonds traded less in the initial
months of the crisis in general, among those held by investors with exposure to securitized bonds,
higher exposure and lower bond rating were directly related to more trades. This is consistent
with Hypothesis (3b). That is, when faced with large uncertainty about recurring future liquidity
shocks (as measured by exposure to securitized bonds), investors chose to sell lower-rated
corporate bonds and to retain higher-rated corporate bonds as a hedge against future forced
liquidations.
This provides the final link between securitized bond holdings, investor sales, and corporate
bond yields. It shows that the corporate bonds that experience increases in yields due to high
exposure of their holders to securitized bonds are also the ones that display spikes in trading
volumes and increases in representations of mutual fund trades among overall trades during the
initial months of the crisis. Overall, these results suggest that funds significantly increase their
price pressure on corporate bonds during the crisis and that this impact is positively related to
their exposure to securitized bonds.
6.3 Are Insurance Companies Strategic Liquidity Providers?
In the previous sections, we find that insurance companies traded relatively little and in fact were
small net purchases of both corporate bonds and securitized bonds at the onset of the crisis.
Magnitudes of their trades are small compared to those of mutual funds, which suggest they did
not fully offset the mutual funds’ liquidity demand. Moreover, unlike mutual fund holders whose
exposure to securitized bonds affected increases in bond yield spreads, insurance companies’
exposure to securitized bonds had no significant impact on the yields of corporate bonds they
held. Similarly, their exposure did not impact how much mutual funds holders contributed to the
selling pressure on a given bond. At the same time, we find, in Table VII, that the effect of
insurance companies’ exposure on the overall trades of a bond was significantly positive in the
period including the last quarter of 2007.
In this subsection we provide additional analysis on whether insurance companies acted as
strategic liquidity providers to offset the sales of corporate bonds by mutual funds.34 Our analysis

34
We acknowledge that our analysis is limited by the fact that we do not observe holdings by other classes of investors,
such as hedge funds, banks, governments, and foreign investors. Clearly, it is important to understand who besides
insurance companies acted as liquidity providers in various asset class markets during this time of the crisis. For
example, He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) argue that banks were liquidity providers in the securitized bond
market.

27

consists of comparisons of insurance companies’ behavior in pre-crisis and crisis periods, such as
correlation of their trades with mutual funds’ and price impact of their trades and mutual funds’
trades on bond yield spreads.
First, we examine the extent to which mutual funds’ net trades of individual corporate bonds
are (positively or negatively) correlated with insurance companies’ net trades of the same bonds.
The model we estimate and report in Table VIII, Panel A is as follows:

(8) ,

where MF_Netbuyit and INS_Netbuyit are mutual funds’ and insurance companies’ net purchases
of corporate bond i at t, respectively. Column (1) in Panel A reports the results for all the mutual
funds, while columns (2)-(3) and (4)-(5) report the results for short-horizon funds and non-shorthorizon funds, respectively. Positive and significant coefficients for β1 and β2 imply that
insurance companies’ trades and mutual funds’ trades are positively correlated both in the precrisis and crisis periods. The large F-stat values for H0: β1 = β2 show that the positive correlation
between the trades became significantly stronger, not weaker, during the crisis months.
In Panel B, we compare for a cross-section sample of corporate bonds the correlation of
mutual funds’ trades with insurance companies’ trades in the crisis periods for low-flow funds
and high-flow funds, respectively. While they are both positively correlated, trades of low-flow
funds are significantly less correlated with the insurance companies’ trades, suggesting that their
trades offset each other to a greater degree than trades of high-flow funds and those of insurance
companies.
Next, we break down the institutional trades into mutual fund trades and insurance company
trades to see if there was a structural break in the relationship between the trades and the bond
yields at the onset of the crisis. The results are reported in Table IX. This analysis provides
several interesting findings. First, we document in column (2) that mutual funds are larger net
sellers of corporate bonds in the crisis period than in the pre-crisis period. In contrast, insurance
companies’ net sales are significantly smaller as a percentage of their total holdings during the
crisis period than in the pre-crisis period (column (1)). This suggests that, at least to a degree,
insurance companies’ trades mitigate the overall fluctuations in trades caused by mutual funds. In
column (3), we show that the relation between the institutional investors’ (i.e., mutual funds and
insurance companies combined) net trades and bond yield spread changes was positive in the precrisis periods, whereas it turns negative, i.e., net sales are associated with yield increases, in the
crisis periods. In column (4), we break down the institutional investors’ net trades into mutual

28

funds’ and insurance companies’ trades, and show that this structural break in the relation
between trades and yield changes is driven by mutual funds rather than insurance companies.
Further, in column (5), we examine the net purchases by funds that experience more negative
flows (below median). We find that their trades is significantly correlated with bond yield spread
changes with a negative sign in the crisis-periods, and that the coefficient is significantly larger
than for mutual funds overall (p-value = 0.0131).
Our interpretation of the results is as follows: Mutual funds were strategic liquidity providers
for corporate bonds they held during the pre-crisis period, buying when yield for the bond was
going up (when price was low). As the crisis hit, mutual funds became liquidity demanders,
effectively selling when the price was low; this is especially true for funds with negative flows. In
contrast, insurance companies never acted strategically. We think that this is perhaps because
their flows are steady and they do not have much room to act strategically. Also, their capital
regulation might have curtailed their economic incentives to hold (especially) lower-rated
corporate bonds.
Overall, these findings suggest that insurance companies did not act as strategic liquidity
providers at the onset of the crisis and that at best there is only weak evidence that their trades
partially offset the net sales of corporate bonds by mutual funds.

Conclusion
We study a transmission mechanism that explains the contagion of the crisis from the securitized
bond market to the corporate bond market. We posit that, ceteris paribus, corporate bonds held by
“intoxicated” investors with high exposure to securitized bonds and liquidity needs experience
greater selling pressure and price declines (yield increases) at the onset of the crisis. We further
test predictions of the theory of dynamic asset liquidation: Investors with large enough future
liquidity shocks retain the most liquid assets, and instead sell assets that have a relatively high
(temporary) price impact of trading.
The results confirm our predictions about the transmission mechanism and the determinants
of investors’ portfolio decisions. We show that, prior to the onset of the crisis, mutual fund
investors were eager participants in the securitized bond market, especially in the top-rating
category. This was “rational” in the pre-crisis world when these securitized bonds were
considered to be safe, liquid and informationally insensitive, relative to corporate bonds with
higher idiosyncratic risk and, therefore, a need for more intensive credit research. Consistent with
the view that investors were hungry for relatively attractive yields in the low-interest environment,

29

funds with high flow-performance sensitivity held higher portions of their portfolios in
securitized bonds. Funds that are affiliated with commercial banks also held higher portions of
their portfolios in securitized bonds.
When securitized bonds abruptly became illiquid and their resale values plunged, the
institutional investors with significant exposure to securitized bonds – i.e., mutual funds with
short investment horizons and insurance firms with regulatory capital constraints – faced a
portfolio rebalancing problem. The mutual funds did not rush to sell the now impaired and hardto-value securitized bonds en masse, and instead sharply reduced holdings of corporate bonds,
while the insurance companies sold neither class of assets (except those with a below-threshold
level of risk-based capital, which reduced holdings of securitized bonds). The mutual funds’
portfolio decisions induced a transmission of shocks from the securitization market to the
corporate bond market. Most importantly, sales rose and yield spreads widened more for bonds
held by exposed mutual fund investors, compared to same-issuer bonds held by unexposed
investors. Our findings show that short-horizon investors with high exposure to securitized bonds
have played a significant role in spreading the crisis from the securitized bond market to the
seemingly unrelated corporate bond market. The incentives and contract features significantly
affect the behavior of institutional investors, as indicated by the impact of investment horizon, as
well as institutional differences between mutual funds and insurance companies on their behavior.

References
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-section and Time-series Effects, Journal
of Financial Markets 5, 31-56.
Bernardo A.E., and I. Welch, 2004, Liquidity and Financial Market Runs, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 135-157
Billett, M., T. D. King, and D. Mauer, 2007, Growth Opportunities and the Choice of Leverage,
Debt Maturity, and Covenants, Journal of Finance 62, 697-730.
Blundell-Wignall, A., Structured Products: Implications for Financial Markets, OECD, 2007.
Boyer, B., T. Kumagai, and K. Yuan, 2006, How Do Crises Spread? Evidence from Accessible
and Inaccessible Stock Indices, Journal of Finance 61, 957-1003.
Brown, D., B. Carlin, and M. Lobo, 2009, On the Scholes Liquidation Problem, Working Paper.

30

Brunnermeier, M., 2009, Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23, 77-100.
Brunnermeier, M., and S. Nagel, 2004, Hedge Funds and the Technology Bubble, Journal of
Finance 59, 2013-2040.
Caballero, R., E. Farhi, and P. Gourinchas, 2008, An Equilibrium Model of ‘Model Imbalances’
and Low Interest Rates, American Economic Review 98, 358-393.
Carlin, B.I., M.S. Lobo, and S. Viswanathan, 2007, Episodic Liquidity Crises: Cooperative and
Predatory Trading. Journal of Finance 62, 2235-2274.
Chen, Q., I. Goldstein, and W. Jiang, 2007, Payoff Complementarities and Financial Fragility:
Evidence from Mutual Fund Outflows, Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Chen, X., J. Harford, and K. Li, 2007, Monitoring: Which Institutions Matter? Journal of Financial
Economics 86, 279-305.
Chen, Y., W. Ferson, and H. Peters, 2008, Measuring the Timing Ability of Fixed Income Mutual
Funds, Working paper, University of Southern California.
Colin-Dufresne, P., R. Goldstein, and J. S. Martin, 2001. The Determinants of Credit Spread
Changes. Journal of Finance 56, 2177—2207.
Coval, J., J. Jurek, and E. Stafford, 2008, Economic Catastrophe Bonds, American Economic
Review 99, 628–66.
Coval, J.D, and E. Stafford, 2007, Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity Markets, Journal of
Financial Economics 86, 479-512.
Edelen, R., 1999, Investor Flows and the Performance of Open-Ended Mutual Funds, Journal of
Financial Economics 53, 439-466.
Gaspar J.-M., M. Massa, and P. Matos, 2006, Favouritism in Mutual Fund Families? Evidence on
Strategic Cross-Fund Subsidization, Journal of Finance 61, 73-104.
Getter, D., M. Jickling, M. Labonte, and E. Murphy, 2007, Financial Crisis? The Liquidity
Crunch of August 2007, CRS Report for Congress.
Gorton, G., 2008, The Panic of 2007, Working Paper.
Gorton, G., 2009, Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand: Banking and the Panic of 2007,
Working Paper.
Gorton, G., and A. Metrick, 2009, Securitized Banking and Run on Repo, Working Paper.
Griffin, J. and D. Y. Tang, 2009, Did Subjectivity Play a Role in CDO Credit Ratings?, Working
Paper, University of Texas at Austin.
Gutierrez, R., W. Maxwell, and D. Xu, 2010, On Economies of Scale and Persistence in
Corporate-Bond Mutual Funds, Working paper, University of Oregon.

31

He, Z., I. Khang, and A. Krishnamurthy, 2010, Balance Sheet Adjustments during the 2008 Crisis,
Working paper.
Herring, R., and T. Schuermann, 2003, Capital Regulation for Position Risk in Banks, Securities
Firms and Insurance Companies, Working Paper.
Holmstrom, B., 2008, "Discussion of ‘The Panic of 2007,‘ by Gary Gorton,“ in Maintaining
Stability in a Changing Financial System, Proceedings of the 2008 Jackson Hole
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2008.
Huang J.C., K.D. Wei, and H. Yan, 2007, Volatility of Performance and Mutual Fund Flows,
Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin.
Jiang, W., A. Nelson, and E. Vytlacil, 2009, Liar’s Loan? Effects of Origination Channel and
Information Falsification on Mortgage Delinquency, Working Paper, Columbia University.
Jin, L., 2006, Capital Gain Tax Overhang and Price Pressure, Journal of Finance 61, 1399-1430.
Keys, B. J., T. K. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig. 2010. Did Securitization Lead to Lax
Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 307-362.
Knez, P., R. Litterman, and J. Scheinkman, 1994. Explorations Into Factors Explaining Money
Market Returns. Journal of Finance 49, 1861-1882.
Litterman, R. and J. Scheinkman, 1991. Common Factors Affecting Bond Returns. Journal of
Fixed Income, 54-61.
Longstaff, F., 2010, The Subprime Credit Crisis and Contagion in Financial Markets, Journal of
Financial Economics 97, 436-450.
Longstaff, F., and B. Myers, 2009, How Does the Market Value Toxic Assets?, Working paper.
Massa, M., A. Yasuda, and L. Zhang, 2009, Supply Uncertainty of the Bond Investor Base and
the Leverage of the Firm, Working Paper.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi, 2008, The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from
the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis, Working Paper.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi, 2009, House Prices, Home Equity-based Borrowing, and the U.S.
Household Leverage Crisis, Working Paper.
Nini, G., 2009. How Non-banks Increased the Supply of Bank Loans: Evidence from Institutional
Term Loans, Working Paper.
Petersen, M., 2009, Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
Approaches, Review of Financial Studies 22, 435-480.
Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 1997, The limits to arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.
Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 2009, Unstable Banking, Working Paper.
Scholes, M., 2000, Crisis and Risk Management. American Economic Review 90, 17-21.

32

Appendix: Variable Definitions
I. Mutual Fund Characteristics
Holdings of corporate bonds and securitized bonds in the mutual fund’s portfolio,
and changes thereof after the onset of the crisis. H is defined as the percentage of
corporate bonds (respectively securitized bonds) in the mutual fund’s portfolio, in excess
of the average percentage holdings of corporate bonds (respectively securitized bonds)
among the funds in the same sector as the fund. We define sectors based on the maturity
and rating of the securities held in the funds’ portfolios by crossing three maturity terciles
is the change in H between June
and three rating terciles, obtaining nine sectors.
2007 and December 2007. C is the percentage of investment grade (resp. sub-investment
grade) corporate bonds in the mutual fund’s portfolio, defined analogously.
is the
change in C between June 2007 and December 2007.
Flow volatility Standard deviation of the mutual fund’s monthly flows, computed over a rolling
window of length 12 months.
Turnover ratio Turnover ratio of the mutual fund’s portfolio, defined as the minimum (of
aggregated sales or aggregated purchases of securities) divided by the average 12-month
total net assets of the fund.
Flow-performance sensitivity Sensitivity of the investment flow into the mutual fund to the
fund’s past performance. Define the net flow into the mutual fund in a given month as:

where TNA is the fund’s total net asset value, and R is the fund’s return. We sort funds
into 3x3 = 9 styles, based on maturity and ratings of bonds held. Every month, the fund’s
style-adjusted return is calculated as the fund’s return minus the average style return. We
measure the fund i’s percentile rank of its cumulative style-adjusted return in January to
June of a given year (Performance(Jan-June)it) and the cumulative flow into the fund in
July to December of the same year (Flow(July-Dec)it), so as to avoid the overlap in
measurement periods. Finally, the following regression is estimated separately for each
fund i over the period 1998-2006:

The fund i’s flow-performance sensitivity is the estimate

.

Log(Family size) Natural logarithm of the total net assets under management of the fund’s mutual
fund family, expressed in thousands of dollars.
Affiliated with commercial bank Indicator variable equal to one if the mutual fund belongs to a
fund family that is affiliated with a commercial bank (following Massa and Rehman
(2008)).
Past flow
Fund return

Investment flow into the mutual fund over the previous quarter.
Quarterly return of the mutual fund.

Family equity holdings Equity holdings by the fund’s fund family as a fraction of total holdings.

33

Mgmt fee Management fees of the mutual fund, as a fraction of its average net assets, obtained
from the CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free Mutual Fund Database.
Expense Ratio Fund’s expense ratio in the most recent fiscal year, defined as the total investment
that the shareholders pay for the fund’s operating expenses (including12b1 fees).
Actual 12b1 Ratio of total assets of the fund attributed to marketing and distribution costs, as
reported in the Annual Report Statement of Operations.
Average maturity of the holdings Natural logarithm of the average maturity of the fixed income
holdings of the mutual fund, expressed in quarters.
No equity (N/Y) Indicator variable equal to one if the fund does not hold any equity, zero
otherwise.
Fund’s equity holdings return Quarterly return on the equity holdings of the mutual fund.
II. Bond characteristics
LogSale (Jul-Oct 2007/Jul-Dec 2007) Natural logarithm of the net sales (in $K) of the bond by
institutional investors over the periods July to October 2007 or July to December 2007.
∆YS (Jul-Oct 2007/Jul-Dec 2007) Change in the bond’s yield spread (defined as the spread
between the bond’s yield and the yield of a government bond of comparable maturity)
over the periods July to October 2007 or July to December 2007.
∆Tr (Jul-Oct 2007/Jul-Dec 2007) Net sales of the bond by mutual funds as a fraction of the
bond’s total trading volume, over the specified periods (July-Oct 2007/July-Dec 2007).
Holders’ Exposure Holdings of securitized bonds as a fraction of the portfolio of the average
mutual fund holding the bond. For each bond, we compute the fraction of securitized
bonds in the portfolio of each mutual fund that holds the bond. We then weight average
across mutual funds, with weights proportional to the par amount held by each fund.
Insurance Holders’ Exposure Average holdings of securitized bonds as a fraction of the
portfolio of the average insurance company holding the bond.
No rating (Y/N) Indicator variable equal to one if the bond does not have a rating, zero otherwise.
InvRating An inverse measure of the quality of the bond’s rating, as defined in the text.
Bond face value Natural logarithm of the total amount outstanding of the bond at the issuance
date, expressed in thousands of dollars.
Covenants (Y/N) Indicator variable equal to one if there are covenants attached to the bond, and
zero otherwise. Data on covenants are obtained from the Mergent Fixed Income database.
CovIndex Billet et al. (2007) index of covenant protection ranging from zero (no covenant
protection) to one (complete covenant protection).
Log(Months to maturity) Natural logarithm of the bond’s time to maturity, expressed in months.
Amihud Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity proxy, as defined in the text.
InvTrades The natural logarithm of the inverse of the number of trades on the bond, as reported
from FINRA’s TRACE data set.

34

Table I Summary Statistics
The table reports the summary statistics. Panel A reports the securitized bond and corporate bond holdings by mutual funds and
insurance companies. Panel B reports the corporate bond and securitized bond holdings of mutual funds by ratings (for bonds
with known ratings only). Panel C reports AAA-rated bond holdings as % of the total portfolio. Panels D reports the breakdown
of securitized bond holdings by collateral type (residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), commercial mortgage-backed
securities (CMBS), other asset-backed securities (ABS), and government agency-backed securities (Agency). Panel E reports
the summary statistics for the main variables used in the analysis.
A. Corporate bond and securitized bond holdings of mutual funds and insurance companies
A-1: Mutual Funds ($bn)

A-2: Insurance Companies ($bn)

B. Corporate bond and securitized bond holdings of mutual funds, by ratings
B-1: Securitized Bonds (%)
B-2: Corporate Bonds %)

C: AAA-rated bonds as % of total
C-1: Mutual fund portfolio

C-2: Insurance company portfolio

35

Table I Summary Statistics – cont’d
D. Securitized bond holdings, by underlying asset type and ratings
D-1: Mutual fund portfolio – all ratings
D-2: Mutual fund portfolio – AAA-rated only

D-3: Insurance company portfolio – all ratings

D-4: Insurance company portfolio – AAA-rated only

36

Table I Summary Statistics – cont’d
E. Variables Used in the Analysis
Mean

Median

St. Dev.

Min

Max

N. Obs

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0346
0.0154
0.0135
0.2407
0.0549
3.0722
0.2877
0.0202
0.0136
0.1582
0.4956
0.0105
0.0025
42.004
0.8166
0.0114

0.0000
0.0000
0.0088
0.0874
0.0303
3.0809
0.0000
-0.0009
0.0114
0.0000
0.5030
0.0093
0.0000
36.797
1.0000
0.0000

0.2809
0.2216
0.0137
0.4779
0.0658
1.8474
0.4527
0.1187
0.0432
0.2720
0.2465
0.0066
0.0036
20.769
0.3869
0.1050

-0.8644
-0.6464
0.0000
0.0000
0.0031
0.0000
0.0000
-0.2176
-0.3982
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0007
0.0000
-0.8961

0.9861
0.8956
0.0980
8.5579
0.3987
7.2332
1.0000
1.9452
0.7702
0.9837
2.2210
0.1877
0.0103
196.00
1.0000
2.0006

16252
16252
16252
15835
15400
16252
16252
16252
16252
16252
16252
16252
16252
16252
16252
16252

3.3864
4.2004
0.8151
1.9650
0.0291
0.0353
0.0944
0.3113
0.3291
-2.6509
1.3392
0.1267
11.275
0.4974
0.1673
4.1110
0.2182
0.4359
0.4466
-0.9774

0.0000
0.0000
0.5376
1.2949
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
-3.0445
1.1010
0.0000
12.067
0.0000
0.0000
4.2627
0.2761
0.0000
0.4095
-0.8544

4.3138
4.7330
1.2439
2.0580
0.2370
0.0846
0.1472
0.4631
0.4699
1.0272
1.4089
0.3327
2.0613
0.5000
0.2004
1.1467
0.1751
0.4959
0.2848
0.5011

0.0000
0.0000
0.0495
0.3239
-0.0962
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
-3.3322
0.3530
0.0000
7.0553
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0433
-4.0012

13.541
13.893
13.191
19.965
0.5646
0.4997
0.9050
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
9.4245
1.0000
15.425
1.0000
0.6667
6.9903
0.9716
1.0000
1.5162
-0.2231

8148
8148
7348
8148
8666
8728
9598
8728
8728
9598
9598
9598
9598
9598
9598
9598
9598
9598
9598
9598

E-1: Variables used in Tables II and IV
Excess fractional holdings of corporate bonds
Excess fractional holdings of securitized assets
Turnover ratio (as fraction of TNA)
Flow-performance sensitivity
Flow volatility (over 12 monthly flows)
Log(Family Size) (Size in $M)
Affiliated with commercial bank [1=YES]
Past flow
Fund return
Family fractional equity holdings
Mgmt fee (%)
Exp. Ratio
Actual 12b1
Average maturity of holdings (months)
No equity [1 = NO]
Fund’s equity holdings return
E-2: Variables used in Tables III and V-VII
LogSale (Jul-Oct 2007) (Sale in $K)
LogSale (Jul-Dec 2007) (Sale in $K)
∆YS (Jul-Oct 2007) (%)
∆YS (Jul-Dec 2007) (%)
∆Tr (Jul-Oct 2007)
∆Tr (Jul-Dec 2007)
Holders’ Exposure (between 0 and 1)
High-Turnover holders [1=YES]
High-Flow volatility holders [1=YES]
InvRating
Yield spread in 2007Q2 (%)
No Rating [1 = NO]
Bond face value (Log($K))
Covenants [1=YES]
CovIndex (between 0 and 1)
Log(Months to maturity)
Insurance Co.’s Exposure (between 0 and 1)
Bond is not held by mutual funds [1 = NO]
Amihud’s Illiquidity proxy
InvTrades

37

Table II The Effects of Fund Types on the Propensity to Hold Securitized Bonds
The table reports the estimates of a model:

H it = α + β Flow − Performance Sensitivity (alternatively Horizon) it + γ ' x it + εit ,

(1)

where each observation represents the portfolio composition of a given mutual fund in a given quarter. The dependent variable H
is the excess percentage ownership of the fund’s portfolio represented by securitized bonds (Panel A) or corporate bonds (Panel
B).€Sensitivity is the mutual fund’s flow-performance sensitivity. Horizon is the mutual fund’s horizon, proxied for by Turnover
ratio or Flow volatility. x is a set of standard control variables. In both panels, in columns (1)-(3) the model is estimated using the
Fama-MacBeth procedure. The standard errors are Newey-West, with lag length parameter equal to 4. In columns (4)-(6), the
model is estimated as a pooled OLS with quarter fixed effects, and standard errors clustered around each fund. The sample
includes all the mutual funds belonging to the merged Lipper eMAXX-CDA/Spectrum data set, over the period 1998Q1-2007Q2.
The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.
A. Holdings of Securitized Bonds
Fama-MacBeth
(1)

Turnover ratio

(2)

(3)

1.3535***

(5)

3.40

0.1841***

0.1442**

4.78

2.57

Flow-perf. sensitivity

0.0235***

0.0288**

4.59

Log(Family Size)
Affiliated with comm. bank

-0.0015

(6)

1.2427***

4.84

Flow volatility

Pooled OLS
(4)

-0.0002

0.0002

2.58

-0.0018

-0.0006

-0.0004

-0.74

-0.09

0.13

-0.56

-0.17

-0.11

0.0198**

0.0181**

0.0216***

0.0205

0.0202

0.0228*

2.57

2.69

2.93

1.58

1.53

1.73

Past flow

0.0001

-0.1230**

-0.0008

-0.0002***

-0.0016

-0.0001***

0.01

-2.15

-0.08

-3.53

-0.66

-3.23

Fund return

-0.3157

-0.2957

-0.3113

-0.1361***

-0.1334***

-0.1420***

-1.66

-1.55

-1.65

-3.18

-3.01

-3.28

Family equity holdings

-0.0185**

-0.0189*

-0.0230**

-0.0226

-0.0255*

-0.0270*

-2.12

-1.93

-2.62

-1.64

-1.80

-1.93

Mgmt fee

-0.0330***

-0.0367***

-0.0395***

-0.0441**

-0.0450**

-0.0503**

-4.37

-4.84

-5.17

-2.26

-2.25

-2.56

Exp. ratio

-1.8571

-1.6070

-1.6725

-2.4794***

-2.2712***

-2.2142***

-1.62

-1.45

-1.54

-3.39

-3.21

-3.10

Actual 12b1

-2.7116

-3.0727

-2.9732

-1.5528

-2.0592

-1.9096

-1.29

-1.58

-1.56

-0.99

-1.31

-1.23

Av. maturity of holdings

0.0005

0.0007

0.0006

0.0010***

0.0012***

0.0011***

No equity
Fund’s equity hold. return

Quarter fixed effects
Standard error
N. Obs.
(Average) R

2

1.25

1.57

1.46

3.38

3.91

3.93

0.1173***

0.1234***

0.1240***

0.1252***

0.1340***

0.1322***

21.35

25.32

23.68

10.62

11.12

11.23

0.0062

0.0003

0.0138

-0.0261**

-0.0244**

-0.0233**

0.20

0.01

0.43

-2.37

-2.10

-2.03

No

No

No

Newey-West

Newey-West

Newey-West

16252

15400

15835

Yes
Clustered
by fund
16252

Yes
Clustered by
fund
15400

Yes
Clustered
by fund
15835

0.14

0.13

0.14

0.11

0.11

0.11

38

Table II The Effects of Fund Types on the Propensity to Hold Securitized Bonds – cont’d
B. Holdings of Corporate Bonds
Fama-MacBeth
(1)

Turnover ratio

(2)

(3)

-1.8692***

(4)

(5)

-4.12

-0.1113**

-0.0399

-2.04

-0.52

Flow-perf. Sensitivity

-0.0232***

-0.0272**

-3.28

Log(Family Size)
Affiliated with comm. bank

-0.0001

(6)

-1.9044***

-5.41

Flow volatility

Pooled OLS

-0.0012

-0.0022

-1.98

0.0010

-0.0002

-0.0011

-0.02

-0.46

-0.85

0.24

-0.05

-0.25

-0.0290***

-0.0309***

-0.0325***

-0.0274

-0.0305*

-0.0311*

-3.11

-3.22

-3.72

-1.64

-1.80

-1.84

Past flow

0.0214

0.1425

0.0218*

0.0003***

0.0022

0.0003***

1.63

1.64

1.70

5.10

0.99

4.66

Fund return

0.3316

0.2993

0.3112

0.1771***

0.1798***

0.1823***

Family equity holdings

1.04

0.92

0.97

2.67

2.60

2.72

-0.0381***

-0.0359**

-0.0329***

-0.0345

-0.0286

-0.0283

-3.37

-2.61

-3.18

-1.44

-1.18

-1.17

Mgmt fee

0.0219*

0.0182*

0.0300**

0.0557*

0.0535*

0.0642**

1.85

1.78

2.20

1.94

1.83

2.25

Exp. ratio

6.8974***

7.0888***

6.7267***

5.1192***

4.8543***

4.7298***

4.62

5.30

4.76

3.06

2.81

2.89

-0.9586

-1.3660

-0.6165

0.8405

1.1335

1.4445

-0.47

-0.84

-0.34

0.31

0.41

0.54

-0.0010*

-0.0012**

-0.0012**

-0.0018***

-0.0020***

-0.0020***

Actual 12b1
Av. maturity of holdings
No equity
Fund’s equity hold. return

Quarter fixed effects
Standard error
N. Obs.
(Average) R

2

-1.92

-2.09

-2.11

-4.48

-4.99

-5.02

0.0993***

0.0932***

0.0907***

0.0575***

0.0465**

0.0486**

3.33

3.20

3.01

2.76

2.19

2.30

-0.0221

-0.0051

-0.0330

0.0391*

0.0408*

0.0391*

-0.33

-0.07

-0.50

1.93

1.95

1.90

No

No

No

Newey-West

Newey-West

Newey-West

16252

15400

15835

Yes
Clustered by
fund
16252

Yes
Clustered by
fund
15400

Yes
Clustered by
fund
15835

0.09

0.09

0.09

0.06

0.05

0.05

39

Table III Mutual Fund Flows and Bond Sales after the Onset of the Crisis
In Panel A, we examine pure bond funds that held both corporate bonds and securitized bonds in their portfolios prior to the crisis
and use their portfolio changes in the last two quarters of 2007 as the dependent variable. In columns (1)-(4) the dependent
variable is the percentage net purchases of corporate bonds (odd-numbered columns) and securitized bonds (even-numbered). In
columns (5)-(8) the dependent variable is the negative of Log-$ Sales and columns are organized analogously. The cross section
of sample funds are then sorted by their contemporaneous fund flows into four bins (VeryLowFlow, LowFlow, HighFlow, and
VeryHighFlow). In columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6), the net position changes are regressed on just the four category dummies; in
columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8), the model also includes additional fund characteristics. The row labelled F-stat reports the F-test
statistics for the hypothesis that the paired coefficients (corporate bonds vs. securitized bonds) on the most negative flow group
(VeryLowFlow) are equal. The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.
Panel B reports the estimates of a model:

,

(2)

where each observation corresponds to a corporate bond with data in the FINRA TRACE data set. The dependent variable is
LogSale, the log-net sales (in thousands of dollars) of the bond by institutional investors between July 2007 and December 2007.
LogHold denotes the log-dollar holding of the bond by institutional investors as of June 2007, and x is a vector of standard bond
characteristics, including issuer and offering year fixed effects. Quality denotes one of three proxies for the quality of the bond:
InvRating (the natural logarithm of the inverse of 1 + the numerical value of the bond’s S&P rating, which ranges from 0 (no
rating) to 24 (AAA rating or higher)), the bond’s Amihud illiquidity ratio, and InvTrades (the natural logarithm of the inverse of
the average number of daily trades of the bond over the period January-June 2007). In all specifications, the standard errors are
clustered around bond issuers. The sample includes all bonds in the FINRA TRACE data set with available data on bond
characteristics from the Mergent FISD data set. The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels.
A. Fund Flows and Bond Sales (Fund-level analysis)
Percentage net purchases
VeryLowFlow
LowFlow
HighFlow

VeryHighFlow

- Log-$ sales

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0461**

-0.0126

-0.1123***

-0.0021

-5.7897***

0.8212

-5.3678***

0.1051

-2.3

-0.4

-3.33

-0.05

3.66

0.58

-3.37

0.08

0.0061

0.0278

-0.0642**

0.0337

-3.7617**

-0.6552

-3.4436**

1.3056

0.4

1.32

-2.07

1.07

2.3

-0.45

-2.11

0.94

0.0623***

0.0333

-0.0068

0.0383

-1.6623

-2.1962

-1.5584

3.1233**

3.39

1.16

-0.22

1.06

0.98

-1.43

-0.92

2.14

1.8597

3.6471***

1.09

0.1097***

0.0733***

0.0312

0.0720**

1.698

3.2612**

5.29

2.69

0.95

2.16

-0.99

-2.21

Secur. h. 2007Q2

-0.1322**
-2.16

Corp. h. 2007Q2

-6.12

0.0673**

-4.7014***

2.04

Affil. comm. bank

2.63

-10.6865***

-2.63

-0.0590***

-0.0432*

-1.1890*

-2.84

-1.76

-1.86

-0.24

Log(Family size)

0.0030

0.0100*

0.0989

0.1407

0.86

1.77

0.52

0.79

Fam. equity hold.

-0.1079***

-0.0076

-5.7627***

-0.4294

-3.65

-0.19

-3.70

-0.23

Av. mat. of holdings

0.0009***

0.0004

-0.0066

0.0711***

2.66

0.64

-0.28

3.42

F-stat (p-value)
St. error
N. Obs.
(Pseudo-)R2

1.06 (0.3035)
White
White
550
550
0.09

0.02

4.82** (0.0281)
White
White
550
550
0.13

0.04

40

6.58** (0.0103)
White
White
550
550
0.02

0.01

-0.2330

22.60*** (0.0000)
White
White
550
550
0.03

0.02

B. Determinants of Corporate Bond Sales (Bond-level analysis)
(1)

InvRating

(2)

(3)

1.0496**
2.14

Amihud

(4)

1.0712**
2.25

-0.9552***

-0.7488***

-4.54

InvTrades

-3.56

-0.4114***
-5.26

-3.72

0.0967

-3.2439**

No Rating [1 = NO]

-3.1242**
-2.01

0.95

1.02

-2.15

Bond is not held by institutional investors [1 = NO]

4.8895***

4.6887***

4.7389***

4.6379***

25.10

24.01

25.04

24.34

LogHold (2007Q2)

1.0148***

0.9738***

0.9840***

0.9647***

33.00

31.90

32.83

31.98

Bond face value

0.1919***

0.1640***

0.1756***

0.1492***

5.99

4.76

5.27

4.29

Covenants [1 = YES]

1.1209***

1.0253***

1.0170***

1.0459***

CovIndex
Log(Months to maturity)

0.0897

-0.2938***

4.61

4.33

4.37

4.36

-0.1055

0.0722

0.0346

-0.1165

-0.25

0.20

0.09

-0.27

-0.3952***

-0.3226***

-0.3886***

-0.3348***

-9.23

-8.39

-9.58

-8.78

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8148

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8148

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8148

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8148

0.91

0.88

0.91

0.91

Issuer fixed effects
Offering year fixed effects
Standard error cluster
N. Obs.
R2

41

Table IV Changes in Mutual Fund Holdings of Securitized and Corporate Bonds At the Onset of the Crisis
Panel A reports the estimates of a model:
,

(3)

is the change, between 2007Q2 and 2007Q4, in the fraction of the fund’s portfolio represented by
The dependent variable
securitized bonds (columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6)) or corporate bonds (columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8)) in excess of the fund class
average. Horizon is the mutual fund’s horizon, proxied for by Turnover ratio (odd-numbered columns) or Flow volatility (evennumbered columns). x is a set of standard mutual fund characteristics, expressed in their values as of June 2007. Horizon is
expressed in its value as of June 2007 (columns (1)-(4)) or as of December 2006 (columns (5)-(8)).
Panel B reports the estimates of a model:

above) of
In the odd-numbered columns, the dependent variable ΔC is the fund’s excess sales (defined analogously to
investment-grade bonds (High). In the even-numbered columns, the dependent variable is the fund’s excess sales of junk bonds
(Low). Horizon is the mutual fund’s horizon, proxied for by Turnover ratio (columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6)) or Flow volatility
(columns (3)-(4) and (5)-(6)). x is a set of standard control variables as in Panel A. F-test statistics and p-values for the
difference between the Horizon coefficients for investment-grade and junk bonds are provided in the row labelled “F-stat (pvalue)”. The sample includes all the mutual funds belonging to the merged Lipper eMAXX-CDA/Spectrum data set, over the
period 2007Q2-2007Q4. The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

42

Table IV Changes in Mutual Fund Holdings of Securitized and Corporate Bonds At the Onset of the Crisis – cont’d
Panel A. Changes in Holdings of Corporate Bonds and Securitized Bonds
Fund horizon as of June 2007
Fund horizon as of December 2006
Securitized Bonds
Corporate Bonds
Securitized Bonds
Corporate Bonds
(1)

Turnover ratio

(3)

(4)

(5)

1.1354**

-1.2015***

0.9809**

2.41

-2.61

2.09

Flow volatility
Secur. h. 2007Q2

(2)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-1.0638**
-2.22

0.0194***

-0.0978**

0.1439

-0.3411*

10.13

-2.04

0.94

-1.81

-0.0703***

-0.1334***

-3.73

-5.35

Corp. h. 2007Q2
0.0308***

-0.0696***

-0.0807***

-3.48

-3.57

-0.0536***

-0.1091***

-0.0498***

-3.05

-4.18

-2.60

-2.24

-0.0048

-0.0310**

-0.0060

-0.0214

0.0197**

0.0237**

-0.0520**

Affil. comm. bank

0.0176*
1.79

2.66

-0.41

-2.32

1.97

2.03

-0.52

-1.59

Log(Family size)

0.0047**

0.0033

-0.0014

0.0014

0.0043*

0.0048**

-0.0015

-0.0032

2.15

1.37

-0.56

0.47

1.95

2.03

-0.58

-1.12

Past flow

0.0349***

-0.0241***

-0.0382***

0.2812*

-0.0487

0.0456

0.0469

0.0007

8.73

-4.96

-10.09

1.78

-0.51

0.56

0.60

0.01

-0.4048*

-0.4537*

0.4436*

0.2713

-0.4752**

-0.5170**

0.4964*

0.4302

-1.76

-1.81

1.66

0.87

-2.03

-2.04

1.81

1.46

0.0141

0.0427***

0.0063

-0.0338**

0.0145

0.0270*

0.0081

-0.0108

1.11

2.98

0.46

-1.98

1.12

1.88

0.58

-0.65

Mgmt fee

0.0008

0.0000

-0.0049***

-0.0039***

0.0007

0.0006

-0.0047***

-0.0042***

1.12

-0.03

-5.24

-3.05

0.90

0.73

-4.97

-3.44

Exp. ratio

-0.9977

-2.4503**

1.5340

4.1035***

-0.4825

-1.5858

1.1322

2.8026**

-0.85

-2.00

1.16

2.70

-0.42

-1.38

0.84

2.00

Actual 12b1

0.0002*

0.0003**

-0.0002

-0.0003*

0.0002

0.0002*

-0.0001

-0.0002

1.91

2.06

-1.43

-1.90

1.36

1.90

-0.95

-1.41

0.0002

0.0010***

0.0000

-0.0010***

0.0002

0.0004

0.0000

-0.0002

0.78

3.44

0.06

-3.00

0.82

1.34

0.07

-0.69

No equity

-0.0104

0.0012

0.0259*

0.0257

-0.0168

-0.0174

0.0307**

0.0339**

-0.79

0.08

1.93

1.43

-1.30

-1.19

2.22

2.04

Fund’s equity ret.

-0.0870

-0.0788

0.0490

-0.0154

-0.0567

0.0318

0.0182

-0.0528

-0.85

-0.70

0.37

-0.11

-0.56

0.30

0.14

-0.38

White
517

White
577

White
517

White
577

White
494

White
511

White
494

White
511

0.10

0.11

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.05

Fund return
Fam. equity hold.

Av. maturity of
holdings

Standard error
N. Obs.
R2

Rating
Turnover ratio

Low

Panel B. Sales of Corporate Bonds, by Ratings
Fund horizon as of June 2007
Fund horizon as of December 2006
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High

(1)

(2)

-1.2922***

-1.0967***

-3.33

-4.16

Flow volatility

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.8574***

-0.7205***

-3.15

-3.59

(7)

(8)

-0.2475***

-0.0790*

-0.1533**

-0.0464

-3.16

-1.70

-2.03

-1.39

[Control variables suppressed]
F-stat (p-value)
Standard error
N. Obs.
R2

0.21 (0.6500)
White
White
508
501
0.25

0.09

3.96** (0.0467)
White
White
568
567
0.24

0.05

43

0.24 (0.6276)
White
White
493
494
0.25

0.07

2.93* (0.0869)
White
White
550
552
0.23

0.04

(5)

CovIndex

Covenants [1 = YES]

Bond face value

Bond is not held by mutual funds [1 = NO]

No Rating [1 = NO]

Yield spread in 2007Q2

Holders’ Exposure X InvRating

InvRating

-0.73

-0.87

0.34

-0.1518

1.37

-0.2727

0.0267

-0.60

-0.07

0.1651

-0.0082

-0.0012

1.95

0.79

-2.60

0.1387*

0.0720

-1.92

-2.89

-3.0231***

-2.6943*

-2.48

2.16

-0.2689***

-0.1909**

2.48

2.47

0.2576**

0.2911**

1.84

1.80

0.9079**

2.02

0.8066*

0.6659*

(2)

44

-0.59

-0.1218

0.39

0.0311

0.19

0.0028

1.57

0.1188

-2.41

-2.8370**

-2.98

-0.2717***

2.53

0.2988**

2.28

0.8497**

1.45

0.5762

(3)

(4)

-0.52

-0.1090

0.46

0.0358

0.79

0.0120

1.56

0.1086

-2.24

-2.6829**

-2.99

-0.2731***

2.18

0.2568**

2.14

0.8048**

1.01

0.3936

Change in Yield Spread – Jul-Oct 2007
0.7885**

(1)

Panel A: The Baseline Model

1.87

0.49

0.1924

-0.73

-0.1065

-1.53

-0.0372

-0.95

-0.1198

-3.05

-6.0739***

-6.70

-0.4174***

2.26

0.4836**

2.96

1.8664**

0.48

0.1865

-0.70

-0.0979

-1.44

-0.0333

-0.99

-0.1244

-2.70

-5.4002***

-6.40

-0.4134***

2.43

0.5349**

2.61

1.6608**

2.04

1.4210**

(6)

0.50

0.1925

-0.68

-0.0958

-1.01

-0.0302

-1.11

-0.1311

-2.63

-5.3617***

-6.34

-0.4147***

2.51

0.5438**

2.54

1.6482**

1.92

1.4042*

(7)

(8)

0.53

0.2066

-0.65

-0.0900

-0.95

-0.0225

-1.16

-0.1434

-2.55

-5.2271**

-6.37

-0.4157***

2.43

0.5311**

2.47

1.6086**

1.74

1.2581*

Change in Yield Spread – Jul-Dec 2007
1.2900*

(5)

where each observation is a corporate bond i. The dependent variable
is defined as in Panel A. ShortExposed is an indicator equal to 1 if bond i’s short-horizon mutual fund
holders’ exposure to securitized bonds is above the sample median. We use two proxies for mutual fund horizon: turnover ratio and flow volatility and obtain one indicator
ShortExposed for each proxy. InvRating is defined as in Panel A. We further include the interaction term between these two variables, along with a standard set of bond
€ characteristics x, including issuer and offering year fixed effects. For brevity, only the key coefficients are shown. In both panels and in all specifications, the standard errors are
clustered around bond issuers. The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

ΔYSi = α + βShortExposedi + γInvRatingi + δ (ShortExposedi × InvRatingi )+ ϕ ' x i + µ j + εi

Panel B of this table reports the estimates of a model:

Holders’ Exposure (to Securitized Bonds)

€

, (4)

where each observation is a corporate bond with data in the FINRA TRACE data set. The dependent variable
is the change in the bond’s yield spread, defined as the
difference between the bond’s yield on the secondary market, as reported by TRACE, and the yield on a Treasury bond of comparable maturity. Data on Treasury bond yields are
from the Federal Reserve Statistical Release. In columns (1)-(4)
is defined as the change in the bond’s yield spread over the period from June to October 2007, while in
columns (5)-(8) it is the change in the bond’s yield spread over the period from June to December 2007. The explanatory variables are: HoldersExposure (the average fraction of
securitized bonds in the portfolio of the mutual funds that hold the bond), InvRating (the natural logarithm of the inverse of 1 + the numerical value of the bond’s S&P rating,
which ranges from 0 (no rating) to 24 (AAA rating or higher)), the interaction term between these two variables, and a standard set of bond characteristics x, issuer fixed effects for
issuer j (µj) and offering year fixed effects.

ΔYSi = α + βHoldersExposurei + γInvRatingi + δ (HoldersExposurei × InvRatingi )+ ϕ ' x i + µ j + εi

Panel A of this table reports the estimates of a model:

Table V Changes in Corporate Bonds’ Yield Spreads After the Onset of the Crisis

0.70

0.70

Yes
Yes
Issuer
7348
0.70

Yes
Yes
Issuer
7348

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8148
0.74

0.66

45

0.66

0.76

Yes
Yes
Yes
Issuer
8136

0.76

Yes
Yes
Yes
Issuer
8136

2.09

Yes
Yes
Yes
Issuer
7302

0.1476**
2.01

2.54

3.55

1.8093***

0.1228**

1.87

3.67

0.2083**

2.74

0.1181*

2.79

1.8800***

1.99

0.9231***

0.4700**

(4)

1.26

0.9439***

R2

0.75

0.2429

2.71

Yes
Yes
Yes
Issuer
7302

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8148

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8148
0.75

Change in Yield Spread – Jul-Dec 2007

1.71

(3)

0.7222***

(2)

0.3324*

(1)

Change in Yield Spread – Jul-Oct 2007

Issuer fixed effects
Other Control Variables
Offering year fixed effects
Standard error cluster
N. Obs.

ShortExposed (flow vol.) X InvRating

ShortExposed (turnover) X InvRating

InvRating

ShortExposed (Flow Volatility)

ShortExposed (Turnover)

0.65

R2

Yes
Yes
Issuer
7348

0.75

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8148

-0.44

-1.22

0.98

-0.1274

-0.2203

0.1088

2.91

0.21

1.35

-0.40

-0.0676

-0.52

-0.2641

-3.22

-0.2220***

0.1873***

0.1272

0.6232

Panel B: Short-horizon Investors with Exposure to Securitized Bonds

Yes
Yes
Issuer
7348

-0.37

-0.0628

-0.51

-0.2645

-3.14

-0.2251***

0.14

-0.37

-0.0635

-0.52

-0.2643

-3.25

-0.2215***

0.94

0.23

-3.17

-0.2147***

0.0468

0.25

0.0266

0.72

0.2573

-2.85

-0.1048***

0.1525

0.33

0.74

0.0286

0.0374

0.75

-3.09

-0.1154***
0.2632

-2.94

-3.20

0.2657

-0.1039***

-0.1016***

Issuer fixed effects
Offering year fixed effects
Standard error cluster
N. Obs.

Holders’ Exposure X InvTrades

InvTrades

Holders’ Exposure X Amihud

Amihud

Insurance Holders’ Exposure X InvRating

Insurance Holders’ Exposure

Log(Months to maturity)

€

€

, (6)

(7)

CovIndex

Covenants [1 = YES]

Bond face value

Bond is not held by mutual funds [1 = NO]

No Rating [1 = NO]

2007Q2 Log-volume

Holders’ Exposure X InvRating

InvRating

Holders’ Exposure

1.83

1.80

-1.07

0.0595*

0.0572*

-1.02

-0.56

-0.0125

-0.0117

-0.28

-6.97

-0.0004

-0.0002

-7.11

-0.41

-0.0386***

-0.0394***

-0.37

1.65

-0.0339

-0.0310

1.75

2.75

0.0007*

3.10

0.0008*

0.0340***

0.40

0.0377***

0.0103

0.37

2.41

2.75

0.0096

0.0928**

(2)

0.1040***

(1)

46

1.70

0.0542*

-1.07

-0.0123

-0.93

-0.0007

-7.00

-0.0386***

-0.47

-0.0386

1.63

0.0006

2.66

0.0331***

0.47

0.0121

3.09

0.1230***

(3)

1.76

0.0563*

-1.07

-0.0122

-0.72

-0.0005

-6.95

-0.0389***

-0.47

-0.0389

0.45

0.0002

3.09

0.0381***

0.47

0.0120

2.38

0.1119**

(4)

Panel A: Baseline model
Trading Pressure of Mutual Funds – Jul-Oct 2007

0.54

0.0140

0.80

0.0079

2.44

0.0015**

-12.01

-0.0562***

-0.59

-0.0352

2.13

0.0014**

2.37

0.0238**

0.55

0.0102

0.99

0.0312

(5)

0.41

0.0104

0.88

0.0086

2.22

0.0014**

-12.07

-0.0559***

-0.60

-0.0351

2.08

0.0013**

2.44

0.0273**

0.57

0.0105

1.20

0.0412

(6)

0.42

0.0107

0.76

0.0073

1.66

0.0010*

-11.81

-0.0555***

-0.73

-0.0430

2.36

0.0012**

1.82

0.0189*

0.69

0.0127

1.55

0.0506

(7)

0.58

0.0150

0.87

0.0086

2.39

0.0016**

-11.88

-0.0566***

-0.55

-0.0325

1.90

0.0014*

2.49

0.0251**

0.51

0.0093

1.46

0.0552

(8)

Trading Pressure of Mutual Funds – Jul-Dec 2007

where each observation is a corporate bond. The dependent variable
is defined as in Panel A. ShortExposed is an indicator equal to 1 if the bond is held by short-horizon
mutual funds with exposure to securitized bonds above the median. We use two proxies for mutual fund horizon: turnover ratio and flow volatility and obtain one indicator
ShortExposed for each proxy. InvRating is defined as in Panel A. We further include the interaction term between these two variables, along with a standard set of bond
characteristics x (the same set of variables as in Panel A), including issuer and offering year fixed effects. For brevity, only the key coefficients are shown. In both panels and in all
specifications, the standard errors are clustered around bond issuers. The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

ΔTri = α + βShortExposedi + γInvRatingi + δ (ShortExposedi × InvRatingi )+ ϕ ' x i + µ j + εi

Panel B reports the estimates of a model:

is defined as the total net sales of bond i by mutual funds
where each observation is a corporate bond with data in the FINRA TRACE data set. The dependent variable
divided by the total trading volume on the bond, over the crisis period. In columns (1)-(4)
is defined over the period from July to October 2007, while in columns (5)-(8) it is
defined over the period from July to December 2007. The explanatory variables are: HoldersExposure (the average fraction of securitized bonds in the portfolio of the mutual
funds that hold the bond), InvRating (the natural logarithm of the inverse of 1 + the numerical value of the bond’s S&P rating, which ranges from 0 (no rating) to 24 (AAA rating
or higher)), the interaction term between these two variables, and a standard set of bond characteristics x, issuer fixed effects for issuer j (µj), and offering year fixed effects.

ΔTri = α + βHoldersExposurei + γInvRatingi + δ (HoldersExposurei × InvRatingi )+ ϕ ' x i + µ j + εi

Panel A reports the estimates of a model:

Table VI Corporate Bond Selling Pressure by Mutual Funds

Issuer fixed effects
Other Control Variables
Offering year fixed effects
Standard error cluster
N. Obs.
R2

ShortExposed (flow vol.) X InvRating

ShortExposed (turnover) X InvRating

InvRating

ShortExposed (Flow Volatility)

ShortExposed (Turnover)

0.58

R2
0.58

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8666
0.58

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8666
0.58

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8666

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8728

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8728
0.68

0.68

0.68

Yes
Yes
Yes
Issuer
8666
0.58

47

Yes
Yes
Yes
Issuer
8728
0.69

Yes
Yes
Yes
Issuer
8728
0.68

1.52

Yes
Yes
Yes
Issuer
8666
0.58

0.0067
1.86

1.84

1.01

0.0183

0.0079*

2.14

1.08

0.0073*

0.73

0.0096**

0.77

0.0197

2.98

0.0188

0.0200

0.0436***
2.82

(4)

0.0375***

4.02

(3)

2.86

(2)

0.0490***

(1)

0.0383***

0.68

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8728

-1.35

-0.24

0.03

-0.0205

-0.0057

0.0001

1.22

-2.51

-5.09

-0.0052***

0.0058

-2.21

-1.85

-0.0946**

-0.0916**

-0.0059*

-1.71

-0.75

0.62

-4.12

-0.0044***

-0.0060*

-0.0048

0.0040

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8728

-5.11

-0.0052***

Panel B: Short-horizon Investors with Exposure to Securitized Bonds
Mutual fund selling pressure – Jul-Oct 2007
Mutual fund selling pressure – Jul-Dec 2007

Yes
Yes
Issuer
8666

-5.09

-0.0052***

-0.50

-1.39

-0.0013

0.97

-0.58

-0.0006
-0.0090

-1.44

-1.44

0.0194

-0.0013

-0.0013

Issuer fixed effects
Offering year fixed effects
Standard error cluster
N. Obs.

Holders’ Exposure X InvTrades

InvTrades

Holders’ Exposure X Amihud

Amihud

Insurance Holders’ Exposure X InvRating

Insurance Holders’ Exposure

Log(Months to maturity)

Amihud

Insurance Holders’ Exposure X InvRating

Insurance Holders’ Exposure

Log(Months to maturity)

CovIndex

Covenants [1 = YES]

Bond face value

Bond is not held by mutual funds [1 = NO]

No Rating [1 = NO]

2007Q2 Log-volume

Holders’ Exposure X InvRating

InvRating

Holders’ Exposure (to Securitized Bonds)

€

-0.50

-0.0302

2.09

0.3919**

-5.97

-0.0869***

1.64

0.2972

2.18

0.1942**

8.12

0.1260***

-6.65

-0.4976***

2.95

1.8119***

17.28

0.4588***

0.30

0.0253

-2.78

-0.5456***

3.75

1.0685***

(7)

48

-1.50

-0.88

-0.0552

1.77

0.3452*

-8.32

-0.1035***

1.94

0.3590*

2.08

0.1914**

8.28

0.1289***

-6.37

-0.4686***

3.05

1.9284***

18.03

0.4963***

1.89

0.1718*

-2.88

-0.5842***

2.49

0.6348**

(6)

Trading Volume – Jul-Dec s2007

0.33

-0.70

-8.47

-0.1056***

2.27

0.4216**

1.90

0.1788*

8.74

0.1389***

-6.63

-0.4955***

3.11

2.0144***

18.22

0.5093***

2.18

0.1564**

-2.96

-0.6168***

2.96

0.6254***

(5)

-0.1411

-0.54

-0.0796

0.95

0.3042

-4.44

-0.0954***

1.81

0.5293*

0.70

0.0931

7.07

0.2653***

-5.83

-0.5910***

4.45

4.7739***

11.08

0.4176***

2.21

0.2664**

-4.36

-1.4969***

1.34

0.5752

(4)

0.0632

-0.69

1.07

-0.0612

-0.0785

0.97

-3.88

0.3357

-4.42

-0.0928***

1.60

0.4661

0.83

0.1084

7.25

0.2636***

-6.03

-0.6176***

4.44

4.7075***

11.02

0.4076***

1.11

0.1395

-4.35

-1.4736***

3.49

1.3250***

(3)

0.3089

-4.57

1.81

-0.0958***

-0.0981***

2.07

0.78

0.5301*

0.6117**

0.64

7.37

0.1031

7.62

0.0862

0.2649***

-5.89

-6.10

0.2756***

-0.5944***

-0.6231***

4.46

4.46

10.50

4.7862***

4.8706***

10.44

2.21

0.4152***

0.4286***

2.28

-4.37

0.2686**

-4.38

0.2382**

-1.5018***

2.63

-1.5356***

0.9275***

2.73

(2)

Trading Volume – Jul-Oct 2007
0.8778***

(1)

-0.93

-0.0589

1.65

0.3325*

-8.47

-0.1028***

1.93

0.3563*

1.94

0.1773*

8.07

0.1317***

-6.37

-0.4627***

3.10

1.9423***

19.98

0.5088***

1.76

0.1594*

-2.92

-0.5862***

-0.33

-0.0996

(8)

where each observation is a corporate bond with data in the FINRA TRACE data set. The dependent variable LogVol is the natural logarithm of the bond’s
average daily trading volume (expressed in number of trades) over the crisis period. In columns (1)-(4) LogVol is defined over the period from July to October
2007, while in columns (5)-(8) it is defined over the period from July to December 2007. The explanatory variables are: HoldersExposure (the average fraction
of securitized Bonds in the portfolio of the mutual funds that hold the bond), InvRating (the natural logarithm of the inverse of 1 + the numerical value of the
bond’s S&P rating, which ranges from 0 (no rating) to 24 (AAA rating or higher)), the interaction term between these two variables, and a standard set of bond
characteristics x, including issuer and offering year fixed effects. In all specifications, the standard errors are clustered around bond issuers. The symbols *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

LogVoli = α + βHoldersExposurei + γInvRatingi + δ (HoldersExposurei × InvRatingi )+ ϕ ' x i + µ j + εi

The table reports the estimates of a model:

Table VII Corporate Bond Trading Volume After the Onset of the Crisis

Yes
Yes
Issuer
9598
0.80

Issuer fixed effects
Offering year fixed effects
Standard error cluster
N. Obs.

R2

Holders’ Exposure X InvTrades

InvTrades

Holders’ Exposure X Amihud

0.80

Yes
Yes
Issuer
9598

49

0.80

Yes
Yes
Issuer
9598
0.80

Yes
Yes
Issuer
9598

Yes
Yes
Issuer
9573

Yes
Yes
Issuer
9573

Yes
Yes
Issuer
9573

0.88

0.88

0.88

0.88

Yes
Yes
Issuer
9573

4.17

1.41

-2.50

0.6824***

-0.50

0.3435

-0.1293**

-4.18

-2.46

-0.0400

-2.4864***

-2.2277**

Table VIII Relationship between mutual funds’ and insurance companies’ trades
Panel A reports the estimates of a model:

(8)
where each observation is a corporate bond i in quarter t. The dependent variable MF_Netbuy is the net purchases of the bond by all mutual
funds in column (1). In columns (2) and (3) they are the net purchases by short-horizon, exposed mutual funds (i.e., funds that have a shorthorizon with exposure to securitized bonds above the median. We use two proxies for horizon – High Turnover (column (2)) and High Flow
volatility (column (3)). In columns (4) and (5) they are the net purchases by all funds except the short-horizon, exposed funds. MF_Netbuy is
calculated as the net purchases of bond i by the funds divided by the total institutional holdings of the bond (holdings of mutual funds plus
holdings of insurance companies) as of the previous quarter. INS_Netbuy is the net purchases of the bond by insurance companies, again divided
by the total institutional holdings of the bond. Crisis is an indicator equal to one for dates between 2007Q3 and 2008Q1. x is a vector of standard
bond characteristics. The last row of the table reports the F-test statistic for H0: β1 = β2. The sample is for the period 1998Q1-2008Q1.
Panel B reports the estimates of a model:
where MF_Netbuy is the net purchases of bond i by funds that experience below-median flows over the last six months of 2007 (LowFlow
funds) in column (1) and HighFlow funds in column (2). INS_Netbuy is defined as above, and x is a set of standard bond characteristics,
including offering year effects. In both panels, the symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

A. Correlations of mutual fund and insurance company trades, before and after the onset of the crisis

INS_Netbuy X (1-Crisis)
INS_Netbuy X Crisis

All funds

High
Turnover

High Flow
volatility

Non-High
Turnover

Non-High
Volatility

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.0892***

0.0010***

0.0016***

0.0862***

0.0835***

11.18

5.05

5.03

10.75

10.56

0.2075***

0.0041***

0.0068***

0.1789***

0.1735***

8.86

5.03

5.29

7.69

7.81

Y
Bond
67744

Y
Bond
67718

Y
Bond
67077

Y
Bond
67069

0.05
15.51***

0.05
14.01***

0.06
14.69***

0.06
14.39***

[Control variables suppressed]
Bond and quarter fixed effect Y
Standard error cluster
Bond
N. Obs.
68233
R2
F-stat for H0: β1 = β2

0.06
23.00***

B. Trade Correlations and Flows after the Onset of the Crisis
LowFlow HighFlow
funds
funds

INS_Netbuy

[Control variables suppressed]
Offering year fixed effect
Standard error
N. Obs.
R2
F-stat for H0: βLowFlow = βHighFlow

50

(1)

(2)

0.0008***

0.0017***

2.76

2.67

Y
White
9598

Y
White
9539

0.02
0.02
5.75 (0.0165)

Table IX The structural break in institutional trades and the correlation of the yield spread to trades
In columns (1)-(2), the table reports the estimates of a model:

where Netbuy is either INS_Netbuy (column (1)) or MF_Netbuy (column (2)). INS_Netbuy is the aggregate net purchases of bond i by all
insurance companies, divided by the prior-quarter total holdings of insurance companies plus mutual funds. MF_Netbuy is analogously defined.
Crisis is an indicator variable equal to one for dates between 2007Q3 and 2008Q1. The last row reports the F-test statistic for Ho:
.
In column (3), the table reports the estimates of a model:

where INST_Netbuy is the sum of INS_Netbuy and MF_Netbuy, Crisis is as defined above, and x is a of standard bond characteristics, including
.
bond and quarter fixed effects. The last row reports the F-test statistic for Ho:
In columns (4)-(5), the table reports the estimates of a model:
ΔYSit = α + β1 INS _ Netbuy it × (1− Crisist ) + β 2 INS _ Netbuy it × Crisist + +β 3 MFit × (1− Crisist ) + β 4 MFit × Crisist + γ ′x it + εit
where Crisis, INS_Netbuy are defined as above, and MF is either MF_Netbuy (column (4)), defined as above, or LowFlow_Netbuy (column (5)),
defined as the net purchases of bond i by mutual funds that experience below-median flows in the quarter, divided by the prior-quarter total
€
holdings of insurance companies plus mutual funds. x is a of standard bond characteristics, including individual bond and quarter fixed effects.
.
The last row reports the F-test statistic for Ho:
The sample is for the period 1998Q1-2008Q1. The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

Dependent Variable

INS_Netbuy

MF_Netbuy

(1)

(2)

1 - Crisis

-0.0302***

-0.0233***

-109.75

-66.95

Crisis

-0.0266***

-0.0436***

(4)

(5)

-54.88

-53.83

INS_Netbuy X (1-Crisis)

-0.1709

-0.1258

-1.39

-1.01

INS_Netbuy X Crisis

-0.6031*

-0.6001*

-1.83

-1.78

INST_Netbuy X (1-Crisis)

(3)

0.1099
0.80

INST_Netbuy X Crisis

-2.3966***
-9.86

MF_Netbuy X (1-Crisis)

0.6210***

MF_Netbuy X Crisis

-3.4781***

3.51
-12.11

LowFlow_Netbuy X (1-Crisis)

-0.3964
-1.01

LowFlow_Netbuy X Crisis

-5.1208***
-5.73

[Control variables suppressed]
Bond and quarter fixed effects
Standard error cluster at
N. Obs.
R2
F-stat (p-value)

N
Bond
63330

N
Bond
63757

Y
Bond
63520

Y
Bond
63137

Y
Bond
62231

0.23
6.19
(0.0128)

0.19
719.11
(0.0000)

0.11
84.19
(0.0000)

0.16
153.36
(0.0000)

0.15
22.48
(0.0000)

51

52

The graph plots weekly average yield spreads on corporate bonds 2007, for Aaa, Baa, and High Yield corporate bonds, as well as the spread between the LIBOR rate and the
Overnight Index swap rate (LIBOR-OIS Spread, secondary axis). The yield spread is defined as the difference between a bond’s yield on the secondary market and the yield on a
Treasury bond of comparable maturity. Data on Treasury yields are retrieved from the Federal Reserve Statistical Release.

Figure 1 Corporate Bond Yield Spreads and LIBOR-OIS spread

Figure 2 Cumulative return of a Long-short Portfolio of Low-rated Corporate Bonds with and without Exposure
The figure plots the cumulative monthly return on a portfolio that is short on the below-investment grade bonds whose mutual fund holders
have high exposure to securitized bonds, and long on a set of issuer- and duration-matched bonds without the exposure, over the period 20042007.
We define “high exposure” as those corporate bonds whose average mutual fund holder’s exposure to securitized bonds is in the top
30% in either of the previous two quarters. We place these bonds in the short portfolio if and only if it has a matching bond without a high
exposure satisfying the following criteria: (i) the matching bond is issued by the same issuer firm; and (ii) the time to maturity of the matching
bond is between 50% and 150% of the time to maturity of the shorted bond. We place these matching bonds in the long portfolio. The longshort portfolio’s monthly return is then the long portfolio’s monthly return (rebalanced to be equal-weighted each month) minus the short
portfolio’s monthly return (similarly rebalanced). Returns on individual corporate bonds are constructed from the secondary market prices, as
reported by TRACE. In each period, bond returns are also winsorized at 1%.

53

