NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN INTEGRATED ASSESSMENT OF WATER MARKETS:
AUSTRALIA, CHILE, CHINA, SOUTH AFRICA AND THE USA
R. Quentin Grafton
Clay Landry
Gary D. Libecap
Sam McGlennon
Robert O'Brien
Working Paper 16203
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16203

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by R. Quentin Grafton, Clay Landry, Gary D. Libecap, Sam McGlennon, and Robert O'Brien.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

An Integrated Assessment of Water Markets: Australia, Chile, China, South Africa and the
USA
R. Quentin Grafton, Clay Landry, Gary D. Libecap, Sam McGlennon, and Robert O'Brien
NBER Working Paper No. 16203
July 2010
JEL No. K11,N15,N16,N5,N92,Q2,Q25
ABSTRACT
The paper provides an integrated framework to assess water markets in terms of their institutional
underpinnings and the three ‘pillars’ of integrated water resource management: economic efficiency,
equity and environmental sustainability. This framework can be used: (1) to benchmark different water
markets; (2) to track performance over time; and (3) to identify ways in which water markets might
be adjusted by informed policy makers to achieve desired goals. The framework is used to identify
strengths and limitations of water markets in: (1) Australia’s Murray-Darling Basin; (2) Chile (in particular
the Limarí Valley); (3) China (in particular, the North); (4) South Africa; and (5) the western United
States. It identifies what water markets are currently able to contribute to integrated water resource
management, what criteria underpin these markets, and which components of their performance may
require further development.
R. Quentin Grafton
Crawford School of Economics & Government
Crawford Building (132)
Lennox Crossing
The Australian National University
Acton, ACT 0200
Australia
quentin.grafton@anu.edu.au

Sam McGlennon
Crawford School of Economics & Government
Crawford Building (132)
Lennox Crossing
The Australian National University
Acton, ACT 0200
Australia
samuelmcglennon@gmail.com

Clay Landry
WestWater Research, LLC
205 N. 10th St. Suite 520
Boise, Idaho 83702
landry@waterexchange.com

Robert O'Brien
PERCAT Water
2 Beulah Road
Norwood, South Australia 5067
robert.obrien@percatwater.com.au

Gary D. Libecap
Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management and Economics Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
Bren Hall 4412
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
and Hoover Institution
and also NBER
glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu

Introduction
Many parts of the world’s arid and semi-arid regions face the dilemmas of reduced water
supplies (Ludwig and Moench 2009) and an increasing demand for water resources due
to population and income growth (Falkenmark 1999). In water scarce and low-income
countries, especially those with high population growth rates, the effects on the
livelihoods of the poor will be dire without comprehensive efforts to address water
scarcity. In rich and dry regions, such as Australia or in the US West, the challenge will
be to balance competing demands such as between irrigated agriculture and the
environment (Grafton et al 2010).

To address these global water challenges, there is a need for effective institutional
arrangements and allocation mechanisms among competing users to mitigate and manage
water scarcity. Our contribution is to develop, for the first time, a comprehensive and
integrated framework to benchmark water markets, one of the most important allocation
mechanisms. The framework is used to identify strengths and limitations in five water
markets: Australia’s Murray-Darling Basin, Chile (in particular the Limarí Valley), China
(in particular, the North), South Africa, and the western United States. All these locations
are semi-arid and face, to a greater or lesser extent, an expectation of reduced water
availability associated with climate change. Two are in rich countries (Australia and the
United States), two are in low to middle-income countries (Chile and South Africa), and
one is in a poor, but rapidly developing country (China).

2

To provide the comparisons across different water markets we use both a qualitative and
quantitative framework that provides an assessment over 26 criteria in four key
categories: institutional underpinnings (eight criteria), economic efficiency (eight
criteria), equity (five criteria) and environmental sustainability (five criteria). The
framework allows us to identify what water markets are currently able to contribute to
integrated water resource management, what criteria underpin these markets, and which
components of their performance may require further development.

In the following section we describe the integrated framework and provide an overview
of the five water markets. Sections three, four, five and six separately evaluate the five
water markets, respectively, in terms of their institutional underpinnings, economic
efficiency, equity, and environmental sustainability. In section seven we draw together
key and general insights from the integrated assessment.

An Integrated Water Markets Framework
Several indicators of water scarcity, water withdrawals, water poverty or ‘peak’ water
have been developed (Palaniappan and Gleick 2009; Postel, Daily and Ehrlich 1996;
Shiklomanov 2003; Sullivan 2002). Most of these measures are based on physical
quantities of water and are not indicators of the quality of water institutions. A notable
exception is a Water Institutions Health Index (WIHI) developed by Dinar and Saleth
(2005) and Saleth and Dinar (2004) that uses 16 variables of institutional quality in three
broad categories: law-related, policy-related, and organization or administration-related
variables. While the WIHI is useful for broad comparisons it was not designed to be an

3

assessment of water markets and, as Dinar and Saleth observe, generates some perverse
rankings.2

Previous reviews of water markets include Easter, Rosegrant and Dinar (1998; 1999),
Howe, Schurmeier and Shaw (1986), Rosegrant and Binswanger (1994), among others.
These studies focus on the benefits of water markets and provide guidance as to how they
may be improved, typically from an economic efficiency perspective. Our goal is more
modest, namely, to show how water markets can, and do, function in very different legal
and institutional frameworks and what this implies in terms of efficiency, equity and
sustainability. We do not provide specific advice about how to ‘improve’ water markets
and neither do we discuss best practices in terms of water institutions (Saleth and Dinar
2000). Instead, we develop a comprehensive and integrated framework to generate an
ordinal rank of the institutional underpinnings of water markets and their performance in
terms of integrated water resource management.

Our approach is ‘institutional’ (Livingston 1993) because it recognizes that objectives,
capacities and institutional constraints differ such that there cannot be a single set of
recommendations universally applicable for all water markets.

For example, South

Africa’s National Water Act 1998 explicitly places equity considerations as a top priority,
putting this goal ahead of economic efficiency in terms of how its water markets have
2

The WIHI has only one variable directly related to water markets. This variable evaluates water rights
and varies from 0 to 7, where 0 indicates no water rights, 1 unclear/unauthorized/scattered rights, 2
common/state rights, 3 multiple rights, 4 riparian system, 5 appropriative systems, 6 proportional sharing
system and 7 indicates the existence of water licenses/permits. It is not clear why a riparian system
should receive a higher rank than multiple rights or why appropriative rights are necessarily superior to
riparian rights. The WIHI also suffers from perverse overall rankings with Myanmar ranking higher than
Australia.

4

developed (Muller 2009). Consequently, recommendations to improve the economic
efficiency of water markets without sufficient regard for their equity implications are
unlikely to be fully supported within South Africa.

The integrated water markets framework (IWMF) uses a four-point scale in four
categories: institutional underpinnings, economic efficiency, equity, and environmental
sustainability. It allows for an understanding of the institutional constraints and
challenges of implementing water markets, and explicitly considers the ‘three pillars’ of
integrated water resource management developed at the 1992 Dublin International
Conference on Water and Environment: equity, economic efficiency and environmental
sustainability (Lenton and Muller 2009).

Many of the criteria we use are qualitative measures that are derived from primary or
secondary data, but some economic efficiency criteria are quantitative. The qualitative
scores provide four ordinal rankings: the highest (three drops) indicates the criterion is
nearly or fully operational; two drops indicates the criterion is mostly satisfied but some
further development is required; one drop means the criterion is partly satisfied and
substantial development is required, while the lowest ranking (X) specifies that the
criterion is not operational or is missing. For some criteria, in some water markets,
insufficient data or information is available to provide a ranking. The contribution of the
integrated framework is that it can be used: (1) to benchmark different water markets; (2)
to track performance over time; and (3) to identify ways in which water markets might be
adjusted by informed policy makers to achieve desired goals.

5

We apply the integrated framework to five water markets: Australia’s Murray-Darling
Basin, Chile (in particular the Limarí Valley), China, South Africa, and the western
United States. In the case of the US limited, local water markets have existed since the
nineteenth century, while in China they are still very much in their infancy. Chilean water
rights of the Limarí Valley are, arguably, the most entrenched in terms of legal rights, but
this market is small in size compared to water markets in Australia’s Murray-Darling
Basin that were first established in the early 1980s.

In all countries we use secondary data sources that have been supplemented by data, firsthand knowledge and experience with three of these markets (Australia, South Africa and
US). The difference in the ranking across the water markets shows that, depending on
the goals of policy makers and underlying institutions, markets can deliver very different
outcomes. In all cases, even in the most developed water markets, the framework shows
that further development of robust water rights and governance are possible, should
policy makers wish to undertake the necessary reforms.

Institutional Underpinnings
The IWMF uses eight criteria to assess the institutional underpinnings of water markets,
namely: (1) Recognition of the public interest (legal and practical recognition of multiple
interests in water resources and measures to reconcile conflicts); (2) Administrative
capacity (sufficient administrative authority, resources and information to manage water
resources effectively); (3) Well-developed horizontal linkages (robust and clear

6

institutional relationships at a given level of governance); (4) Well-developed vertical
linkages (robust and clear institutional relationships between different levels of
governance); (5) Legal/administrative clarity (definitional clarity, particularly in relation
to water rights, as well as transparent administrative actions); (6) Conflict resolution
mechanisms (appropriate and robust mechanisms for resolving conflict between water
users and uses where it arises); (7) Adaptive management of institutions (capacity for
institutional adaptation); and (8) Registration/titling (sufficient processes for ensuring
accurate and updated registration/titling of water rights). A summary of the comparisons
of the five markets in terms of these criteria is provided in Table 1.

Recognition of Public Interest
The public interest includes beneficiaries from water resources other than direct water users.
This broad conception of the public interest is most developed in Australia, the Colorado Basin
and South Africa. In the case of Australia, water resource plans are obliged to “…establish the
intended balance between environmental and consumptive use outcomes, as well as setting out
terms and conditions for water access” (National Water Commission 2009a, p. 14). In practice,
wider interests are not necessarily put into operation (Connell and Grafton 2008). In the US,
western states own water in trust for their citizens. Individuals hold usufruct rights to the water,
subject to the requirement that the use is beneficial and reasonable and is subject to oversight by
the state in monitoring applications and water transfers to ensure that they are consistent with the
public interest (Gould, 1995, 94). The notion of ‘public interest’, however, is sufficiently vague
and potentially expansive in justifying state intervention with the effect that uncertainty
regarding water rights and markets is increased. The South African approach is similar to

7

Australia with the public interest in water resources defined under its National Water Act 1998
and the national government held as the custodian of the public interest (Nieuwoudt and
Armitage 2004, p. 2). In practice, however, the national government has failed to prevent major
pollution problems, such as acid mine drainage (Water Research Commission 2009, pp. 14-17),
that generate substantial external costs.

The divergence between theory and practice is most evident in Chile and China. In Chile, the
1981 Water Code specifies “…water is a natural resource for public use” (Hearne 1998: 142),
but there appears to be little supporting regulation in place to protect the public interest (Bauer
2004:, p. 33). China’s Constitution provides that water resources are owned by the state on
behalf of the people (Speed 2010a, p. 207), and its 2002 Water Law provides a framework for
integrated water resource management and includes sections dealing with planning, conservation
and pollution control (Khan and Liu 2008, p. 14). Despite the good intentions, however, Chinese
water resource planning is still in a ‘developmental phase’ (Liu and Speed 2010, p. 12) and
water plans tend to focus solely on allocation and utilization of basin water resources (Zhou
2006, p. 6).

Administrative Capacity
Unsurprisingly, administrative capacity is most developed in the high–income countries:
Australia and the US. In both cases, much of this capacity resides at a state level, but in the case
of Australia this capacity is rapidly being developed at a federal level consistent with changes in
the legal governance of the Murray-Darling Basin following passage of the Water Act 2007. In

8

the US, each state has a regulatory agency to monitor whether water is held, used, and
transferred consistent with the notions of beneficial use and the public interest. These agencies
vary from the State Engineer in New Mexico and Utah, to the Department of Water Resources in
Arizona, and to the Department of Natural Resources and special water courts in Colorado.

In South Africa, capacity in the water sector is much more limited, to the extent that the ability
of the state to effectively manage and control water resources remains problematic (Malzbender
et al. 2005, p. 2). This is evidenced by the continuing failure to effectively implement catchment
management authorities, despite more than a decade of trying. A similar problem exists in
China, where there are “serious questions about the state’s capacity to tackle water problems”
(Lee 2006, p. 10), and although several river basin commissions have been established they have
“no effective tools to monitor and supervise water development and use” (Zhou 2006, p. 4). By
contrast, the problem in Chile is not so much one of capacity to implement, but rather inadequate
regulatory authority. This is because the government’s water rights agency, Direccion General
de Aguas (DGA), “…has very little regulatory authority over private water use”, and “cannot
cancel or restrict water rights once they have been granted” (Bauer 2004, p. 33).

Horizontal Linkages
Well-developed linkages across governments and agencies are fundamental to ensuring effective
water governance where responsibilities are shared. In Australia, cross-government agreements
as part of the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) have formed the basis of water
reform since the mid 1990s. A willingness to cooperate and cede authority to the federal

9

government in return for financial benefits has also been critical to the water reform process. The
substantial inter-basin transfers within South Africa, and also across borders, have necessitated
functioning horizontal cooperation and numerous water agreements have been implemented
(Turton, Patrick and Rascher 2008, p. 326).

The US federal government has not had the same degree of action in water reform, where water
management is left to the states, as in Australia or South Africa. Consequently, institutional
relationships are less than clear, with multiple conflicting, overlapping or sequential jurisdictions
within states. For example, proposed water trades may have to be approved initially by the
irrigation district board within which the water is currently located; the county where the district
is found; the state regulatory body; and potentially, federal agencies, such as the Bureau of
Reclamation (BOR), if BOR water is involved. Consequently, agency actions may not be
consistent. In Chile, while relationships are transparent at lower levels of governance (e.g.
between irrigation organizations), significant problems exist at upper levels, particularly between
the DGA and the court system in dealing with water conflicts (Bauer 2004, p. 98-9). China has
the most fragmented horizontal linkages of the five countries in this study, which has
undermined administrative authority and caused confusion (Lee 2006, p. 10; Liu and Speed
2010, p. 17). In addition to the Ministry of Water Resources, there are eight other bureaus with
interests in water policy, known collectively as the ‘nine dragons’ of Chinese water policy (Lee
2006, p. 10).

Vertical Linkages

10

Well-developed vertical linkages allow for effective implementation of water policy. Australia,
until its Water Act 2007, lacked any formal linkages across multi-levels of governance except
those between catchment authorities and state governments and agencies. Such processes may be
effective at a local, catchment level but have proved ineffective when faced with Basin-wide
challenges.

The US is also characterized by relatively weak vertical linkages.

Interstate

compacts, where applicable, divide surface waters among the states; state regulatory agencies
rule on water transfers involving changes in the timing, nature, and place of diversion; county
regulations may restrict water exports; and local water supply bodies, such as irrigation districts
with different decision rules and water rights arrangements among their members may have a
separate role in approving water transactions (Thompson 1993).

At a much more restricted spatial scale, Chile appears to have the most developed vertical
linkages. The inter-connected nature of the Limarí Valley’s water infrastructure means that
water supply decisions must be closely coordinated between officials and irrigation
organizations (Zegarra 2008, p. 40). The top-down nature of water governance in South Africa
since the National Water Act 1998 has generated many challenges, even though in principle the
lines of authority are clearly defined. In reality, however, water planning has been rendered
ineffective at a catchment level (Farolfi and Perret 2002, p. 3) until capacity and authority are
developed in the (still-planned) catchment management authorities. China also has its difficulties
with institutional relationships between different levels of government unclear, with confusion
and conflict a frequent result (Zhou 2006, p. 5). Fragmented water management systems have
been identified by the World Bank (2002, p. 5) as “…the critical unsolved problem” for China’s
water resources.

11

Legal/administrative clarity
Legal clarity over water rights, including what they can be used for and the rules of water trade,
is a cornerstone of functioning water markets. In Australia, surface water rights are statutory
rights that are separated from land rights. In some circumstances they can be attenuated or even
acquired without compensation. Chile has the strongest and most broadly-defined water rights
(Bauer 1997, p. 13), although there is confusion about the priority of consumptive
(predominantly irrigation) and non-consumptive (hydropower) rights (Brehm and Quiroz 1995,
p. 15).

In the US West, water rights are typically based on prior appropriation and diversion (Johnson,
Gisser and Werner 1981), with diversions prioritized based on the date of the right. In certain
areas, however, water rights are not well defined, while in others over allocation of the available
water undermines the assurance of receiving water for junior rights. Water rights are, therefore,
not always fully quantified. In addition, rights are conditional upon meeting public interest and
beneficial use standards, which can be loosely-defined concepts that depend on administrative
judgements.

In the case of South Africa, correcting previous injustices – including through water
management — remains the chief national priority, relegating the trading of water rights
between relatively privileged farmers to a low-order priority.

Registration, licensing and

recognition of existing water uses are also required at a catchment level to provide clarity over

12

use rights before trade can occur. Delays in registration have, in many catchments, prevented
water users from being assured of their existing rights and impeded trade. Unclear property
rights in China continue to cause significant problems for the management of China’s water
resources (Speed 2010b, p. 88). There remains a lack of transparency surrounding water
allocation decisions (Lee 2006, p. 17; Zhou 2006, p. 6), and the opaque legal status of water
allocation has led to inconsistencies and implementation difficulties (Shen and Speed 2010, p.
33).

Conflict Resolution
Conflict resolution mechanisms provide a way to overcome disputes that could compromise the
functioning of water markets. In Australia, conflicts over water use and tradeoffs are resolved
primarily in the water planning framework at both a basin and catchment level. Provided the
planning processes are effective, conflicts can be resolved in timely and effective ways. Where
there have been difficult tradeoffs, for example between water allocations to the environment to
the detriment of irrigators, the federal government has provided substantial funding, worth some
$8 billion, to smooth the transition (Crase and O’Keefe 2009).3

The approach to conflicts in both Chile and the US has primarily been one of litigation. In Chile,
conflicts that cannot be solved through private bargaining have gone to the court system which,
to date, “has not demonstrated the institutional capacity to resolve water conflicts” (Hearne
1998, p. 146). In the US, state regulatory agencies have a review process for water trades to

3

We have converted Australian dollars to US dollars at the rate of $A 1.00= US$ 0.90.

13

determine whether they meet the no harm requirement and are in the public interest. If opposed,
trades can be modified or halted. A source of potential judicial action is the Public Trust
Doctrine, a common law notion that emphasizes the public nature of water and other natural
resources (Sax, 1970; Brewer and Libecap, 2009). Because there is no compensation for rights
holders who lose water under the doctrine, conflicts over water reallocation can be long lasting
(Libecap, 2007, 148-51).

In South Africa conflicts are on-going. Until and unless there are effective catchment
management authorities that encompass all stakeholders these difficulties are unlikely to be
resolved. In China, the 2002 Water Law contains provisions relating to dispute settlement (Liu
and Speed 2010, p. 9). However, shortcomings in the water planning framework have allowed
inconsistencies to emerge between regional and local water plans, increasing the potential for
conflict in times of water shortage (Liu and Speed 2010, p. 18).

Adaptive Institutions
Australia’s Water Act 2007 was a radical shift in responsibility of water planning and
management and was agreed to by all levels of government and with bi-partisan support. This
suggests that, at least at the present time, Australia has the most adaptable institutions of the
countries in this study. This adaptability is, undoubtedly, linked to what has been perceived as a
national water crisis that has provided a motivation to political leaders to resolve the problems.
By contrast, in Chile there have been numerous attempts since 1990 to reform Chilean water
law, but these have been blocked by minority parties (Bauer 1997, p. 13; Zegarra 2008, p. 29).

14

In the US, institutional heterogeneity within and across states provides opportunities for learning
and innovation. For instance, many water supply organizations have historically resisted water
transfers (Thompson, 1993), but as the potential gain from exchange rises, some irrigation
districts have become more responsive (Eden et al. 2008). Additionally, water trading for
environmental purposes has been enacted within the Central Valley Project in California
(Brewer, Fleishman, Glennon, Ker, and Libecap 2008). Other examples of institutional
adaptation include: voluntary settlement agreements in New Mexico, whereby claimants in overallocated and un-adjudicated systems have agreed to assign water rights outside traditional prior
appropriation (Richards 2008); and the unitization of groundwater, where pumpers in the
Escalante Valley pool their interests and manage the pumping of the reservoir.4

South Africa radically changed its water institutional framework with its National Water Act
1998 that provides for centralized control of water resources. Since its passage, the focus has
been to implement the various reforms rather than embark on further institutional change.
China’s recent development of river commissions for its seven major basins is illustrative of
adaptability, as is the Water Law 2002 which, on paper, contains many provisions conducive to
sound water management. The ability of institutions to adapt in practice, however, has lagged
significantly

behind

the

ideals

espoused

in

official

laws

and

regulations,

enforcement/compliance remains debilitating (Liu and Speed 2010, p. 17).

4

See http://aquadoc.typepad.com/waterwired/2010/05/groundwater‐unitization‐in‐utah‐todd‐jarvis‐is‐
prescient.html

15

and

Registration/Title of Water Rights
The registration of water titles is a necessary first step to ensure comprehensive water trading in
formal water markets. Currently, Australia has the most complete system of registration of water
rights and titles, but further development is required to develop a national and compatible
register ─ a stated goal of the federal government. At present, titles are set at a state level and
there are substantial differences that impede inter-state water trade (National Water Commission
2009a, p. 120). In the US, there is no single or central water title office. Existing surface water
rights have their priority date and allotments of water set, but quantification of water that accrues
to these rights is not quantified in some Basins. In Chile, China and South Africa there are ongoing centralized processes to register titles to water rights.

Economic Efficiency
One of the key attributes of water markets is their ability to transfer water from lower to higher
value uses. In this section we provide three ways of quantifying the efficiency of water markets:
(1) Size of the market (volume of water traded of permanent and temporary water rights as a
percentage of total water rights); (2) Estimates of the annual gains ($) from water trade; and (3)
Size of storages (that allows for trades over a longer duration and trades upriver). In addition, we
present qualitative measures of economic efficiency: (1) Nature of water rights (the extent to
which they are unbundled); (2) Quality of title (extent to which rights are recognized in law and
in practice); (3) Breadth of market (capacity for water trading between catchments, including
upstream trades, as well as inter-sectoral trading); (4) Stability of price formation (predictability
of prices given changing water availability); and (5) Availability of market price information
(accessibility and reliability of price information). These criteria are summarized in Table 2.
16

Size of Water Market
Chile’s Limarí Valley (Hadjigeorgalis and Lillywhite 2004, p. 9) and Australia’s MurrayDarling Basin (National Water Commission 2009b, p. 5) have well developed water markets in
terms of the amount traded as a proportion of the entitlements available. The amount traded is
some 30% in both locations, including permanent and temporary water rights, which is
extraordinarily high. Data is not available across all the US West to make a similar calculation,
but the amount of water traded as a proportion of total water use appears to be an order of
magnitude smaller. Nevertheless, substantial volumes of water are traded in US water markets,
as is demonstrated by the following figures, by state, between 1987 and 2008: Texas (38,700
GL); Arizona (27,500 GL); and California (24,500 GL).5 These amounts are based on committed
volumes where the annual amounts are projected forward for the term of the contract and
discounted back at 5% (Brewer, Glennon, Ker, and Libecap 2008, p. 99). In terms of the total
value of trades from 1987-2008, the leading states are California ($1.33 billion); Texas ($0.86
billion); Arizona ($0.84 billion); Colorado ($0.82 billion); and Nevada ($0.73 billion).6 As of
2010, there have been only limited transfers of water rights in South Africa, although this may
change after all rights are registered (expected by the end of 2011). Similarly, in China there are
only ad hoc transfers that may amount to less than 0.1% of the total volumes used (derived from
Speed 2010b, p. 85 and Liu and Speed 2010, p. 15).

5

All values in acre‐foot have been converted to Gigaliters (GL, one thousand million liters) or Megaliters
(ML, one million liters) at the rate 1.0 acre‐foot = 1.233482 ML.
6
The values are in $2008 and involve all transactions in the Bren School water transfer dataset across 12
western states from 1987‐2008 as interpreted from discussion in the Water Strategist where price was
included and maintained at http://www.bren.ucsb.edu/news/water_transfers.htm. Multi‐year lease and
sales cash flows are discounted by 5%. For California six large leases were not included as extreme
outliers. $1 billion = $1,000 million.

17

Gains from Trade
To be able to calculate gains from trade requires data on actual transactions. These data, at best,
are only partially available for China and South Africa. Calculations of the gains from trade in
Chile indicate that the benefits of water markets are substantial and amount to between 8 and 32
per cent of agricultural contribution to regional GDP (Hadjigeorgalis and Lillywhite 2004, p. 9),
or some $22 million annually. Australian water markets are much larger, with the total volume
of trade in the Murray-Darling Basin worth over $1.8 billion in 2009 (National Water
Commission 2009b) and estimated gains from trade in a dry year around $495 million (Peterson
et al. 2004, p. 43). In the USWest, the average annual value of water trading between1987-2008
was about $400 million.7 Annually, the value of water transactions for all contract types and
sectors varies from under $1 million in Montana and Wyoming, the two least urban western
states, to near $40 million in Arizona, Colorado, Nevada, and Texas; and over $223 million in
California. The high turnover in California is driven by one-year leases within agriculture and a
few large multi-year leases from agriculture to urban use.

Nature of Water Rights
In the past 15 years water rights in Australia have, more or less, been separated from land rights.
Although some riparian rights (stock and domestic use by farmers) still exist, essentially water
rights can, in principle, be traded across catchments without also acquiring the land where the
water rights were originally located (National Water Commission 2009a, pp. 140-2). These
7

Calculated from data in the Bren School water transfer dataset and is the sum of the price of
transactions across 12 western states from 1987‐2008 in 2008 $.

18

water rights include high reliability entitlements where, in most years, holders of these rights
would expect to receive their full allocation, and low reliability rights where in dry years there
may be zero allocations of water. In addition, the water market includes two types of trade: a
permanent market for the water right and its allocation in per perpetuity, and a seasonal market
for the actual allocations of water assigned each year to the permanent water right.

Chile has a similar system to Australia that features both permanent and contingent rights where
the latter provide allocations when availability is above-average. In the Limarí Valley there are
also both permanent (title) and seasonal trade, with the latter typically more prevalent (Zegarra
2008, p. 5; Hadjigeorgalis and Lillywhite 2004, p. 9). In the US western states, surface water
rights are based on the prior appropriation doctrine that allows water to be separated from the
land and moved via canals and ditches to new locations (Getches 1997, p. 74-189; Kanazawa
1998; Johnson, Gisser and Werner 1981). Appropriative rights with the earliest water claims are
the most secure because they have the highest priority claim on water during drought.

Water rights have been unbundled from land in South Africa since the passage of National
Water Act 1998 (Pott et al. 2009, p. 2) and both temporary and permanent water trading have
been observed (Nieuwoudt, Gillet and Backeberg 2005, p. 1). In China, despite the 2002 Water
Law, water rights remain poorly defined at either the regional, irrigation district or farmer level
(Speed 2010b, p 88). Water remains an ‘open access resource’ within the Chinese Constitution
(Lee 2006, p. 15) and where rights have been established, allocations have generally not been
granted at the farmer level (Shen and Speed 2010, p. 32), with land area often used as a proxy to
calculate water charges (World Bank 2002, p. 12).
19

Quality of Title
The most developed/protected title for water rights is in Chile where it is not possible to modify
rights without full compensation (Bauer 1997, p. 13). This provides security to existing rights
holders, but has created conflicts where existing uses imposes external costs on others. In
Australia, water rights are statutory rights that could, in principle, be revoked or modified
without compensation. In practice, however, both state governments and the federal government
have sought to protect the existing rights holders by purchasing water rights at the market price
when seeking to reduce water diversions and increase environmental flows (Connell and Grafton
2008).
Appropriative water rights in the US West are usufruct rights, conditional upon varying state
regulations for beneficial use, preferred uses, area of origin restrictions, and public
interest/public trust doctrine mandates (Getches 1997, p.128-9).8 Regulatory mandates vary
across states and can raise the transaction costs of transfers and lower the value of water rights.
For instance, high conveyance losses and risks associated with environmental mandates result in
low levels of reliability for surface water transferred through the Sacramento Delta.
Consequently, buyers pay a 20-25 per cent premium for water originating south of the Delta
(Hollinshead 2008). The ‘use it or lose it’ requirement of appropriative rights has also motivated
rights holders to place water into low-valued applications rather than forgo their water rights. In
China the quality of title is not well defined nor necessarily protected in the rule of law. In the
case of South Africa, water rights are formally recognized and registered by the Department of

8

Wetter western states also allow for some riparian water rights—Washington, Oregon, California, the
Dakotas, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas

20

Water and Environmental Affairs, but as rights are renewable every five years this restricts the
security of tenure (Pott et al. 2009, p. 9).

Breadth of Market
The breadth of water markets is defined spatially as well as by trades across competing uses.
While Australia has well developed water markets over a very large spatial area within irrigated
agriculture, there have been relatively few agricultural-urban trades. This is not because of legal
restrictions, but has arisen because state governments that control urban water supplies have
eschewed, at least until very recently, the purchase of water from rural areas so as to protect
rural livelihoods and communities. As in Australia, the agricultural sector dominates Chile’s
water markets (Bauer 2004, p. 88). In the Limarí Valley, there has been limited trade activity by
the urban sector because of adequate urban supplies (Easter et al. 1999, p. 14). Importantly, the
government has intervened in several inter-sectoral applications for water rather than leave it to
markets to resolve (Bauer 1997, p. 11).

In the US West, with the exception of a few locations, the majority of water markets are
localized with trading limited to within river basins or sub-basins. Regulatory restrictions and
limited conveyance infrastructure are the primary reasons markets have largely emerged at these
levels. Nearly every western state has laws which protect basins of origin that make it difficult
to export water from one basin to another. Consequently, there is virtually no private water
trading across states. The lack of conveyance infrastructure and the high capital costs of moving
water also limit the geographic scope of water markets. Most short-term trades are within sector,

21

especially within agriculture. Agriculture-to-urban transactions are dominated by longer term
leases and sales, but patterns vary across the states. In South Africa the vast majority of water
trading has been within the agricultural sector (Pott et al., pp. 25-6), despite demands for extra
water by industry. While inter-sectoral transfers from agriculture to mining would be beneficial
for both parties in South Africa it could also “challenge the [equity] objectives of government”
(Farolfi and Perret 2002, p. 8) and the priority of providing water to previously disadvantaged
individuals (PDIs). Any inter-sectoral water trading must also wait for initial allocation of
licenses to be completed (Pott et al. 2009, p. 9). China stands out as the one country where there
has been substantial transfer of water from agricultural to industrial and domestic uses.
However, this has occurred via water efficiency measures such as lining irrigation channels
rather than through a fully operational water market (Speed 2010b, pp. 85-9).

Stability of Price Formation
Smooth price formation, and the avoidance of inexplicable price spikes, is an indicator of a
competitive and mature water market. In Australia, water prices are remarkably consistent across
catchments in the southern Murray-Darling Basin (National Water Commission 2009b, p. 26-9).
Where substantial differences exist it is because of differences in reliability of the water rights or
whether they are permanent or seasonal water rights. South Africa’s Lower Orange River, where
there is data available (1997-2003), is also characterized by stable price formation (Gillet et al.
2005, p. 10), but with substantial variation in prices associated with changes in water availability
(Nieuwoudt and Armitage 2004, p. 3).

22

In Chile’s Limarí Valley, prices of water shares have increased rapidly due to economic
development across the mining, industrial and agricultural sectors (Zegarra 2008: 46). Spot
prices have, on occasions of low water availability, been very high because irrigators with
perennial crops are prepared to pay substantially more than the value of the marginal product if
the alternative is the loss of their trees (Zegarra 2008, p.117). In the US West, markets are both
local and ‘thin’ such that there is considerable annual fluctuation in prices across time, across
jurisdictions, and among sectors. As well as reflecting limited market integration, differences in
price across sectors reflect the opportunity cost of water, adjusted for water quality, conveyance,
and the priority of the water right. Price differentials can be considerable. For example, median
state prices for one-year leases between 1987 and 2008, ranged from $6.50/ML in Idaho to
$71/ML in Arizona and median sales prices ranged from $92/ML in Idaho to $5,344/ML in
Colorado.9 There are also significant price differences in three local markets. Median prices for
agriculture-to-urban and agriculture-to-agriculture transactions in the South Platte region of
Colorado were $6,600/ML and $5,093/ML respectively; in the Truckee Basin of Nevada,
$15,792/ML and $2,366/ML; and in the Central Valley of California, $138/ML and $140/ML.10
The outlier in terms of price formation is China where water prices are regulated by the
government (Liao et al. 2008, p. vi). Consequently, water prices are stable, but they do not
reflect changing environmental or economic conditions. Prices for water transfers, for instance
between regional governments, are determined through direct negotiation.

Availability of Market Price Information

9

The price data are in 2008$ as discussed in endnote 5 above.
All values are in 2008 $. Time periods are 2002‐8 for Colorado and 2002‐9 for Nevada and California.
Colorado and Nevada transactions are sales while California transactions are leases (Landry 2010).

10

23

Market price information is not readily available for all five water markets. The most developed
price data is in Australia where state registers are accessible and some water brokers provide
information on water prices, sometimes on a commercial basis. In Chile, there is an uneven
spread of pricing information in the market that particularly disadvantages market participants
with the least resources and also increases transaction costs (Zegarra 2008: 120). In the US
West, markets are generally informal and segmented. Consequently, it is often difficult for
buyers and sellers to locate one another. Although brokers are emerging to help create water
markets there are no general water rights registries across the US states and accessible price
information is restricted to water trade journals. In China, there is no accessible water price
information while in South Africa price information is spread from word of mouth (Gillet,
Nieuwoudt and Backeberg 2005, p. 10) with no central notice board of pricing. This has led to
asymmetries in terms of price information between buyers and sellers (Nieuwoudt and Armitage
2004, p. 3).

Water Storages
In semi-arid climates where rainfall is not evenly spread throughout the year, water storages
provide a valuable smoothing function in terms of water availability. The more variable is the
climate, the larger are the required storages. In terms of water markets, storages also provide an
opportunity for trade over longer periods of time and enable trades upstream provided the
transaction takes place before the water is released from upriver storages.

In all five water markets there are substantial water storages that facilitate water trade. The ratios
of total capacity of water storages to average water use range from more than two in Australia’s

24

Murray-Darling Basin to about three in Chile’s Limarí Valley. The ratios vary substantially for
the US West, but in Colorado the ratio is 2.3

Equity
Equity can be defined as who gets what water, and when? It is a key component to the successful
operation of water markets because perceived unfairness in initial allocations of water can
undermine the legitimacy of trades. Inequities may also compromise the overall market if it
contributes to water ‘poaching’ or contravention of water regulations. An assessment of equity is
provided below using five criteria: (1) Beneficial use of water extractions; (2) Provision of basic
human needs; (3) Limits on market power; (4) Recognition of third-party impacts; and (5) Initial
allocation mechanisms that include equity considerations.

Beneficial Use
Beneficial use refers to how the water is used, and whether it is used. In underutilized systems
the greater is the beneficial use, the larger are the potential benefits of water diversions.
Conversely, in overused systems the imposition of beneficial use for diversions may be
inequitable to the extent it limits the rights of users, can be subject to administrative intervention
and may contribute to conflicts among users.

Neither Australia nor Chile has explicit provisions for beneficial use although an effectively
functioning market provides strong incentives to trade allocations when water is not needed. By
contrast, in the US appropriative water rights are conditional upon placing the water in beneficial
use. Most western states define beneficial use in terms of the benefit for the appropriator, other

25

persons, or the public with corresponding lists of what is considered beneficial use. Although
irrigation was the dominant initial basis for diversion, the set of beneficial uses can be expanded
or contracted based on changing public values, judicial interpretations, and constituent group
politics. For example, leaving water in stream for habitat has recently been accepted as a
beneficial use across US states although its exact definition differs among them (Anderson and
Johnson, 1986; Getches, 1997, p.113-4).

South Africa has an explicit consideration of beneficial use that it defines as “…conferring a
benefit on the whole population, not just the user” (Pott et al., p. 12). Beneficial use is taken into
account when licences are reviewed (Nieuwoudt 2000, p. 2) although there appears to be little
transparency around what this means in practice. China, because of its centrally administered
nature of water allocation, presumably also incorporates beneficial use in water planning, but
again there is no transparency as to what guides actual decisions

Basic Human Needs
Basic human needs can be interpreted in various ways, but is typically defined as meeting the
immediate requirements of households in terms of drinking water and sanitation. In both China
and South Africa provisions for basic needs are an important part of water planning. In South
Africa’s case the National Water Act 1998 aims to ensure adequate water for basic human needs,
ecological and development purposes (Farolfi and Perret 2002, p. 3). As a result, the provision of
basic water services in townships has been a major priority of the South African government in
terms of its water policies. Basic human needs for water appears to be relatively well-provided
for in China despite an absence of provisions within water planning (Speed 2010b, p. 214).
26

In Australia, basic human needs are defined in terms of water supplies for communities that
depend on rivers for their water supplies. Such communities have the highest order priority of
access. In Chile there is a general deference to the urban water supply (Hearne 1998, p. 154), as
in the case of Australia, but water scarcity is such that the provision of basic human needs does
not currently compromise existing water markets and allocations. This is also true in the US, but
should there be extreme water shortages domestic and municipal uses would be preferred over
agricultural, industrial and in-stream uses (Trelease 1955, p. 134).

Limits on Market Power
Controls that limit how many water rights one individual can own or hold may be implemented
to address perceived abuses of market power, especially in ‘thin’ water markets. In the case of
Australia, concerns over market power have been primarily directed towards the Federal
Government that has become the largest purchaser of water rights in the past two years in its
attempt to acquire water rights from willing sellers for the environment. A separate arm of the
Australian government is charged with ensuring a competitive water market – including
addressing potential issues of market power – and its advice will be incorporated into water
market rules that will be implemented in 2011 in the Murray-Darling Basin.

In Chile, speculation and hoarding have been significant problems, especially in nonconsumptive rights, although these effects have also flowed through to consumptive rights
(Bauer 2004, p. 122-3). The purpose of hoarding, however, seems to be a way for holders of

27

water rights to insure themselves against reductions in water availability rather than to exercise
market power. In large part, this stems from the fact that reductions in allowable water use are
proportionate across all users when water availability declines. In the US, because water markets
are local with few traders and trading options, there are potential problems of bilateral monopoly
and bargaining problems such as between the Imperial Irrigation District and the City of San
Diego (Haddad 2000; Glennon 2009, pp. 258-9) However, because western water markets are so
fragmented there is little likelihood of broad market power emerging. Limited trading in both
China and South Africa currently makes the exercise of market power a remote possibility, at
least until their water markets develop more fully.

Third-party Impacts
Third-party impacts can arise when water trades impose cost on others not accounted for in the
transaction by buyers and sellers. In Australia water markets have been constrained and limits
imposed on the quantity of sales so as to protect communities from reduced water diversions.
These controls have had a negative effect on water transactions and the efficient functioning of
water markets (Productivity Commission 2010). Chile’s 1981 Water Code does not specifically
address third-party effects or environmental impacts. The World Bank considers externalities in
Chile’s water sector to be pervasive and likely to “become more important in coming decades”
(Briscoe, Salas and Peña 1998, p. 15). Externalities as a result of water trading, however, may
not yet be a major problem due to the low volume of trade (Bauer 2004, p. 84).

In the US water trades are regulated by states to meet beneficial use and no harm or no injury
requirements when they involve changes in location, timing and nature of use that could affect
28

other rights holders (Getches 1997, p. 161). There can also be restrictions to limit negative
pecuniary impacts of trades. Despite these equity concerns, most studies suggest that third-party
pecuniary effects are small (Hanak 2003, p. 81; Howitt 1994). Overall, ‘no injury’ requirements
can be sufficiently vague so as to add uncertainty and raise regulatory costs. Additionally, states
generally require that transfers be for consumed, rather than diverted, water to mitigate thirdparty effects.

Nieuwoudt (2000, p. 8) reports that the South African National Water Act

1998 “gives

prominence to third party (environment and human) issues”, although it is difficult to assess how
effective these protections are in practice in the absence of significant levels of water trading. In
China, water transfers as a result of water ‘savings’ through lining of irrigation channels is likely
to produce third-party effects which, to date, have not been adequately considered (Speed 2010b,
p. 89), including in terms of surface-groundwater linkages and wetlands (Xie 2008, p. 76).
Importantly, the third-part effects of large inter-basin transfers from South to the North
(Ghassemi and White 2007, pp. 307-316) have not been fully compensated.

Initial Allocation Mechanisms
Initial allocations of water rights can be contentious, especially if prior users of water are
excluded or provided with a lower share than they had historically. Such allocations may be
viewed as inequitable and can contribute to water conflicts that can jeopardize the efficient
functioning of water markets.

29

The challenge in Australia has been to reallocate water rights from existing users to the
environment in ways that are equitable and meet societal goals. To date, this has been
accomplished with the purchase by the Federal Government of water rights from willing sellers
funded from general tax revenues (Connell and Grafton 2008). In the US, water rights in western
states are largely based on the prior appropriation doctrine or ‘first possession’ (Getches 1997,
p.74-189; Kanazawa 1998; Johnson, Gisser and Werner 1981). Appropriative rights are based
on timing of claim, measured in terms of water diversion, and held conditional on beneficial use.
Senior rights have first claim to water and junior rights holders bear more risk during drought.

Since the passage of its National Water Act 1998, South Africa has been undergoing a process of
compulsory licensing, following which an ‘initial allocation’ of water licences will occur (Water
Research Commission 2009, p. 9). This process may reallocate water to other purposes, such as
to previously disadvantaged individuals, without compensation, as way of correcting past
inequities. China’s 11th five-year plan (2006-10) requires the development of a national initial
allocation system (Sun 2010, p. 1), but no clear interpretation of this requirement has been
provided to date. Large inter-basin transfers from the South to the North indicate that past water
use does not ensure current access. In Chile’s 1981 Water Code prior users, primarily in
agriculture, were allocated consumptive water rights, but also included were non-consumptive
rights such as for hydro-electric power generation. Disputes over the priority of water rights
(consumptive versus non-consumptive) have led to legal challenges (Bauer 2004, p. 103-111).
Allocation of return flows to holders of water rights, as part of the 1981 Water Code, has also
disadvantaged the customary practice of using such flows by downstream users.

30

Environmental Sustainability
Water markets provide a mechanism for the allocation of water between competing water users
and market-based consumptive uses. However, unless there is explicit consideration given to
non-market uses or set asides/reserves for the public good, markets may not deliver on broader
societal goals.

There are several preconditions for meeting environmental sustainability in water management,
including adequate information of environmental needs, delivery of water to meet these needs,
and an adaptive process to manage these requirements with changing conditions and
circumstances. These preconditions are captured in the criteria presented in Table 4, namely: (1)
Adequate scientific data to determine hydrological requirements of water-based environmental
resources; (2) Adequate provisions for environmental flows; (3) Adaptive management of
environmental needs, including the capacity to monitor the environment; (4) Water quality
considerations in water planning and markets; and (5) Complementary catchment and Basinwide planning and trading.

Adequate Scientific Data
Adequate scientific data is required for effective water resource planning that underpins formal
water markets. The best available data are in Australia, the US and South Africa. In the case of
Australia, much of this data has been developed in the past decade in response to government
programs such as the Living Murray First Step (Grafton and Hussey 2007), initiated to increase
environmental flows. The data are ‘patchy’ depending on the catchment and are not always
accessible even to academic researchers, but are used by water agencies for planning purposes.

31

In the US, state and federal agencies gather and provide information regarding hydrological data
on stream flows, water use, and environmental demands.

Environmental requirements are

project and river specific and there is no central clearinghouse. South Africa has well developed
hydrological models of its major catchments and is developing ‘ecological reserves’ as part of its
National Water Act 1998 that has forced water planners to improve data collection and
monitoring. Neither Chile (Brehm and Quiroz 1995) nor China (Shen and Speed 2010, p. 33)
has adequate water data for environmental purposes.

Provisions for Environmental Flows
In the US all western states recognize that environmental flows are consistent with beneficial
use. Quasi-government agencies and private organizations, such as Oregon Water Trust, engage
in water leasing or rights acquisition for in-stream flow maintenance (Neuman 2004;
Scarborough 2010). However, there is considerable debate about how much water is needed to
achieve specific environmental objectives. Cost-benefit analysis is not expressly required under
the Endangered Species Act 1973 or the Clean Water Acts of 1972, 1977, or 1987 so that a
weighing of opportunity costs generally does not take place in determining environmental flows.
Absent these data as well as scientific consensus, there are debates as to whether there is
sufficient water or too much water devoted to maintaining flows.

In Australia, Chile and South Africa there is federal legislation mandating provision of water for
environmental and public good purposes. In the case of Australia’s Murray-Darling Basin this
will be implemented via a Basin-wide plan that will determine sustainable diversion limits for

32

each catchment beginning 2011. At present, water is provided for the environment through water
resource planning processes and also through the purchase of water rights by governments from
willing sellers. South Africa is also developing ecological reserves of water for public good
purposes that include basic human needs as well as for the environment (Farolfi and Perret 2002,
p. 3), although progress to date has been slow (Pollard, Toit and Skukuza 2009, p. 2). In China,
“…water is generally not allocated to the environment in any meaningful way” (Shen and Speed
2010, p. 33), however, China is in the process of amending water basin plans to account for
environmental flows in at least seven of its major river basins (Speed 2010b, p. 211).

Adaptive Management
Adaptive management is an important way of responding to unexpected changes and coping
with management surprises. One of the key uncertainties in surface water management is climate
variability, especially unexpected and prolonged periods of below-average inflows.

All water markets, to some extent, have some elements of adaptive management. Indeed, water
markets themselves are an instrument that can facilitate adaptive responses to change, such as
drought, by allowing high-value uses to access water that would otherwise have been denied to
them. The challenge is to ensure water markets and water planning can flexibly respond and
sustain the desired public good benefits of water, such as for environmental flows. In Australia,
water resource plans disproportionately favor water diversions that, typically, decline by a lesser
amount than inflows in dry periods (CSIRO 2008, p. 43). As a result, in extended droughts,
environmental flows can become negligible and this can generate widespread environmental
degradation (The Senate Standing Committee on Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport

33

2008; Wentworth Group of Concerned Scientists 2010). A Basin Plan for the Murray-Darling
Basin, due for implementation in 2011, will attempt to correct this fundamental failing in water
planning. South Africa has also recognized the importance of adaptively managing its water
resources and ecological reserves of water are being determined to meet environmental needs
(e.g. Pollard, Toit and Skukuza 2009, p. 17).

In the US West there is capacity for adaptive management under state and federal environmental
legislation. The absence of cost-benefit analysis and reliance upon judicial injunctions under
federal endangered species and water quality legislation, however, can result in protracted legal
disputes. Consequently, there is potential for greater reliance upon water markets where rights
holders are compensated for environmental diversions.

In the case of Chile, adaptive

management is in the form of proportional allocation adjustments across all water rights in
response to variability of inflows. China’s water adaptive water planning is presently in a state
such that “…current approaches to defining environmental flows do not adequately account for
complex relationships between flow regimes and ecosystems” (Liu and Speed 2010, p. 17).

Water Quality Considerations
Water quality is related to flows and how water is diverted and used. In all water markets some
consideration is given to water quality. In the Murray-Darling Basin of Australia there are some
restrictions on trade to avoid worsening salinity and the Basin Plan due for implementation in
2011 will include a water quality and salinity management plan to safeguard water quality
(Murray-Darling Basin Authority 2009, p. 14). In the US, water quality is regulated by state and
federal legislation. Water trades can be restricted by quality concerns. This has been the case,

34

for example, in the Sacramento Delta where rising salinity levels contribute to reduced exports of
water through the State Water Project.

In Chile, China and South Africa there is evidence of major water quality problems, at least in
some rivers. In the case of Chile, the most developed water market is in the Limarí Valley and
this region does not appear to have major water quality problems, but this may be more by
chance than good water management (Hearne 1998, p. 145). In South Africa, the most damaging
water quality issue is acid mine drainage that comes from both active and abandoned mines.
Despite the fact that these problems have existed for many decades, they remain a major concern
in key catchments. China has a daunting challenge to mitigate severe water quality problems,
and although it is taking steps to resolve water pollution, enforcement remains weak and the
problems are “…grave and deteriorating” (Lee 2006, p. 7).

Basin and Catchment-level Water Planning
Interlinked and compatible Basin and catchment water planning is necessary for integrated
catchment management to address downstream externalities. In Australia, there will be a
comprehensive Basin Plan for the Murray-Darling Basin in 2011 that will specify environmental
water requirements and sustainable diversions for each catchment (Murray-Darling Basin
Authority 2009, p. 19). However, the actual catchment water resource plans will be developed
by state governments and these do not need to be consistent with the Basin Plan until current
plans expire, which in some cases does not occur until 2019.

35

Chile has a decentralized planning system and there is a tightly circumscribed role for the
relevant Water Ministry. The absence of river basin institutions also prevents any administrative
engagement with water planning, including in the Limarí Valley (Bauer 2004, pp. 96-7). Instead,
irrigation associations and officials in the Irrigation Bureau effectively manage Limarí’s water
supply on a year-to-year basis (Zegarra 2008, p. 41). In the US there is partial basin-wide water
management regarding environmental flows. Basins often cross multiple political jurisdictions
so that differing regulations and agencies are involved, although federal quality regulations
generally apply. The 18 interstate water basin compacts have had limited coordinated
environmental roles, and in California the Integrated Regional Water Management Plan Program
(IRWMP) has been expanded to promote water planning outside traditional political boundaries.

South Africa’s National Water Act 1998 provides for catchment-level planning for
environmental and human needs through reserves. However, slow progress in creating
catchment management authorities has meant that water planning remains in its infancy in most
catchments. China’s seven major river basins all have comprehensive water plans, but these
focus solely on allocation and utilization and do not necessarily incorporate more holistic
objectives such as water quality, environmental protection and human needs (Zhou 2006, p. 6).

Water Markets: An Overview
The five markets assessed under the integrated framework is by no means an exhaustive list.
Informal markets exist in many other countries such as India and Pakistan, as well as more
formal water markets, such as in Mexico (Easter, Rosegrant and Diner 1998). Benchmarking
across water markets would assist informed policy makers to make judgments about how they

36

can be further developed to achieve particular goals. We contend that our integrated framework
shows the important linkages between water market development, institutional constraints, and
management goals. Understanding these connections is crucial to good water governance and,
thus, recommendations about what criteria should be further developed is contingent on the
espoused goals, institutions and capacity where water markets are located. The integrated
framework, thus, should be viewed as a road map or guide that offers multiple routes and options
about how to move from points A to B, or points A to C, depending on what the ‘driver’ wants
and what ‘vehicle’ is available, rather than a single pathway to a unique destination.

In closing, we provide ten key insights from the application of the integrated framework to five
water markets. First, institutions matter. Thus, what may work in one water market may not
necessarily be as successful in another with different institutions. This also implies an important
role for water regulators or governments to support water markets to ensure that they are
delivering the desired societal benefits. Second, some water markets have developed and evolved
for purposes other than economic efficiency. Trade-offs between equity and efficiency exist in
water market design and operation, even if these trade-offs are not always as transparent as they
are in South Africa. Third, Australia shows that markets can be adapted to account for
environmental sustainability without necessarily compromising economic efficiency. Fourth,
markets can successfully work in small catchments, such as Chile’s Limarí Valley, as well as in
large basins, such as the Murray-Darling in Australia. Fifth, water markets can generate
substantial gains for buyers and sellers that would not otherwise occur, and these gains increase
as water availability declines. Sixth, there is a need for flexibility in water markets so that they
can change as the benefits of water use and in situ use change over time, as has happened in the

37

US West and Australia. Seventh, there must be a close connection between water markets and
water planning to provide surety to holders of water rights while also sustaining the public good
aspects of water. Eighth, history matters. For instance, the path dependence of the US with its
appropriative rights is likely to be different to that of Australia that has statutory rights. Ninth,
differences in regulatory capacity (human and financial) to support water markets help to explain
some of the variation in the performance of water markets, such as between China and the US.
Tenth, performance must match goals. Thus, if equity is the primary goal, such as in South
Africa, then water markets should be judged on this priority rather than objectives that may
dominate in other jurisdictions, such as economic efficiency.

38

References
Anderson, Terry L. and Ronald N. Johnson. 1986. The problem of instream flows.
Economic Inquiry. 24(4): 535-53.

Bauer, Carl J. 2004. Siren song: Chilean water law as a model for international reform.
Washington D.C.: Resources for the Future.

Bauer, Carl J. 1997. Bringing water markets down to earth: The political economy of
water rights in Chile, 1976-95, World Development. 25(5): 639-656.

Brehm, Monica Rios, and Jorge Quiroz. 1995. The market for water rights in Chile:
Major issues, World Bank technical paper no.285. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.

Brewer, Jedidiah, and Gary D. Libecap. 2009. Property rights and the public trust
doctrine in environmental protection and natural resource conservation. The Australian
Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics. 53: 1–17.

Brewer, Jedidiah, Robert Glennon, Alan Ker, and Gary D. Libecap. 2008. Water markets
in the west: prices, trading, and contractual flows. Economic Inquiry. 46(2): 91-112.

Brewer, Jedidiah, Michael A. Fleishman, Robert Glennon, Alan Ker, and Gary Libecap.
2008. Law and the new institutional economics: water markets and legal change in
California. Washington University Journal of Law and Policy. 26: 183-214.

39

Briscoe, John, Pablo Anguita Salas and Humberto Peña T. 1998. Managing water as an
economic resource: Reflections on the Chilean experience, Environment Department
Paper no. 62, Environmental Economics Series. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.

Connell, Daniel, and R. Quentin Grafton. 2008. Planning for water security in the
Murray-Darling Basin. Public Policy. 3(1): 67-86.

Crase, Lin, and Suzanne O’Keefe. 2009. The paradox of national water savings: A
critique of ‘Water for the Future’. Agenda. 16(1): 45-60.

CSIRO. 2008. Water availability in the Murray-Darling Basin. A report to the Australian
Government from the CSIRO Murray-Darling Basin Sustainable Yields Project.
Canberra, CSIRO.

Dinar, Ariel, and R. Maria Saleth. 2005. Can water institutions be cured? A water
institutions health index. Water Science and Technology: Water Supply. 5(6): 17-40.

Easter, K. William, Mark W. Rosegrant, and Ariel Dinar. 1999. Formal and informal
markets for water: Institutions, performance and constraints. The World Bank Research
Observer. 14(1): 99-116.

40

Easter, K. William, Mark W. Rosegrant, and Ariel Dinar (eds). 1998. Markets for water:
potential and performance. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Eden, Susanna, Robert Glennon, Alan Ker, Gary Libecap, Sharon Megdal, and Taylor
Shipman, 2008. Agricultural water to municipal use: the legal and institutional context
for voluntary transactions in Arizona. The Water Report. 58: 9-20.

Falkenmark, Malin. 1999. Forward to the future: A conceptual framework for water
dependence. Ambio. 28(4): 356-361.

Farolfi, S., and S. Perret. 2002. Inter-sectoral competition for water allocation in rural
South Africa: Analysing a case study through a standard environmental economics
approach, Working paper 2002-23, Department of Agricultural Economics, University of
Pretoria.

Getches, David H. 1997. Water law in a nut shell, St. Paul: West Publishing Co.

Gould, George. A. 1995. Recent developments in the transfer of water rights. In Water
law: Trends, policies, and practice, ed. Kathleen Marion Carr and James D. Crammond,
93–103, Chicago: American Bar Association.

41

Ghassemi, Fereidounm, and Ian White. 2007. Inter-basin water transfer: Case studies
from Australia, United States, Canada, China, and India. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Gillet, C.G., W.L. Nieuwoudt and G.R. Backeberg. 2005. Water markets in the Lower
Orange River catchment of South Africa, Agrekon. 44(3): 363-382.

Glennon, Robert Jerome. 2009. Unquenchable: America’s water crisis and what to do
about it, Washington D.C.: Island Press.

Grafton, R. Quentin, and Karen Hussey. 2007. Buying back the Living Murray: At what
price? Australasian Journal of Environmental Management. 14: 74-81.

Grafton, R. Quentin, Clay Landry, Gary D. Libecap, and Robert J. O’Brien. 2010. Water
markets: Australia’s Murray-Darling Basin and the US Southwest. NBER Working Paper.
w15791, Cambridge: Ma.

Haddad, Brent M. 2000. Rivers of gold: designing markets to allocate water in
California. Washington D.C.: Island Press.

Hanak, Ellen. 2003. Who should be allowed to sell water in California? Third-party
issues and the water market. San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California.

42

Hadjigeorgalis, Ereney, and Jay Lillywhite. 2004. The impact of institutional constraints
on the Limari River Valley water market, Water Resources Research. 40, W05501,
doi:10.1029/2003WR002701.

Hearne, Robert R. 1998. Institutional and organisational arrangements for water markets
in Chile. In Markets for water: Potential and performance, ed. K. William Easter, Mark
W. Rosegrant and Ariel Dinar, 181-158. Massachusetts: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Hollinshead, Sarah P. 2008. Water is not liquid: Securitization, transaction costs, and
California’s water market. Columbia Journal of Environmental Law. 33(2): 323-368.

Howe, Charles W., Dennis R. Schurmeier, and W. Douglas Shaw. 1986. Innovative
approaches to water allocation: The potential for water markets. Water resources
Research. 22(4): 439-445.

Howitt, Richard. E. 1994. Effects of water marketing on the farm economy. In Sharing
Scarcity: Gainers and Losers in Water Marketing, ed. H. O. Carter, H. J. Vaux Jr, and A.
F. Scheuring. Davis, 97–132. Davis, CA: Agricultural Issues Center,

Johnson, Ronald N., Micha Gisser, and Michael Werner. 1981. The definition of a
surface water right and transferability. Journal of Law and Economics. 24 (2): 273-88.

43

Kanazawa, Mark T. 1998. Efficiency in western water law: The development of the
California doctrine, 1850-1911. Journal of Legal Studies. 27(1): 159-185.

Khan, Haider, and Yibei Liu. 2008. Ecological economics of water in China: Towards a
strategy for sustainable development. MPRA paper no. 7705, Munich Personal RePEc
Archive. Published March 2008.

Landry, Clay. 2010. Water Transfer Dataset. WestWater Research, LLC, Boise, Idaho.

Lee, S. 2006. China’s water policy challenges. China Policy Institute discussion paper
13, University of Nottingham.

Lenton, Roberto, and Mike Muller. 2009. Introduction. In Integrated water resources
management in practice: Better water management for development, eds. Roberto
Lenton, and Mike Muller. Earthscan: London.

Liao, Yongsong, Zhanyi Gao, Ziyun Bao, Qingwen Huang, Guangzhi Feng, Di Xu,
Jiabin Cai, Huijing Han, and Weifeng Wu. 2008. China’s water pricing reforms for
irrigation: Effectiveness and impact. CA Discussion Paper 6. Comprehensive Assessment
of water management in agriculture. Colombo: International Water Management
Institute.

44

Libecap, Gary D. 2007. Owens valley revisited: a reassessment of the west’s first great
water transfer. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.

Liu, Bin, and Robert Speed. 2010. Water resources management in the People’s Republic
of China. In Water resources management in the People’s Republic of China, ed. Xeutao
Sun, Robert Speed, and Dajun Shen. New York: Routledge.

Livingston, Marie Leigh 1993. Normative and positive aspects of institutional economics:
The implications for water policy. Water Resources Research 29(4): 815-821.

Ludwig, Fulco and Marcus Moench. 2009. The impacts of climate change on water. In
Climate change adaptation in the water sector, eds. Fulco Ludwig, Pavel Kabat, Henk
van Schaik, and Michael van der Valk, 35-50. London: Earthscan Publishing.

Malzbender, Daniel, Jaqui Goldin, Anthony Turton, and Anton Earle. 2005. Traditional
water governance and South Africa’s National Water Act: Tension or cooperation? Paper
presented at the international workshop African water laws: Plural legislative frameworks
for rural water management in Africa, Johannesburg, South Africa, January, 26-28.

Muller, C. 2009. Attempting to do it all: How a new South Africa has harnessed water to
address its development challenges, In Integrated water resources management in
practice: Better water management for development, eds. Roberto Lenton, and Mike
Muller. London: Earthscan: London.

45

Murray-Darling Basin Authority. 2009. The Basin Plan: A concept statement. MDBA
Publication no. 02/09, June.

National Water Commission. 2009a. Australian water reform 2009: Second biennial
assessment of progress in implementation of the National Water Initiative. Canberra:
National Water Commission.

National Water Commission. 2009b. Australian water markets report 2008-09. Canberra:
National Water Commission.

Neuman, Janet C. 2004. The good, the bad, and the ugly: The first ten years of the
Oregon water trust. Nebraska Law Review. 83: 432-84.

Nieuwoudt, W. L., C. G. Gillet, and G. R. Backeberg. 2005. Water marketing in the
Crocodile River, South Africa. Agrekon. 44(3): 383-401.

Nieuwoudt, W. L. and R. M. Armitage. 2004. Water market transfers in South Africa:
Two case studies. Water Resources Research. 40, W09S05,
doi:10.1029/2003WR002840.

Nieuwoudt, W. L. 2000. Water market institutions: Lessons from Colorado. Agrekon.
39(1): 58-67.

46

Palaniappan, Meena, and Gleick, Peter H. 2009. Peak water, In The World’s Water 20082009 The Biennial Report on Freshwater Resources, ed. Peter H. Gleick, Heather
Cooley, Michael Cohen, Mari Morikawa, Jason Morrison, and Meena Palaniappan, 1-16.
Washington D.C.: Island Press.

Peterson, Deborah, Gavin Dwyer, David Appels, and Jane M. Fry. 2004. Modelling water
trade in the southern Murray-Darling Basin. Productivity Commission Staff Working
Paper. Melbourne, Productivity Commission.

Pollard, Sharon R., Derick du Toit, and S. Mallory Skukuza. 2009. Drawing
environmental water allocations into the world of realpolitik: Emerging experiences on
achieving compliance with policy in the Lowveld rivers, South Africa. Paper presented at
the International Conference on Implementing Environmental Water Allocations, Port
Elizabeth, February 23-26.

Postel, Sandra L., Gretchen C. Daily, and Paul R. Ehrlich. 1996. Human appropriation of
renewable fresh water. Science, 271: 785-788.

Pott, A., K. Versfeld, M. van Rooyen and A. Muir. 2009. A scoping exercise to
investigate the potential need for, and nature of, water trading in South Africa. WRC
Report No. KV 222/09. South African Water Research Commission.

47

Productivity Commission. 2010. Market mechanisms for recovering water in the MurrayDarling Basin. Melbourne, Productivity Commission.

Richards, Elizabeth H. 2008. Over-allocation and the doctrine of prior appropriation;
water rights settlement agreements in New Mexico. PhD Dissertation, Interdisciplinary
Graduate Program in Environment and Resources, Stanford University

Rosegrant, Mark, and Hans P. Binswanger. 1994. Markets in tradable water rights:
Potential for efficiency gains in developing country water resource allocation. World
Development. 22: 1613-1625.

Saleth, R. Maria, and Ariel Dinar. 2000. Institutional changes in global water sector:
Trends, patterns, and implications. Water Policy, 2(3): 175-199.

Saleth, R. Maria, and Ariel Dinar. 2004. The institutional economics of water: A cross
country analysis of institutions and performance. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Sax, Joseph. 1970. The public trust doctrine in natural resource law: effective judicial
Intervention. Michigan Law Review. 68: 471–566.

Scarborough, Brandon. 2010. Environmental water markets: restoring streams through
trade. PERC Policy Series No. 46. Bozeman, MT: PERC.

48

Shen, D. and R. Speed. 2010. Water resources allocation in the People’s Republic of
China. In Water resources management in the People’s Republic of China, ed. Xuetao
Sun, Robert Speed and Dajun Shen. New York: Routledge.

Shiklomanov, I.A.2003. World water use and water availability, In World Water
Resources at the Beginning of the 21st Century, eds. I.A. Shiklomanov, and John C.
Rodda, 369-389. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Speed, R. 2010a. A comparison of water rights systems in China and Australia. In Water
resources management in the People’s Republic of China, ed. Xuetao Sun, Robert Speed
and Dajun Shen. New York: Routledge.

Speed, R. 2010b. Transferring and trading water rights in the People’s Republic of China.
In Water resources management in the People’s Republic of China, ed. Xuetao Sun,
Robert Speed and Dajun Shen. New York: Routledge.

Sullivan, Caroline. 2002. Calculating a water poverty index. World Development. 30(7):
1195-1210.

Sun, Xuetao. 2010. Introduction: The development of a water rights system in China. In
Water resources management in the People’s Republic of China, ed. Xuetao Sun, Robert
Speed and Dajun Shen. New York: Routledge.

49

The Senate Standing Committee on Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport. 2008,
Water management in the Coorong and the Lower Lakes. Canberra: Parliament of
Australia.

Thompson, Barton H. 1993. Institutional perspectives on water policy and markets.
California Law Review. 81: 673-764.

Trelease, Frank J. 1955. Preferences to the use of utility. Rocky Mountain Law Review.
27: 133-60.

Turton, Anthony R., Marian J. Patrick, and Jeanette Rascher. 2008. Editorial: Setting the
scene – hydropolitics and the development of the South African economy. Water
Resources Development. 24(3): 323-327.

Water Research Commission. 2009. Experts united to save abused river from extinction.
The Water Wheel. 8(1): 14-17.

Wentworth Group of Concerned Scientists in association with R.Q. Grafton, I. Kowalick,
C. Miller, T. Stubbs, F. Verity and K. Walker. 2010, Sustainable diversions in the
Murray-Darling Basin: An analysis of the options for achieving a sustainable diversion
limit in the Murray-Darling Basin. Melbourne: Wentworth Group of Concerned
Scientists.

50

World Bank. 2002. China: Country water resources assistance strategy. The World Bank
East Asia and Pacific Region. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.

Xie, Jian. 2008. Addressing China’s water scarcity: Recommendations for selected water
resource management issues. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.

Zegarra, Eduardo. 2008. Water markets and coordination failures: A case study from
Chile. Saarbrucken: VDM Verlag Dr. Muller Aktiengesellscharft & Co. KG.

Zhou, G. 2006. Institutional arrangements for river basin management: A case study
comparison of the United States and China. World Bank Policy Note 37747, China
Water Analytical and Advisory Assistance Program. Washington D.C.: IBRD, The World
Bank.

51

Table 1. Institutional Underpinnings

Recognition
of public
interest

Administr
ative
capacity

Well
developed
horizontal
linkages

Well
developed
vertical
linkages

Legal/adm
inistrative
clarity

Conflict
resolution

Adaptive
manageme
nt of
institutions

Registratio
n/titling

Australia
US West
Chile
South
Africa

X

China

X

X
(pending)

X

X

X
X

I
X

(pending)

(pending)

I

Nearly or fully satisfied
Mostly satisfied, some further development required
Partly satisfied, substantial further development required

X
I

Not satisfied/Missing/Not operational
Inadequate info

52

Table 2. Economic Efficiency
Size of
market
(permanent/
temporary)

Gains from
trade (US$
million)

Australia

12.5/20.1 %

495

US West

I

406

15/30 %

22.1

2.0
2.3
(Colorado)
3.3

I
I

I
I

I
I

Chile
South
Africa
China

Nature of
water
products

X

Quality
of title

Breadth of
market

X

Stability of
price
formation

Market
pricing
information

N/A

Nearly or fully satisfied
Mostly satisfied, some further development required
Partly satisfied, substantial further development required

X
I

Not satisfied/Missing/Not operational
Inadequate info

53

Storage
(ratio of
average
use)

Table 3. Equity
Beneficial use
in extractions

Basic human
needs

Controls on
market power

Third‐party
impacts

Initial
allocation

Australia
US
Chile

I

South Africa

X

China

N/A

(pending)

X

N/A

Nearly or fully satisfied
Mostly satisfied, some further development required
Partly satisfied, substantial further development required

X
I

Not satisfied/Missing/Not operational
Inadequate info

54

Table 4. Environmental Sustainability

Adequate
scientific data
Australia

Adequate
provisions for
environmental
flows

Adaptive
management of
environmental
needs

Water quality
considerations
in water
planning

Basin and
catchment‐
level water
planning

(pending)

(pending)

(pending)

(pending)

(pending)

I
X

I

I
X

US
Chile
South Africa

X

China

Nearly or fully satisfied
Mostly satisfied, some further development required
Partly satisfied, substantial further development required

X
I

Not satisfied/Missing/Not operational
Inadequate info

55

