                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                           CREDIT TRAPS

                                           Efraim Benmelech
                                           Nittai K. Bergman

                                         Working Paper 16200
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16200


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2010




We thank Marios Angeletos, Mark Carey, Douglas Diamond, Oliver Hart, Raj Iyer, Anil Kashyap,
David Laibson, Owen Lamont, Stewart Myers, David Scharfstein, Antoinette Schoar, Andrei Shleifer,
Jeremy Stein, Ren e Stulz, Raghuram Rajan, James Vickery, Ivo Welch, Ivan Werning, Tanju Yorulmazer
and seminar participants at CEMFI, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Harvard University, MIT,
the IMF Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, and the NBER Project on Market Institutions
and Financial Market Risk for insightful discussions. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Efraim Benmelech and Nittai K. Bergman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Credit Traps
Efraim Benmelech and Nittai K. Bergman
NBER Working Paper No. 16200
July 2010
JEL No. E44,E51,E58,G01,G32,G33

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies the limitations of monetary policy transmission within a credit channel frame- work.
We show that, under certain circumstances, the credit channel transmission mechanism fails in that
liquidity injections by the central bank into the banking sector are hoarded and not lent out. We use
the term ‘credit traps’ to describe such situations and show how they can arise due to the interplay
between financing frictions, liquidity, and collateral values. Our analysis offers a characterization of
the problems created by credit traps as well as potential solutions and policy implications. Among
these, the analysis shows how quantitative easing and fiscal policy acting in conjunction with monetary
policy may be useful in increasing bank lending. Further, the model shows how small contractions
in monetary policy or in loan supply can lead to collapses in lending, aggregate investment, and collateral
prices.


Efraim Benmelech
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer 233
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
effi_benmelech@harvard.edu

Nittai K. Bergman
MIT Sloan School of Management
E52-437
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
nbergman@mit.edu
Introduction

The literature on the credit channel of monetary policy analyzes how changes in the money supply
aﬀect real economic activity through their impact on ﬁnancial frictions and the availability of credit.
However, little is known on when and why such a policy will fail to induce bank lending. Our paper
ﬁlls this gap. Using a general equilibrium model with endogenous collateral values, we show that
banks may rationally choose to hoard liquidity during monetary expansions rather than lend it out.
Despite the best eﬀorts of the central bank to stimulate lending, liquidity remains trapped in banks.
In equilibrium, investment levels do not rise, collateral values remain depressed, and liquidity in
the corporate sector remains low. We use the term ‘credit traps’ to describe these scenarios, and
show how they can arise due to an adverse interplay between liquidity and the value of collateral.
   Our model has two building blocks. The ﬁrst is the well known notion that collateral eases
ﬁnancial frictions and increases debt capacity (see e.g. Hart and Moore 1994, 1998). The second
building block of the model is that the value of ﬁrms’ collateral is determined, in part, by the
liquidity constraints of industry peers. As in Shleifer and Vishny (1992) we assume that banks
cannot operate assets on their own to generate cash ﬂow and so must sell seized collateral to other
industry participants. Liquidity constraints in these peer ﬁrms, therefore, aﬀect collateral values
through their impact on the amount which potential purchasers can pay for assets. In particular,
when industry ﬁnancial conditions are poor, the liquidation value of collateral – which is the relevant
value to the bank – might be lower than the intrinsic value of the assets.
   Based on these two building blocks, the mechanism of our model hinges on a feedback loop
between collateral values, lending, and liquidity in the corporate sector. According to this, increases
in collateral values allow greater lending due to the attendant reductions in ﬁnancial frictions;
Greater lending, in turn, increases liquidity in the corporate sector; Finally, increases in corporate
liquidity serve to increase collateral values, as these are determined in part by the ability of industry
peers to purchase ﬁrm assets (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992). Monetary policy aﬀects real outcomes
through its impact on this feedback loop between collateral values, lending, and corporate liquidity.
By injecting liquidity into the banking sector, monetary policy shifts banks’ lending calculus as they
know that increased aggregate lending will inﬂuence collateral values.
   Our model identiﬁes three mutually exclusive types of potential equilibria of monetary trans-
mission. In the ﬁrst type of equilibrium, which we call the ‘conventional equilibrium’, shifts in


                                                   1
monetary policy successfully inﬂuence aggregate lending activity. This rational expectations equi-
librium can be described by the following series of interlocking forces. When the central bank eases
monetary policy, the supply of loanable funds increases. Similar to a standard monetary lending
channel eﬀect (see e.g. Bernanke and Blinder (1988)), banks will tend to lend out more funds
which will increase liquidity in the corporate sector. As liquidity in the corporate sector increases,
liquidation value of assets will increase due to a Shleifer and Vishny (1992) eﬀect: ﬁrms become
less liquidity constrained, and can hence bid more aggressively when acquiring assets of liquidated
ﬁrms. As in a standard ‘balance sheet channel’ eﬀect (e.g. Bernanke and Gertler (1989, 1990,
1995)), the endogenous increase in liquidation values improves ﬁrms’ collateral positions, and thus
enables them to borrow the additional liquidity which was injected to the commercial banks by the
central bank.
   The lending and balance sheet channels of monetary policy are therefore linked in a rational
expectations equilibrium through endogenous collateral values: increased bank lending leads to
greater liquidity in the corporate sector and thus higher collateral prices. In turn, higher anticipated
collateral prices reduce ﬁnancial frictions and enable banks to utilize the central-bank injection of
liquidity to increase lending. In this conventional equilibrium, an easing of monetary policy thus
translates into three eﬀects: an increase in lending, an increase in collateral values, and a change
in the interest rate associated with bank lending.
   The second type of equilibrium in our model is the ‘credit trap’ equilibrium. In this equilibrium,
any easing of monetary policy beyond a certain point is completely ineﬀective in increasing lending
– banks simply hold on to the additional reserves created by the central bank. In the credit trap
equilibrium aggregate lending is constrained by low collateral values. To increase collateral values
the central bank would need to induce banks to inject additional liquidity into the corporate sector
so as to increase ﬁrms’ ability to purchase the assets of other industry participants. However, the
marginal increase in collateral values implied by additional lending, and the associated increase in
debt capacity, are not suﬃciently large to actually induce banks to lend. Regardless of the amount
of liquidity added by the central bank, credit therefore remains stuck in banks and collateral values
do not increase beyond the low level implied by the lack of corporate liquidity.
   The third equilibrium type in our model is the ‘jump start’ equilibrium. In this equilibrium
monetary policy can be eﬀective, but only when the central bank acts suﬃciently forcefully in
injecting reserves to the banking sector. When increasing reserves by only a moderate amount,

                                                   2
credit remains trapped in the banking sector as in a credit trap equilibrium. Banks rationally
understand that when they can employ only a moderate amount of reserves to lend to ﬁrms, the
implied collateral values are too small to justify any actual lending. Banks, therefore, retain the
additional liquidity provided by the central bank as reserves, lending remains low, and in equilibrium
the interest rate on loans will remain constant at its lower bound. However, when the central bank
eases monetary policy suﬃciently, a high lending and high collateral value rational expectations
equilibrium arises: lending is high because collateral values are high enough to support it, while
collateral values are high because lending increases liquidity in the corporate sector.
       The jump start equilibrium, therefore, provides theoretical support motivated by the credit
channel framework for a policy of quantitative easing, showing how, under certain circumstances,
such easing can be eﬀective in increasing lending.1 The jump start equilibrium also explains how
small contractions in the stance of monetary policy can lead to large crashes in both asset values
and lending. According to this, small reductions in lending reduce liquidity in the corporate sector
which, in turn, decreases collateral values. Firm balance sheets are therefore weakened, reducing
lending still further. Small reductions in aggregate lending induced by monetary policy are thus
ampliﬁed, thereby bringing about large contractions in equilibrium lending and collateral values.
This eﬀect is very much consistent with accounts of the Japanese experience during the 1980s such
as Bernanke and Gertler (1995) who argue that “the crash of Japanese land and equity values in
the latter 1980s was the result (at least in part) of monetary tightening; ... [T]his collapse in asset
values reduced the creditworthiness of many Japanese corporations and banks, contributing to the
ensuing recession.”
       We show that the nature of the equilibrium that arises – be it a credit trap or jump start
equilibrium – crucially depends on the relation between liquidity and the value of collateral. Credit
traps are associated with a concave relation between aggregate liquidity and collateral values while
convexities in this relation lead to a jump-start equilibrium. By providing micro foundations for
the market for assets, we show that lower asset redeployability, or alternatively, search costs in
ﬁnding a suitable buyer for assets, make quantitative easing equilibria more likely as compared to
credit traps. However, expectations of large future asset sales – say due to an economic downturn
   1
    Quantitative easing is a monetary policy tool in which a central bank focuses on increasing the money supply
when standard interest rate targeting is of little use, such as when the funds rate is close to zero. By conducting
open-market operations, lending money directly to banks, or purchasing assets from ﬁnancial institutions, banks are
encouraged to lend.



                                                        3
– give rise to credit traps in which monetary policy will be ineﬀective. In contrast, intermediate
levels of asset sales give rise to a quantitative easing, jump-start equilibrium in which monetary
policy is eﬀective if pursued suﬃciently forcefully. Finally, credit traps will arise when the level of
corporate liquidity in the corporate sector at the time of monetary intervention is low. Thus, the
model shows that monetary intervention may arrive too late: If liquidity in the corporate sector
at the time of intervention is low, monetary expansions will not easily convey additional liquidity
from ﬁnancial intermediaries to ﬁrms.
   While monetary policy on its own is ineﬀective in a credit trap equilibrium, our model also
shows how ﬁscal policy acting in conjunction with monetary policy can be useful in easing credit
traps and increasing bank lending. By circumventing ﬁnancial intermediaries and directly injecting
liquidity into the corporate sector, expansionary ﬁscal policy can increase collateral values. With
collateral values increased, banks can then provide loans to ﬁrms. The model therefore points to a
natural complementarity between ﬁscal and monetary policy in stimulating lending.
   Finally, since the transmission of monetary shocks does not occur through a neoclassical cost-
of-capital eﬀect, the model shows how large changes in aggregate lending and investment can
be associated with comparatively small changes in interest rates. This result is consistent with
empirical evidence showing that monetary shocks have large real eﬀects even though components
of aggregate spending are not very sensitive to cost-of-capital variables (see e.g. Blinder and
Maccini 1991). The intuition is that an expansion in monetary policy shifts out both loan supply
and loan demand – the latter occurring due to the increase in debt capacity associated with the
rise in collateral values. Although the outward shift in loan supply and loan demand increase both
lending and investment, they have counteracting eﬀects on the equilibrium interest rate. Small
changes in interest rates are therefore coupled with large changes in lending and investment.
   The rest of the paper is organized in the following manner. Section 1 provides a brief review
of related literature. Section 2 explains the setup of the model. Section 3 analyzes the benchmark
case in which liquidation values are determined exogenously. In section 4, which contains the main
analysis, we endogenize liquidation values and study their eﬀect on the credit channel transmission
of monetary policy. In section 5 we impose more structure on the pricing function of assets by
building micro-founded models of collateral values and the market for assets. Section 6 studies the
interplay between monetary and ﬁscal policies in increasing collateral values and boosting bank
lending. Section 7 concludes.

                                                  4
1.       Monetary Policy and the Credit Channel

According to the Credit Channel view of monetary policy transmission, shocks to monetary policy
aﬀect the economy through their impact on ﬁnancial frictions and the availability of credit. This
credit view is generally divided into two distinct channels. The ﬁrst is the ‘balance sheet channel’
in which monetary shocks aﬀect borrower balance sheets. An easing of monetary policy strengthens
ﬁrms’ balance sheets – for example, by reducing interest rates and raising collateral values – which
reduces the cost of external capital and promotes investment and spending. The second channel
emphasizes the importance of bank loans to economic activity and is known as the ‘bank lending
channel’. According to this view, an expansion of monetary policy shifts the supply of banks loans
outwards, and as a result leads to an increase in investment and aggregate demand. Classic studies
in the credit channel literature include Bernanke and Blinder (1988), Gertler and Hubbard (1989),
Gertler and Gilchrist (1994), Kashyap and Stein (1994), (1995), (2000), Lamont et al. (1994),
Bernanke and Gertler (1995), Stein (1998), Holmström and Tirole (1997), and Allen and Gale
(2000).
       While the credit channel predicts that expansionary monetary policy should lead to increased
economic activity, little is known about the limitations of the transmission mechanism of monetary
policy in stimulating increased lending. Our paper ﬁlls this gap by analyzing how the interplay
between liquidity, collateral values and lending can give rise to credit traps. In doing so, the model
takes a uniﬁed view of the balance sheet and lending channels.2
       Another strand of literature related to our work is that studying the ongoing ﬁnancial crisis
of 2008 – 2009. This includes Diamond and Rajan (2009), Kashyap, Rajan and Stein (2008),
and Shleifer and Vishny (2009) which provide a theoretical framework for the crisis based on the
role that securitization played in recent years. Bolton and Freixas (2006) analyzes the role that
depleted bank equity capital plays in the transmission of monetary policy in a setting of asymmetric
information. Bebchuk and Goldstein (2009) develop a model in which credit market freezes arise as
a coordination failure amongst banks lending to ﬁrms with interdependent projects. While related
to studies of credit crises, our model does not rely on the depletion of bank equity capital. As
will be seen, the main friction concerns the lack of liquidity and the strength of balance sheets
in the corporate sector. Clearly, though, the addition of features such as bank capital depletion,
   2
    Diamond and Rajan (2006) present a model unifying the traditional ‘money channel’ view with the ‘balance sheet
channel’, and Holmström and Tirole (1997) identiﬁes both ‘balance sheet’ and ‘lending’ channels.


                                                        5
uncertainty regarding the strength of bank balance sheets, and debt-overhang in bank ﬁnancing –
all of which played an important role during the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008-2009 – will only serve to
further hinder the transmission of monetary policy.
       Our paper is also related to numerous studies on credit cyclicality and the ﬁnancial accelerator.
In this literature, pioneered in Bernanke and Gertler (1989), countercyclical frictions in the cost
of external ﬁnance, driven by pro-cyclical variation in the strength of ﬁrms’ balance sheets, serve
to amplify the business cycle. Important studies in this ﬁeld include Shleifer and Vishny (1992),
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Holmström and Tirole (1997), and Fostel and Geanakopols (2008).
       Finally, as described above, our work is closely related to Shleifer and Vishny (1992) which
ﬁrst introduces the positive feedback loop between liquidity and collateral values, debt capacity,
and the provision of credit. Other recent papers which study the interplay between liquidity,
ﬁre sales, and asset prices are Acharya and Viswanathan (2009), Acharya, Shin and Yorulmazer
(2009), and Rampini and Viswanathan (2009). Our analysis is also related to Holmström and
Tirole (1997) which analyzes how the distribution of wealth across ﬁrms and suppliers of capital
aﬀects lending and investment. Holmström and Tirole, however, consider exogenous asset values
while we endogenize these values and analyze their interplay with liquidity and lending.3


2.       Model Setup

Consider an economy comprised of a continuous set of ﬁrms with measure normalized to unity, a
set of commercial banks which can supply capital to ﬁrms, and a central bank. The ﬁrms in our
model are each endowed with an identical opportunity to invest in a project. The project requires
an initial outlay of I at date-0, and returns a cash ﬂow of X1 in date-1 and X2 in date 2. As in
Hart and Moore (1998) cash ﬂows are assumed to be unveriﬁable. For simplicity we assume that
I < X1 < X2 .4 If undertaken, a project can be liquidated at date-1 for a value denoted by L. The
liquidation value of assets will play a key role in the analysis and will be described further below.
       Firms diﬀer in their level of internal wealth, A, with A distributed over the support [0, I]. For
convenience, ﬁrms are parameterized by the level of borrowing that they require in order to invest
in the project B = I − A. We assume that B is distributed according to the cumulative distribution
   3
     Indeed, according to Holmström and Tirole (1997): ‘A proper investigation of the transmission mechanism of
real and monetary shocks must take into account the feedback from interest rates to capital values.’
   4
     While by no means necessary, this assumption eases exposition and is consistent with our main interest of tight
liquidity in date-1.



                                                         6
function G(), where for simplicity G is twice diﬀerentiable.
       To invest in their project, ﬁrms can borrow capital from banks. We assume that ﬁrms cannot
issue bonds in the capital markets. While this is a strong assumption, adding a bond market does
not change our results qualitatively, as long as banks are assumed to have some informational or
monitoring advantage in providing capital.5
       As is common in the literature on the lending channel of monetary policy (see, e.g. Kashyap and
Stein, 1994) we assume, for simplicity, that the supply of loanable funds, R, is directly determined
by the central bank.6 This can thought of as occurring in a number of ways. First, as in the lending
channel literature, open market operations can shift loan supply by inﬂuencing the level of reserves
and hence of deposits.7 Another method by which the central bank can inﬂuence loan supply is
through direct loans to the banking sector.8 Finally, in extreme cases – as in the ﬁnancial crisis
of 2008-2009 – shifts in loan supply can be brought about through government equity injections to
banks.
       To conclude the setting, we assume that both banks, as well as ﬁrms, can invest in a security
yielding a return normalized to zero rather than engaging in lending or borrowing. One can think
of this security as investment in government debt.9
       While most of our predictions stem from a general equilibrium analysis in which we endogenize
the liquidation value of assets, it is useful to begin the analysis with the benchmark case of exogenous
liquidation values.


3.       The Benchmark Case: Exogenous Liquidation Values

We begin by assuming that the liquidation value of the project L is exogenously determined. As
we show in the next section, we can restrict our attention to cases in which L is smaller than X1 ,
   5
      That intermediated loans are somehow ‘special’ is a fundamental assumption in the lending channel literature
(see Bernanke and Blinder (1988)).
    6
      The central bank is exogenous to the model – its sole role is in inﬂuencing R – and so it is not assigned an
objective function. In addition, to obtain monetary non-neutrality, we make the standard assumption of imperfect
price adjustment.
    7
      This implicitly assumes that there are frictions in banks’ ability to insulate lending from shocks to reserves
by switching to other forms of non-reservable ﬁnance such as equity, commercial paper, or long-term debt. For a
discussion see Kashyap and Stein (1995), Stein (1998).
    8
      The Federal Reserve used this method during the crisis of 2008-2009 under the Term Auction Facility. Indeed,
it is argued that by expanding the set of acceptable forms of collateral, the Federal Reserve was actually providing
subsidized loans to the banking sector, and hence was in eﬀect recapitalizing banks.
    9
      The interest rate provided by government debt can be endogenized to depend on the level of demand for such
debt by both the banking and corporate sector. Doing so would not change our main results.



                                                         7
since once L is endogenized this inequality holds in equilibrium. Further, we consider the more
interesting case where L < I.10
       Consider a ﬁrm which needs to borrow an amount B to invest in its project and is faced with
an interest rate r. Since cash ﬂow is unveriﬁable, there is no way to induce the ﬁrm to repay at
date 2. As is common in the literature in incomplete ﬁnancial contracts, the only method to induce
the ﬁrm to repay at date-1 is through the threat of liquidation (see, for example, Hart and Moore
(1994)). Assuming that at date-1 the ﬁrm has all the bargaining power in renegotiating its debt
obligation with its bank, the ﬁrm will never be able to commit to repay more than L at date-1 as
it can always bargain down its repayment to the bank’s outside option. Thus, the ﬁrm will be able
to borrow an amount B only when B(1 + r) ≤ L, or equivalently, when

                                                             L
                                                   B≤           .                                                     (1)
                                                            1+r

Faced with an interest rate r, a ﬁrm will choose to borrow B and invest in its project rather than
invest its internal funds A in the zero-interest security when X1 +X2 −(1+r)B ≥ A.11 Equivalently,
since B = I − A, this occurs when

                                                     X1 + X2 − I
                                              B≤                 .                                                    (2)
                                                          r

Inequality (2) represents the participation constraints of ﬁrms and is driven by the cash ﬂows
generated by the project and their initial ﬁnancial constraints. Combining (1) and (2) yields that
at an interest rate r, all ﬁrms with borrowing requirement

                                                     L X1 + X2 − I
                                       B ≤ min[         ,          ]                                                  (3)
                                                    1+r     r

are both able and willing to borrow funds to invest in their respective projects. At any interest
rate r, the demand for capital generated by ﬁrms is therefore given by:
                                                         B ∗ (r)
                                           D(r) =                   BdG(B),                                           (4)
                                                      0

where B ∗ (r) = min[L/(1 + r), (X1 + X2 − I)/r] represents the marginal ﬁrm that borrows and
invests in the project as a function of the interest rate r. As can be seen, the liquidation value of
  10
     When L > I the analysis continues to hold but the ﬁnancial frictions are negligible since liquidation of the project
at the end of the ﬁrst period would yield enough to fully repay the bank.
  11
     Note that ﬁrms invest non-utilized capital in the zero-interest security. At the cost of ease of exposition, we could
also assume that ﬁrms invest non-utilized capital in banks.


                                                               8
assets, L, thus plays a role in determining demand for loanable funds through its impact on ﬁnancial
constraints. Indeed, for low enough r inequality (1) binds while inequality (2) does not: demand
for loanable funds is determined by ﬁrms’ ability to borrow (as constrained by liquidation values)
rather than their desire to borrow (as determined by the participation constraint). To emphasize
this, we refer to the demand function in (4) as ‘eﬀective demand’, thereby diﬀerentiating it from
the demand that would have been obtained under no ﬁnancial frictions.
     Equilibrium in the model is determined by equating eﬀective demand for loanable funds to the
supply of loanable funds:
                B ∗(r)
                        BdG(B) ≤ R, with strict inequality only when r = 0                         (5)
                  0

From (5) it is easy to see that as the central bank increases the supply of funds, the interest
rate decreases and aggregate lending increases. Importantly, however, the liquidation value L will
determine the maximal level of aggregate lending. At a zero interest rate, ﬁnancial frictions imply
that the maximal amount a ﬁrm can borrow is B = L. Thus, as can be seen from (4), for any
                                                                       L
exogenous L the maximal eﬀective demand is obtained at r = 0 and equals 0 BdG(B). From (5),
                                                       L
any increase by the central bank of loan supply beyond 0 BdG(B) will not increase lending to
the corporate sector, but will instead be invested by banks in the zero-interest security. Aggregate
lending from banks to ﬁrms therefore increases one-to-one with the loan supply R, up to the point
     L
R = 0 BdG(B), after which it remains constant.
     In sum, the liquidation value of assets limits the eﬀectiveness of monetary policy. Monetary
policy itself, however, shifts liquidation values through its eﬀect on lending and corporate liquidity.
Thus, to understand the limits of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, it is crucial to
endogenize the interplay between lending, liquidity and liquidation values.


4.     The Credit Channel with Endogenous Liquidation Values

To endogenize liquidation values, we assume that when a bank repossess the assets of a ﬁrm which
has defaulted it must sell these assets instead of operating the asset itself. The value obtained
in this sale is the liquidation value of assets. Following Shleifer and Vishny (1992), we assume
that the best users of a defaulted ﬁrm’s assets are other ﬁrms within the same industry. Industry
participants bid for the defaulted ﬁrm’s assets, so that demand will be determined both by the
potential value of the assets as well as the liquidity constraints of the bidders. As in Shleifer and

                                                  9
Vishny (1992), if the liquidity available to the bidders is suﬃciently low, the value obtained for the
asset will be lower than its ﬁrst-best value.12
       Before continuing, it is useful to provide a general description of the model’s main eﬀects.
The model combines the ‘balance-sheet channel’ and the ‘lending channel’ in a general equilibrium
rational expectation framework. This can be described with the following series of interlocking
forces. When the central bank eases monetary policy, the supply of loanable funds increases.
Similar to a standard ‘lending channel’ eﬀect (see e.g. Kashyap and Stein (1995)), banks will tend
to lend out more funds, which will increase liquidity in the corporate sector. As liquidity in the
corporate sector increases, liquidation value of assets will increase – ﬁrms become less liquidity
constrained, and can hence bid more aggressively when acquiring assets of liquidated ﬁrms. As in
a standard ‘balance sheet channel’ eﬀect (e.g. Bernanke and Gertler (1989, 1990, 1995), Lamont
(1995)), this endogenous increase in liquidation values improves ﬁrms’ collateral positions, which
enhances their ability to borrow the additional liquidity which was injected to the commercial banks
by the central bank.
       In equilibrium, the lending and balance sheet channels of monetary policy are therefore linked
through endogenous liquidation values: increased bank lending leads to greater liquidity in the
corporate sector and thus higher collateral prices, while higher collateral prices reduces ﬁnancial
frictions and enables banks to increase lending to ﬁrms.
       Initially, rather than imposing a particular structure on the market for repossessed assets, we
analyze the results using a general speciﬁcation where the price of assets in liquidation depend
on the level of liquidity in the corporate sector and its distribution.13 Accordingly, we deﬁne a
pricing function, P , for the liquidation value of assets that takes as inputs two variables which
jointly span the level and distribution of liquidity at date-1 within the corporate sector. The ﬁrst
variable is B ∗ , the marginal ﬁrm that successfully obtained funding at date-0. The second variable
is the equilibrium interest rate r ∗ paid by ﬁrms borrowing at date-0.14 Thus, if a ﬁrm defaults
and its assets are repossessed by a bank and sold on the market, the price of these assets will be
  12
      Empirical evidence for this industry equilibrium model and its implications for liquidation values, corporate
liquidity and debt ﬁnancing is provided in Benmelech (2009), Benmelech and Bergman (2009) and Pulvino (1998).
   13
      In Section 5 we impose more structure on the pricing function by modeling the market for assets in two ways:
bargaining and a competitive market.
   14
      Other exogenous determinants of the date-1 distribution of liquidity is the date-0 distribution of internal funds,
G, and the level of date-1 cash ﬂows X1 . In this section, we suppress in our notation of the pricing function its
dependency on G and X1 . In Section 6, we consider how the pricing function varies with these exogenous variables.
For simplicity, we assume that P is diﬀerentiable in B ∗ , r∗ , and X1 .



                                                          10
P = P (B ∗ , r ∗). For simplicity, we assume that all assets of a ﬁrm are essential in generating cash
ﬂow, which implies that partial liquidation of assets is useless. This implies that if a ﬁrm defaults
and its assets are repossessed by its bank and sold on the market, the maximal price of these assets
will be X1 , the maximal amount of cash holdings of any potential buying ﬁrm.
       We make the reasonable assumption that if date-1 corporate liquidity increases, the price of
liquidated assets does not go down. This implies:

Liquidity Pricing Assumption.
(i) ∂P/∂B ∗ ≥ 0
(ii) ∂P/∂r ∗ ≤ 0

These assumptions are straightforward. First, as the proportion of ﬁrms obtaining funding at
date-0 increases, date-1 liquidity increases, as does, therefore, the price of liquidated assets.15 The
pricing function will therefore be increasing in B ∗ , the marginal ﬁrm obtaining ﬁnance. Similarly,
as the interest rate at which ﬁrms borrow increases, date-1 liquidity decreases, so that P will be
decreasing in r ∗ .

4.1.       Equilibria with Endogenous Liquidation Values

Given a pricing function P , an equilibrium in the lending market is characterized as follows:

Market Equilibrium. An equilibrium in the lending market is a vector {R, r ∗ , L∗, B ∗ }, such that:
(i) Firms optimize in their borrowing and investing choices given the interest rate r ∗ and the liqui-
dation value of assets L∗ .
(ii) Banks optimize in their lending choices, knowing that ﬁrms can commit to repay no more than
L∗ .
(iii) The market for loanable funds clears at date-0: Denoting by B ∗ the marginal ﬁrm which bor-
rows to invest in a project, the market clearing condition is


                         B ∗ (r)
                                    BdG(B) ≤ R, with strict inequality only when r ∗ = 0
                      0




(iv) L∗ is an equilibrium liquidation value: L∗ = P (B ∗ , r ∗ ).
  15
       Throughout the paper, all monotonicity statements refer to weak monotonicity unless stated otherwise.



                                                           11
The equilibrium requirements are quite intuitive. First, in equilibrium ﬁrms will optimize their
borrowing choices. Since each individual ﬁrm takes the liquidation value L∗ as exogenous, this
requirement translates into the optimality condition developed in inequality (3) of the previous
                                                                                                  ∗    (X1 +X2 −I)
section: a ﬁrm with borrowing requirement B borrows if and only if B ≤ min[ (1+r
                                                                              L
                                                                                 ∗) ,                       r∗     ].
       In optimizing lending decisions, banks will lend at the equilibrium interest rate r ∗ while under-
standing that ﬁrms cannot commit to repay more than L∗ . Further, in equilibrium, for any rate
r ∗ > 0 realized demand for loanable funds will equal supply. In contrast, when r ∗ = 0 the supply
of loanable funds can be greater than the demand – any excess supply will simply be invested by
the banks in the zero-interest security.16
       Finally, equilibrium requirement (iv) is a rational expectations condition, stating that the liq-
uidation value of assets taken as given by individual banks when making their date-0 decisions is
indeed the date-1 price of liquidated assets. As described above, this price is determined through a
Shleifer-Vishny (1992) equilibrium by the liquidity in the corporate sector and is governed by the
pricing function P . It should be noted that since there is no uncertainty about project outcomes
there will be no liquidation on the equilibrium path. As in Hart and Moore (1994), all threats of
default are strategic rather than liquidity driven. To the extent that a strategic default is credible
– i.e., if the promised payment is greater than the liquidation value, L – debt renegotiation ensues.
As is standard in the ﬁnancial contracting literature, if initial contracts are renegotiation proof,
there will therefore be no on-the-equilbrium path reductions in debt payments.
       We solve for the equilibrium in the following manner. First, the analysis of exogenous liquidation
values in Section 2 shows that for every potential liquidation value L and loan supply R, there
exist an associated equilibrium interest rate r ∗ and an equilibrium marginal borrowing ﬁrm B ∗ =
       L         (X1 +X2 −I)
min[ (1+r ∗) ,        r∗     ].   We can thus deﬁne for any liquidation value L and loan supply R the
associated equilibrium interest rate and marginal borrowing ﬁrm, r ∗ (L; R) and B ∗ (L; R). Using
these, we deﬁne for every direct pricing function P (B, r) an indirect pricing function

                                       p(L; R) ≡ P (B ∗ (L; R), r ∗(L; R)),                                       (6)

which takes as input the liquidation value L and the exogenously given loan supply R and provides
as output the implied price of assets given L and R.
  16
     Note that the assumption that banks cannot raise external ﬁnance implies that no bank will be able to reduce the
interest rate it oﬀers to increase loan capacity and proﬁts. Essentially, banks’ marginal cost of raising funds beyond
the reserves they have is assumed to be inﬁnite. More generally, as in a standard lending channel framework, all that
is required is non-zero marginal costs in raising non-reservable forms of liabilities.


                                                          12
       It is then easy to see that for the rational expectations equilibrium condition (iv) to be satisﬁed,
the equilibrium liquidation value L∗ must be a ﬁxed point of p that satisﬁes p(L∗ ; R) = L∗ . If banks
at date-0 lend capital under the assumption that the date-1 liquidation value of assets will be L∗ ,
then at date-1, the price of liquidated assets, as determined by the amount of liquidity in the
corporate sector in date-1 should indeed be L∗ . Formally, we have the following proposition:

Proposition 1. Assume an exogenous supply of loans R. Then L∗ is an equilibrium liquidation
value if and only if

                                                      p(L∗ ; R) = L∗ .                                    (7)

The equilibrium interest rate is then given by r ∗ (L∗ ; R), while the marginal ﬁrm that borrows in
this equilibrium is given by B ∗ (L∗ ; R).

Proof. See Appendix.
   To characterize the pricing function p(L; R), it is useful to deﬁne for every amount of loanable
          I
funds, R ≤ 0 BdG(B), the value B̄(R) which represents the marginal ﬁrm that obtains ﬁnancing
assuming that the full amount R is lent out by banks.17 It is easy to see that B̄(R) is given
implicitly by the equation:
                                                    B̄(R)
                                                             BdG(B) = R.                                  (8)
                                                 0




The indirect pricing function p(L; R) is then characterized by the following proposition.
                                                                                                 I
Proposition 2. Fix an exogenous liquidation value of assets L and loan supply R ≤                0    BdG(B).
(1) For any L < B̄(R):
       (i) The equilibrium interest rate associated with the pair (L,R) will be r ∗ = 0, and the marginal
ﬁrm able to borrow will have a borrowing requirement of B ∗ = L.
       (ii) The indirect pricing function therefore satisﬁes p(L; R) = P (L, 0).
                                         L
       (iii) Demand for loanable funds, 0 BdG(B) will be smaller than the supply R, implying that
not all of the supply will be lent out.
(2) For any L ≥ B̄(R):
       (i) The market for loanable funds clears, with the entire loan supply lent out.
  17
                I
       Rmax =   0
                     BdG(B) is the maximal level of aggregate lending possible in the economy.


                                                                13
       (ii) The equilibrium interest rate will be such that the marginal borrowing ﬁrm will have a
borrowing requirement of B̄(R). In equilibrium, therefore, B ∗ = B̄(R) and r ∗ satisﬁes B̄(R) =
       L       (X1 +X2 −I)
min[ (1+r ∗) ,      r∗     ].
       (iii) The indirect pricing function satisﬁes p(L; R) = P (B̄(R), r ∗), with r ∗ given in 2(ii).

Proof. See Appendix.
       To understand Proposition 2 consider ﬁrst a potential equilibrium liquidation value L satisfying
L < B̄(R). Since at a zero interest rate the maximal amount ﬁrms can borrow is L, realized
                     L
demand at r = 0 is 0 BdG(B). Since, by assumption, L is smaller than B̄(R), realized demand at
                                          B̄(R)
a zero interest rate will be smaller than 0      BdG(B) = R, the supply of loanable funds. Because
equilibrium interest rates cannot fall below zero, the equilibrium interest rate associated with any
L smaller than B̄(R) will indeed be zero and the associated marginal borrowing ﬁrm will have
B = L. By deﬁnition, the pricing function will satisfy p(L; R) = P (L, 0) on the region L ≤ B̄(R).18
Further, in equilibrium, in this region not all of the loan supply will be lent out: realized aggregate
         L
lending, 0 BdG(B), will be smaller than loan supply, R.
       Consider now a potential equilibrium liquidation value L satisfying L > B̄(R). In this case,
following the lines of the argument above, we have that realized demand at a zero interest rate,
 B̄(R)
 0      BdG(B), is greater than the supply of loanable funds, R. Thus, in equilibrium, the interest
rate will shift upwards so as to equate the supply and demand for loanable funds.19 Put diﬀerently,
the equilibrium interest rate will be set such that the marginal ﬁrm will have borrowing requirement
B̄(R), thereby guaranteeing that all of R is lent out.
A direct consequence of Proposition 2 which we use in the next section is:
                                                             I
Corollary 1. Fix an exogenous loan supply R ≤                 0   BdG(B). The indirect pricing function p(L; R)
is increasing in L over the region L < B̄(R) and decreasing in L over the region L > B̄(R).

       Holding R constant, increasing L has two opposing eﬀects on the price of collateral in date
1. The ﬁrst eﬀect is that as L increases, more ﬁrms are able to raise external ﬁnance which
increases liquidity in the corporate sector and therefore raises the market price of date-1 collateral.
The second eﬀect is that as L increases, more ﬁrms are able to borrow. Eﬀective demand for
intermediated loans increases, which implies that the equilibrium interest rate of loans rises. An
increase in the interest rate reduces liquidity in the corporate sector in date 1, which tends to push
  18
       Recall that P is the direct pricing function.
  19
       In the knife-edge case where L = B̄(R), r = 0 will be an equilibrium interest rate.


                                                            14
down the date-1 price of collateral.20 When L is low the ﬁrst eﬀect dominates, while when it is
high the second dominates. p(L; R) is therefore non-monotonic in L.
       Combining Proposition 2 with Corollary 1 shows how shifts in monetary policy inﬂuence the
indirect pricing function. This is illustrated in Figure 1 which presents the impact of an increase
in the supply of funds from R1 to R2 . By Proposition 2, the pricing function p(L; R) is identical
to the function P (L, 0) up to the point B̄(R), after which for any L > B̄(R) it is decreasing. As
can be seen in the ﬁgure, P (L, 0) therefore serves as an envelope of p(L; R): for any R, the two
functions are equal up to the point B̄(R), while P (L, 0) is greater than p(L; R) for L greater than
B̄(R).

4.2.      Monetary Policy, Liquidation Values, and Lending

In this section we characterize the impact of monetary policy on lending, collateral values, and
interest rates when the value of assets is determined endogenously. We will say that monetary
policy is ‘eﬀective at R’ if, in equilibrium, when loan supply is equal to R, the entire loan supply
is lent out. Alternatively, monetary policy is ‘ineﬀective at R’ if when loan supply is equal to R,
an amount strictly less than R is lent out in equilibrium. We begin with the following proposition.

Proposition 3. Consider a loan supply R. Banks can lend out R in loans in equilibrium if and
only if P (B̄(R), 0) ≥ B̄(R). Consequently, monetary policy is eﬀective at a loan supply R = B̄ −1 (L)
if and only if P (L, 0) ≥ L.

       Proposition 3 is quite intuitive. First, the minimal level of collateral required to extract R in
loans is B̄(R). To see this note that if the value of collateral, L, is less than B̄(R), since no ﬁrm can
borrow more than L, the marginal ﬁrm able to borrow will have borrowing requirement B < B̄(R).
By deﬁnition of B̄(R), this then implies that aggregate loan supply lent out will be smaller than R.
Second, the maximal value of collateral when R is lent out is P (B̄(R), 0). This is because when R
is lent out the marginal ﬁrm obtaining ﬁnancing will have a borrowing requirement of B̄(R), and
liquidity is highest when the interest rate is zero. Proposition 3 states that if the maximal value of
collateral conditional on R being lent out – i.e. P (B̄(R), 0) – is smaller than the minimal amount
of collateral required to extract R – i.e. B̄(R) – then R will not be lent out. In contrast, R will
be lent out if the maximal value of collateral associated with R being lent out is greater than the
  20
    This eﬀect is similar to the analysis of Diamond and Rajan (2001) which shows that an adverse eﬀect of liquidity
provision is to raise real interest rates which may lead to more bank failures and lower subsequent aggregate liquidity.


                                                          15
minimal value of collateral required to extract R. In this case, the equilibrium interest rate and
liquidation value will adjust to equate eﬀective loan demand to loan supply, R.
    Using Proposition 2 and Proposition 3, we can analyze the general equilibrium eﬀects of shifts
in the supply of loanable funds. Proposition 4 provides a formal characterization of three types of
equilibria that arise.

Proposition 4. Consider the pricing function P (L, 0).

(i) The conventional equilibrium: If P (L, 0) > L for all 0 ≤ L ≤ I then aggregate lending
increases one-for-one with increases in the loan supply R on the range 0 ≤ R ≤ Rmax , where
         I
Rmax = 0 BdG(B) is the maximal level possible of aggregate lending. Monetary policy is there-
fore eﬀective at any level of reserves R ≤ Rmax. Further, in this region the equilibrium liquidation
value of assets is increasing in loan supply R.


(ii) The credit trap equilibrium: Assume that P (L, 0) is concave in L, with P (L∗ , 0) = L∗ ,
P (L, 0) > L for 0 ≤ L < L∗ , and P (L, 0) < L for L > L∗ . Then monetary policy is eﬀective up to
the loan supply R∗ = B̄ −1 (L∗ ) and ineﬀective beyond R∗ . Increases in loan supply beyond R∗ do
not increase lending, nor do they change the equilibrium liquidation value of assets which remains
constant at L∗ . Maximal aggregate lending is therefore R∗ and the maximal liquidation value of
assets is L∗ .


(iii) The jump-start equilibrium: Assume that P (L, 0) is convex in L over the region [L1 ,L2 ],
with P (Li , 0) = Li for i=1,2, P (L, 0) > L for 0 ≤ L < L1 , and P (L, 0) < L for L1 < L < L2 .
Then, monetary policy is ineﬀective over the region (R1 , R2), where Ri = B̄ −1 (Li ) (i=1,2), but is
eﬀective at loan supply R2 . Further, increases in loan supply over the region [R1 , R2) do not change
the equilibrium liquidation value which remains constant at L1 . However, L2 is an equilibrium
liquidation value at loan supply R2 .

Proof. In the Appendix.


To understand Proposition 4 we consider each of the three equilibrium types in turn.




                                                  16
Conventional Equilibrium
First, consider the conventional equilibrium in case (i). Since P (L, 0) > L for all 0 ≤ L ≤ I,
Proposition 3 directly implies that any loan supply R can be lent out, up to the maximal possible
                         I
level of lending, Rmax = 0 BdG(B). Monetary policy in this equilibrium is therefore fully eﬀective:
increases in R are matched one to one with increases in aggregate lending, up to Rmax.
       Figure 2 demonstrates this conventional equilibrium. Increases in R shift out the indirect pricing
function p(L; R) as described in Proposition 2. This shift in p(L; R) implies that the equilibrium
liquidation value – i.e. the price of assets – will increase (from L∗1 to L∗2 in the ﬁgure). The overall
chain of events of an increase in loan supply can then be summarized as follows: The increased loan
supply is lent out to the corporate sector; the increased liquidity in the corporate sector increases
collateral values; and ﬁnally, the increase in collateral values increases ﬁrm debt capacity, thereby
enabling the increase in loan supply.
       The eﬀect on equilibrium interest rates of a shift in loan supply is less clear cut. This is best
demonstrated in Figure 3 which graphs loan supply and loan demand as a function of interest rates,
r. The main point is that eﬀective demand for loans is not just a function of the loan interest rate,
but is also inﬂuenced by collateral values. Firm borrowing in the model is determined both by
their desire to borrow as well as their ability to do so. Loan demand can thus be represented by
the function D(r; L∗), where L∗ is the equilibrium collateral price.
       As can be seen in Figure 3, an increase in R has two eﬀects. First, loan supply shifts out.
Second, eﬀective loan demand shifts out as well – equilibrium liquidation values increase, thereby
increasing ﬁrm borrowing capacity. While the outward shifts in loan supply and loan demand both
push aggregate lending upwards, they have countervailing eﬀects on the equilibrium interest rate.
If loan demand shifts out suﬃciently – due to a large increase in collateral prices – the change in the
equilibrium interest rate will be small.21 Put diﬀerently, in a conventional equilibrium large changes
in aggregate lending and investment can be associated with small changes in interest rates. This is
consistent with evidence that monetary shocks have large real eﬀects, even though empirical studies
show that components of aggregate spending are not very sensitive to cost-of-capital variables (see
e.g. Blinder and Maccini(1991)).
  21
     In fact, the equilibrium interest rate may actually rise with increases in loan supply. Formally, it is easy to show
                                           ∗)
that the condition for this is ∂P (B̄(R),r
                                    ∂B ∗
                                              > 1 + r∗ . That is, the sensitivity of the value of collateral to changes in
                            ∗
liquidity (as proxied by B , the marginal ﬁrm obtaining ﬁnancing) is suﬃciently large. We return to this point when
discussing jump-start, quantitative easing equilibria.



                                                           17
Credit Trap Equilibrium
Consider now the credit trap equilibrium represented in case (ii) of Proposition 4. In this equilib-
rium, monetary policy is ineﬀective at any point beyond R∗ . The intuition is that for any additional
loan supply above R∗ to actually be lent out by banks, liquidation values need to be suﬃciently
high. However, in a credit trap the implied increase in date-1 liquidation values associated with
a marginal increase aggregate lending above and beyond R∗ is not suﬃcient to induce banks to
actually lend the additional funds at date-0. Monetary policy thus becomes ineﬀective above the
loan supply R∗ .
    The equilibrium is depicted in Figure 4. If the central bank sets reserve level at R1 < R∗ ,
there is a positive equilibrium liquidation value – L1 in the ﬁgure – in which aggregate lending is
R1 . However, monetary policy is completely ineﬀective at any point beyond R∗ . As loan supply
increases beyond R∗ , say to R2 in the ﬁgure, the sole positive equilibrium liquidation value remains
at L∗ and equilibrium lending remains constant at R∗ . This is because the rate at which the
implied value of collateral increases is not suﬃciently high to enable banks to lend the additional
loan supply. Put diﬀerently, banks rationally understand that lending any incremental amount
beyond R∗ does not increase collateral values suﬃciently to support the additional lending. Since
the equilibrium liquidation value L∗ does not change with increases in loan supply above R∗ , ﬁrm
borrowing capacity remains constant. This implies that realized lending remains at R∗ with the
diﬀerence R − R∗ invested by banks. Finally, since beyond loan supply R∗ eﬀective loan demand is
smaller than loan supply, based on Theorem 2(i), the equilibrium interest rate will remain constant
at zero. Monetary policy is powerless in increasing lending, collateral values or corporate liquidity.
    To emphasize, note that in this credit trap equilibrium, increased liquidity in the corporate
sector would have increased collateral values which could then serve to enable additional lending.
The issue, though, is that banks are not willing to supply the additional liquidity on their own.
Regardless of the stance of monetary policy, collateral values therefore remain depressed at a low
level implied by the lack of liquidity in the corporate sector.22


Jump-start equilibrium
Consider now the jump-start equilibrium of case (iii) in Proposition 4. As exhibited in Figure 5,
  22
     This reasoning suggests that direct injections of liquidity into the corporate sector may be useful – a point we
return to in Section 6.



                                                         18
for any loan supply R1 < R < R2 , the only equilibrium has a liquidation value of L = L1 and
associated lending of R1 = B̄ −1 (L1 ).23 Increases in the loan supply over the region [R1 , R2) are
therefore completely ineﬀective in increasing lending and collateral values. There is no response
to injections of liquidity by the central bank: the equilibrium liquidation value is stuck at L1 and
lending remains constant R1 . Further, since as in a credit trap equilibrium, eﬀective loan demand
will be depressed due to the low level of liquidation values, in this region the interest rate on loans
will be constant at zero, its lower bound.
       In contrast, if the central bank acts forcefully enough by increasing loan supply to R2 , another
equilibrium arises. In this equilibrium the liquidation value of assets is high – L2 in the ﬁgure –
enabling the full loan supply R2 to be lent out. This equilibrium arises due to the feedback eﬀect
between lending and collateral values: lending is high because collateral values are large enough
to support it, while collateral values are high because lending increases liquidity in the corporate
sector.
       The jump-start equilibrium therefore demonstrates how a policy of quantitative easing may
successfully reignite bank lending. Banks know that when loan supply is moderate, the implied
value of collateral conditional on lending occurring is not high enough to actually justify lending.
However, when loan supply is expanded suﬃciently, a new high lending and high collateral value
rational expectations equilibrium arises.
       It should be emphasized that although a new equilibrium arises with a suﬃciently forceful
monetary expansion, it is by no means clear that banks will successfully coordinate on it. If each
bank assumes that the others will continue lending at depressed levels, the economy will be stuck
in the ineﬃcient equilibrium. In this sense, a policy of quantitative easing in and of itself may
not be suﬃcient to jump-start lending and collateral values. The central bank, or more generally
government at large, may require other tools to solve the coordination problem arising between
banks.24
       The jump-start equilibrium also explains how small contractions in the stance of monetary policy
can lead to large crashes in asset values and lending. This is simply the ﬂip-side of quantitative
easing. Returning to Figure 5, consider an economy with loan supply at R2 and liquidation value
  23
     To see this note that for any R in this region, the only value where p(L; R) equals L is L = L1 . Further, in this
region P (B̄(R), 0) < B̄(R) which by Proposition 3 implies that R will not be lent out.
  24
     To eliminate the low lending equilibrium, these actions may include government subsidies for new loans, a tax
on bank reserves, or government prodding to increase lending (as seen, for example, during the crisis of 2008-2009).



                                                          19
at L2 . An incremental reduction in loan supply from R2 leads to a collapse in lending and collateral
values to R1 and L1 , respectively. The small reduction in lending reduces liquidity and collateral
values, which in turn reduces liquidity further. The negative feedback eﬀect between lending,
liquidity and collateral values drives all three to lower levels until the process stops at the new
equilibrium.
     Interestingly, the monetary contraction will also reduce the interest rates (to zero according to
Proposition 2). The intuition is that while loan supply decreases by a small amount, eﬀective loan
demand collapses because of the attendant drop in collateral values. A form of ﬂight to quality
arises in which the supply of loans is distributed at low cost to the comparatively small number of
ﬁrms that have balance sheets strong enough to borrow.
     Taken together, therefore, in this equilibrium monetary contraction can lead to crashes in
lending and collateral values coupled with a reduction in interest rates. These eﬀects are very
much consistent with accounts of the Japanese experience during the 1980s such as Bernanke and
Gertler (1995) who argue that “the crash of Japanese land and equity values in the latter 1980s was
the result (at least in part) of monetary tightening; ... [T]his collapse in asset values reduced the
creditworthiness of many Japanese corporations and banks, contributing to the ensuing recession.”
     To conclude, Proposition 4 shows that the eﬃcacy of monetary policy crucially depends on
the shape and level of the pricing function P – i.e. on how collateral prices vary with corporate
liquidity. A low and concave pricing function will generally lead to a credit trap equilibrium where
quantitative easing will be ineﬀective in increasing lending and liquidation values, regardless of the
level of loan supply set by the central bank. In contrast, convexities in the pricing function will
lead to a jump start equilibrium where quantitative easing may be useful. What determines the
shape of the pricing function – and hence the eﬃcacy of quantitative easing – is therefore a natural
question which we turn to in the next section.


5.     Microfoundations of the Collateral Pricing Function

In this section we impose more structure on the pricing function of assets, P , by building micro-
founded models of collateral values and the market for assets. In the ﬁrst model, collateral values
are determined in a competitive market for repossessed assets. The second model involves a bar-
gaining setting in which, when selling repossessed assets, the bank negotiates a price with a limited



                                                  20
set of potential buyers. Finally, we show that search costs associated with ﬁnding a suitable buyer
for assets introduces convexities in the pricing function and hence the possibility of a jump-start,
quantitative easing equilibrium.


A Competitive Market for Repossessed Assets
Consider the case where the price of collateral is determined in a competitive market in which
the equilibrium price of assets at date-1 is set so as to equate the demand and supply of assets.
We assume that ﬁrms that invested at date zero – which we call industry insiders – develop the
know-how to operate assets of ﬁrms liquidated at date 1. Operating liquidated assets enables these
ﬁrms to generate cash ﬂow V with V < X2 at date 2.25 For ease of exposition, we further assume
that V > X1 . Since X1 is the maximal wealth of ﬁrms in the economy, this assumption implies
that at date-1 ﬁrms will be willing to pay their full internal wealth to obtain liquidated assets.26
       Aside from demand stemming from industry insiders, we assume that there is a perfectly elastic
supply of capital at date-1 ready to buy liquidated assets at a positive price of kV < X1 . This
supply of capital should be thought of as stemming from industry outsiders who can employ the
assets but only in an inferior use.
       Finally, we assume that at date-1, a supply α of assets, exogenous to the model, are sold on
the market. Variations in α capture shifts in the supply of assets which must be cleared in the
market.27 For example, in a downturn the supply of assets sold on the market will be high.
       To obtain the pricing function P (L, 0), we calculate for every L the market clearing price of
assets assuming that (a) the marginal borrowing ﬁrm has a date-0 borrowing requirement of L and
(b) the interest rate on loans is zero. To do this, for every L we calculate the demand schedule for
assets and equate it to asset supply α.
       Consider ﬁrst any L that is suﬃciently small to satisfy kV ≤ X1 − L. Note that if the marginal
borrowing ﬁrm has a date-0 borrowing requirement of L, the date-1 wealth distribution of industry
insiders – i.e. those that invested – will have a support of [X1 − L, X1].28 This implies that at any
price P ≤ X1 − L all industry insiders will be able to purchase assets. Since their aggregate date-1
         L
wealth is 0 (X1 − B)dG(B), the demand for assets at any price P ∈ [kV, X1 − L] is given by
  25
      Liquidation is ineﬃcient in that the industry insider purchasing the assets is a second-best user: V < X2 .
  26
      Assuming that V < X1 generates similar results, but the pricing function developed below is capped at V .
   27
      At the cost of additional complexity α itself could be endogenized to capture the number of ﬁrms experiencing
liquidity defaults.
   28
      Since the interest rate is zero by assumption, date-1 wealth of a ﬁrm that borrowed an amount B will be X1 − B.


                                                         21
                                 ⎧ L
                                 ⎨ 0 (X1 −B)dG(B)                      if P ∈ (kV, ≤ X1 − L]
                   D(P ; L) =              P      L
                                 ⎩D s.t. D ≥       0   (X1 −B)dG(B)
                                                                       if P = kV
                                                           kV
                                                                                                                            (9)

Note that since industry outsiders are ready to purchase any amount of assets at a price of P = kV ,
                                                                                      L
                                                                                       0
                                                                                           (X1 −B)dG(B)
demand at this price is perfectly elastic at any quantity greater than                         kV       ,        the demand
stemming from industry insiders.29
In contrast, for any price P ∈ (X1 − L, X1], ﬁrms require a date-1 wealth of at least P to purchase
assets. This implies that demand over this range will be
                                         X1 −P
                                                (X1 − B)dG(B)
                             D(P ; L) = 0                                                                                  (10)
                                                   P

Taken together, (9) and (10) deﬁne the demand schedule D(P ; L) for any L satisfying kV ≤ X1 −L.
On the other hand, for L satisfying kV > X1 − L, it is easy to see that demand is given solely by
                                                                                            X1 −kV
                                                                                            0           (X1 −B)dG(B)
(10) with the addition that at P = kV demand is perfectly elastic above                                  kV          .
      For any L, the equilibrium price of assets solves D(P ; L) = α, equating demand and supply.
By deﬁnition, this equilibrium price is equal to P (L, 0). The following corollary characterizes this
pricing function (see Figure 6):
                                     X1 −kV                                                     L∗1 (α)
                                           (X1 −B)dG(B)                                                     (X1 −B)dG(B)
Corollary 2. For any α <             0
                                            kV ∗           , deﬁne    L∗1 (α) implicitly by      0
                                                                                                              kV           = α.
                                              L2 (α)
                                                      (X1 −B)dG(B)
Further, deﬁne L∗2 (α) implicitly         by 0 X1 −L       ∗ (α)      = α. Then the pricing function P (L, 0)
                                                           2

satisﬁes
                ⎧
                ⎪
                ⎨kV                     if L ≤ L∗1 (α)
      P (L, 0) = ( α1 ) 0L (X1 − B)dG(B) if L∗1 (α) < L ≤ L∗2 (α)
                ⎪
                ⎩
                  X1 − L∗2 (α)           if L > L∗2 (α)

Further, M axL {P (L, 0)} = X1 − L∗2 (α) is strictly greater than the outside valuation kV .

Proof. See Appendix.
      To understand Corollary 2, note that as L increases, more ﬁrms obtain ﬁnancing, thereby
increasing date-1 liquidity available to purchase assets. However, if L is comparatively low – and in
particular, smaller than L∗1 (α) – aggregate liquidity of industry insiders is not suﬃcient to clear the
market for assets. The marginal buyers, therefore, are industry outsiders, implying that the market
 29
      For this reason, we also need not consider any price less than kV .


                                                            22
clearing price is kV.30 As L increases beyond L∗1 (α), industry-insider aggregate liquidity becomes
suﬃciently large to enable them to become the marginal buyers of assets. In this region, increases in
L shift out the demand schedule for assets of industry insiders, implying that the price of collateral
will increase as well. Finally, beyond L∗2 (α), increases in L do not aﬀect the equilibrium price of
assets which remains constant at X1 − L∗2 (α). At this price, aggregate liquidity is large enough to
clear the entire supply of assets. Further increases in the liquidation value L do increase aggregate
liquidity, but only by adding ﬁrms with internal wealth lower than the price X1 − L∗2 (α). Thus,
even though there are more potential buyers, the equilibrium price remains constant at X1 − L∗2 (α).
       It is easy to see that at any exogenous L, the pricing function P (L, 0) is decreasing in α: Since
the demand for assets is determined by (the ﬁnite) available date-1 liquidity and is not perfectly
elastic at the fundamental value V , the price must drop to clear the market. This yields the
following proposition:
                                                                                            X1 −kV
                                                             X1                             0         (X1 −B)dG(B)
Proposition 5. For any outside value kV <                     2 ,   there exists an ᾱ <               kV          ,   such
that for any α > ᾱ, regardless of the stance of monetary policy, the equilibrium value of collateral
will be kV and aggregate lending will equal B̄ −1 (kV ).

Proof. See Appendix.

       Proposition 5 shows how expectations of asset sales inhibit the eﬀectiveness of monetary policy.
Anticipating a large number of assets on the market, banks understand that the price of collateral
will be low. As in a credit trap, while lending would have served to increase date-1 liquidity and
with it the price of collateral, the implied value of collateral is too small to actually justify the
lending. The economy therefore suﬀers from a lack of liquidity, collateral prices are depressed at
liquidity pricing levels, and lending remains low regardless of the stance of monetary policy.
                                           X1 −kV
                                                     (X1 −B)dG(B)
       To emphasize, because ᾱ ≤          0
                                                      kV          ,   as Corollary 2 shows the collateral pricing
function P (L, 0) does increases beyond the outside-valuation of kV (see Figure 6). However, to
enable the value of collateral to increase beyond kV , banks need to supply liquidity to industry
insiders, increasing their liquidity suﬃciently so that they, rather than the industry outsiders, are
the marginal buyers of asset. This, however, will not occur. Regardless of the stance of monetary
policy, banks will not lend any level of loan supply greater than B̄ −1 (kV ) since the implied value of
                        X1 −kV
  30                            1 (X −B)dG(B)
   Indeed, when α > 0          kV        , it is easy to show that P (L, 0) equals kV for all L. Since asset supply is
comparatively large, the marginal buyer will always be an industry outsider.



                                                             23
collateral is not suﬃciently high to enable the lending. A form of ‘asset overhang’ therefore arises:
to push up asset prices, banks need to increase lending suﬃciently forcefully. Because of expected
asset sales, however, the level of lending required to generate an increase in the value of collateral
above kV is larger than what can be supported by the resultant value of collateral. In equilibrium,
expectations of asset sales depress lending and, further, make monetary policy ineﬀective beyond
a certain threshold.
       Because the value of collateral is constant at kV for low levels of liquidity and only begins to rise
when insider liquidity is suﬃciently large, a convexity arises which may bring about a quantitative
easing, jump-start equilibrium. This is formalized in the following proposition (see also Figure 7):

Proposition 6. Assume that g(0) = 0. If the outside value kV is suﬃciently low, there exist
an α1 and α2 such that for any asset supply α ∈ [α1 , α2 ], a policy of quantitative easing will be
successful in increasing lending. Speciﬁcally, for any α ∈ [α1 , α2 ] there exist an R1 and R2 such
that monetary policy is eﬀective at R1 , ineﬀective over the region (R1,R2 ), and eﬀective at R2 .

Proof: See Appendix
       The intuition behind Proposition 6 is similar to that behind Proposition 5. At any α ∈ [α1 , α2 ],
to increase the value of collateral above kV , the Central Bank must inject liquidity suﬃciently
forcefully. Doing so ensures that industry insiders have suﬃcient liquidity to be the marginal buy-
ers of the assets. On the other hand, because α is in an intermediate range, the asset overhang
eﬀect is dampened.31 This enables suﬃciently forceful liquidity injections to give rise to a high
collateral and high lending jump start equilibrium in which quantitative easing is eﬀective.


Bargaining and Collateral Values
Rather than a competitive market, we consider now the case where the price of repossessed assets is
determined through a bargaining process. Assume that if a bank repossesses a ﬁrm’s assets in date
1, it must redeploy and sell them to other industry participants. Each ﬁrm will be associated with N
other ﬁrms, randomly drawn from the population, who are potential operators of that ﬁrm’s assets;
N should be thought of as characterizing the degree of redeployability of ﬁrm assets.32 However,
  31
     It is easy to see that α2 is smaller than the ᾱ of Proposition 5.
  32
     In the context of physical assets, low redeployability may stem from the high degree of specialization required to
operate the assets. Alternatively, in the context of banks providing loans to institutional investors that are collater-
alized by ﬁnancial assets, low redeployability corresponds to situations in which the ﬁnancial assets are suﬃciently
complex that there are a limited number of investors with the knowledge to value and actively trade in them.



                                                          24
of the N potential users of a particular ﬁrm’s assets, only those ﬁrms that invest in the project
in date-0 acquire the know-how to actually operate the assets.33 Operating the assets implies
using them to generate X2 in date 2. Finally, for simplicity, we assume that the bank has all the
bargaining power in determining the price to be paid for the repossessed assets. (Abandoning this
assumption only increases the role that corporate liquidity plays in determining collateral values
and lending.)
       The expected price that the bank will obtain for a ﬁrm’s repossessed asset is determined as
follows. First, note that all potential users have a period 1 cash balance which is less than X2 ; a
ﬁrm that borrowed B to invest has cash balance X1 − B(1 + r), where X1 was assumed to be less
than X2 .34 Each of the potential users will therefore be willing to pay up to the full amount of
their cash holdings to acquire the repossessed assets. Since the bank is assumed to have all of the
bargaining power, this implies that the amount that the bank will obtain for the repossessed assets
will be the entire cash balance of the wealthiest ﬁrm that can operate the assets. Since only ﬁrms
that invest in date-0 have the know-how to operate the assets, the expected price that the bank
will obtain for repossessed assets is


                                                    B∗
                                     ∗   ∗
                                P (B , r ) =              (X1 − B(1 + r ∗ ))dGN
                                                                              (1),                                (11)
                                                 0




where B ∗ is the marginal ﬁrm obtaining ﬁnancing, r ∗ is the equilibrium interest rate, and G(1) is
the 1st order statistic of N draws of G.
       Equation (11) shows that liquidity in the corporate sector in period 1 aﬀects the price banks
obtain for repossessed assets in two ways. As B ∗ increases, the number of potential buyers with
know-how to purchase assets increases. Naturally, this serves to increase the expected price of
collateral. Second, all else equal, reductions in the equilibrium interest rate increase liquidity
available to ﬁrms to purchase assets, again increasing the liquidation value of assets.
       Consider now the determinants of the shape of P (L, 0), which as described in Proposition 4,
  33
     Prior to raising ﬁnancing, ﬁrms can be thought of as empty shells run by entrepreneurs. Once an entrepreneur
raises ﬁnancing from a bank she employs the capital to start a ﬁrm, the subsequent running of which provides the
know-how to utilize industry assets. While simplifying the exposition, the assumption that without investing ﬁrms
do not gain the know-how to operate assets is not necessary.
  34
     Recall that the assumption that X1 < X2 highlights the role of lack of period 1 liquidity in determining the value
of collateral.



                                                              25
inﬂuences the eﬀectiveness of monetary policy. For intuition, assume ﬁrst that N = 1 so that the
assets of each ﬁrm have only one other potential operator. From (11), we have that


                                                       L
                                   P (L, 0) =               (X1 − B)dG,                                     (12)
                                                    0




so that the condition for convexity of P (L, 0) at L is:

                                                        g  (L)
                                       (X1 − L)                 > 1.                                        (13)
                                                        g(L)



The intuition for (13) is as follows. An incremental increase in the liquidation value L increases
the universe of ﬁrms that obtain funding, and which therefore have the know-how to operate
repossessed assets. Formally, from (12), the marginal eﬀect of an increase in the liquidation value
L is (X1 − L)g(L). This represents two eﬀects. The incremental potential buyer that is added will
have internal wealth of X1 − L. However, for any given ﬁrm, the probability that this incremental
buyer will be the particular buyer that can operate that ﬁrm’s assets is g(L). Therefore, the
expected eﬀect of an incremental increase in liquidation value on the implied price the bank will
obtain for repossessed assets is the multiplication of the two incremental eﬀects: (X1 − L)g(L).
   Note though that as L increases, the incremental ﬁrm able to purchase assets will have dimin-
ishing internal cash: (X1 − L) decreases in L. Therefore, the marginal eﬀect of an increase in
liquidation value on the price of assets will be increasing in L, when the increase in the expected
number of purchasers is suﬃciently large to dominate the reduction in the internal wealth associ-
ated with the additional marginal purchasers. Put diﬀerently, the pricing function will be convex
when the increase in g(L) dominates the reduction in (X1 − L). Formally, as stated in (13), this
                                                    g  (L)
occurs when the elasticity of the ﬁrst eﬀect        g(L)         dominates the (inverse) of the elasticity of the
second eﬀect (X1 − L).
   More generally, consider now the case where there are N > 1 potential buyers for each individ-
ual ﬁrm’s assets. From (11), the condition for convexity then becomes:



                                           g (L)    (N − 1)
                               (X1 − L)(          −          ) > 1.                                         (14)
                                           g(L)     1 − G(L)

                                                            26
Since increases in N reduce the lefthand side of (14), greater asset redeployability increases the
prevalence of a concave pricing function. The intuition is as follows. An increase in the liquidation
value of assets, L, enables more ﬁrms to obtain ﬁnancing which increases the universe of potential
buyers of collateral. However, when assets are very redeployable, increasing the universe of potential
buyers – i.e. making the market thicker – is not as crucial in increasing the expected purchase price;
Since assets are easily redeployable, the probability of ﬁnding a ﬁrm with high net worth with which
to pay for the assets, as well as the know-how to actually operate the assets, is comparatively high.35
Increasing L will therefore have diminishing impact in this case. In contrast, it is when assets are
not easily redeployable that it will be particularly useful to expand the universe of potential buyers
– i.e. the pricing function will exhibit a convexity.
    Since a convexity in the pricing function is associated with the jump-start equilibrium, a policy
of quantitative easing is more likely to be useful when asset redeployability is low. In such a case,
increasing the universe of ﬁrms with the know-how to buy repossessed assets is particularly impor-
tant. When injecting liquidity suﬃciently forcefully, the increase in the potential number of buyers
of collateral will have a disproportionate eﬀect on the expected purchase price of assets, enabling
a policy of quantitative easing to be successful. In contrast, high asset redeployability will tend to
be associated with a concave pricing function, and hence with a credit trap equilibrium. As shown
in Proposition 4, a strategy of quantitative easing will be powerless in such a case.


Search Costs
It is easy to see that search costs introduce convexities in the pricing function which can bring
about jump-start, quantitative easing equilibria. Consider a pricing function P that describes the
liquidation value of assets assuming that a bank sells the assets to an industry insider (for example,
as described in the bargaining case above). We add now the assumption that in order to actually
ﬁnd a specialized industry buyer, the bank pays a search cost, C. This can be thought of as the
actual monetary cost, or the opportunity cost of managerial time and eﬀort, associated with ﬁnding
a buyer. Alternatively, we assume that banks can opt to avoid incurring the search costs by selling
liquidated assets to industry outsiders for a low valuation that we normalize to zero.
   35
      For example, in the extreme case, when N diverges to inﬁnity, the pricing function P (L, 0) converges to X1 . This
is because with N very large, there will always be a ﬁrm with internal wealth close to X1 that can operate the assets.



                                                          27
    Denoting by P̃ the pricing function which incorporates the assumption of search costs, we have
that:

                  
                      0              if P (L, 0) < C
    P̃ (L, 0) =
                      P (L, 0) − C   otherwise

Put simply, if the price obtained by selling the asset to industry insiders is comparatively small,
the bank will choose to sell assets to an industry outsider.
    Since the pricing function is now constant for low values of L and only then begins to increase,
a convexity arises (see Figure 8). This, in turn, will bring about a possibility of a quantitative
easing, jump-start equilibrium. This is formalized in the following proposition:
                                                                                        ∂P (L,0)
Proposition 7. Assume that the pricing function P(L,0) is concave with                    ∂L |L=0     > 1. Deﬁne
                                         ∂P (L∗ ,0)
L∗ to be the point that satisﬁes            ∂L        = 1. For any cost P (0, 0) < C ≤ P (L∗ , 0) − L∗ there
exists an R̄ such that monetary policy will be ineﬀective over the region [0,R̄) but eﬀective at R̄.
A policy of quantitative easing over the region [0,R̄] will thus be successful in increasing lending.

Proof: See Appendix
    The intuition of Proposition 7 is quite simple. As discussed above, if the price of assets is
comparatively small when sold to industry insiders – say, because the market is too thin or corpo-
rate liquidity amongst industry insiders is too low – banks will choose to ignore this market and
avoid the associated search costs by selling directly to industry outsiders. Therefore, to increase
the value of collateral above the industry outsider valuation, the central bank must inject liquidity
suﬃciently forcefully to ensure that the industry insider market is developed – i.e. that there are
a suﬃcient number of industry insiders with high enough internal liquidity. As in a quantitative
easing equilibrium, the rise in collateral values above the outsider valuation will support, in equi-
librium, additional lending. The condition that P  > 1 ensures that the liquidity pricing eﬀect is
suﬃciently strong so as to generate an equilibrium in which the value of collateral is above the
outside value despite the search cost.36


  36
     On a related point, note also that search costs cannot be too high since otherwise banks will choose to sell to
outside buyers regardless of the depth of the insider market.




                                                           28
6.       Fiscal Policy and Direct Injections of Corporate Liquidity

We have shown how ﬁnancial frictions and the interplay between liquidity and collateral values
hinder the translation of liquidity injections to the ﬁnancial sector into increased credit and invest-
ment. This line of reasoning suggests that direct injections of liquidity into the corporate sector
may be beneﬁcial. In particular, by circumventing ﬁnancial intermediaries, liquidity provision to
the corporate sector will increase collateral values directly, enabling ﬁrms to extract liquidity from
banks on their own.
     Fiscal policy is one tool by which the government can directly aﬀect liquidity in the corporate
sector without relying on ﬁnancial intermediation. For example, by reducing the corporate tax rate
or introducing an investment tax credit, the government can increase the level of internal liquidity
available to ﬁrms – liquidity which ﬁrms can then use to purchase assets and hence raise collateral
values. Alternatively, increasing direct government spending may serve to increase internal cor-
porate liquidity, for example when individuals use funds to increase consumption. Finally, direct
government loans to ﬁrms will also serve to increase corporate liquidity, particularly when these
are provided at a rate lower, and in amounts higher, than that provided by the ﬁnancial sector.37
In this section we show that in a credit trap setting direct injections of liquidity into the corporate
sector give rise to a natural synergy between monetary and ﬁscal policy as well as a ﬁscal multiplier
eﬀect.
     Formally, we examine the eﬀect of government injections of liquidity into the corporate sector
by analyzing exogenous shocks to date-1 cash ﬂow, X1 .38 Since we are now interested in the eﬀects
of changes in X1 , we rewrite the direct pricing function, P , as P (B, r; X1 ). Assuming that collateral
prices can only increase when date-1 corporate liquidity increases in all ﬁrms, we have that P is
increasing in X1 .39
     Consider the eﬀect of an increase in date-1 cash ﬂow, X1 , in the case of a credit trap equilibrium.
We have the following proposition:
  37
     During the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008-2009 the Federal Reserve provided direct loans to the corporate sector using
the Commercial Paper Funding Facility. While not constituting monetary policy (nor ﬁscal policy) in the standard
sense, the program allowed the government to bypass ﬁnancial intermediaries along the lines discussed here.
  38
     For example, decreases in the corporate tax rate τ will increase ﬁrm after-tax date-1 income, (1 − τ )X1 .
  39
     For simplicity, we make the assumption that P is strictly increasing in X1 . Alternatively, we could assume that
P is increasing in X1 in a region [0, X̄1 ]. With the latter assumption, all of the following propositions should be
interpreted as conﬁned to that region.




                                                         29
Proposition 8. Assume that the conditions in Proposition 3(ii) hold so that the economy is in
a credit trap. An increase in X1 increases the maximal aggregate loan supply which the banking
sector can successfully lend to ﬁrms.

   The intuition for Proposition 8 is quite simple. An exogenous increase in date-1 liquidity
increases collateral values which, in turn, supports higher lending by banks. The increased lending
by banks further increases corporate liquidity and so collateral values increase further. In this way,
liquidity-induced increases in collateral values and lending amplify one another. By circumventing
banks and directly injecting liquidity into the corporate sector, ﬁscal policy eases a credit trap
equilibrium.
   This process is demonstrated in Figure 9. At X1low the economy is in a credit trap equilibrium,
with the maximal liquidation value of assets being the ﬁxed point L1 satisfying P (L1 , 0; X1low) = L1 .
The corresponding maximal aggregate amount of loans that banks will be willing to provide to
ﬁrms is then B̄ −1 (L1 ). Consider now the eﬀect of a shift from X1low to X1high arising from an
expansion in ﬁscal policy. The associated increase in corporate liquidity will raise the collateral
pricing function P . The implied value of assets assuming a liquidation value of L1 and an interest
rate of zero rises from P (L1 , 0; X1low) to L2 ≡ P (L1 , 0; X1high). This higher level of collateral
values will support a higher level of lending, equal to B̄ −1 (L2 ), which will imply a still higher
liquidation value of L3 ≡ P (L2 , 0; X1high). The initial increase in collateral values due to the liquidity
provided by the ﬁscal policy expansion is ampliﬁed in the feedback loop between lending, liquidity,
and collateral values. The process converges at the point in the ﬁgure marked LH satisfying
P (LH , 0; X1high) = LH .
   Indeed, the feedback loop between liquidity injections, collateral values, and lending generates
a ﬁscal policy multiplier eﬀect. This is described in the following proposition:

Proposition 9. Assume that the economy is in a credit trap as described in Proposition 3(ii) where
the supply of loanable funds is greater than the maximal lending capacity of banks, Rmax, and the
equilibrium liquidation value of assets is at its maximal level, L∗ . Assume that the government
transfers δ in period 1 to every ﬁrm which invested in period 0. Deﬁning T as the aggregate wealth
                                                                                               ∂W (T )
transfer to ﬁrms and W (T ) as the aggregate period-1 wealth of ﬁrms, we have that              ∂T     > 1.
Further, the ﬁscal policy multiplier increases when the liquidity pricing eﬀect is         greater: ∂W∂T(T )
                 ∂P   ∗
increases with   ∂L (L , 0).



                                                    30
       As discussed above, the government transfer to ﬁrms raises expected corporate liquidity at
date-1, and with it the expected equilibrium collateral value. This, in turn, allows greater lending
and investment, which further increases period-1 ﬁrm wealth. The eﬀect of the transfer is therefore
multiplied through the interplay of lending, corporate liquidity, and investment.40 As would be
expected, the strength of the multiplier eﬀect is larger when the impact of additional liquidity on
the value of collateral is greater.
       In sum, by circumventing ﬁnancial intermediaries and providing direct liquidity injections, ﬁscal
policy increases the maximal borrowing capacity of ﬁrms and enables liquidity to be extracted from
banks. With ﬁscal policy in place, monetary policy can push out liquidity from the banking sector to
the corporate sector, employing in the process the positive feedback loop between lending, liquidity
and increased collateral values. Lending is therefore jump-started through a push-pull mechanism,
where monetary policy serves to push and ﬁscal policy serves to pull out liquidity from ﬁnancial
intermediaries into ﬁrms. As such, the model therefore implies a natural synergy between monetary
and ﬁscal policy.

6.1.      The Eﬀects of Initial Liquidity

In this ﬁnal section we analyze how the initial level of liquidity in the corporate sector aﬀects the
success of monetary policy interventions. We show that if date-0 corporate liquidity is suﬃciently
low, such interventions will not be successful, in that banks will not increase lending and liquidation
values will be stuck at low liquidity-pricing levels. Credit traps thus arise when initial corporate
liquidity at the time of intervention is low.
       Formally, we analyze the model’s comparative statics with respect to the distribution of bor-
rowing requirements, G. We make the added assumption that the pricing function P is continuous
in G under the L1 metric, implying simply that if G and G are similar distributions of borrowing
requirements, the implied values of collateral for each distribution will be similar as well. Since
each ﬁrm’s borrowing requirement B is equal to I − A (i.e the diﬀerence between its internal wealth
and the required investment outlay) increases in ﬁrm borrowing requirements are associated with
decreases in initial corporate liquidity. Thus, if G and G are two distributions of ﬁrm borrowing
  40
    As explained, one way to think of the transfer δ is through a reduction in the corporate tax rate. Reducing the
rate from τ1 to τ2 involves a transfer of δ = (τ1 − τ2 )X1 . Focusing on tax rate changes, it is easy to see that lowering
the tax rate may actually serve to increase tax revenue; Reducing the tax rate will increase the tax base, since more
ﬁrms can obtain ﬁnancing and invest due to the equilibrium eﬀect on collateral values.




                                                           31
requirements with G ﬁrst order stochastically dominating G, liquidity in the corporate sector is
higher under the distribution G as compared to the distribution G . Further, we denote for every
                                                                                  I
distribution G, the aggregate date-0 liquidity in the corporate sector as W (G) := 0 (I − B)dG(B).
       Clearly, the smallest level of aggregate corporate liquidity in date-0 is zero – this is the situation
in which all ﬁrms have zero internal wealth, and thus all ﬁrms have a borrowing requirement of I.
For what follows, it turns out useful to deﬁne P0 to be the date-1 price of collateral assuming that
(1) aggregate liquidity was zero in date-0 and (2) in date-0 all ﬁrms were provided ﬁnancing at a
zero interest rate, so that in date-1 all ﬁrms have liquidity X1 − I.
       The next proposition shows that if X1 is suﬃciently small, low levels of date-0 aggregate cor-
porate liquidity necessarily involve credit traps:

Proposition 10. Assume that X1 is suﬃciently small so that P0 < I. Then there exists a threshold
level of aggregate liquidity W̄ and a level of loan supply R∗ < Rmax such that for any distribution
of date-0 liquidity G with aggregate liquidity W < W̄ , monetary policy will be ineﬀective beyond
R∗ .

       The intuition of Proposition 10 is as follows. In providing liquidity to the corporate sector, banks
must rely on the aggregate liquidity already present in the corporate sector, as this determines, in
part, the value of collateral and the strength of ﬁrms’ balance sheets. Therefore, when injecting
liquidity into the banking sector in the hope of increasing bank lending and jump starting the
feedback loop between lending and collateral, the central bank must also rely on the initial level
of liquidity in the corporate sector. In eﬀect, the central bank is leveraging the initial level of
aggregate liquidity to inject additional liquidity into the corporate sector. Proposition 10 then
states that if this initial level of aggregate liquidity is suﬃciently low, the central bank’s ability to
leverage existing liquidity to increase lending will be limited – i.e. the economy will be in a credit
trap equilibrium where banks will not increase lending beyond a certain level, regardless of shifts
in the loan supply.
       The next proposition states that if an economy is in a credit trap, decreases in date-0 corporate
liquidity intensify the severity of the credit trap: The maximal level of lending and the maximal
value of collateral both decrease.

Proposition 11. Consider an economy with a date-0 distribution of borrowing needs G1 which
is in a credit trap equilibrium. Denote by R∗1 the maximal aggregate lending and L∗1 the maximal


                                                      32
collateral value in this credit trap equilibrium. If G2 stochastically dominates G1 (implying that
date-0 liquidity in the corporate sector is higher under G1 ) then under the distribution G2 :
(i) The maximal aggregate level of loans provided by banks, R∗2 , will be smaller than R∗1 .
(ii) The maximal value of collateral, L∗2 , will be smaller than L∗1 .

     Proposition 10 and 11 make clear the importance of initial aggregate liquidity when the central
bank tries to intervene and inject liquidity into the banking sector. Proposition 10 states that if
aggregate liquidity is suﬃciently low at the point of intervention, the economy will be stuck in
a credit trap, while Proposition 11 states that as aggregate liquidity decreases, this credit trap
becomes more severe. Put together, the propositions show that monetary intervention may arrive
too late: If liquidity is suﬃciently low in the corporate sector, monetary expansions will not easily
convey additional liquidity from ﬁnancial intermediaries to ﬁrms.


7.     Conclusion

We study the limitations of the ‘credit channel’ in transmitting monetary policy into real economic
outcomes. Developing a model that relies on the interplay between lending, liquidity, and collateral
values, we identify three types of equilibria that may arise. The ﬁrst equilibrium is one in which
monetary policy successfully inﬂuences aggregate lending activity. In this conventional equilibrium,
expansionary monetary policy translates into an increase in collateral values and lending. In the
second equilibrium, which we call a credit trap equilibrium, the transmission mechanism of the
credit channel fails. Any easing of monetary policy beyond a certain level is completely ineﬀective
in increasing aggregate lending or collateral values. In the third equilibrium, called the jump-start
equilibrium, a policy of quantitative easing will be successful in increasing bank lending: monetary
policy can be eﬀective, but only when the central bank injects a suﬃciently large amount of reserves
into the banking sector.
     While monetary policy on its own is ineﬀective in a credit trap equilibrium, we show that
ﬁscal policy acting in conjunction with monetary policy can be useful in easing credit traps and
increasing bank lending. By circumventing ﬁnancial intermediaries and directly injecting liquidity
into the corporate sector, expansionary ﬁscal policy can increase collateral values. With collateral
values increased, banks can then provide loans to ﬁrms. Our paper therefore proposes a natural
complementarity between ﬁscal and monetary policy in stimulating lending.


                                                   33
References
Acharya, Viral and S. Viswanathan, “Leverage, Moral Hazard and Liquidity,” NYU Working paper,
2009.
Acharya, Viral, Hyun Song Shin and Tanju Yorulmazer, “A Theory of Slow Moving Contagion,”
NYU Working paper, 2009.
Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton, “An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial Contract-
ing,” Review of Economic Studies 59, (1992), 473-494.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, “Bubbles and Crises,” The Economic Journal 110, (2000),
236-255.
Bebchuk, Lucian, and Itay Goldstein, “Self-fulﬁlling Credit Market Freezes,” Working paper Har-
vard University (2009).
Benmelech, Efraim, “Asset Salability and Debt Maturity: Evidence from 19th Century American
Railroads,” Review of Financial Studies Forthcoming, (2009).
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K., Bergman, “Collateral Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics
(2009), 91(3) 339-360..
Benmelech, Efraim, Mark J., Garmaise, and Tobias J., Moskowitz, “Do Liquidation Values Aﬀect
Financial Contracts? Evidence from Commercial Loan Contracts and Zoning Regulation” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120 (2005), 1121-1154.
Bernanke, Ben “Nonmonetary Eﬀects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
Depression,” American Economic Review 73 (1983) 257-276.
Bernanke, Ben, and Alan Blinder “Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand” American Economic
Review 78 (1988) 435-439.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,” Amer-
ican Economic Review 79 (1989) 14-31.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler, “Financial Fragility and Economic Performance,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 105 (1990) 87-114.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler, “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy
Transmission,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (1995) 27-48.
Blinder, Alan, and Louis Maccini, “Taking Stock: A Critical Assessment of Recent Research on
Inventories,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 5 (1991) 73-96.
Bolton, Patrick, and Xavier Freixas, “Corporate Finance and the Monetary Transmission Mecha-
nism,” Review of Financial Studies 19, (2006), 829-870.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram Rajan, “Bank Bailouts and Aggregate liquidity,” American
Economic Review 92(2) (2002) 38-41.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram Rajan, “Money in a Theory of Banking,” American Eco-
nomic Review 96(1) (2006) 30-53.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram Rajan, “The Credit Crisis: Conjectures about Causes and
Remedies,” Working paper University of Chicago GSB January 2009.
Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist, “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behavior of Small
Manufacturing Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (1994), 309-340.

                                              34
Gertler, Mark and R. Glenn Hubbard, “Financial Factors in Business Fluctuations,” in Financial
Market Volatility: Causes, Consequences, and Policy Recommendations Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City (1989).
Hart, Oliver and John Moore, “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human capital,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (1994), 841-79.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore, “Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of Debt,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113(1) (1998), 1-41.
Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole, “”Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(3) (1997), 663-691.
Ivashina, Victoria and David Scharfstein, “Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis of 2008,”
Working paper Harvard Business School (2009).
Kashyap, Anil K., Owen Lamont, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Credit Conditions and the Cyclical Be-
havior of Inventories,” Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol 109 (1994), 565-592.
Kashyap, Anil K., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Rethinking Capital Regulation,”
Working paper, Harvard University and University of Chicago, 2008.
Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein, “The Impact of Monetary Policy on bank Balance Sheets,”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy Vol 42 (1995), 151-195.
Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein, “Monetary Policy and Bank Lending,” in Monetary Policy
edited by N. Gregory Mankiw, University of Chicago Press, 1994, pp. 221-56.
Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein, “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say About
the Transmission of Monetary Policy?” American Economic Review 90(3) (2000), 407-428.
Lamont, Owen, “Corporate-Debt Overhang and Macroeconomic Expectations,” American Eco-
nomic Review 85 (1995) 1106-1117.
Myers, S., and N., Majluf “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when Firms have Infor-
mation that Investors do not have,” Journal of Financial Economics 13 (1984), 187-221.
Adriano Rampini and S. Viswanathan, “Collateral, Risk Management, and the Distribution of Debt
Capacity,” Duke working paper, 2009.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equi-
librium Approach,” Journal of Finance 47 (1992), 143-66.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny “Unstable Banking,” Working paper Harvard University
(2009).
Stein, Jeremy, “An Adverse-Selection Model of Bank Asset and Liability Management with Im-
plications for the Transmission of Monetary Policy,” Rand Journal of Economics 29(3) (1998),
466-486.




                                             35
Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1. First assume that L∗ satisﬁes p(L∗ ; R) = L∗ . By deﬁnition, B ∗ (L; R) and
r ∗ (L; R) are the associated equilibrium marginal borrowing ﬁrm and market clearing interest rate
associated with the exogenous pair of liquidation values and loan supply (L, R). By construction,
therefore, the vector (R, r ∗, L∗ , B ∗ ) satisﬁes conditions (i) through (iii) of a market equilibrium.
Further, we have that L∗ = p(L∗ ; R) = P (B ∗ (L∗ ; R), r ∗(L∗ ; R)), where the second equality results
from the deﬁnition of the pricing function p. Thus, condition (iv) of the market equilibrium is
satisﬁed as well, guaranteeing that R, r ∗ , L∗ , B ∗ is indeed an equilibrium.

Suppose now that the vector (R, r ∗, L∗ , B ∗ ) is a market equilibrium. By Section 3, it is easy to
see that for every exogenous pair (L∗ , B ∗ ) there is a unique equilibrium marginal borrowing ﬁrm
and market clearing interest rate. Thus, B ∗ (L∗ ; R) = B ∗ and r ∗ (L∗ ; R) = r ∗ . Since (R, r ∗, L∗ , B ∗ )
is a market equilibrium, condition (iv) implies that L∗ = P (B ∗ , r ∗) = P (B ∗ (L∗ ; R), r ∗(L∗ ; R)) =
p(L∗ ; R). L∗ is therefore a ﬁxed point of p as required.

As a ﬁnal point, note that existence of at least one equilibrium is guaranteed by the fact that p is
continuous (since P is continuous) and bounded from above by X1 .
                                                                                      L
Proof of Proposition 2. Assume ﬁrst that L < B̄(R). We have then that 0 BdG(B) <
 B̄(R)
 0      BdG(B). As shown in Section 3, the left hand side of this inequality is equal to D(0), the
demand for loans at a zero interest rate, while the right hand side of the inequality equals R (by
deﬁnition of B̄(R). Thus, we have that D(0) < R: Loan demand is smaller than loan supply even
at the lower bound of r = 0, implying that the equilibrium interest rate will indeed be zero. (Recall
that to obtain a positive interest rate, the market for loanable funds must clear with equality.)
                  B̄(R)                  I
Note now that 0          BdG(B) ≤ R ≤ 0 BdG(B) implies that L < B̄(R) ≤ I. Since L < I,
therefore, at a zero interest rate the marginal borrowing ﬁrm will have a borrowing requirement of
L. This is because the marginal ﬁrm able to borrow has a borrowing requirement of L, while the
marginal ﬁrm that would like to borrow has the maximal borrowing requirement of B = I > L.
We therefore have that the equilibrium interest rate associated with the pair (L, R) will be r ∗ = 0
and B ∗ = L. By deﬁnition, the indirect pricing function is therefore p(L; R) = P (L, 0). Finally, in
this equilibrium, the level of loan
                                 L supply actually lent out will equal the eﬀective loan demand at
the zero interest rate, D(0) = 0 BdG(B). As shown above, this is strictly smaller than R.

Consider now the case where L ≥ B̄(R). As above, this implies that D(0) ≥ R. Since demand
for loanable funds monotonically decreases to zero as r diverges to inﬁnity, there must be an r ∗
at which demand and supply equate: D(r ∗ ) = R. By deﬁnition, this r ∗ will be the equilibrium
interest rate, and further, at this rate the full amount R will be lent out. Since the full amount R is
lent out, by deﬁnition of the function B̄, this implies that the marginal ﬁrm that obtains ﬁnancing
has a borrowing requirement of B ∗ = B̄(R). By equation (3) the marginal ﬁrm obtaining ﬁnance
at an interest rate r has a borrowing requirement of min[ (1+r) L
                                                                   , (X1 +X
                                                                          r
                                                                            2 −I)
                                                                                  ], which implies that r*
                         L      (X1 +X2 −I)
satisﬁes B̄(R) = min[ (1+r ∗) ,      r∗     ]. Finally, since the equilibrium marginal borrowing ﬁrm
                                    ∗
and interest rate are B̄(R) and r respectively, we have that the indirect pricing function satisﬁes


                                                     36
p(L; R) = P (B̄(R), r ∗).

Proof of Corollary 1. Consider ﬁrst a liquidation value L with L ≤ B̄(R). By Proposition 2, we
have that in this region p(L; R) = P (L, 0). Since P is increasing in L, p will be increasing in L as
well in this region (recall that, unless stated otherwise, throughout the paper ‘increasing’ refers to
weak monotonicity.)

Similarly, by Proposition 2, if L > B̄(R) we have that


                                      p(L; R) = P (B̄(R), r ∗),                                       (15)
                                         (X +X −I)
with r ∗ satisfying B̄(R) = min[ (1+r
                                   L
                                      ∗) ,
                                           1
                                             r∗
                                                2
                                                  ]. Therefore, r ∗ is increasing in L (recall that R is
exogenous and therefore constant in this comparative static). Thus, since P is decreasing in r by
(15) we have that p is decreasing in L.

Proof of Proposition 3. Assume ﬁrst that P (B̄(R), 0) < B̄(R) and assume by contradiction that
there exists an equilibrium (R, r ∗, L∗ , B ∗ ) in which R is lent out. By Corollary 1, p(L; R) is decreas-
ing in L over the region L > B̄(R). Further, By Proposition 2, p(B̄(R); R) = P (B̄(R), 0). Since
by assumption P (B̄(R), 0) < B̄(R), we therefore have that p(B̄(R); R) < B̄(R) and that p(L; R)
decreases over L > B̄(R). Since any equilibrium liquidation value must satisfy p(L∗ ; R) = L∗ , this
implies that L∗ < B̄(R). By Proposition 2(1)(i), however, this implies that an amount strictly less
than R is lent out, contrary to the original assumption.

Suppose now that P (B̄(R), 0) ≥ B̄(R) and assume that loan supply is R. To show that there
exists an equilibrium in which R is lent out, note again that by Proposition 2, we have that
p(B̄(R); R) = P (B̄(R), 0). This implies that p(B̄(R); R) ≥ B̄(R). Since p is continuous and
bounded from above by X1 there exists an L∗ ≥ B̄(R) which satisﬁes p(L∗ ; R) = L∗ . By Proposi-
tion 1 this L∗ is an equilibrium liquidation value. Further, by section (2)(i) of Proposition 2, since
L∗ ≥ B̄(R) the entire loan supply R will be lent out.

We therefore have that a loan supply R will be lent out in its entirety if and only if P (B̄(R), 0) ≥
B̄(R). Thus, for any R = B̄ −1 (L), we have that R is lent out if and only if P (L, 0) ≥ L.

Proof of Proposition 4. The proposition is a direct result of Proposition 2 and Proposition 3.
Consider ﬁrst the case of the conventional equilibrium. Since P (L, 0) > L for all 0 < L ≤ I, we
know by Proposition
               I    3 that monetary policy is eﬀective at any R ∈ [B̄ −1 (0), B̄ −1 (I)] = [0, Rmax]
where Rmax = 0 BdG(B).

Consider now the eﬀect of shifts in loan supply R on the equilibrium liquidation value of assets.
For any R ≤ Rmax we have that B̄(R) ≤ I. Therefore, the equilibrium liquidation value can’t
satisfy L ≤ B̄(R) since in this region by Proposition 2 we have that p(L; R) = P (L, 0) > L. Thus,
the equilibrium liquidation value must be in the region L > B̄(R). Since p is decreasing in L,
and the equilibrium liquidation value must satisfy p(L; R) = L it is clear that the equilibrium
liquidation value is unique. Further, by Proposition 2, in this region p(L; R) = P (B̄(R), r ∗) where


                                                    37
                                            (X1 +X2 −I)                                              ∂r ∗                  ∂r ∗
r ∗ satisﬁes B̄(R) = min[ (1+r
                            L
                               ∗) ,              r∗     ].   It is easy to see from this that        ∂R     ≤ 0 and also   ∂L     ≥ 0.

Consider, therefore, for each loan supply R ≤ Rmax the equilibrium liquidation value L(R) that
satisﬁes P (B̄(R), r ∗(L; R)) = L(R). Diﬀerentiating both sides by R and rearranging yields:

                                                             ∂P ∂B      ∂P ∂r ∗
                                                            ∂B ∂R    +  ∂r ∂R
                                                   L (R) =            ∂P ∂r ∗
                                                                                   .                                              (16)
                                                               1−     ∂r ∂L

                                            ∂r ∗              ∂r ∗
Since   ∂P
        ∂B   ≥ 0,   ∂B
                    ∂R   ≥ 0,   ∂P
                                ∂r   ≤ 0,   ∂R     ≤ 0, and   ∂L     ≥ 0, we have that L (R) ≥ 0 as was to be shown.

Next, consider the credit trap equilibrium described in case (ii) of the proposition. Since P (L, 0) ≥ L
for 0 < L ≤ L∗ , by Proposition 3 monetary policy is eﬀective over the region [B̄ −1 (0), B̄ −1 (L∗ )].
Further, since P (L, 0) < L for L > L∗ by Proposition 3 monetary policy is ineﬀective for any
R > B̄ −1 (L∗ ). Maximal equilibrium lending is therefore R∗ = B̄ −1 (L∗ ).

Consider now a loan supply R greater than R∗ . We have that B̄(R) > B̄(R∗ ) = L∗ . Therefore, the
equilibrium liquidation value cannot be greater than B̄(R) since for any L > L∗ according to the as-
sumption in case (ii) of the Proposition P (L, 0) < L. Since, by Proposition 2, p(L; R) ≤ P (L, 0) this
implies that in this region p(L; R) < L. To be an equilibrium, however, L must satisfy p(L; R) = L.
Thus, the equilibrium liquidation value must have L ≤ B̄(R). In this region, though, by Propo-
sition 2, p(L; R) = P (L, 0). Thus, the only equilibrium liquidation value is L∗ since according to
case (ii) of the proposition, P (L∗ , 0) = L∗ , P (L, 0) > L for 0 < L < L∗ , and P (L, 0) < L for L > L∗ .

Case (iii) of the jump start equilibrium is proved in a similar manner. Since P (L, 0) < L
for L1 < L < L2 , by Proposition 3 we have that monetary policy is ineﬀective at any R ∈
(B̄ −1 (L1 ), B̄ −1 (L2 )) = (R1 , R2). Now, since P (L2 , 0) = L2 , by Proposition 3 we have that if loan
supply is R2 = B̄ −1 (L2 ) it will successfully be lent out in equilibrium.

Consider now any loan supply R ∈ [R1 , R2 ]. Since L1 ≤ B̄(R) < L2 , it must be that the associ-
ated equilibrium is smaller than B̄(R). This is because p(L; R) is decreasing for L > B̄(R) and
p(B̄(R); L) = P (B̄(R), 0) < B̄(R) based on the assumption in case (iii) of Proposition 4. Thus
p(L; R) < L for L ≥ B̄(R), whereas to be an equilibrium equality is needed. Thus, the equilibrium
liquidation value satisﬁes L ≤ B̄(R). Over this range, though, by Proposition 2, p(L; R) = P (L, 0).
Thus, based on the assumption in case (iii) in the proposition the only liquidation value is L1 since
P (L, 0) > L for 0 < L < L1 , P (L, 0) < L for L1 < L < L2 , and P (L1 , 0) = L1 . Finally, since
p(B̄(R2 ); R2) = P (B̄(R2 , 0) = B̄(R2 ), we have that L2 = B̄(R2 ) is an equilibrium liquidation value
when loan supply is R2 .
                                                                       X1 −kV
                                                                          0      (X1 −B)dG(B)
Proof of Corollary 2. Since by assumption α <                                     kV          ,   by continuity there exists an
                                  L∗1
                                         (X −B)dG(B)
L∗1 < X1 − kV with α = 0         1
                                   kV      . Consider now a value L ≤ L∗1 . Since L∗1 < X1 − kV , we
have that kV ≤ X1 −L. Further, if the marginal ﬁrm obtaining ﬁnancing has borrowing requirement
L, then at an interest rate of zero, date-1 distribution of wealth is [X1 − L, X1 ]. Since kV < X1 − L,
                                                                                                                 L
                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                      (X1 −B)dG(B)
we therefore have that at a price of P = kV , demand by industry-insiders is given by                                     kV       .


                                                                     38
Since industry outsiders are willing to pay kV for the assets, we have that demand at the price
                                 L                                                   L∗1                        L
                                      (X1 −B)dG(B)                                           (X −B)dG(B)               (X −B)dG(B)
P = kV satisﬁes D ≥              0
                                       Because α = 0
                                          kV       .     1
                                                           kV        ≥ 0 1 kV       , we have that
P = kV is an equilibrium price of assets. To see that any P > kV cannot be an equilibrium, note
that for such P outsiders are priced out of the market while insider demand is bounded from above
   L                                  L                           L                                L∗1
         (X1 −B)dG(B)                       (X1 −B)dG(B)              1  (X1 −B)dG(B)                        (X −B)dG(B)
by   0
              P       .
                   Since                0
                                         <       P           ≤ 0     0
                                                                        kV   kV = α it cannot be that
a price P > kV is an equilibrium of the asset market. Thus, P = kV is the unique equilibrium
price. By deﬁnition, therefore, for any L ≤ L∗1 , the direct pricing function satisﬁes P (L, 0) = kV .
                                                    L∗2 (α)
                                                            (X1 −B)dG(B)
Deﬁne now        L∗2 (α)   implicitly by            0
                                                           X1 −L∗2 (α)             = α. Because L∗1 < X1 − kV and by deﬁnition
        L∗1
        0 (X1 −B)dG(B)
α=             kV            , we have that L∗1 < L∗2 .

Consider therefore the demand function D(P ; L) for an exogenous L ∈ (L∗1 , L∗2 ].
             L∗2 (α)                                 X1 −kV
                        (X −B)dG(B)                               (X −B)dG(B)
Because 0 X1 −L 1
                  ∗ (α) =α< 0         1
                                     kV          we have that L∗2 < X1 − kV . Since L ≤ L∗2 <
                  2
X1 − kV , then kV ≤ X1 − L. The demand schedule is therefore governed by (9) and (10).
                                                   L∗1                                                           L
                                                          (X −B)dG(B)                                                  (X −B)dG(B)
Now, because L > L∗1 and α = 0     1
                                     kV      , it must be that α < 0 1 kV         . This implies,
though,
     
        that P = kV  is not an equilibrium price  of assets since by (9) demand at  kV is greater
         L
         0 (X1 −B)dG(B)
than            kV           .
                                            L                            L∗2 (α)
                                                 (X1 −B)dG(B)
                                                       (X1 −B)dG(B)
Since L ≤ L∗2 we have that                   0
                                                      X1 −L∗2 (α)
                                                   X1 −L            ≤     0
                                                                     = α. This, together with the fact
                                                           L
                                                               (X −B)dG(B)
that by (10) over the region P > X1 − L, D(P ; L) < 0 1X1 −L               , it must be that the market
clearing price satisfying D(P ∗ ; L) = α satisﬁes P ∗ ≤ X1 − L. By (9), over this region we have that
            L                                                                   L
               (X −B)dG(B)
D(P ; L) = 0 1 P           , implying that the market clearing price is ( α1 ) 0 (X1 − B)dG(B). By
deﬁnition, this market clearing price is P (L, 0).
Consider now an L > L∗2 (α). First, assume that kV ≤ X1 − L so that the demand schedule is
                                                           L                             L∗2 (α)
                                                           0    (X1 −B)dG(B)                (X1 −B)dG(B)
                                                                                             0
governed by (9) and (10). Because                                 X1 −L            >       X1 −L∗2 (α)   = α and since by                   (9) over
                                                                          L
                                                                                   (X1 −B)dG(B)
the region P < X1 − L we have that D(P ; L) > 0                                        clearing
                                                                                     X1 −L      it must be that the market
                    ∗                   ∗
price satisfying D(P ; L) = α satisﬁes P ≥ X1 − L. Over this region, though, by 10 we have that
                  X1 −P                                                                                           X1 −P ∗
                  0        (X1 −B)dG(B)                                            1                                          (X −B)dG(B)
D(P ; L) =                   P     Thus, the equilibrium price satisﬁes 0
                                        .                                         P∗          = α. By
deﬁnition of L∗2 (α) this implies that P ∗ = X1 − L∗2 (α). Assume now that kV > X1 − L. This means
that the demand schedule is governed by (10). By the same argument, therefore, the equilibrium
price of assets is P ∗ = X1 − L∗2 (α). Thus, regardless of the relation between kV and X1 − L, for all
L > L∗2 (α), the equilibrium price, is P ∗ = X1 −L∗2 (α). By deﬁnition, therefore P (L, 0) = X1 −L∗2 (α)
for L > L∗2 (α). Finally, since L∗2 < X1 − kV we have that P (L, 0) = X1 − L∗2 (α) > kV . Note also
that because G is twice diﬀerentiable and the smooth pasting conditions at L∗1 and L∗2 are satisﬁed,
the function P (L, 0) is continuous in both L and the exogenous α.

Proof of Proposition 5. By Corollary 2, for any α for which L∗1 (α) > kV and L∗1 (α) > X1 −L∗2 (α),
we have that (a) L = kV is a ﬁxed point of P (L, 0); (b) P (L, 0) > L for L < kV ; and (c)
P (L, 0) < L for L < kV . To see this note that by Corollary 2, P (L, 0) = kV for all L ≤ L∗1 (α).
Since L∗1 (α) > kV we have that P (kV, 0) = kV . By the same argument, for any L < kV we have
that P (L, 0) = kV > L, while for L ∈ (kV, L∗1(α)] we have that P (L, 0) = kV < L. Finally, because

                                                                              39
P (L, 0) increases for all L > L∗1 (α) and obtains at L = L∗2 (α) its maximum value of X1 − L∗2 (α),
over the region L > L∗1 (α), P (L, 0) ≤ X1 − L∗2 (α) < L∗1 (α) < L. We have thus proved all three
requirements stated in conditions (a), (b), (c). Given this, the proposition is then a direct result
of Corollary 2.
                                                                                                             X1 −kV
                                                                                 1                                     (X −B)dG(B)
To conclude the proof, it needs to be shown that there exists an ᾱ < 0         kV          such
                      ∗               ∗             ∗
that for all α > ᾱ, L1 (α) > kV and L1 (α) > X1 − L2 (α). To see this note that since by deﬁni-
             L∗1                                               X1 −kV
                    (X1 −B)dG(B)                                          (X −B)dG(B)
tion α =        0
                       kV        ,
                         we have that     0         1
                                                   kV L∗1 (   ) = X1 − kV . Since by assumption
kV < X21 , we have that X1 − kV > kV . Since L∗1 (α) is increasing in α, by continuity there exists
            X1 −kV
                      (X1 −B)dG(B)
an ᾱ1 <    0
                       kV               such that for all α > ᾱ1 , L∗1 (α) > kV .
                                                                                L∗2 (α)
                                                                                   (X1 −B)dG(B)
Finally, note that since           L∗2 (α)   is implicitly deﬁned by            0
                                                                                 X1 −L∗2 (α)     = α,
                         X1 −kV                                                               X1 −kV
                                   (X −B)dG(B)                                                         (X1 −B)dG(B)
we have that L∗2 ( 0       1
                          kV        ) = X1 − kV .                         Therefore, at α∗ = 0
                                                                                         we have        kV          ,
      ∗   ∗     ∗    ∗
that L1 (α ) + L2 (α ) = 2(X1 − kV ) > X1 where the inequality stems from the fact that kV < X21 .
                                                                                                      X1 −kV
                                                                                                                (X −B)dG(B)
Since L∗2 (α) is increasing in α, by continuity there exists an ᾱ2 < 0            1
                                                                                  kV       , such that
L∗1 (α) + L∗2 (α) > X1 for all α > ᾱ2 . Put diﬀerently, for all α > ᾱ2 , L∗1 (α∗ ) > X1 − L∗2 (α). By
deﬁning ᾱ = min(ᾱ1 , ᾱ2 ) the proposition is proved.
                                                                  X1 −kV
                                                            1               (X −B)dG(B)
Proof of Proposition 6. Assume that α < 0                  kV          so that Corollary 2 applies. In this
case if L1 > kV and L2 < X1 − L2 then by Corollary 2, we have that P (L, 0) = kV for all L ≤ L∗1 ,
         ∗             ∗            ∗

and P (L∗2 , 0) = X1 − L∗2 < L∗2 . Since L∗1 > kV and P is increasing and continuous, this implies
that (a) P (kV, 0) = kV and (b) there exists an L with L∗1 < L < L∗2 such that P (L, 0) < L for
L ∈ (kV, L) and P (L , 0) = L . By Proposition 2 this implies that monetary policy will be ineﬀec-
tive over the region R ∈ (B̄ −1 (kV ), B̄ −1 (L )) and eﬀective at both R = B̄ −1 (kV ) and R = B̄ −1 (L )
as stated in the proposition.

Consider then the conditions under which L∗1 > kV and L∗2 < X1 − L∗2 . Since L∗1 satisﬁes
 L∗1                                                      kV
     (X1 −B)dG(B)                              (X1 −B)dG(B)
 0
        kV             = α, we have that if α >      kV
                                                           0
                                                                  , then L∗1 > kV . Second, since L∗2 satisﬁes
 L2
   ∗                                         X1 /2
     (X1 −B)dG(B)                                   (X1 −B)dG(B)
 0
      X1 −L∗2   = α, we have that if α < 0            X1 /2           then L∗2 < X21 . This implies that L∗2 <
                           kV                         X1 /2
                               (X1 −B)dG(B)                   (X1 −B)dG(B)
X1 −L∗2 . Put together, if 0      kV        <α< 0              X1 /2        then L∗1 > kV and L∗2 < X1 −L∗2 .
                                                                                X1 −kV
                                                                                        (X1 −B)dG(B)
In addition, we require Corollary 2 to hold, which necessitates α < 0                    kV          .
                                                                              kV
                                                             1                      (X −B)dG(B)
Now, by L’Ĥoptial’s rule, as kV converges to zero, 0         kV        converges to X1 g(0) which is
equal to zero due to the fact that g(0) = 0. (As can be seen, the condition that g(0) = 0 implies that
as kV converges to zero, aggregate
                            
                                     insider liquidity decreases suﬃciently quickly that the maximal
                                       kV
                               1            (X −B)dG(B)
insider demand for assets 0     kV      converges to zero as well. It is this that guarantees that
for any α, if kV is suﬃciently small, monetary policy will be ineﬀective over low levels of loan
supply.)
                                                                                            X1 /2                       X1 −kV
                                                                                            0        (X1 −B)dG(B)        0         (X1 −B)dG(B)
Continuing with the proof, for suﬃciently low kV it is clear that                                     X1 /2         <               kV          .


                                                                    40
                                           kV                     X1 /2
                                           1     (X −B)dG(B) 1              (X −B)dG(B)
Thus, for suﬃciently low kV , the set [ 0   kV      , 0     X1 /2     ] is nonempty and, further,
for any α in it, Corollary 2 applies. Since, by construction, for any α in this set we have that
L∗1 > kV and L∗2 < X1 − L∗2 , as shown above, for any such α there exist R1 and R2 such that
monetary policy is eﬀective at R1 and R2 but ineﬀective at (R1 , R2).

Proof of Proposition 7. We begin by showing that the set of search costs C satisfying P (0, 0) <
C ≤ P (L∗ , 0) − L∗ is nonempty. To see this deﬁne the function H(L) = P (L, 0) − L. Since
H(0) = P (0, 0) and H(L∗ ) = P (L∗ , 0) − L∗ , we need to show that H(L∗ ) > H(0). To see this note
               ∂P (L,0)                  ∂P (L,0)             ∂P (L∗ ,0)
that H  (L) = ∂L − 1. Thus, since ∂L |L=0 > 1 and               ∂L      = 1, we have that H  (0) > 0
                                                    ∂ 2 P (L,0)
and H  (L∗ ) = 0. Further, because H  (L) = ∂L2 ≤ 0 it must be that H  (L) ≥ 0 for L ∈ [0, L∗]
and H  (L) > 0 over L ∈ [0, L] with L ≤ L∗ . This implies that H(L∗ ) > H(0) as was desired – i.e
the set {C|P (0, 0) < C ≤ P (L∗ , 0) − L∗ } is nonempty.

Consider therefore a search cost C with P (0, 0) < C ≤ P (L∗ , 0) − L∗. We have that P (0, 0) − C < 0
and P (L∗ , 0) − C ≥ L∗ . Since P (L, 0) is continuous and increasing in L, this implies that there
exists anL̄ such that 0 < L̄ < L∗ , with P (L, 0) ≤ C for L ≤ L̄ and P (L, 0) > C for L > L̄. This
then implies that
              
               0              if L ≤ L̄
P̃ (L, 0) =
               P (L, 0) − C   if L > L̄
Since L̄ < L∗ and C ≤ P (L∗ , 0) − L∗ we have that P̃ (L∗ , 0) = P (L∗ , 0) − C ≥ L∗ . Combining this
with the fact that P̃ (L̄, 0) = 0, P̃ (L, 0) is increasing in L, and continuous, implies that there is an
L̃ between L̄ and L∗ such that P̃ (L, 0) < L for L < L̃ and P̃ (L̃, 0) = L̃. By Corollary 2, monetary
policy is therefore ineﬀective at any loan supply R ∈ [0, B̄ −1 (L̃)) and eﬀective at R = B̄ −1 (L̃).
(Note here the slight abuse of semantics in denoting monetary policy ‘ineﬀective’ at R = 0.)

Proof of Proposition 8. Based on Proposition 4(ii), the maximal loan supply which can be
lent out is R∗ = B̄ −1 (L∗ ), where L∗ is the ﬁxed point of the pricing function P that satisﬁes
P (L∗ , 0; X1) = L∗ . Note that we write P taking as input the exogenous variable X1 which varies
with changes in ﬁscal policy. Since p is strictly increasing in X1 , and since p(L; R, X1) = P (L, 0; X1),
we have that P is strictly increasing in X1 as well. Further, since under the conditions of Propo-
sition 4(ii), P is concave with P (L, 0) > L for L < L∗ while P (L, 0) < L for L > L∗ , it is easy to
           ∂P (L∗ ,0;X1 )
see that        ∂L        < 1.

To prove the proposition, diﬀerentiate both sides of the equation P (L∗ , 0; X1) = L∗ by X1 and
rearrange to obtain:


                                            ∂L∗
                                                           ∂P
                                                = ∂X∂P
                                                     1
                                                                                                     (17)
                                            ∂X1  1 − ∂L
                                                                    ∗
      ∂P
Since ∂X   > 0 and ∂P                ∗                 ∂L                      −1 is increasing in L
         1           ∂L < 1 at L = L , we have that ∂X1 > 0. Thus, since B̄
and L is increasing in X1 , the maximal loan supply that can be lent out R∗ = B̄ −1 (L∗ ) is increasing



                                                        41
in X1 as well.

Proof of Proposition 9. Denote by B̄(δ) the marginal ﬁrm obtaining ﬁnancing when investing
ﬁrms obtain a wealth transfer of δ per ﬁrm at date-1. By Proposition 8, B̄(δ) is increasing in δ.
Given a transfer of δ to each investing ﬁrm, we have that the aggregate wealth transfer to all ﬁrms
is T (δ) = δG(B̄(δ)). Since T is increasing in δ, we can therefore deﬁne the function δ(T ) = T −1 (T ).
For every wealth transfer T , δ(T ) is the level of the individual ﬁrm transfer such that the aggregate
wealth transfer is T .

Date-1 ﬁrm aggregate wealth given a wealth-transfer of T is

                                    B̄(δ(T ))                        I
                 W (T ) = T +                    (X1 − B)dG(B) +                (I − B)dG(B)       (18)
                                 0                                  B̄(δ(T ))

Integrating and rearranging slightly we have that

                                                                                I
                  W (T ) = T + X1 B(δ(T )) + I[I − B̄(δ(T ))] −                      (B)dG(B).     (19)
                                                                             0

                                δ(T )
       dT = 1 + (X1 − I) dδ dT > 1 where the inequality stems from the fact that X1 > I, the
Thus, dW                    dB̄

function B̄ is increasing in δ, and δ is increasing in T .

Finally, since loan supply is greater than the maximal lending capacity of banks, for every δ,
the marginal ﬁrm obtaining ﬁnancing will have a borrowing requirement of L∗ , where L∗ is the
maximal liquidation value in the credit trap associated with a wealth transfer of δ. This implies
that ddδB̄ = dL∗
              dδ . Similar to the proof of Proposition 8, we have that


                                     dL∗                    ∂P
                                                            ∂δ
                                         =                                                         (20)
                                      dδ   1−        ∂P   ∗
                                                     ∂L (L (δ), 0; X1 + δ)

Now, if L∗ is a maximal liquidation value in a credit trap as in Proposition 4(ii), we have that
∂P    ∗                                                                 ∗           ∗
∂L (L ) < 1. This stems from the fact that P is concave with P (L , 0) = L , P (L, 0) > L for
           ∗                              ∗                        ∂P   ∗
0 < L < L , and P (L, 0) < L for L > L . Thus, from (20), as ∂L (L (δ), 0; X1 + δ) increases, we
             ∗                          dL∗                               dB̄ δ(T )
           dδ increases as well. Since dδ = dδ and dT = 1 + (X1 − I) dδ dT , we therefore have
have that dL                                   dB̄      dW

that as ∂P     ∗                         dW
        ∂L (L (δ), 0; X1 + δ) increases, dT increases as well. Put diﬀerently, the strength of the
ﬁscal multiplier is greater when the liquidity pricing eﬀect is stronger.

Proof of Proposition 10. First, we show that for any pricing function P with P (I, 0) < I
there exists a loan supply R∗ ≤ Rmax beyond which monetary policy will be ineﬀective. Further,
R∗ ≤ B̄ −1 (P (I, 0)).

To see this, note that since P (0, 0) ≥ 0 and P (I, 0) < I, by continuity of P there exists an L∗ with
P (L∗ , 0) = L∗ . Consider then the set of all ﬁxed points {L | s.t. P (L, 0) = L and L ≤ I}. Since this
set is bounded from above, deﬁne L̄ = sup{L|s.t.P (L, 0) = L}. By continuity of P , it must be that

                                                          42
P (L̄, 0) = L̄; i.e. the supremum is a maximum as well. To see this, assume by contradiction that
P (L̄, 0) = L̄. Since L̄ is a supremum of the ﬁxed points of P (L, 0), there must be a ﬁxed point Ln in
every interval (L̄ − n1 , L̄). We can therefore deﬁne a sequence of ﬁxed points {Ln } with {Ln } → L̄.
Since P is continuous we have that {P (Ln , 0)} → P (L̄, 0). Further, since {Ln } are ﬁxed points, we
have that {Ln } → P (L̄, 0). However, since by construction {Ln } also converges to L̄ it must be
that P (L̄, 0) = L̄, in contradiction to our assumption.

We therefore have that L̄ = max{L|s.t.P (L, 0) = L}. It must be then that for any L > L̄,
P (L, 0) < L. Otherwise, by continuity of P there would be an L > L̄ that is a ﬁxed point of
P (L, 0) in contradiction to L̄ being the maximum ﬁxed point. Since P (L̄, 0) = L̄, by Proposition
3 we have that R∗ = B̄ −1 (L) can indeed be lent out. By the same corollary, since P (L, 0) < L
for L > L∗ , no R∗ < R ≤ Rmax can be lent out in equilibrium, implying that monetary policy is
ineﬀective beyond R∗ . Finally, it must be that L̄ ≤ P (I, 0); Otherwise, since L̄ is a ﬁxed point, we
have that P (L̄, 0) = L̄ > P (I, 0), contradicting the fact that P is increasing in L and that L̄ < I.
Since L̄ ≤ P (I, 0), it must therefore be that R∗ ≤ B̄ −1 (P (I, 0)), as was stated above.
Now deﬁne:

                                                            I
                  Pmax (W ) = SupG {P (I, 0; G)} s.t.            (I − B)dG(B) = W                  (21)
                                                         0

That is, Pmax (W ) is the supremum of P (I, 0) over all distributions of borrowing requirements G
such that the aggregate date-0 wealth associated with G equals W .

Clearly, Pmax (0) equals P0 , the value of collateral assuming aggregate date-0 wealth is zero and all
ﬁrms obtain ﬁnancing. Since by assumption P0 < I, it must be that there exists a W̄ for which
Pmax (W̄ ) < I. To see this, assume to the contrary that there is a sequence {Wn } → 0 and asso-
                                                              I
ciated distributions {Gn } such that P (I, 0; Gn) ≥ I and 0 (I − B)dGn (B) = Wn for all n. Now,
      I                       I                 I                 I
since 0 (I − B)dG(B) = I − 0 BdG(B) = I − 0 (1 − G(B))dB = 0 G(B)dB (the second equality
                                                     I
is obtained by integration by parts), we have that 0 Gn (B)dB = Wn . Deﬁne now G0 to be the dis-
tribution that places full mass on B = I: i.e. the distribution
                                                          I    associated with zero aggregate date-0
wealth. Under the L1 metric, we have that d(Gn, G0 ) = 0 (Gn (B)−G0 (B))dB = Wn −0 = Wn → 0.
Therefore, Gn → G0 under L1 . By continuity of P , we have that P (I, 0; Gn) → P (I, 0; G0) = P0 < I
in contradiction to P (I, 0; Gn) ≥ I for all n. Thus, there must exist a W̄ for which Pmax (W̄ ) < I.

Since P is decreasing in W , we have that Pmax (W ) < I for all W < W̄ . By deﬁnition of the
function Pmax , we therefore have that for any distribution G with aggregate wealth W < Wmax ,
P (I, 0; G) ≤ Pmax (W̄ ) < I. As shown above, the fact that P (I, 0; G) < I, implies that for any
such G there exists an R∗ (G) beyond which monetary policy is ineﬀective. Further, as shown
above, R∗ (G) ≤ B̄ −1 (P (I, 0; G)). Since B −1 is increasing and P (I, 0; G) ≤ Pmax (W̄ ), we have that
B̄ −1 (P (I, 0; G)) ≤ B̄ −1 (Pmax(W̄ )). Thus, R∗ (G) ≤ B −1 (Pmax (W̄ )) for any G. This implies that
monetary policy is ineﬀective beyond B −1 (Pmax(W̄ )) for any distribution G with aggregate wealth
W < Wmax . Finally, since Pmax (W̄ ) < I, we have that B̄ −1 (Pmax(W̄ )) < B̄ −1 (I) = Rmax . Thus,
deﬁning R∗ = B̄ −1 (Pmax (W̄ )) we have that there exists an R∗ < Rmax beyond which monetary
policy is ineﬀective for all distributions G with aggregate liquidity W < W̄ .



                                                  43
Proof of Proposition 11. Since by assumption under G1 the economy is in a credit trap equilib-
rium, we have by Proposition 4 that L∗1 , the maximal collateral value in this credit trap equilibrium,
satisﬁes P (L∗1 , 0; G1) = L∗1 and that P (L, 0; G1) < L for L > L∗1 . Further, the maximal aggregate
lending R∗1 is equal to B̄ −1 (L∗1 ).

Now it is easy to see that if G2 stochastically dominates G1 (implying that date-0 liquidity in the
corporate sector is higher under G1 ) equilibrium date-1 liquidity is always higher under G1 as com-
pared to G2 . As such, we have that if G2 stochastically dominates G1 , P (L, 0; G1) > P (L, 0; G2)
for any L. As shown in the proof to Proposition 10, since P (I, 0; G2) < P (I, 0; G1) < I, under the
distribution G2 there exists a maximal equilibrium collateral value L∗2 and an associated maximal
equilibrium level of loan supply R∗2 = B̄ −1 (L∗2 ). Further, L∗2 is equal to the maximum of all of the
ﬁxed points L satisfying P (L, 0; G2) = L. Since for any L we have that P (L, 0; G2) < P (L, 0; G1)
and further for any L ≥ L∗1 we have P (L, 0; G1) ≤ L it must be that P (L, 0; G2) < L for any L ≥ L∗1 .
Since L∗2 exists and satisﬁes P (L∗2 , 0; G2) = L∗2 (see the proof for Proposition 10) it must therefore
be that L∗2 < L∗1 . Further, since the maximal loan supply that can be lent out is R∗2 = B̄ −1 (L∗2 )
and B̄ −1 is increasing in L, it must be that R∗2 < R∗1 .




                                                  44
                                        P(L,0)                                                              P(L,0)
L, P                                                          L, P


                                                                                                                 p(L;R2)
                    p(L;R1)




          B (R1 )                                             L                                  B (R2 )                   L

              Figure 1. The indirect pricing function p(L;R) provides the implied price of assets assuming a
              liquidation value L and loan supply R. As R expands, the direct pricing function P(L,0) serves
              as an envelope of p(L;R).


                                                                  P(L;0)
                    L, P

                                                                            p(L;R2)

                                               p(L;R1)




                                                                      L2*               L
                                                 L1*

        Figure 2. The conventional equilibrium. This figure presents the pricing function p(L;R) for two levels of
        loan supply, R1 and R2. The equilibrium liquidation value increases from L1* to L2*.



                         r




                                         1
                                          .              .
                                                         3
                                                                     D(r; L*(r;R2))
                                                         .
                                                         2           D(r; L*(r;R1))

                                         R1              R2                           Loan Quantity

       Figure 3. The market for loanable funds: aggregate loan supply and aggregate loan demand
       as a function of interest rate r for two levels of loan supply, R1 and R2. An increase in R shifts
       out both loan supply and effective loan demand.
 L, P                                                                L, P
                                              L                                                                      L


                                .              P(L;0)
                                                                                                    .                    P(L;0)



                  .   p(L;R1)
                                                                                                                     p(L;R2)




                  L1            L*                 L                                               L*                      L

        Figure 4. The credit trap equilibrium. The pricing function p(L;R) represents the implied price of assets
        assuming a liquidation value L and loan supply R. Increases in loan supply beyond R * = B −1 ( L* ) do not
        increase the equilibrium value of collateral or equilibrium lending.




L, P                                      P(L;0)                   L, P                                      P(L;0)


                                                   L
                                                                                                             .            L

                                                                                                                         p(L;R2)


                 .                       p(L;R)
                                         with R1 < R < R2                          .
                                                          L                                                                        L
                 L1                                                                L1                        L2

               Figure 5. The jump-start equilibrium. The pricing function p(L;R) represents the implied price of
               assets assuming a liquidation value L and loan supply R. Monetary policy is ineffective over the
               region (R1, R2), where B ( Ri ) = Li , i = 1,2.




                                                              46
         L, P
                                                                     L




  X 1 − L*2 (α )

                                             P(L;0)

           kV

                   kV        L*1 (α )                     L*2 (α )       L


Figure 6. The pricing function P(L,0) in a competitive market for assets with industry-
outsider valuation kV and supply of assets α > α .




         L, P
                                                                     L

  X 1 − L*2 (α )

                                 P(L;0)




           kV

                             L*1 (α )                 L*2 (α )           L


Figure 7. The pricing function P(L,0) in a competitive market for assets with
industry-outsider valuation kV and supply of assets α ∈ [α1, α2].




                                        47
                     L, P                                              L



                                                    ~
                                                    P ( L ,0 )




                                                                             L


                            P(L,0) – C

                                                                                   ~
Figure 8. Search costs and convexity of the pricing function. The pricing function P ( L,0) , in bold,
incorporates a fixed cost C of searching for industry-insider buyers. This search cost creates a
convexity which brings about a jump-start, quantitative easing equilibrium.




                L, P


                                                    . ..   L3
                                                                 LH
                                                                       L
                                                                         P( L,0; X 1high )

                                                    L2

                                         .
                                         L1
                                                                 P ( L,0; X 1low )




                                                                                      L


         Figure 9.  The effect of an exogenous increase in date-1 liquidity in a credit trap
         equilibrium.




                                               48
