                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              GETTING TO THE TOP OF MIND:
                            HOW REMINDERS INCREASE SAVING

                                            Dean Karlan
                                        Margaret McConnell
                                        Sendhil Mullainathan
                                          Jonathan Zinman

                                        Working Paper 16205
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16205


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2010




We are grateful to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, CGAP, the Ford Foundation, the Center
for Retirement Research at Boston College, Netspar, and the National Science Foundation for funding
research operations. We also thank the management at Ecofuturo in Bolivia, Bank of Ica in Peru and
the First Valley Bank in the Philippines and John Owens from the MABS program in Philippines.
We are thankful to Kareem Haggag and Martin Rotemberg for excellent assistance with data analysis.
We are also grateful to Doug Parkerson, Martin Rotemberg, Mark Miller, Tomoko Harigaya, Daniel
Kahn, Sara Nadel and Tania Alfonso for their dedicated field work. We thank Gharad Bryan and Ted
McConnell for valuable feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Ford Foundation, CGAP, the Center for Retirement Research at Boston
College, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the National Science Foundation, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Dean Karlan, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving
Dean Karlan, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 16205
July 2010
JEL No. D91,E21

                                               ABSTRACT

We develop and test a simple model of limited attention in intertemporal choice. The model posits
that individuals fully attend to consumption in all periods but fail to attend to some future lumpy expenditure
opportunities. This asymmetry generates some predictions that overlap with models of present-bias.
Our model also generates the unique predictions that reminders may increase saving, and that reminders
will be more effective when they increase the salience of a specific expenditure. We find support for
these predictions in three field experiments that randomly assign reminders to new savings account
holders.


Dean Karlan                                            Sendhil Mullainathan
Economic Growth Center                                 Department of Economics
P.O. Box 208269                                        Littauer 208
New Haven, CT 06520-8269                               Harvard University
dean.karlan@yale.edu                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                       and NBER
Margaret McConnell                                     mullain@fas.harvard.edu
Harvard University
9 Bow St                                               Jonathan Zinman
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    Dartmouth College
mmcconnell@gmail.com                                   41 Gibson Rd
                                                       Hanover, NH 03755
                                                       jzinman@dartmouth.edu
                   Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                         1

                                                 I. Introduction

Consumption, savings and borrowing behavior is sometimes difficult to reconcile with traditional

models of intertemporal choice. Calibrations of U.S. data suggest that extremely high short-term

discount rates are necessary to explain observed borrowing patterns (Laibson, Repetto and Tobacman

2007). Voluntary commitment devices help increase savings (Ashraf, Karlan and Yin 2006; Benartzi

and Thaler 2004). Default options have large effects on retirement savings decisions (Madrian and

Shea 2001; Beshears et al 2009). These patterns are often explained by models that emphasize time

inconsistency and self-control problems (Laibson 1997; O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999; Fudenberg and

Levine 2006; Banerjee and Mullainathan 2009). In such models, people can exhibit both impatience

and patience, depending on the horizon or good of choice.

       We develop some theory and evidence that a different psychology – limited attention – also plays

an important role in explaining these types of intertemporal choices. In most models, deciding what

to consume today requires a consideration of all future expenditure opportunities; e.g., how much

in school fees or taxes are coming due? What novel consumption opportunities will arise? In our

model, individuals overlook some of these future expenditure opportunities. We are motivated in

part by the “planning fallacy:” people systematically underestimate the time required to complete

tasks (Buehler, Griffin and Ross 2002). But prodding people to list specific sub-components of

tasks improves the accuracy of time-completion estimates (Forsythe and Burt 2008). This evidence

illustrates the potential for overlooking specific items when making plans.

       We provide a simple model of lifetime consumption and savings that incorporates an attentional

failure.1 Individuals face two kinds of consumption opportunities each period: 1) regular consumption

spending and 2) a lumpy expenditure, which occurs with certainty but can differ in each period. For

example, the expenditure opportunity may be school fees in one period, car registration in another
   1
     Macroeconomists have proposed that costly information processing capability may lead to “rational inattention”
(Sims 1998 and 2003; Mankiw and Reis 2002; Ball, et al 2005; Reis 2006). In Gabaix and Laibson (2006) consumers
may not (fully) attend to future, state-contingent prices. In Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) agents are attentive only
to posted prices. These theoretical models have found empirical support; see DellaVigna (2009) for a review of the
field evidence. While these models emphasize inattention to prices or some component of the price vector, our model
emphasizes inattention to future consumption opportunities. Banerjee and Mullainathan (2008) proposes a theoretical
model in which individuals allocate scarce attention between problems at home and problems at work, leading to a
poverty trap.
                   Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                         2

period, and a night out in the next. For simplicity, we assume that regular consumption spending has

no foresight problems but that lumpy expenditures are overlooked with some probability.2 In any

period individuals choose consumption to maximize their lifetime utility given the future expenditure

opportunities they “attend” to.3 The failure to forecast some future expenditure opportunities can

distort intertemporal allocations by leading to less smoothing (via more borrowing and/or less saving)

than would occur under perfect or unbiased foresight.

       A simple example illustrates our model. Suppose you hear that your favorite singer is coming

to town three months from now. You decide to go, and mark the concert date in your calendar.

Tickets will not go on sale until the night of the show. Ideally, if your utility is concave with

respect to consumption, you would finance the ticket by smoothing the expenditure shock over your

lifetime – including some saving over the next three months. But if you are inattentive as in our

model, you may sometimes forget your concert plan and choose to consume instead of save. Then,

when the day of the concert arrives, you face the second-best options of forgoing the concert or

financing it disproportionately through debt (e.g., by charging it to a credit card or incurring a

checking account overdraft fee) and thus reducing future consumption even more in order to cover

the financing costs. This sort of attentional failure may or may not be consequential in isolation.

But lifetime consumption allocations are the result of countless such decisions, and small distortions

can add up (and compound). Now suppose there is a reminders technology (e.g., in your personal

digital assistant, or from a third-party as in Appendix Figure 1). Periodic reminder messages induce

you to attend to the benefits and task of putting money aside for the concert, and thereby help you

increase incremental savings and long-run smoothing.

       This example also highlights how our model relates to other findings and behavioral models.

Savings deposit collection services may be effective because they serve as reminders (Ashraf, Karlan

and Yin 2006a; Dupas and Robinson 2009). Likewise, surveys may induce saving and investment

behaviors because they serve as reminders or as a shock to attention (Stango and Zinman 2010;
   2
      This asymmetry is a stark way of creating a wedge between more vs. less routine consumption (e.g., daily food vs.
annual car registration fee).
    3
      Our setup is related to Mullainathan (1999), where individuals fail to remember information that predicted future
income, and to Schwartzstein (2009), where individuals may mistakenly only attend to information that they consider
relevant for a prediction task.
                   Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                          3

Zwane et al 2010). Non-binding commitments may be effective because they operate on attention,

rather than on self-control with large transaction costs for undoing the commitment (e.g., default

options or automatic enrollment features in retirement saving; prepaid fertilizer sales as in Duflo,

Kremer, and Robinson 2009). Indeed our model generates undersaving, and an ensuing inability to

take-up some high-return lumpy investments or high-utility lumpy expenditures, without any role for

(time-varying) impatience or commitment. Our model also suggests that overborrowing may occur

in part because debt can be “salience-advantaged” relative to saving; e.g., when debt is available

“on-demand,” at the moment when a lumpy expenditure opportunity arises (unexpectedly, due to

limited attention) and is (momentarily) at the “top of mind.”

       Perhaps the starkest difference between our model and other (behavioral) models is our key

role for reminders. Reminders change intertemporal allocations, and improve consumer welfare, by

providing associations between future expenditure opportunities and today’s choices that mitigate

the attentional failure.4 Our model generates two related testable predictions: 1) Reminders will

increase saving; 2) Reminders will be particularly effective when they draw attention to a particular

future goal or opportunity; in this respect our model provides a novel potential microfoundation

for mental accounting (Thaler 1990). Instead of offering a weak counter to temptation, mental

labels provide a strong association between today’s saving(s) and specific future events, increasing

the probability that individuals attend to those events when choosing consumption, and thereby

improving smoothing.


       We test our model’s predictions about reminders in field experiments with three different banks

in Bolivia, Peru, and the Philippines. In each experiment, individuals opened a bank savings ac-

count which included varying degrees of incentives or commitment features designed to encourage

individuals to reach a savings goal. Some individuals were randomly assigned to receive a monthly
   4
    Our predictions on reminders have some similarities to cue-based models (Laibson 2001). But our setup is distinct
both motivationally and formally. Motivationally, work on cues has focused on the role of external stimuli in triggering
consumption desires, following a large body of psychological evidence on cravings and conditioning. We focus on
the role of external events –reminders – that focus attention on future expenditure opportunities, leading to savings.
Formally: 1) limited attention can lead to both ex-ante and ex-post mistakes in our model, whereas in preference-based
models individuals might consider consumption choices to be a mistake only ex-post; 2) neither past consumption nor
past reminders influence current decisions in our model. In cue theory, the past matters because cues develop from
learned, Pavlovian associations between external stimuli and consumption.
                  Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                       4

reminder via text message or letter, while a control group received no reminder. Reminders increased

the likelihood of reaching a savings goal by 3% and the total amount saved in the reminding bank by

6%. This effect size is comparable to that found for commitment savings on a similar sample in the

Philippines (Ashraf, Karlan and Yin 2006a).5 Reminders that highlighted the client’s particular goal

- i.e., reminders that made a particular future expenditure opportunity, like school fees, more salient

- were two times more effective than reminders that did not mention the goal. These findings are

novel empirical evidence on the importance of reminders in household finance, and build on evidence

from several clinical trials on patient and clinician behaviors.6

    Our theory, evidence, and applications have some limitations. We do not model awareness of or

competition for limited attention. We do not make specific predictions about what kind of events most

effectively increase attention. Indeed, we tested several other treatments that could be interpreted as

attention treatments that, unlike reminders, had no effect on saving. Our experimental results do not

cover the household’s full balance sheet, and we cannot make precise statements about whether and

how much reminders increased total savings or changed consumer welfare in our sample. Our sample

is comprised of people who had already signed up to save of their own volition, thus we do not answer

the interesting question of whether attention treatments would differ for non-savers. Nevertheless

our theory and evidence provide novel evidence that limited attention may be an important driver of

intertemporal choice. The paper proceeds as follows. Section II details our main theoretical model

and predictions. Section III discusses some additional applications. Section IV details the settings

and design of our field tests. Section V presents the results. Section VI concludes.

                                                   II. Model

We model individual consumption over a finite horizon period with 3 ≤ T < ∞. In each period,

individuals receive constant income y. We assume for simplicity that individuals do not discount the

future so that the discount rate δ = 1.

    Individuals derive utility from consumption and from discrete (“lumpy”) expenditure opportu-
   5
     The commitment savings treatment in Ashraf et al (2006a) increased short-term savings balances by an average of
49 pesos (7%) relative to the control group treatment.
   6
     See van Dulmen et al (2007) and Krishna et al (2009) for a review of evidence on the impact of reminders on
adherence.
                Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                            5

nities. The utility from consumption spending is represented by the function u which is increasing

and concave in consumption. Individuals face one expenditure opportunity in every period. Lumpy

expenditure opportunities differ in terms of their composition in each time period (e.g., medical one

period, car registration the next), but always have a unit cost of 1. Individuals who pay a unit

cost to finance the opportunity faced in the current period receive additive utility ū. The decision

about whether to pay for the opportunity is represented by the binary variable xt , where xt = 1 if

individuals finance the expenditure opportunity and xt = 0 otherwise.

   To maximize lifetime utility, individuals choose current period consumption ct and whether to

satisfy the expenditure opportunity xt .

                                               T
                                               X
                                                     (u(ct ) + xt ū)
                                               t=1

subject to:


                                 wt+1 = wt + y − ct − xt for all t

                                   w1 = 0 and wT +1 = 0




where wt represents the wealth at the start of a period. We assume that individuals start and end

with zero wealth. Individuals may save or borrow, and we assume that borrowed money must be

repaid by life’s end. For simplicity, we assume that there is no interest charged on loans or earned

on savings.

   Full Attention Benchmark

   Fully “attentive” individuals correctly forecast all future expenditure opportunities from the first

period, and, given concavity with respect to consumption, will optimize by smoothing: ct = c∗ in

all periods. We can see by backward induction that the level of optimal consumption c∗ will be a

function of the number of expenditures financed.

                                                          T
                                                                      !
                                                          X
                                           ∗
                                           c =y−                 xt       /T
                                                           t=1
                 Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                 6

                        T
                        X
Let us denote kt =              xτ as the total number of future expenditures to be financed after t. The
                       τ =t+1
total number of expenditures satisfied will then be k1 + x1 . In the first period, individuals will

optimally chose to satisfy k1∗ + x∗1 lifetime expenditures such that:

                                     k1∗ + x∗1                (k1∗ + x∗1 + 1)
                                                                           
                                 0                       0
                                u y−             ≤ ū < u y −
                                         T                           T

That is, individuals will finance expenditures until they are indifferent between the utility from

financing an additional expenditure and the marginal utility from consumption (assuming individuals

are not constrained by their lifetime income constraint k1∗ + x∗1 ≤ T y). Perfectly attentive individuals
                                                                         k1∗ +x∗1
will perfectly smooth their consumption by consuming ct = y −                T      in each period. For fully

attentive individuals, consumption and savings plans will never deviate from the optimal plan made

in the first period.

   Without less of generality, we consider the notationally simple case of k1∗ +x∗1 = T for the duration

of the analysis (i.e., fully attentive individuals will purchase one lumpy expenditure in every time

period in their lifetime). Wealth formation will therefore follow the process:

                                                              T −1+1
                           wt+1 = wt + y − c∗t − x∗t = wt +          − 1 = wt
                                                                 T

which implies s∗t = 0. We could instead assume that fully attentive individuals optimally purchase

some fraction α ∈ [0, 1] of expenditures, so that k1∗ + x∗1 = αT . We could further specify that when

indifferent, individuals always chose to purchase expenditures later in life, so that {x∗1 = 0, x∗2 =

0, . . . , x∗αT = 1, . . . , x∗T = 1}. With these two assumptions, we would predict positive savings for

fully attentive individuals. Since borrowing and saving are symmetric in our model, we consider net

savings (amount saved less amount borrowed) when considering comparative statics between fully

attentive and inattentive consumers.


   Inattention to Future Expenditures

   In practice, individuals may not be fully attentive to all lumpy expenditure opportunities. Let us

consider that inattentive individuals attend perfectly to consumption and current period expenditure
                 Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                              7

opportunities, but only attend to future lumpy expenditure opportunities with some probability

θ ∈ [0, 1).

    Inattentive individuals then choose their current period consumption ct and whether to satisfy

current period expenditure xt in order maximize their lifetime utility, as perceived in that time period

(i.e., considering only those lumpy expenditures they take into account in the current period).

                                              T
                                              X
                          u(ct ) + xt ū +            (θ [u(cτ ) + xτ ū] + (1 − θ)u(cτ ))
                                             τ =t+1

subject to:


                                   wt+1 = wt + y − ct − xt for all t

                                      w0 = 0 and wT +1 = 0




We assume that individuals are unaware of their inattention to expenditures: people believe they are

optimizing utility as they would in the rational model, but they actually underforecast the number

of lumpy expenditure opportunities.

    Inattentive individuals reoptimize their savings plan in every period depending on the realization

of K
   e t which is a random variable representing the number of future expenditures an individual

attends to in period t. K                        e t ) = θ(T − t). Instead of saving the same fixed
                        e t has expected value E(K

amount in each period, individuals will consider both their current period wealth and the set of

future expenditures they attend to when choosing consumption. Because individuals may forecast a

different number of future expenditures in every period, they must recalibrate their savings plan as

they are faced with unexpected expenditures. In doing this, individuals will either forgo some lumpy

expenditures (illustrated in example 1) or curtail consumption (illustrated in example 2), depending

on how much utility individuals get from each lumpy expenditure (ū).

    As with fully attentive individuals, concave utility implies that inattentive individuals will plan to

                           c∗t = e
smooth consumption so that e     c∗τ for all t, τ . By backward induction, we can see that consumption
                   Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                         8

for the inattentive individual will be:
                                                                  T
                                         "                                  !#
                                                                  X
                                        et − x
                               ct = y + w
                               e             et − θ                    x
                                                                       eτ        /(T − t + 1)
                                                             τ =t+1

Let us denote the number of future expenditures an individual plans to purchase in period t as:
       XT
kt = θ
e          x                                                                         x∗t ) and plan
           eτ . Individuals will choose whether to purchase the current expenditure (e
          τ =t+1
                                                 T
                                                 X
                                 kt∗ = θ
to purchase future expenditures (e                       e∗τ ):
                                                         x
                                                τ =t+1

                                                   !                                             !
                        0      w     kt∗ + x
                               et − (e     e∗t )                   0            kt∗ + x
                                                                          et − (e
                                                                          w           e∗t + 1)
                       u    y+                          ≤ ū < u       y+
                                 T −t+1                                       T −t+1

Provided they are not constrained by their lifetime budget constraint in period t (w
                                                                                   et + e       e∗t ≤
                                                                                        kt∗ t + x

[T − t + 1]y), individuals will finance expenditures until they are indifferent between the utility from

financing an additional expenditure and the marginal utility from consumption.7 While the model

is agnostic about when expenditures will be financed, we make the notationally simple assumption

that as long as individuals still gain positive marginal utility from financing expenditures, they will

                                                                                kt∗ + x
finance expenditures happening in the current period first. That is, as long as e     e∗t ≥ 1, x
                                                                                               e∗t = 1.8


Savings and Inattention

       The inattentive consumer’s savings in period t is:

                                                         kt∗ + x
                                                         e     e∗t
                                               se∗t =               e∗t
                                                                   −x
                                                        T −t+1

We can now compare expected savings for inattentive and attentive individuals. Individuals can

                                                                             kt∗ ≤ K
only plan to purchase weakly less than the future expenditures they foresee: e     e t Recall that in

our full attention benchmark, the consumer simply spends her income in each period, for a constant
   7
     When individuals are budget constrained they will plan to finance fewer expenditures than kt∗ and the intuition of
our main result remains the same.
   8
     This assumption is made for ease of notation and is without loss of generality.
                Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                           9

savings rate of zero. In contrast the inattentive consumer borrows in some period(s):

                                     k ∗ ) + x∗t
                                   E(e                   [θ(T − t) + 1]
                         s∗t ) =
                       E(e                       − x∗t ≤                − 1 < 0 = s∗t              (1)
                                   T −t+1                  T −t+1

So the inattentive consumer has a negative expected savings rate that is lower than the full-attention

consumer’s.

Example

   Let us consider an example in three periods, T = 3. Suppose that fully attentive individuals

prefer to finance 3 expenditures. That is, suppose that
                                                               
                                                              2
                                    3u (y − 1) + 3ū > 3u y −     + 2ū
                                                              3

   Now let us suppose that an inattentive consumer fails to attend to just one lumpy expenditure

occurring in the future. Because she (incorrectly) forecasts only 2 total expenditures, she borrows

to finance part of the expenditure she faces in period 1. In period 2, when faced with an unplanned

expenditure, she realizes her mistake. The inattentive consumer then has two options: she can

either cut consumption to finance all 3 expenditures or she can forgo one expenditure. She will

finance an unexpected expenditure if and only if financing the expenditure affords greater utility

than maintaining higher consumption. That is, she will finance the expenditure if and only if:

                                                              
                                 2            7                  2
                            u y−     + 2u y −     + 3ū > 3u y −     + 2ū
                                 3            6                  3

   Otherwise, she will forgo the unexpected expenditure and maintain consumption.

   Inattention in the first period ultimately reduces lifetime utility, whether because of lower con-

sumption (as illustrated in Figure 1) or through purchasing fewer total lumpy expenditures (as

illustrated in Figure 2).

   In models of self control, present biased preferences imply a relatively lower relative valuation

of future consumption. In our model, individuals fundamentally misunderstand the value of future

consumption. As with a model of self control, our model predicts that inattentive individuals will

undersave or underborrow. However, our model also generates distinct predictions from the self
               Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                                                    10




                                                                        Example 1:
                                                                  Low marginal utility per                                  Inattentive

                   Utilityy                                            expenditure                                              Fully
                                                                                                                                attentive
                                                                                                                                 tt ti
                    1.25
                                                         Period 2: An unforecasted expenditure arises. With low marginal
                                                         utility from expenditures, she is better off maintaining consumption
                                                         and foregoing one of her remaining expenditure items. She chooses
                                                         to maintain consumption y‐2/3, purchase the expenditure in period 2
                        1                                and plans not to purchase the expenditure in period 3.




                    0.75



                     0.5      Period 1: She makes
                              one expenditure and
                              forecasts one more
                              expenditure in time
                              period 3. She plans
                    0.25      to consume y‐ 2/3 in                                                         Period 3: She foregoes
                              every period.                                                                the expenditure in period
                                                                                                           3.in order to maintain
                                                                                                           consumption of y‐2/3.

                        0

                                                     1                        2                             3
                                                                          Time period
                               Utility is defined by U= 0.5 c^0.5, with y=1.2 and ū = 0.5.
                               Total utility for a rational agent over three periods is 2.17.
                               Total utility for an inattentive agent over three periods is 2.10.




                                                Figure 1: Model Example 1


control model which we will now discuss.

Reminders

   In self-control models, individuals decide to consume more in the current period while fully

accounting for all future expenditures. That is, individuals who are present-biased plan to undersave

and or overborrow. Therefore, reminders should have no impact on the consumption decisions of

individuals with self control problems. On the other hand, if individuals have inconsistent savings and

consumption behavior because of lack of attention, we predict that reminders will increase savings.

   We model reminders as an exogenous increase in the probability that individuals attend to future
               Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                                       11




                                                                  Example 2:
                                                            High marginal utility per                            Inattentive

                  Utilityy                                       expenditure                                      Fully
                                                                                                                  attentive
                                                                                                                   tt ti
                   1.25



                       1


                                Period 1: She makes
                   0.75         one expenditure and
                                forecasts one more
                                                                                                  Period 3: She purchases
                                expenditure in time
                                                                                                  the expenditure appearing
                                period 3. She plans         Period 2: An unforecasted
                                                                                                  in period 3 and continues
                                to consume y‐ 2/3 in        expenditure arises, which she
                    0.5                                                                           to consume y‐7/6.
                                every period.               purchases. Because each
                                                            expenditure has high marginal
                                                                  y she still plans
                                                            utility,          p     to purchase
                                                                                       p
                                                            the expenditure in period 3. She
                                                            decreases consumption to y‐7/6 in
                   0.25                                     order to afford it.




                       0

                                                1                       2                         3
                                                                    Time period
                             Utility is defined by U= 0.5 c^0.5, with y=1.2 and ū = 0.8.
                             Total utility for a rational agent over three periods is 3.07.
                             Total utility for an inattentive agent over three periods is 2.95.




                                             Figure 2: Model Example 2


lumpy expenditure opportunities: θr > θnr . In turn reminders affect the expected number of future

expenditure opportunities attended to in a current period:

                                                         e t ) = θnr (T − t)
                                                    Enr (K

                                                           e t ) = θr (T − t)
                                                       Er (K




with Er (K
         e t ) > Enr (K
                      e t ). As before, individuals only plan to purchase lumpy expenditures they

foresee, and the optimal number of planned expenditures in future periods will be less than or
                 Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                              12

                                                 kt∗ ≤ K
equal to the number of expenditures attended to: e     e t . Therefore the expected number of

                                                                                        kt∗ ) > Enr (e
expenditures an individual plans to satisfy is higher in the presence of reminders: Er (e            kt∗ ).

From equation (1) we can then see that expected savings will be increasing in θ, and hence higher

                                    s∗t ) > Enr (e
after a reminder is introduced: Er (e            s∗t ).

   Note that models of temptation would only make this prediction under the additional assump-

tion that reminders affect preferences or the cost of self-control. Although this might be a natural

assumption to make for reminders or other exogenous, Pavlovian stimuli for current consumption

(Laibson 2001), there is little if any psychological or neurological evidence that such stimuli can

change the marginal utility of saving (or future consumption). We test our model using randomly

assigned reminders to save (see Section IV).

Mental Accounting

   Our model also provides a potential microfoundation for mental accounting (Thaler 1990). Con-

sumers often report that they create separate accounts (real or imagined) for different spending

categories/goals and then constrain their spending based on individual account balances (rather

than total balances). This behavior violates the standard assumption of fungibility of money (see

DellaVigna 2009 for a review of related empirical evidence).

   Our model helps explain why mental accounting might be a constrained optimum. For a limited

attention consumer, an account label increases the “salience” of a specific future lumpy expenditure

in the current period: i.e., the label may increase the likelihood of attending to the future expenditure

and optimally smoothing for it. The Appendix provides a formal model of salience and its effects

on attention. Less formally, define θrτ as the probability of attention when a reminder focuses on

a specific future expenditure occurring in period τ , so that θrτ > θr . Then the expected number

of lumpy expenditures will be higher when individuals receive a reminder that focuses on a specific

expenditure:

                                           e t ) = θr (T − t)
                                       Er (K

                                       Erτ (K
                                            e t ) = θr (T − t − 1) + θrτ
                 Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                       13

Based on equation (1), we see that when individuals forecast more expenditures because of focusing
                               e t ) > Erτ (K
on a specific expenditure (Er (K                                                           s∗t ) > Erτ (e
                                            e t )), expected savings will be higher : Erτ (e            s∗t ).

    So our model predicts that savings rates will be higher when reminders mention (or are otherwise

associated with) a particular future expenditure. We test this prediction for a group of individuals

who placed a label on their saving account ex-ante, by randomizing whether a reminder to save

mentions the individual’s chosen label. Please see Section V for the results.


Time Inconsistency

    Models based on time-inconsistent preferences do not generally predict that reminders to save will

affect behavior. Yet empirically, measures of time-inconsistency are strongly correlated with more

discretionary borrowing (Meier and Sprenger 2009) and less saving (Ashraf, Karlan and Yin 2006b).

We find that reminders increase saving more for individuals who exhibit appear time-inconsistent

ex-ante. Here we offer a way to reconcile these findings.

    A common method for measuring time-inconsistency is to give individuals multiple hypothetical

choices between a smaller payoff at time t and a larger payoff at time t+1, where the choices vary t

(e.g., t might be “today” in one choice, and “six months from now” in another choice). When the

same individual prefers the smaller payoff when t = today, but prefers the larger payoff when t is

sometime in the future, we say that person is time-inconsistent.

    But if individuals are credit constrained, such time-inconsistency may be borne of limited atten-

tion rather than preferences. To see this, consider a four-period example in our model. As in the

scenarios used to measure time-inconsistency, individuals face a choice between receiving A in period

1 and B in period 2, where A < B. In addition, individuals must choose between C in period 3

and D in period 4, where C < D. We modify our set-up by assuming that individuals are totally

credit constrained: they cannot borrow. Furthermore, individuals’ current period income y is not

enough to finance a lumpy expenditure: y < 1. If the utility from the expenditure is high enough, a

consumer will prefer the smaller payoff because it allows her to finance today’s lumpy expenditure.
                    Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                      14

Formally, she prefers the immediate payoff A if:
                                                                   
                                                      B             A−1
                                   ū ≥ u(y) + 3u y +      − 4u y +
                                                      3              4

Now consider a limited-attention consumer who does not forecast some future lumpy expenditure

opportunities. She considers the stream of consumption benefits from the payoffs C and D but does

not consider the payoffs’ implications for financing unforeseen lumpy expenditure opportunities. To

simplify, consider the case where the consumer does not forecast any of the future lumpy expenditure

opportunities. Then if the consumption stream from the higher payoff D is greater than the con-

sumption stream from the payoff C, she prefers to wait for the higher payoff. Formally, she prefers

D in this case if:
                                                      
                                                     C
                                      2u(y) + 2u y +     < 3u(y) + u(y + D)
                                                     2

      Thus, limited attention can generate time-inconsistent choices over payoffs without any instability

in preferences.

                                               III. Other Implications


Defaults

      Our model also helps interpret the effects of default options on retirement plan enrollment, organ

donation and other decisions. Once enrolled, the default can “stick” in our model because the decision

(or, more precisely, the option of undoing the decision) leaves the top of mind. In contrast, models

with temptation requires time-varying costs of self-control to get sticky defaults.


      Fertilizer Purchase

      Evidence on fertilizer purchase and use from Duflo, Kremer and Robinson (2009) suggests that

when visited by a program officer at harvest time, farmers are more likely to buy fertilizer and use

this fertilizer at planting time, even when the fertilizer is delivered immediately after harvest and

could therefore be resold before planting time. These results are consistent with a model of time

inconsistency where there are costs to selling fertilizer.9 Choosing to have fertilizer delivered at
  9
      These costs could be the costs of re-selling fertilizer or some stigma associated with selling fertilizer.
                Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                            15

harvest time could be seen as a form of commitment. However, these results are also consistent with

a model of limited attention. The event of the visit by the program officer at harvest time is highly

associated with the future expenditure of purchasing fertilizer at the next planting period. Without

this event, farmers who have just finished planting would not be as likely to attend to all of the

expenditures they would face in the next planting cycle. Once the farmers have purchased fertilizer,

the fertilizer is perfectly associated with the need to use the fertilizer in planting periods, ensuring

that fertilizer is not crowded out by other consumption between harvest and planting time. The

fertilizer program allows farmers to prepare for future fertilizer expenditures without fully attending

to them when choosing current consumption.


   Deposit Collection

   Evidence from the Philippines and Kenya suggests that providing savers with deposit collection

services increases savings and investment (Ashraf, Karlan and Yin 2006a; Dupas and Robinson 2009).

It could be that deposit collection services remove a small cost barrier to making deposits, allowing

individuals who might procrastinate to realize their intentions of saving more. However like defaults,

the “commitment” provided by deposit collection service is easy to reverse and therefore unlikely to

provide assistance to individuals who face serious self control programs. Instead, it could be that

deposit collection service brings savings to the top of mind on a regular basis, helping individuals

attend to future expenditure opportunities while making current consumption decisions.


   Reminders of Other Forms

   Zwane et al (2009) find that taking a baseline survey on aspects of household finance and health

increases the subsequent takeup of health insurance products. Relatedly, Stango and Zinman (2010)

find that taking a survey that mentions bank overdrafts decreases the subsequent likelihood of paying

an overdraft fee. This behavior could be consistent with limited attention consumers. If surveys focus

individual attention on future expenditure opportunities (health expenses and or fees), they could

increase individuals’ willingness to invest in those opportunities in the current period.
                  Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                           16

                                           IV. Experimental Design

Here we describe the setting, design, and implementation for three field experiments designed to test

two theoretical predictions 1) that reminders increase savings and 2) that reminders mentioning a

particular planned future expenditure will increase savings more than reminders that do not mention

the expenditure. Each design involves individuals responding to a marketing offer to open a goal-

oriented savings account. Linking back to the model, this implies that at the time of deciding whether

to open the account, the individual is thinking about the future expenditure, though he may forget

it in the future. In each experiment, after the account is opened, the bank then randomly assigned

clients to either receive a reminder or not. Each bank also had its personnel collect some “baseline”

data prior to making the product offer. In one of the sites (Philippines), the account includes a

commitment feature, i.e., the individual may not withdraw funds until a preset goal is reached. This

has potentially important implications for the sample frame, i.e., that only those who see value

in commitment to save open the accounts. For these products, the three banks each targeted the

working poor and lower middle class.

Experiment 1: First Valley Bank, Western Mindanao, Philippines

       First Valley Bank (FVB), a for-profit bank operating in Western Mindanao, Philippines, worked

with us to randomize reminders as part of the rollout of its Gihandom (Dream) Savings product.10

Between April and August 2007, bank marketing employees conducted door-to-door marketing visits

in rural and small urban areas and offered 10,056 individuals the opportunity to open a Gihandom

account. As part of this marketing visit, the bank employee also conducted a brief five to ten

minute survey. Bank staff used personal digital accessories (PDAs) for the baseline survey and

random assignment to treatments. Of the 10,056 individuals, 2,314 (23%) opened an account. The

reminders treatment was not part of the marketing of the account, and thus the analysis will be

conducted only on those who took-up.
  10
     The bank also randomly assigned people to: a) a low interest rate, high interest rate, or low interest rate + 1.5%
reward for goal attainment; b) whether clients were given offers for an individual account only, a joint account only, or
the choice of individual or joint account. Requiring a joint account significantly reduced take-up and lowered savings
(but the effect was not statistically significant). Neither the high interest rate nor the reward interest rate had a
statistically meaningful impact on take-up or meeting savings goals. We control for these offers in our analysis of the
effectiveness of reminders.
                  Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                       17

    Gihandom allows a client to set her own savings goal amount (US$50 or above) and goal term

(from three months to two years). Once the client opens the account with a minimum deposit of

US$2.50, there is no fixed deposit schedule to fulfill. The client receives a savings lockbox and is

encouraged at sign-up to make small deposits on daily basis. When the lockbox is full, the client

goes to the bank to deposit the money. The rules of the account differ from the commitment savings

product described in Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006b) in that money in the account can be withdrawn

only if the account reaches the goal amount and the goal term has concluded.

    Among clients with a cell phone (66% of those who opened accounts), the bank randomly as-

signed some clients to receive one “regular” text message reminder to make a deposit each month.

Among those assigned to get regular reminders, the bank also randomized whether the message used

gain or loss language with respect to “making your dream come true.” The text of the reminder

messages are provided in Table 1a.11 Table 2 reports some validation checks on the integrity of the

randomizations.12

    Clients were also randomly assigned to receive a “late” text message reminder or not, indepen-

dently of their assignment to receive a regular reminder. The late text reminder was only sent if the

client did not make any deposit in a given month. Similar to the regular text message reminders,

late text messages reminders were also randomized to gain or loss frame language. If the client was

assigned to receive both a regular text reminder and a late text reminder, then client always received

either gain frame for both, or loss frame for both. The text of the late reminders is included in Table

1a. Table 2 shows checks on the integrity of the randomization.13

Experiment 2: Bank of Ica, Ica, Peru

    In Peru, the Government owned bank Caja de Ica worked with us to randomize reminders as

part of the rollout of a new commitment savings product called Plan Ahorro (“Saving Plan”). The
  11
     A fourth group was randomly assigned to deposit collection service. The deposit collection was not widely used,
and thus the bank stopped providing the service. We include controls for individuals who were originally assigned to
receive deposit collection.
  12
     In the Philippines, we have income data based on individual reports about their income in the past seven days. A
wealth index was constructed from a range of survey variables including income, whether the individual owns a home,
water source, roof, and whether they have a shared pipe for water.
  13
     The wealth variable in Peru is constructed using the IRIS poverty score card in Peru, where where “wealthy” =
above the poverty line.
                  Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                         18

bank marketed the product on television and radio, and clients signed up over the course of several

months. When opening an account, Plan Ahorro clients selected a commitment period (either 6

months or 12 months), a minimum amount to deposit each month, and a goal/account label from 14

pre-established categories (these savings goals appear in Appendix Table 1). Clients were required

to make their planned deposit within ten days of each monthly due date in order to meet their

commitment. Clients who completed their commitment were rewarded with an annualized interest

rate of 8% per annum rather than the normal 4% per annum.

    As in our other sites, the bank randomly assigned reminders to clients after they signed up for the

product. The bank sent letters because low cell phone prevalence made text messages impractical.

As in the Philippines, the bank did independent randomizations for “regular” and “late” reminders,

which were jointly to a gain or a loss frame.14 Table 1b shows the text of the different reminder

letters.

    Each month, the bank sent clients assigned to the regular reminder group a letter seven days

before the due date for that month’s scheduled deposit. As in the Philippines, clients assigned to

the late reminder group got a letter only if they were late (i.e., if they still had not made a deposit

three days after their scheduled deposit date).15

    The bank implemented two additional treatments designed to increase the salience of the client’s

specific, labeled goal. One treatment randomly assigned some in the reminder group to get a letter

that focused on their particular goal (in addition to containing the boilerplate reminder content, see

Table 1b). Another treatment independently and randomly assigned the gift clients received upon

opening the account: a jigsaw puzzle of their goal, a photo of their goal, or a pen. Those in the

jigsaw puzzle group received a piece of the puzzle after each deposit.



   14
      The bank also randomly assigned clients to receive a message on each month’s deposit slip (gain frame vs loss
frame; a mention of goal versus no mention of goal, or control). The bank also assigned some individuals to receive a
reminder message written by the bank and another group to receive a reminder message written in an individual’s own
hand. These treatments did not impact the amount that individuals saved.
   15
      Clients assigned to receive late reminders were randomly assigned to receive their late reminder if (a) they were
late for any scheduled deposit, (b) they were late for any of the first four scheduled deposits, and c) they were late
for any of the fifth or later scheduled deposits.These timing treatments had imprecisely estimated and statistically
insignificant effects on savings.
                  Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                        19

Experiment 3: Ecofuturo Bank, Bolivia

       In Bolivia, Ecofuturo, a for-profit bank, worked with us to implement a text message reminder

program as part of its established, popular commitment savings product Ecoaguinaldo. “Aguinaldo”

is the year-end bonus, equal to one month’s pay, that employers are required to pay employees in

Bolivia. Ecofuturo markets Ecoaguinaldo as a product designed to help its clients, many of whom

are self-employed, save up all year for their own year-end payout. The product was marketed for

three months between January and March on television and radio. Clients were required to sign up

for the product by March 31, and made savings deposits from the time of their enrollment until the

December payout date.

       At sign-up, clients chose a monthly minimum deposit amount (with a floor of US$1.41), and the

bank offered a set of incentives for making the pledged, minimum monthly deposits. Clients making

all of their pledged monthly deposits received a bonus interest rate of 6% for their first ten months

following enrollment in the program (compared to a regular interest rate of 3%) as well as free life

and accident insurance.16 Clients missing one deposit, or withdrawing money before the payout date,

forfeited the higher interest rate and had their insurance policies canceled.

       Clients with a cell phone were randomly assigned to receive text message reminders or not.17

Unlike the other sites, clients did not receive late reminders. The bank began sending reminders to a

randomly selected subset of the reminder group in May 2008, and continued with the entire sample

from June 2008 through November 2008. In the first two months of the program following May 2008

all of the reminder clients received text message reminders, regardless of whether they had already

made a deposit. In the remaining four months of the program, only clients who had not yet made a

deposit received a text message reminder.18

       Clients in the treatment group were further divided into one of four reminder content sub-

treatments. Some messages mentioned the insurance incentive, while others did not. Reminders
  16
     Ecofuturo paid the monthly premiums of $0.13 and $0.32 on policies that paid $214 in the event of death and $285
in the event of debilitating injury.
  17
     Some individuals had multiple accounts. Our analysis focuses on the total saved in all accounts. We include
controls for the number of accounts that individuals have.
  18
     In our analysis, these clients are still considered to be in the text message treatment group since they received
messages in the first months of the program.
                   Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                           20

were also randomized to gain or loss frames. Table 1c shows the different scripts of the reminders.

                                                     V. Results

Overall Effect of Reminders on Saving

      One of the two key testable predictions of our model is that reminders will increase savings. Our

primary, and simplest, test of this prediction is to use data from all three experiments to identify

the effect of getting any reminder.


                                              Yi = α + βRi + γZi + εi                                  (2)


We measure Y, savings by client i, two different ways: the log of (1+the total amount saved in the

bank account by the end of the commitment period),19 or an indicator for whether the client saved

her targeted amount by the end of commitment period. R is an indicator that equals 1 if the bank

randomly assigned the client to receive any reminder. Z is a vector of randomization conditions,

other treatment assignments, and country fixed effects. We also provide specifications that show

robustness to including X, a vector of the client’s baseline characteristics. We report OLS estimates

in the main tables; the results are robust to using probit for the binary measure of saving (see

Appendix Tables 2a and 2b).

      Table 3 Panel A presents estimates of equation (2).           Clients who received monthly reminders

saved 6% more than individuals who did not, with a p-value of 0.079 or 0.065, depending on whether

we include client baseline covariates (Columns 1 and 2). Reminders also made clients 3 percentage

points more likely to save their targeted amount (“reach savings goal” below) by the end of the

commitment period. Table 3 Panel B presents results separately for each experiment. We do not

find any evidence that reminders have significantly different effects across settings, although these

estimates are a bit imprecise: the confidence intervals do not rule out economically meaningful

differences across the three settings.

The Salience of Specific Expenditures

      Our model also predicts that reminders which are highly associated with a particular future
 19
      2,592 clients had made no deposits by the end of the study.
                  Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                       21

lumpy expenditure will increase savings. We can test this prediction in Peru, our only setting where

clients labeled their savings account with a specific future expenditure.

    Table 4 Panel A shows support for this prediction. Reminders that mentioned the specific ex-

penditure increased savings by an estimated 16% relative to no reminder, while reminders that did

not mention the specific expenditure had no effect (Column 1). The difference between these two

reminder coefficients is significant. In contrast, we do not find significant effects, or a significant

difference between the effects, of the two types of reminders on goal attainment (Column 2).


    Salience, Mental Accounting, and Timing

    Table 4 Panel B sheds some further light on the relationship between mental accounting (in the

form of the specific expenditure clients use to label their accounts in Peru), limited attention, and the

timing of shocks to attention. Recall that, in addition to reminders, the bank in Peru also randomly

and independently assigned clients to a second treatment that was designed to increase the salience

of the client’s specific future expenditure.Clients in the control group received a pen from the bank,

at account opening. Clients in the treatment group were randomly received either a photograph of

the future expenditure they used to label the account, or a piece of a jigsaw puzzle depicting the

future expenditure (an example of a photograph a goal is included in Appendix Figure 2).20 Neither

of these treatments significantly affected savings. Furthermore, these treatments were significantly

less likely to increase savings than the expenditure specific reminders.21

    Note that the timing of these treatments differs from the reminders. Clients got photos at account

opening. Clients got a puzzle piece after making a deposit. Clients got reminders before making a

deposit.

    The nature of the treatments differs as well. The photo and puzzles reinforce the client’s goal

(the specific expenditure), but not a means toward achieving a goal (making the next deposit).

The reminders are focused on the means (making a deposit), and the most effective reminders also
  20
     Most pictures were self explanatory. When individuals were saving for an “emergency,” the picture of their goal
was a hospital emergency room. For individuals saving for the goal “other,” the picture of their goal was the logo of
the “Plan Ahorro” savings account.
  21
     The comparison of expenditure specific reminder to puzzle has F-statistic = 8.10 and the comparison of the
expenditure specific reminder and photo treatment has F-statistic = 10.27.
                Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                               22

mention the goal.

   The results here suggest that both the timing and content can impact the effectiveness of shocks

to attention. We discuss some implications for further research in the conclusion.


Alternative Explanations

   Perhaps reminders impact saving because they are a signal from the bank that saving is important,

or that the bank values the client’s relationship? The regular communication in the form of a

reminder may also have increased clients’ trust of the bank. These alternatives to limited attention

could explain the main effect of reminders, but not the differential impact of reminders that mention

the client’s goal. Nor do these alternatives explain why (well-timed) reminders are more effective

than gifts like the photo, puzzle, or pen (although naturally these alternative treatments may simply

have been ineffective, i.e., they did not successfully act as a signal or generate higher levels of trust).

   Another explanation for the effectiveness of reminders would be a two part argument: individuals

are not merely hyperbolic or consistent as is traditionally modeled (Laibson 1997; O’Donoghue

and Rabin 1999), but stochastically hyperbolic, and that reminders lower the probability of being

hyperbolic in a given time period. The mechanism is not so different from our model here, in

that the reminder “works” by focusing attention on the future, in the case of attention by simply

incorporating the future expenditure into the current consumption and savings decision, and in

the case of hyperbolic preference by changing the discount rate which drives the choice between

consumption and savings.

Heterogeneity in the Effectiveness of Reminders

   As shown in Section II, our model also predicts that reminders will be especially effective on

individuals who appear time-inconsistent, if time-inconsistency is due to the interaction of limited

attention and liquidity constraints rather than time preferences that are present-biased. Our entire

sample is plausibly credit constrained, so we test this prediction by simply estimating the interaction

between reminders and a measure of time-inconsistency obtained in the Philippines baseline survey.

Table 2 shows that 16% of the Philippines sample made time-inconsistent choices when presented

with the hypothetical: “Would you prefer to receive P200 (˜=$4 USD) guaranteed today, or P300
               Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                            23

(˜=$6 USD) guaranteed in 1 month?” and “Would you prefer to receive P200 guaranteed in 6 months,

or P300 guaranteed in 7 months?”

   Table 5 shows some support for the prediction that reminders will be more effective on time-

inconsistent individuals. This holds for savings balances (a 47% increase, with a p-value of 0.07),

and we also find a large and positive point estimate on savings goal attainment (7 percentage points,

or 35%), although that treatment effect is not significantly different from zero.

Other Account features

   Appendix Table 3 presents results from other treatments with weaker links to the theory. Panel

A shows that reminders in Bolivia increased savings when they mentioned the account’s financial

incentive (along with the “year-end payout” used to frame the account). Reminders that do not

include this financial incentive do not significantly impact savings. We do not find strong evidence of

differential effects of loss vs. gain-framed reminder messages (Panel B), of late vs. regular reminders

(Panel C), or of client-written vs. bank-written reminders (Panel D).

Cost Effectiveness of Reminders

   The variable cost of sending direct mail reminders is nontrivial (almost a dollar in the Peru

context). Given our estimated treatment effect (a 6% increase in bank balances) and the small

average balances ($100 or less), mailing reminders is not cost-effective for banks under reasonable

assumptions about rates of return on deposited funds. Indeed the one bank here that experimented

with mailing reminders discontinued them after the study. However, sending reminders by text

message has near zero marginal cost. And indeed Ecofuturo in Bolivia has continued sending the

reminders. Direct mail costs and the recent emergence of low-cost text messaging may help explain

why most banks have not (yet) offered reminders to save.

                                          VI. Conclusion

We develop and test a model of savings and consumption behavior when individuals have limited

attention. Our model predicts that individuals will undersave when they are inattentive to some

future expenditures. The model generates several phenomena that overlap with other behavioral

models, including high levels of debt relative to savings, mental accounting, and sticky defaults. Our
                Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                          24

model also makes the unique predictions that reminders to save will increase savings, that reminders

mentioning a particular future expenditure will be especially effective, and that reminders will be

especially effective on time-inconsistent individuals (given, as we show, that time-inconsistency can

be driven by limited attention and credit constraints rather time preference reversals per se). We

find support for these predictions in field experiments with three banks in the Philippines. These

findings raise several issues for further research.

   One key question going forward is the relationship between present-biased attention and present-

biased preferences. Are both biases prevalent, and correlated with each other? Or does one dominate

decision making (in certain domains)? Our results open up the possibility that phenomena attributed

to unstable time preference may in fact be due to limited attention, but more work is needed to

address this possibility rigorously.

   A closely related issue is measuring a broader set of outcomes that might be affected by “treat-

ments” for limited attention. If limited attention takes particular forms, or if consumers have ad-

ditional behavioral biases, then attention-getting treatments could have countervailing and even

perverse effects. Reminders from one bank may crowd-out savings in other instruments, or even

induce (expensive) borrowing to offset lost consumption, thereby reducing savings on net.


   Understanding the market for attention is critical. For example, only one of the banks that

implemented reminders in this study has continued reminding its clients to save. Might the market

under-supply reminders, particularly if consumers are naive about their limited attention? Do lenders

exploit attentional failures by providing financing “on-demand,” that is tied to specific expenditures

(as is common in durables financing), and comes with built-in reminders (e.g., required monthly

payments)?

   Deriving the optimal content and timing of attention treatments also offers rich possibilities for

future work. Our results hint that reminders are most effective when they focus on both a particular

future goal set by the client (e.g., a future expenditure to be purchased with a targeted savings

amount), and on the means toward achieving that goal (making the next deposit). But our results

suggests that the relationships between ends, means, and attention are complex; e.g., in the one site
               Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                          25

where the bank (and not the client) labeled the account with a homogeneous goal– the year-end

payout in Bolivia– reminders were only effective when they mentioned financial incentives for goal

attainment.

   We also speculate that the frequency and source of attention shocks plays an important role.

Attention may interact with habit formation; e.g., if reminders to save induce consumers to adopt

pro-savings routines. Conversely, some consumers may eventually “tune out” repeated reminders.

   These dynamics suggest that reminders or other attention shocks may be most (cost-)effective

when they focus on inducing a one-time change with “sticky” consequences (e.g., 401k enrollment,

fertilizer prepayment, or automatic payment of annual car registration fees). Ultimately, the welfare

implications of limited attention presumably depend not only on how a consumer responds to a given

attention shock, but on how shocks are generated (endogenously) and interact. It should be fruitful

to build bridges between models like ours, and models where firms (and other agents) compete for

consumer attention.
                   Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                         26

                                                        Appendix

Formal Definition of Salience

       The probability that individuals attend to future expenditures may depend on events that occur

in the current period. For example, a reminder to save for school fees in each period will make people

more likely to attend to the opportunity to pay for school fees when they occur. Other events may

have a weaker association with future opportunities. For example, the event of meeting the parents

of your daughter’s fiance may or may not be associated with the future opportunity of financing your

daughter’s wedding.

       In order to consider the role of events, we assume that in each period t, there is a set of events

that may occur:

                                                    εt = {et1 , . . . , etK }

       Events occurring in period t have some association with opportunities that occur in the future

(periods τ > t). The strength of the association between an event in the current period t and an

opportunity in a future period τ is denoted by the parameter akτ ≥ 0. The probability of attention

in period t an opportunity that will occur in period τ is

                                                                  K
                                                                  X
                                              θτt   = F (m +            akτ etk )
                                                                  k=1

where m represents a baseline probability of attention to future opportunities and events associated

with future opportunities increase the probability of attending to future opportunities. F represents

a cumulative density function such that 0 <= F (x) < 1 and F is increasing in x. We can use this

framework of events and associations to consider a more formal definition of salience.22

       The salience of a future expenditure in the current period is the average association of all current

events with that future opportunity. The salience of an event occurring in τ to an individual in
  22
   In our model, events occurring in the present can increase the salience of future expenditure opportunities in a
way that is related to the ability of current events to increase recall of the past as proposed by Mullainathan’s (1998)
model of memory.
               Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                            27

period t can be represented as
                                                  K
                                                                  !
                                                  X
                                        Sτt   =         akτ etk       /K
                                                  k=1

Individuals are more likely to attend to future opportunities that are highly associated with current

events or that are associated with many events in the present. In turn, individuals are more likely

to attend to opportunities in the future that have high salience today. That is because increasing

the salience of a future opportunity in the current period will increase the probability of attention

to that opportunity today. Since the average number of expenditures an individual attends to when

planning for the future increases in θ (as can be seen in equation (1)), expected savings will increase

as the salience of future opportunities increases.
               Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                        28

                                          References

 [1] Armstrong, A., Watson, A. Makredes, M., Frangos, J., Kimball, A., and Kvedar, J. (2009),

    “Text-Message Reminders to Improve Sunscreen Use: A Randomized, Controlled Trial Using

    Electronic Monitoring,” Arch Dermatol, 145(11), 1230-1236.

 [2] Ananth, B., Karlan, D., Mullainathan, S. (2007), “Microentrepreneurs and Their Money: Three

    Anomalies,” Working paper.

 [3] Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, Yin, W. (2006a), “Deposit Collectors,” Advances in Economic Analysis

    & Policy, 6 Article 5.

 [4] Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, Yin, W. (2006b), “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a Com-

    mitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2), 673-697.

 [5] Ball, L., Mankiw, G. and Reis, R. (2005), “Monetary Policy for Inattentive Economies,” Journal

    of Monetary Economics, 52(4), 703-725.

 [6] Banerjee, A. and Mullainathan, S. (2008), “Limited Attention and Income Distribution,” Amer-

    ican Economic Review, 489-93.

 [7] Banerjee, A., Mullainathan, S. (2009), “The Shape of Temptation: Implications for the Eco-

    nomic Lives of the Poor” working paper.

 [8] Benartzi, S. and Thaler, R. (2004), “Save More Tomorrow (TM): Using Behavioral Economics

    to Increase Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(S1), S164-S187.

 [9] Beshears, J., Choi, J., Laibson D., and Madrian, B. (2006), “The Importance of Default Options

    for Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence from the United States,” NBER Chapters, in: Social

    Security Policy in a Changing Environment, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[10] Buehler, R., Griffin, D., and Ross, M. (2002), “Inside the Planning Fallacy: The Causes and

    Consequences of Optimistic Time Predictions,” In T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, and D. Kahneman

    (Eds.), Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, 250-270. Cambridge, UK:

    Cambridge University Press.
               Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                        29

[11] Chetty, R., Looney, A. and Kroft, K. (2009), “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,”

    American Economic Review, 99(4), 1145-77.

[12] Choi, J., D. Laibson, B. Madrian and A. Metrick (2004), “For Better or For Worse: Default

    Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior,” Perspectives in the Economics of Aging, D. Wise. Chicago,

    University of Chicago Press, 81-121.

[13] Choi, J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. , Metrick, A. (2005), “Saving for Retirement on the Path of

    Least Resistance,” in E. McCaffrey and J. Slemrod, eds., Behavioral Public Finance, 2005.

[14] DellaVigna, S. (2009), “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from The Field,” Journal of

    Economic Literature, 47, 315-372.

[15] Duflo, E. Kremer, M., Robinson, J. , (2009), “Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Evidence from

    Kenya,” Working paper.

[16] Dupas, P. , Robinson, J. (2009), “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development: Evi-

    dence from a Field Experiment in Kenya,” NBER Working Papers 14693, National Bureau of

    Economic Research, Inc.

[17] Fudenberg, D. and Levine, D. (2006), “A Dual Self Model of Impulse Control,” American

    Economic Review, 96(5), 1449-1476.

[18] Gabaix, X. and Laibson, D. (2006), “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information

    Suppression in Competitive Markets,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,121(2), 505-540.

[19] Gul, F. and Pesendorfer, W. (2004), “Self-Control and the Theory of Consumption,” Economet-

    rica, 72(1), 119-158.

[20] Krishna S., Austin Boren S., Balas E., (2009), “Healthcare via Cell Phones: A Systematic

    Review,” Telemedicine and e-Health, 15(3), 231–40.

[21] Laibson, D. (1997), ”Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-

    nomics, 112, 443-477.
               Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                        30

[22] Laibson, D. (2001), ”A Cue-Theory of Consumption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116,

    81-119.

[23] Laibson, D., Repetto, A., Tobacman, J. (2007), “Estimating Discount Functions with Consump-

    tion Choices over the Lifecycle,” NBER Working Papers 13314.

[24] Macharia W., Leon G., Rowe B., Stephenson B., and Haynes R. (1992), “An Overview of

    Interventions to Improve Compliance with Appointment Keeping for Medical Services,” Journal

    of the American Medical Association, 267, 1813-1817.

[25] Madrian, B. and Shea, D. (2001), “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation

    and Savings Behavior,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,116(4), 1149-1187.

[26] Mankiw, G. and Reis, R. (2002), “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to

    Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4) 1295-

    1328.

[27] Meier, S., and Sprenger, C. (2009), “Discounting and Defaulting: Evidence from Time Preference

    Experiments and Administrative Credit Data,” working paper.

[28] Miloh T., Annunziato R., Arnon R., Warshaw, J., Parkar, S., Suchy, F., Iyer, K. and Kerkar, N.

    (2009), “Improved Adherence and Outcomes for Pediatric Liver Transplant Recipients by Using

    Text Messaging,” Pediatrics, 124(5), 844-50.

[29] Mullainathan, S. (2002), “A Memory-Based Model Of Bounded Rationality,” The Quarterly

    Journal of Economics, 117(3), 735-774.

[30] O’Donoghue, T. and Rabin, M. (1999), “Doing it Now or Doing it Later,” American Economic

    Review, 89(1), 103-124.

[31] Reis, R. (2006), “Inattentive Consumers,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(8), 1761-1800.

[32] Schwartzstein, J. (2009), “Selective Attention and Learning,” Unpublished.
               Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                            31

[33] Sims, Christopher A. (1998), “Stickiness,” Carnegie–Rochester Conference Series on Public

    Policy, 49 317-356.

[34] Sims, Christopher A. (2003), “Implications of Rational Inattention,” Journal of Monetary Eco-

    nomics, 50(3), 665-690.

[35] van Dulmen, S., Sluijs, E., van Dijk, L., de Ridder, D., Heerdink, R. and Bensing, J. (2007), “Pa-

    tient Adherence to Medical Treatment: A Review of Reviews,” BMC Health Services Research,

    7:55.

[36] Stango, V. and Zinman, J. (2010), “Limited and Varying Consumer Attention: Evidence from

    Shocks to the Salience of Penalty Fees,” working paper.

[37] Thaler, R. (1990), “Saving, Fungibility and Mental Accounts,” Journal of Economic Perspec-

    tives, 4, 193-205.

[38] Zwane, A., Zinman, J., Van Dusen, E. Pariente, W., Null, C., Miguel, E., Kremer, M., Karlan,

    D., Hornbeck, R., Giné, X., Duflo, E., Devoto, F., Crepon, B., and Banerjee, A. (2009), “The

    Risk of Asking: Being Surveyed Can Affect Later Behavior,” working paper.
Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving        33




Appendix Figure 1: Free Reminder Service Offered at Boston DMV
Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving   34

       Appendix Figure 2: Example of Photograph of Goal
       Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                              35




                         Table 1a: Message Treatments
                                  Philippines
          Timing       Frame                               Message
                                Frequent deposit into the Gihandom Savings account will
                      Gain      make your dream come true. A reminder from 1st Valley
                                Bank.
Regular
                                If you don't frequently deposit into the Gihandom Savings
                      Loss      account, your dream will not come true. A reminder from 1st
                                Valley Bank
                                You didn't deposit in the 1st Valley Gihandom account for
                      Gain      30 days. Don't forget to deposit, so you can reach your
                                savings goal, make your dream come true!
Late
                                You didn't deposit in the 1st Valley Gihandom account for
                      Loss      30 days. If you forget to deposit, you cannot reach your
                                savings goal and make your dream come true.
       Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                       36




                                   Table 1b: Message Treatments
                                                 Peru
Timing          Message                 Focus             Frame                Message
                                                                  Regular + If you make all of
                                                                  your deposits, you will receive a
                                                        Gain
                                                                  total of [Amount] in additional
                                   Standard
                                                                  interest rate incentive!
                                   Reminder                       Regular + If you miss a
                                                                  payment, you will lose a total of
                                                        Loss
                                                                  [Amount] in additional interest
        We would like to                                          rate incentive!
        remind you that your                                      Regular + If you make all of
        next Plan Ahorro                                          your deposits, you will receive a
Regular
        deposit should be                                         total of [Amount] in additional
                                                        Gain
        made on [Date].                                           interest rate incentive that you
                                   Specific                       will be able to use to reach your
                                   Expenditure                    savings goal of [Goal]!
                                   Reminder                       Regular + If you miss a
                                                                  payment, you will lose a total of
                                                                  [Amount] in additional interest
                                                        Loss
                                                                  rate incentive that you will be
                                                                  able to use to reach your savings
                                                                  goal of [Goal]!
                                                                  Late + If you make all of your
                                                                  deposits, you will receive a total
                                                        Gain
                                                                  of [Amount] in additional
                                   Standard                       interest rate incentive!
                                   Reminder                       Late + If you miss a payment,
                                                                  you will lose a total of [Amount]
          We would like to                              Loss
                                                                  in additional interest rate
          remind you that your                                    incentive!
          Plan Ahorro deposit                                     Late + If you make all of your
          should have be made                                     deposits, you will receive a total
Late      on [Date]. If you wish                                  of [Amount] in additional
          to continue in Plan                           Gain      interest rate incentive that you
          Ahorro you should        Specific                       will be able to use to reach your
          make your deposit as                                    savings goal of [Goal]!
          soon as possible.        Expenditure
                                   Reminder                       Late + If you miss a payment,
                                                                  you will lose a total of [Amount]
                                                                  in additional interest rate
                                                        Loss
                                                                  incentive that you will be able to
                                                                  use to reach your savings goal of
                                                                  [Goal]!
    Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                               37




                       Table 1c: Message Treatments
                                  Bolivia
           Focus      Frame                             Message
                              Ecofuturo reminds you: Maintain your Ecoaguinaldo life
                     Gain     insurance! Don’t forget your deposit this month! You will
                              keep your insurance by making all of your deposits on time.
Incentive Reminder            Ecofuturo reminds you: Don’t lose your Ecoaguinaldo life
                              insurance! Don’t forget your deposit this month! You will
                     Loss
                              lose your insurance if you don’t make all your deposits on
                              time.
                              Ecofuturo reminds you: Your Ecoaguinaldo is within reach!
                     Gain     Don’t forget your deposit this month! You will be one step
                              closer to your savings goal.
Reminder                      Ecofuturo reminds you: Don’t fail to reach your
                              Ecoaguinaldo! Don’t forget you deposit this month! If you
                     Loss
                              don’t make your deposit you increase the chance of not
                              reaching your savings goal.
                                                                       Table 2: Summary Statistics from Baseline Survey and Orthogonality Verification
                                                              Pooled Sample                                     Peru                                    Bolivia                              Philippines
                                                                            P-value from F-                           P-value from F-                           P-value from F-                            P-value from F-
                                                                               Test from                                  Test from                                Test from                                   Test from
                                                                             regression of                              regression of                            regression of                               regression of
                                                                           characteristic on                          characteristic on                          characteristic                            characteristic on
Panel A: Demographic Characteristics                 Mean           Obs        treatments       Mean        Obs          treatments        Mean        Obs       on treatments      Mean         Obs          treatments
  Female, Proportion                                 0.644         13974          0.660         0.717       2777            0.972          0.594       9650          0.295          0.827        1547            0.103
                                                    (0.479)                                    (0.450)                                    (0.491)                                  (0.379)
  Age                                               34.799         13971          0.407        38.163       2775            0.297         34.191       9652          0.823         32.553        1544           0.452
                                                   (12.260)                                   (13.667)                                   (11.929)                                 (10.355)
  Completed High School, Proportion                  0.438         14166          0.054         0.749       2968            0.015          0.305       9652          0.892          0.675        1546           0.771
                                                    (0.496)                                    (0.434)                                    (0.460)                                  (0.469)
  Wealthy                                            0.701          4515          0.602         0.663       2968            0.689                                                   0.775        1547           0.319
                                                    (0.458)                                    (0.473)                                                                             (0.418)
  Married, Proportion                                0.209         11185          0.973                                                    0.140       9638          0.951          0.636        1547           0.822
                                                    (0.406)                                                                               (0.347)                                  (0.481)
  Has Saved Formally Before                          0.196         11199          0.791                                                    0.154       9652          0.978          0.458        1547           0.378
                                                    (0.397)                                                                               (0.361)                                  (0.498)
  Weekly Income                                     37.818          1547          0.335                                                                                            37.818        1547           0.335
                                                   (55.679)                                                                                                                       (55.679)
  Hyperbolic Discounting = 1                         0.156         1547          0.891                                                                                              0.156        1547           0.891
                                                    (0.363)                                                                                                                        (0.363)
  Did Not Save As Much As I Want = 1                 0.728         1506          0.672                                                                                              0.728        1506           0.672
                                                    (0.445)                                                                                                                        (0.445)
  Spent Before I Saved = 1                           0.251         1506          0.754                                                                                              0.251        1506           0.754
                                                    (0.434)                                                                                                                        (0.434)
Panel B: Marketing Offers (Philippines Only)
  Low Interest Rate                                                                                                                                                                0.318           1547         0.838
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.466)
  High Interest Rate                                                                                                                                                               0.334           1547         0.433
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.472)
  Reward Interest Rate                                                                                                                                                             0.348           1547         0.672
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.476)
  Single Account                                                                                                                                                                   0.361           1547         0.989
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.480)
  Joint Account                                                                                                                                                                    0.295           1547         0.761
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.456)
  Joint/Single Account                                                                                                                                                             0.345           1547         0.578
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.475)
  Deposit Collection                                                                                                                                                               0.255           1547         0.000
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.436)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving




Note: Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        38
                                         Table 3: Effect of Any Reminder, by country
                                                       Log (Amount saved by Goal
                                                                 Date+1)                 Reached Savings Goal By Goal Date
Panel A: Pooled Sample
    Pooled Sample                                       0.063*              0.065*            0.031***           0.031***
                                                        (0.036)             (0.035)            (0.009)            (0.009)
    Baseline Controls                                     No                  Yes                No                 Yes
    Mean of Dep Var                                      3.178               3.178              0.549              0.549
    N                                                    14167               14167              14167              14167
Panel B: Countries
    Peru (n = 2,968)                                     0.036               0.027              0.034              0.031
                                                        (0.058)             (0.058)            (0.027)            (0.027)
     Bolivia (n = 9,652)                                 0.059               0.059            0.032***           0.032***
                                                        (0.042)             (0.041)            (0.010)            (0.010)
     Philippines (n = 1,547)                             0.151              0.187*              0.013              0.017
                                                        (0.104)             (0.105)            (0.027)            (0.027)

     Baseline Controls                                    No                 Yes                No                  Yes
     Mean of Dep Var                                     3.178              3.178              0.549               0.549
     N                                                   14167              14167              14167               14167
     P-value from f-test of joint significance of        0.218              0.142              0.007               0.006
     country-level reminder effect


* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Reminder messages sent by text message in
Bolivia and Philippines. Reminder message sent by mail in Peru. All regressions include controls for marketing offers in the
Philippines (interest rate, joint/single account, deposit collection), number of accounts per individual (Bolivia), and country
fixed effects. Covariate controls include the full set household demographics listed in Table 1 as control variables.
                                                                                                                                  Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving
                                                                                                                                           39
                        Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving                                                                                           40




                                                     Table 4: Focus on Specific Expenditures (Peru Sample Only)
                                                                     Log (Amount saved by Goal Date+1)                       Reached Savings Goal By Goal Date
  Panel A: Specific Expenditure Focused
     Standard Reminder                                                  -0.007                      -0.008                      0.028                   0.027
                                                                        (0.059)                     (0.059)                    (0.027)                 (0.027)
     Specific Expenditure Focused Reminder                             0.155***                    0.153***                     0.024                   0.024
                                                                        (0.041)                     (0.041)                    (0.020)                 (0.020)

     Baseline Controls                                                    No                         Yes                         No                      Yes
     Mean of Dependent Variable                                          4.076                      4.076                       0.679                   0.679
     N                                                                   2968                       2968                        2968                    2968
  Panel B: Effect of Puzzle intervention and Photo Intervention
     Puzzle of Goal                                                     -0.018                     -0.013                       0.021                   0.019
                                                                        (0.042)                    (0.042)                     (0.021)                 (0.021)
     Photo of Goal                                                      -0.043                     -0.040                       0.003                   0.001
                                                                        (0.046)                    (0.046)                     (0.022)                 (0.022)

     Baseline Controls                                                    No                         Yes                         No                      Yes
     Mean of Dependent Variable                                          4.076                      4.076                       0.679                   0.679
     N                                                                   2968                       2968                        2968                    2968
  * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Reminder messages sent by text message in Bolivia and Philippines. Reminder
  message sent by mail in Peru. All regressions include controls for marketing offers in the Philippines (interest rate, joint/single account, deposit collection),
  number of accounts per individual (Bolivia), and country fixed effects. Omitted variable in Panel A is "no reminder." Omitted variable in Panel B is receiving a
  pen.




                                                         Table 5: Time Inconsistency (Philippines Sample Only)

                                                                                  Log (Amount saved by Goal Date+1)                Reached Savings Goal By Goal Date
Panel A: Time Inconsistency
   Any Reminder Message                                                      0.151        0.087        0.180*       0.106         0.013     0.004      0.018      0.006
                                                                            (0.104)      (0.113)       (0.106)     (0.115)       (0.027)   (0.030)    (0.027)    (0.030)
    Time Inconsistent                                                                    -0.380*                    -0.341                  -0.070                -0.061
                                                                                         (0.226)                   (0.234)                 (0.060)               (0.064)
    Interaction: Any Reminder * Time Inconsistent                                        0.472*                    0.548**                  0.070                 0.087
                                                                                         (0.259)                   (0.265)                 (0.067)               (0.071)

    Baseline Controls                                                         No           No            Yes          Yes         No        No         Yes        Yes
    Mean of Dependent Variable                                               2.531        2.531         2.531        2.531       0.204     0.204      0.204      0.204
    N                                                                        1547         1547          1547         1547        1547      1547       1547       1547

* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Reminder messages sent by text message. Regressions include controls for marketing offers in
the Philippines (interest rate, joint/single account, deposit collection). Omitted variable is "no reminder."
