                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    LAW AND FINANCE C. 1900

                                            Aldo Musacchio

                                         Working Paper 16216
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16216


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2010




The author would like to thank for their comments and suggestions Stefano Battilossi, Dan Bogart,
Mike Bordo, Les Hannah, Pierre-Cyrille Hautcoeur, Lakshmi Iyer, Noel Maurer, Mary O’Sullivan,
Hugh Rockoff, Dick Sylla, Gail Triner, Eugene White, and seminar participants at Universidad Carlos
III, in Madrid, ITAM, Mexico City, Rutgers, and of the panel “The Micro-structure, Regulation and
Development of Stock Markets Around The World” in the XVth World Economic History Conference,
Utrecht, 2009. Les Hannah, Noel Maurer, and Lyndon Moore shared their data with me and helped
me to compile some of the data presented in this paper. Thanks to Elisabeth Koll for her help with
Chinese laws. Research assistance for this project was ably provided by Claire Gilbert and Jonathan
Selter. All errors are the responsibility of the author. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Aldo Musacchio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Law and Finance c. 1900
Aldo Musacchio
NBER Working Paper No. 16216
July 2010
JEL No. G3,G33,K22,N20

                                                 ABSTRACT

How persistent are the effects of legal institutions adopted or inherited in the distant past? A substantial
literature argues that legal origins have persistent effects that explain clear differences in investor protections
and financial development around the world today (La Porta et al, 1998, 1999 and passim). This paper
examines the persistence of the effects of legal origins by examining new estimates of different indicators
of financial development in more than 20 countries in 1900 and 1913. The evidence presented does
not yield robust results that can sustain the hypothesis of persistence effects of legal origin, but it is
not powerful enough to reject it either. Then the paper examines if there were systematic differences
in the extent of investor protections across countries, since that is the main channel through which
legal origin affects financial development, and shows that all the evidence supports the idea of relative
convergence in corporate governance practices across legal families circa 1900. The paper concludes
that, if the evidence presented is representative, the variation observed in financial development around
the world today is likely a product of events of the twentieth century rather than a consequence of
long-term (and persistent) differences occasioned by legal traditions.


Aldo Musacchio
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 279
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
amusacchio@hbs.edu
Introduction
       Over the past few years, a series of papers published in top journals in economics and
finance find institutions to be powerful predictors of economic and financial development that
exert persistent effects over time (e.g., Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001, 2005; Banerjee
and Iyer, 2005; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny—LLSV hereafter—1997, 1998,
2000; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer—LLS hereafter—1999, 2008). The power of these
findings derives from a strong correlation between exogenous institutions, or the variables used
to instrument for these institutions, and current institutions that are highly correlated with
economic and financial development today. These statistical findings are given economic
significance by building a theory of how institutions adopted or inherited in the distant past
have exerted persistent effects over time. But because few studies have explored whether
correlations between institutions and economic and financial outcomes hold in the past, we
cannot be certain the alleged persistence of the effects of these institutions passes the scrutiny of
history. If these relations were not statistically significant in the past, the correlations observed
today might instead be the product of recent events that have not been considered and
incorporated into the statistical work of these institutional studies.
       This paper examines specifically the relationship between legal origins and financial
development by analyzing the implied path-dependent relation between a country’s legal
tradition and the extent of investor protections and financial development over time. A
significant number of recent papers find legal origins to be strongly correlated with current
indices of rule of law (Acemoglu, Jonhson, and Robinson, 2001; Beck, Demirguç-Kunt, and
Levine, 2003b), financial development (LLSV, 1997, 1998; Djankov, McLeish, and Shleifer, 2007;
Beck, Demirguç-Kunt, and Levine, 2003a, 2003b), the regulation of entry and labor (Djankov, La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2002; Botero, Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer, 2004), and the concentration of ownership (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer,
1999) among other things. In particular, the work of LLSV (1997, 1998, 2000) and LLS (2000,
2008) relates financial development to the extent of a country’s legal protections for investors
(shareholders and creditors), arguing that ―when investor rights such as the voting rights of the
shareholders and the reorganization and liquidation rights of the creditors are extensive and
well enforced by regulators or courts, investors are willing to finance firms‖ (LLSV, 2000, p. 5).




                                                  2
       Therefore, the theory goes, investors and banks are willing to finance firms as
shareholders or creditors in exchange for the power to reduce agency costs by, for example,
effectively monitoring management or devising contracts that align the incentives of managers
and outside investors. The law and finance literature maintains that because shareholder and
creditor protections provided at the company level are often embodied in financial contracts or
company bylaws that, because of their exceeding complexity, impede enforcement by the
courts, such provisions should instead be written into national company, bankruptcy, and
securities laws, and, indeed, research has found financial markets to be more developed in
countries that have legislated more shareholder and creditor protections (LLSV, 1997, 1998).
        The world is divided by this literature into two main legal traditions, civil law and
common law, and four legal families, Common law, French civil law, German civil law, and
Scandinavian civil law. LLS (2008, p. 3) find that ―legal rules protecting investors vary
systematically among legal traditions or origins, with the laws of common law countries
(originating in English law) being more protective of outside investors than the laws of civil law
(originating in Roman law) and particularly French civil law countries.‖ Legal origin is a valid
exogenous variable for explaining investor protections and financial development because
―countries typically adopted their legal systems involuntarily (through conquest or
colonization)‖ and, hence, legal families can ―be treated as exogenous to a country’s structure of
corporate ownership and finance‖ (LLSV, 1998, p. 1126).
       The current paper replicates in the most basic way the statistical exercises used to find
correlations between legal origin and financial development today in order to test the implied
persistence of the effects of legal origin using a variety of financial development indicators for
1900 and 1913. This exercise follows the work of Bordo and Rousseau (2006) who use high
powered money to GDP as their proxy for financial development and explore its relationship
with legal origin in cross-sections in the past. Instead, the current paper uses a variety of
conventional financial development indicators for 1900 and 1913 to test this same hypothesis,
such as stock and market capitalization to GDP, private credit to GDP, and the not so standard
deposits per capita. This exercise reveals significant differences in stock and bond market
capitalization across legal families only in a few cases when we look at cross-sections of
countries in the past. That is, the historical evidence does not provide robust support for the
idea of a persistent effect of legal origin on financial development. Yet, since the sample size is




                                                  3
so small, we would expect the statistical tests (either t-statistics for a simple means test or t-tests
for the coefficients of multivariate regressions) to yield no significant differences in financial
development across legal families. For this reason, one could argue that the evidence is only
weakly rejecting the persistent effects of legal origin according to some indicators of financial
development, while accepting the hypothesis with others (especially deposits per capita).
       Thus, the last two sections of the paper look at whether there are systematic differences
in investor protections in the past just like today. These sections of the paper consequently
examine fragmentary evidence on investor protections, specifically, evidence of creditor and
shareholder rights across countries at the turn of the twentieth century. That evidence reveals
that, across common law and civil law countries circa 1910, creditor rights included in
bankruptcy laws were quite similar and that the protection of shareholder did not rely strongly
on government or court enforcement of shareholder rights (i.e., there was convergence on weak
shareholder rights), most protections being either provided by companies or a product of
regulation mandating strict disclosure rules for the prospectuses of new stock and bond issues.
       The fragmentary evidence of shareholder protections reveals no clear differentiation in
terms of better or worse corporate governance across common and civil law countries. In many
countries, companies reliant on outside financing had to win investor trust by either building
good reputations or writing strong protections for small shareholders into their company
bylaws. Among the latter were provisions that limited the power of large shareholders by
restricting the number of votes per shareholder or reducing their voting power as their
shareholdings increased.
       The idea of seeking significant correlations with legal origin in cross-sections of stock
market capitalization in the past is not new. Rajan and Zingales estimated stock market
capitalization in 1913 for 23 countries. But their findings that, on average, French and German
civil law countries had larger stock markets than common law countries have been criticized for
having too many outliers. Their critics argue, for example, that Rajan and Zingales
underestimated stock market capitalization for some common law countries and overestimated
it for French civil law countries (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, 2008; Sylla, 2006).
Evidence of the relationship between legal origin and financial development must thus be
considered to be rather preliminary.




                                                   4
       The current paper corrects Rajan and Zingales’ figures, and follows the work of LLSV
(1998, 1999) and Djankov, McLeish, and Shleifer (2007) in examining by means of simple tests
the differences in the impact of legal origin on financial development. The small sample size
notwithstanding, the data presented here constitute an original attempt to expand Rajan and
Zingales’ estimates with additional estimates of stock and bond market capitalization in 1900
and 1913 as well as new figures that afford a look at the development of bank finance between
1913 and 1929.
       Bordo and Rousseau (2006) use broad money to GDP in a sample of 17 countries to test
the relationship between legal origin and financial development in the past, finding persistent
effects of some of the legal variables only when the Netherlands is excluded from the regression
(because it is a French civil law country with a large banking system). Yet these authors
acknowledge that broad money to GDP is an imperfect measure of financial development
because it mostly represents the development of the banking system and not of the stock or
bond market. For this reason the current paper attempts to expand the evidence on the
relationship between legal origins and financial development by using new indicators of
financial development.
       Finally, according to the law and finance literature one of the main channels through
which legal origin affects the development of financial markets is through investor protections.
This does not imply that we should instrument for investor protections using legal origin
because the latter variable affects financial development through channels other than investor
protections (e.g., through regulation of labor, entry, and so forth). Still, we would also want to
examine if there are systematic differences in investor protections in the past. This paper
consequently assesses investor protections across countries in a separate section by compiling
information on creditor and shareholder rights from unpublished sources and directly from
some of the laws of the countries under study.
       The paper is divided into four sections. Section two briefly describes the data compiled
for the present exercise. Section three, which explains the paper’s findings, is divided into three
parts, the first using the results of the statistical work to examine observed differences in
financial development around the world, the second documenting strong convergence in
bankruptcy practices circa 1910, and the third finding no clear differences in corporate




                                                  5
governance practices across countries that belong to different legal families. Section four
presents the conclusions.


Data and Methodology
Stock Market Capitalization and Companies Traded per Million People

       Rajan and Zingales’ (2003) study of the evolution of financial development across
countries was the first attempt to explore the persistence of the effects of legal institutions. Their
examination of the variation in financial market size in 23 countries, every decade, from 1913 to
1999, revealed, irrespective of a country’s legal tradition, a first peak in financial market
development circa 1913 followed after 1929 by a great and rapid reversal (less so in countries
with a common law tradition) from which the financial markets in most countries did not
recover until the end of the twentieth century. One of the most important findings of their
study, included in the first two columns and the last one of Panel A of Table 1, is that in 1913
both stock market capitalization over GDP and the number of traded companies per million
people was higher, on average, in countries that adhered to the French civil law tradition than
in common law countries.


       [INSERT TABLE 1 AROUND HERE]


       The accuracy of Rajan and Zingales’ figures, however, has been questioned by, among
others, Sylla (2006), who suggests that stock market capitalization in the United Kingdom circa
1913 was perhaps overestimated by including bonds and stocks (a stock market capitalization to
GDP ratio of 1.09), and stock market capitalization to GDP for the United States underestimated
by including only the New York Stock Exchange and four other regional markets ―but not the
New York Curb Exchange, other regional exchanges, or the extensive U.S. over-the-counter
dealer market (that eventually became the NASDAQ)‖ (Sylla, 2003, p. 401). Sylla suggests that a
more accurate picture of the size of the U.K. and U.S. stock markets can be obtained by using
Raymond Goldsmith’s (1985) estimates, which show a stock market capitalization of 0.95 for the
United States.
       Rajan and Zingales’ figures have also been criticized in a recent paper by La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008), who point out that (1) many of Rajan and Zingales’




                                                  6
estimates of stock market capitalization include some corporate bonds, and (2) companies in
many countries cross-listed in stock markets in Europe or the United States and, because what
matters is the legal regime of the country in which a company is listed, companies cross-listed
in London were perhaps borrowing that municipality’s legal system and, hence, not subject to
the legal tradition of their home country. Observing that this leads Rajan and Zingales to
overestimate stock market capitalization for French civil law countries such as Cuba and Egypt,
LLS (2008) correct some of the figures that bias the averages for civil law countries up by, for
instance, using new estimates for France and adjusting the figures for Cuba. For Egypt, they
subtract the capitalization of bond issues and cross-listed companies (e.g., Havana Electric listed
in Cuba, incorporated in New Jersey, and traded in New York). LLS (2008) also follow Sylla’s
suggestion and correct the capitalization of the U.S. stock market (their figures are presented in
Panel A of Table 1). After their corrections, common law countries have an average stock
market capitalization almost twice that of the average capitalization for civil law countries.
       The present paper contributes to this debate by making two corrections to the data on
stock market capitalization. First, the estimates of stock market capitalization in the United
Kingdom are corrected using data from the Investors’ Monthly Manual. (Appendix A explains the
methodology and assumptions used to estimate the stock market capitalization figures for the
United Kingdom.) Second, using Goldsmith’s (1985) data, estimates published by Neymarck
(1901, 1902, 1915), and a variety of primary sources described in Appendix B, Table 1 presents
corrected estimates of stock market capitalization for 1913 (adding South Africa, Spain, and
Uruguay, and correcting the figures for Brazil, Denmark, Egypt, Switzerland, and the United
Kingdom) and a new set of estimates for 1900. The new estimates attempt to bias the market
capitalization of French civil law countries downwards (by adding countries with relatively
small markets and correcting some estimates downwards) and of common law countries
upwards (by adding South Africa and correcting the capitalization figure for the United States).
Nevertheless, the corrections for the U.K. market bring the average for common law countries
down to a figure closer to that for civil law countries.
       Panel B of Table 1 assumes that each legal tradition is a country and estimates average
stock market capitalization to GDP figures by adding the capitalization (in US dollars) of the
stock exchanges of all the countries that follow a specific legal tradition over the sum of GDP




                                                  7
(also in dollars). When these averages are used, common law countries have a larger average
stock market capitalization than their civil law counterparts in both 1900 and 1913.
       Another important finding is that, with such a small sample, changing the figures for
one or two countries too readily alters the average by legal family. For example, whether
persistence and common law ―domination‖ are supported can be affected by small errors in
estimates of stock market capitalization for countries with larger markets. The paper thus tries
to remain skeptical of the econometric findings, and relate them to other qualitative evidence
available when making generalizations.
       Skeptics of the data on which the present paper relies might find the sample size to be
inadequate to the performance of econometric tests, as it is difficult to believe that the sample is
random and representative of the population of countries. Yet, the development of stock
markets around the world was less broad than today. From a table presented in Appendix D, of
the most important stock markets in the world circa 1913, it can be seen that the current sample
covers more than half the total exchanges and all of the most important financial markets in the
world. Indeed, it is unclear how the results would be changed by adding more observations.
For common law countries, for instance, because most of the stock markets not included in the
sample were rather small (e.g., Burma, Ceylon, Malaya, and Rhodesia), their inclusion would
bias downwards the coefficients that measure the effect of this legal tradition. In other words,
the current sample most likely overestimates average stock market capitalization for common
law countries. In terms of French civil law countries, markets such as those of Indonesia,
Rumania, and Venezuela might bias average stock market capitalization for the group
downwards, but the bias introduced by excluding them would be partly compensated by the
exclusion of Mexico and Portugal, both of which had markets of average or above average size
(at the time, Mexico had a large mining exchange together with a regular stock exchange for
banks and industrials, and Portugal significant banking and shipping sectors funded in the local
exchanges).

Bond Market Data

       Appendix C describes the sources of and assumptions used to estimate the bond market
capitalization figures. Most of the new estimates follow Goldsmith (1985), who compiled figures
for the stock of corporate bonds and stock market capitalization for 10 countries between the
1870s and 1978 (the number of estimates varies over time). Goldsmith’s figures are



                                                 8
complemented by estimates of ministers of finance, directors of stock exchanges, and
statisticians compiled by Neymarck (1902, 1915). For countries not included in the Goldsmith or
Neymarck estimates, it was necessary to build new estimates using various official publications.

Banking Data

        This paper uses two measures of banking development across countries. Albeit
imperfect, they are the only indicators that have been compiled in a somewhat standardized
manner. The first measure is private bank credit to GDP, which is usually combined with bond
market capitalization to create an estimate of total private credit to GDP. The data on private
bank credit are from a variety of sources, but rely heavily on the work of Goldsmith (1985), and
include all private credit, discounts, and mortgage loans by banking institutions.1 It is difficult
to compile these data for many countries, however, because they only became a relevant
measure of financial development in the second half of the twentieth century. Thus, the sample
is quite limited.2
        The second measure of banking development used for this exercise is deposits per
capita. Whereas Rajan and Zingales (2003) compiled a measure of deposits to GDP for a sample
of 20 countries in 1913, the statistics on deposits compiled by the League of Nations (1927, 1930)
between 1925 and 1929 provide figures for total deposits for 1913 and 1925-1929 for between 30
and 40 countries. 3 This paper uses data from the latter source, and normalizes deposits by
population. With this larger sample the confidence in the results for the means test is higher.
Yet, it is an imperfect measure of financial development for two reasons. First, it is not clear if
more deposits per capita translate into higher supply of credit that can promote growth (we
would need to have information about how banks used those deposits to know that). Second,
these series of deposits represent the demand and time deposits of commercial and some
savings banks, but exclude postal savings and other forms of savings that are more common in
civil law countries. It thus has to be acknowledged that the data biases deposits per capita down


        1  Other loan data is taken from Nakamura and Zarazaga(2003) for Argentina ; Eitrheim (2004) for
Norway; Leacy (1983) for Canada; and Musacchio (2007) for Brazil.
         2 I have data on private bank credit to GDP for 16 countries, but there being no data on bond

markets for India and Austria, I end up with 14 for the regressions. Another problem is that there is no
GDP data for South Africa before 1906 or so, and nothing from Maddison before 1913. Thus, South Africa
is also dropped from the regressions.
         3 All of the deposits data are from League of Nations (1927), Table 87, and League of Nations

(1930), Table 104.



                                                   9
in civil law countries. Finally, for the regression analysis it does not make much difference to
have deposits per capita for more countries because GDP estimates from Maddison (2003) are
only available for 24 (in 1890) to 33 countries (in 1925 and 1929).

Basic Regression Set Up

        The paper tries to mimic the estimates of simple OLS regressions of the correlates of
financial development following the set up used by LLSV (1998) or Djankov, McLeish, and
Shleifer (2007),4 but since there is no complete data on investor protections to include in the
regressions, the specification used follows more closely the work of Bordo and Rousseau (2006).
The OLS regression specification used is:
                    qi=+ln(y/pop)i + gold +  + (legal origin dummy) + ei

where qi is a measure of financial development for country i (stock or bond market
capitalization to GDP, private credit to GDP, number of traded companies per million people or
deposits per capita), ln(y/pop)i is GDP per capita in either 1870 or 1890 (1990 PPP dollars from
Maddison, 2003), gold measures the number of years the country has been on the gold standard
(measured in 1900 and 1913),  is the average inflation rate (arithmetic mean), and legal origin
dummies are included. It is assumed that the errors, ei, are normally distributed. Both years on
the gold standard and inflation are good measures of macroeconomic and political stability
during this period of time (Bordo and Russeau, 2006; Bordo and Rockoff, 1996). All regressions
are estimated with robust standard errors using White’s correction for heteroskedasticity. For
robustness I also run regression specifications that mimic the origin LLSV set up and control for
GDP growth, either since 1870 or since 1890 using the compound annual growth rate of GDP in
1990 PPP dollars from Maddison (2003).

Creditor and Shareholder Rights in National Laws

        The final part of the paper follows the methodology of LLSV (1998) and Djankov,
McLeish, and Shleifer (2007) in compiling indices of creditor and shareholder rights from the
bankruptcy and company laws of a small cross-section of countries for use in comparing
countries over time. This work suggests that credit markets are likely to be larger in countries


        4Both LLSV (1998) and Djankov, McLeish, and Shleifer (2007) control for investor protections, but
given that the information is not available for all countries, the current set up adjusts the exercise to check
for simple correlations between legal origin and financial development indicators.



                                                      10
with bankruptcy laws that include any of the following rights: secured creditors have the right
to repossess their collateral in case of default (i.e., no automatic stay on assets for debtors);
priority dictates that secured creditors (i.e., collateralized creditors) are paid first; approval of
creditors is necessary for reorganizing a firm or rescheduling the service of a firm’s debts; and
original managers do not stay during reorganization (i.e., no debtor-in-possession
reorganization; trustees elected by the court or creditors run a company declared by a court to
be bankrupt).
        In the second part of the next section, indices of creditor rights are compiled for
Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France, Hong Kong, Spain, the Strait Settlements
(Singapore), United Kingdom, and United States for 1910 (using the bankruptcy law in
operation at that time). The main reason for including only French civil law and common law
countries is that it is precisely in these two groups of countries where the literature finds more
marked differences in creditor protections (LLSV, 1998; Djankov, McLeish, and Shleifer, 2007).
The results of this compilation are included in Table 7.
        According to LLSV (1997, 1998), national company laws that contain more protections
for minority shareholders have larger equity markets (e.g., larger equity markets to GDP, larger
companies per million people, more IPOs per year, and so forth). In Table 10, I follow the
methodology used by LLSV (1998) to identify the presence (or absence) of six shareholder rights
they deem relevant for the growth of equity markets (relative to GDP) or for the increase in the
number of companies that open their capital to the public in a handful of countries for which
there is information easily accessible. First, I determine whether shareholders absent from
shareholders’ meetings could vote (i.e., whether there was proxy voting). Second, I check
whether shares were required to be deposited before a meeting and whether shareholders were
prevented from selling their equity for several days after a meeting. Third, I look for cumulative
voting or proportional representation whereby minority shareholders would elect board
members. Fourth, I look for explicit minority-shareholder rights such as the right to challenge
directors and assembly decisions in court and the option in the event of disagreement with a
managerial or assembly decision to sell stock to the firm and thereby end one’s participation.
Fifth, I check whether shareholders had the first right to buy new stock in order to preserve
their share of the company in the event of a decision to expand total equity. Sixth, I coded as
one when the percentage of capital needed to call an extraordinary meeting was less than or




                                                   11
equal to 10%. I added the number of rights present in the laws of each country to create what
LLSV (1998) term the ―anti-director rights index‖ (bottom row of Table 10). Because voting
rights and disclosure are also important determinants of financial development, but are studied
separately by LLSV (1998), I mention differences in these investor protections in the text but do
not compile systematic differences in disclosure and voting rights (mainly because there are no
major differences across countries).


Statistical Evidence on the Persistence of the Effects of Legal Origins
(1900, 1913)
Stock Market Capitalization across Countries in 1900 and 1913

       Today, when examining samples of 50 countries or more, students of financial
development find significant differences in stock market development across countries that
embrace different legal traditions (and families). The stylized view is that common law
countries tend to have the largest stock markets, followed closely by German civil law
countries, with Scandinavian and French civil law countries having the least developed
markets. Panels A and B of Table 1 show the basic differences in average stock market
capitalization across legal families in 1900 and 1913 according to Rajan and Zingales (2003), LLS
(2008), and the new estimates introduced in this paper. According to all of the average measures
except those of Rajan and Zingales, in 1900 and 1913 common law countries had relatively
larger stock markets (to GDP) than most civil law countries. Using the average of the new
estimates of stock market capitalization, and assuming that each legal family is a country (Panel
B of Table 1), we find the average for common law countries to be 0.48 in 1900 and 0.65 in 1913
and the equivalent figures for civil law countries to be 0.38 and 0.37 (French), 0.32 and 0.56
(German), and 0.50 and 0.54 (Scandinavian). This preliminary evidence seems to support the
idea that, just as today, on average, common law countries had larger stock markets than civil
law countries. In fact, it can be seen in the graphical depiction in Panel A of Figure 1 that the
distributions of stock market capitalization in 1900 and 1913 have relatively similar means and
about the same level of dispersion across legal families.
       A better way to test for significant differences across legal traditions is to take into
account the sample variance using t-tests for the difference of means. The results presented in
Panel C of Table 1, which reports the t-statistics of the means test by legal tradition, do not




                                                 12
support the hypothesis of persistence of effects over time because there does not seem to be a
significant difference in stock market capitalization across legal traditions in 1900 and 1913. The
only significant t-statistic shows stock market capitalization to have been higher, on average, in
German civil law countries than in all the other countries taken together. But the sample being
so small, these tests must be taken only as weak evidence against the persistence of effects
hypothesis. Even in LLS’ (2008) and Rajan and Zingales’ (2003) data, no clear differences can be
discerned across legal families. LLS’ (2008) estimates show common law countries to have had,
on average, larger stock markets in 1913, but the t-statistics for these differences are only
significant at the 20% level.
       Finally, it can be seen in the data at the bottom of Panel C (Table 1) that countries that
experienced higher than 1% average inflation since 1880 (difficult to achieve under the gold
standard) also had significantly lower stock market capitalizations (most of these were at the
time ―emerging‖ markets such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and India). This variable is, in fact, a
proxy for macroeconomic instability and weak adherence to the gold standard, and thus
suggests the importance of taking into account contingent factors when trying to explain
variation in financial development.
       In sum, the results as they stand suggest convergence rather than divergence in financial
development across legal families. This finding is confirmed by an examination of the
correlation between legal origin and stock market development in a multivariate setting.
Following LLSV (1997), I estimate specifications that control for the demand for finance using
the logarithm of GDP per capita in 1870 or 1890 and the growth rate between 1870/1890 and
1900/1913, and include dummies for legal origin to test for significant differences across legal
traditions. The summary statistics are reported in Table 2; the regression output is presented in
Tables 3 and 4.


       [TABLE 2 AROUND HERE]


       Table 3 looks at the conditional correlation of the common law dummy with different
measures of financial development in 1900 and 1913. Specifications 1 to 8 in Panel A of this table
uses the data compiled by Rajan and Zingales (2003) and LLS (2008) to examine the conditional
correlations of legal origin and financial development. In none of the specifications do we find




                                                 13
significant coefficients for the common law dummy and in fact, with the the data of Rajan and
Zingales (specifications 1 to 4) the coefficients that capture the difference in stock market size
between common and civil law countries (common law coefficient) have mostly the wrong sign
(they are negative instead of the expected positive). In specifications 5 to 8, with the data of LLS
(2008), the coefficients have the right sign but are not significant in any of the specifications.
Across specifications 1 to 8, it can also be seen that the F-statistics that test the joint significance
of all the coefficients are not significant except for two specifications.


        [TABLE 3 AROUND HERE]


        Specifications 9 to 16 perform the same exercise using the new estimates of stock market
capitalization in 1900 (specs 13 to 16) and 1913 (specs 9 to 12). Using the new data, all of the
specifications are seen to be more powerful in explaining the variation in the new estimates of
stock market capitalization, yielding more robust coefficients and higher F-statistics. The
coefficients for legal origin, however, are not significant in any of these specifications and have
wrong sign (negative instead of positive). In sum, the evidence presented in Panel A of Table 3
does not offer robust support for the idea of persistence of effects of legal origin. Tables 4A and
4B also use the different measures of stock market capitalization and run specifications that
control for GDP growth and other combinations of legal origin dummies. The results are
basically the same.
        It can also be seen in specifications 11, 12, 15, and 16 of Table 3 that that the coefficients
for the variables that measure the number of years on the gold standard and average annual
inflation since 1880 is large and highly significant. Average inflation between 1880 and 1913 is a
proxy for macroeconomic and/or political instability. The fact that this variable is highly
significant suggests that perhaps other contingent factors need to be taken into account to
understand the variance in financial development across countries. The number of years on the
gold standard is also a measure of macroeconomic stability and we would expect it to have
provided investors with more security when buying securities with nominal (non-indexed)
values and payment schedules. In fact, these results is consistent with the finding of Djankov,
McLeish, and Shleifer (2007) and Bordo and Rousseau (2006) that countries with higher average
inflation have smaller (private) credit markets. That the coefficient for average inflation does not




                                                   14
work in the same way in specification 16 of Panel A might be related to measurement error in
the inflation figures before 1900 inasmuch as for most countries data on inflation is only
accurately measured and widely available after 1900.
       In sum, these results suggest that other factors such as demand for financing (e.g., how
developed a country is) and stability of the macroeconomic and political environments are more
highly correlated than legal origin with stock market development. Legal origin dummies are
not significant in any of the specifications used. Still, given the sample size, these results cannot
be taken at face value. Both the sample size and the low degrees of freedom would lead us to
expect insignificant coefficients (because low degrees of freedom increase the size of standard
errors and, thus, reduce the size of the t-statistics). This is why fragmentary evidence presented
at the end of the paper of relative similarity of corporate governance practices across countries
is used to make the case that perhaps there was convergence in financial development.

Bond Markets around the World in 1900 and 1913

       The same exercise detailed in the previous section can be performed with the new
estimates of bond market capitalization to GDP. Panel A of Table 1 shows the new estimates of
bond market capitalization to GDP for 16 countries in 1900 and 18 countries in 1913. The means
by legal family in Panel A and estimated means in Panel B (which treats each legal family as a
country) show common law countries to have had significantly larger bond markets than civil
law countries. In particular, Scandinavian countries seem, on average, to have had the smallest
bond markets. Another way to understand why common law countries, on average, have larger
bond markets is to look at Panel B of Figure 1, which shows that bond markets in the majority of
common law countries were relatively small compared to those in French civil law countries,
but because the United Kingdom had the largest bond market in the world, the average for
common law countries is strongly biased upwards.
       These differences across legal families are partly a product of how the estimates for these
countries were constructed, biased upward for common law countries (see Appendix A for the
methodology used for the United Kingdom) and downward for civil law countries (see
Appendix C). For instance, France had one of the largest bond markets in the world, by some
estimates even higher than 100% of GDP, but because many of the bond issues were either
cross-listings or government-guaranteed bonds the figures had to be adjusted to reflect the
market for private securities rather than the market for securities with sovereign backing. This



                                                 15
problem also applies, however, to common law countries, which traditionally also guaranteed
bond coupons and stock dividends in transportation companies. But the figures for common
law countries do not correct for that, thus the bond market data has a bias upwards in some
common law countries.5
       Even after biasing the estimates for common law countries up, the differences in bond
market capitalization are not significant, either in the simple means test (Panel C of Table 1) or
in the multivariate setting. For instance, in Panel B of Table 3 I repeat the multivariate exercise
using bond market capitalization to GDP as a dependent variable. The results do not support
the hypothesis of persistence of effects of legal tradition, but the dummies that measure the
differences between common and civil law countries have the right sign in all of the regressions,
and are almost significant at the 10% level. As a robustness check, Table 5 runs specifications of
the same regression that control for GDP growth and use different combinations of legal origin
dummies. When controlling for GDP growth (done as a robustness check) the coefficient for
common law is large and significant at the 10% level, suggesting that common law countries
had a bond market capitalization of 0.28 of GDP, higher than that of Scandinavian and German
civil law countries, and at least 0.18 larger than that of French civil law countries. Most of the
specifications, however, do not pass the joint significance test.
       The evidence for bond markets is thus also not powerful enough to suggest that legal
origins have persistent effects on financial development. Inflation seems to be more highly
correlated with bond market development. Even if the coefficients have the right sign and are
sometimes significant, the results are weak statistically and might be driven by the one outlier,
the United Kingdom (controlling for the UK does not help because the coefficients for common
law did not become significant). The most important correlate of bond market capitalization
seems to be average inflation. An average inflation rate of 1% is related to smaller bond market
capitalization to GDP by around 0.06 in 1900 and 0.04 in 1913. This is a significant drop given
that the means for bond market capitalization in those two years were 0.18 and 0.17
respectively.




       5  For a discussion of how problematic it is to disentangle government-backed securities from
private securities, especially in the railway sector, see Hautcoeur (1994). Government guarantees in
common law countries have scarcely been studied. For a good idea of how these guarantees worked, see
Carlos and Lewis (1995).



                                                 16
        One could argue that these exercises are not equivalent to those performed by the law
and finance literature nowadays. Most of the papers in this literature use estimates of private
credit over GDP rather than bond markets as the dependent variable. Private credit to GDP is a
better measure of credit market development, but it is not clear that it should be related to
differences in legal traditions because bank and other forms of private credit do not need formal
contract enforcement mechanisms in order to grow, personal connections and other forms of
cooperation between banks and companies usually being relied upon to facilitate the
enforcement of such contracts (Petersen and Rajan, 1994; Maurer and Sharma, 2001).
        Notwithstanding this caveat, specifications 9 to 12 of Panel B (Table 3), use as a
dependent variable the scant evidence available on private credit to GDP from Table 1 and
displays the same regression specifications used above. In specifications 9 through 12 of Panel B
(Table 3), the common law country dummy is only significant after controlling for inflation or
years on the gold standard, but has the wrong sign. In fact, in all specifications, this dummy has
a negative coefficient, and even if not significant, the results do not go in the expected direction.
Moreover, in specifications 13 through 16 (Panel B of Table 3), which use the number of traded
companies as a dependent variable in an additional robustness check, no significant difference
was observed between common law and civil law countries, and the coefficients were negative.
As an additional robustness check, Table 6 runs similar specifications controlling for GDP
growth and using other combinations of legal origin dummies. But the results are basically the
same.
        In sum, even if, on average, common law countries had larger bond markets than civil
law countries, these differences are not statistically significant and seem to be driven by the
inclusion of the United Kingdom’s extremely large bond market. When using the scant evidence
on private credit to GDP, the results also go against the persistence of effects hypothesis.
Finally, using as an extra check the number of companies traded per million people also reveals
no significant difference in financial development across legal families.

Deposits per Capita around the World, 1913-1929

        Table 7 presents the summary statistics and means test for the data on bank deposits per
capita in 1913, 1925, and 1929. These data provide more robust evidence favoring the
persistence of effects hypothesis, deposits per capita in common law countries being
significantly larger than in French civil law countries in 1913. Yet there are no significant



                                                  17
differences in deposits per capita among common law and German and Scandinavian civil law
countries in that year. Thus, this indicator of financial development provides only weak support
for the dominance of common law over civil law countries before 1913.


          [TABLE 7 AROUND HERE]


          By 1925, common law countries have larger deposits per capita than German civil law
countries, an interesting result because, according to Perotti and von Thadden (2006), financial
development should be most affected in those countries that suffered the largest inflationary
shock after World War I. This evidence supports their view because the high inflation (in some
cases, hyperinflation) in many of the German civil law countries during the 1920s must have
affected the rate of deposits per capita by 1925. In fact, the average deposits per capita were
larger in 1913 than in 1925.
          Scandinavian civil law countries also seem to be losing ground vis–à-vis common law
countries over the 1920s. In fact, by 1929 average deposits per capita are significantly larger in
common law than in Scandinanvian civil law countries (with a t-statistic significant at the 18%
level).
          Panel A of Table 8 displays the results of the multivariate analysis using deposits per
capita as the dependent variable. In this case the results confirm the persistent effects
hypothesis and are robust to the inclusion of most controls. In fact, with this data we find that
the coefficient for the common law dummy is significant at the 1% level. Common law countries
have $50 dollars more in deposits per capita than the average country in 1913, over $100 in 1925
and $120 in 1929. Moreover, deposits per capita in French civil law countries are falling relative
to the average over time.


          [TABLE 8 AROUND HERE]


          Panel B of Table 8 repeats the exercise but looking only at the change in deposits per
capita from 1913 to 1929 and controlling only for GDP growth and average inflation between
1913 and 1929. In common law countries the growth in deposits is also higher than the average
country and French and Scandinanvian civil law countries have lower deposits per capita than




                                                  18
the average. The dummy for German civil law countries is not significant because even if they
lost ground versus all the countries after the inflation of the early 1920s (with extremely high
inflation in Poland, Hungary, Germany, Austria), they recovered their level of deposits per
capita by 1929, in contrast French civil law countries did not experiment such high levels of
inflation, but did not have a significant increase in deposits.
        Based on these results one could say that because there are systematic differences in
deposits per capita and because some of the coefficients for the common law dummy in Table 3
(where the dependent variable is bond market capitalization to GDP) are also positive and
significant at the 10% level, there is enough evidence to sustain the hypothesis of persistent
effects with common law having larger financial markets. Given that the sample size is small
and the degrees of freedom to estimate the standard errors is low, all of the statistical tests
performed so far (including the means tests) would obviously lead us to accept the null
hypothesis that there are no significant differences among legal traditions (or that the coefficient
for the legal origin dummy is not different from zero). Thus, finding that some of the
coefficients are significant should be strong enough to show that legal institutions have
persistent effects. Yet, the evidence in some of the other regressions shows not only insignificant
coefficients for the common law dummy, but also coefficients with the wrong sign. Thus, it is
hard to say the evidence is strongly pushing for one side or the other. This is why the discussion
of the next couple of sections might also shed some light on how much there was divergence or
not in the institutions that supposedly sustain financial development.

Could it be taxes?

        Another explanation, which has been so far disregarded completely by the literature, is
that different taxation levels across countries drove some of the differences in the size of equity
and bond markets. For instance, in some countries, governments charged stamp taxes for the
listing of equity or corporate bonds (usually exempting government bonds). Moreover, there
were other taxes that may have affected the listing of securities, like taxes on the turnover of
securities, on interest and dividend gains, and the taxes that stock brokers had to pay per
transaction.
        In Europe there was significant variation in the levels of taxation of stock transactions at
the turn of the twentieth century. In Table 11 I show some of the taxes charged for listing
securities, for the turnover of those securities, for the interest and dividend gains on stocks and



                                                 19
bonds, and other taxes on the transactions conducted by stock brokers for a selection of
European countries for which the data is easily accessible for 1905. Some states taxed heavily
stock exchange transactions, while others took a more laissez faire approach. For instance, Spain,
Sweden, and Germany taxed more heavily the listing of securities, with an estimated stamp tax
that was equivalent of two to three percent of the face value of the security, while other
countries like Denmark, the United Kingdom, and Austria charged less than 1%. At the extreme
was Norway that did not tax the listing of securities at all. The same can be said for other taxes.
For example, the taxation of interest and dividend gains shows extreme variation. Countries
like Spain, Hungary, and Italy taxed interest and dividend gains from corporate securities more
heavily (over 10%), while Sweden, Denmark, and Belgium had taxes around 1% (Belgium
apparently had not taxes on dividend/interest gains).
        Now, can the variation in these taxes explain some of the variation in stock and bond
market size? The question is relevant, unfortunately the number of countries for which
information on financial development and taxation is available is rather limited. Therefore, in
Table 12 I pursue this exercise with 10 observations for which I have complete data. Not
surprisingly, taxes do not seem to drive the variation in stock and bond market size. Yet taxes
on both stock listings and dividends seem to explain significantly some of the variation in stock
market size. Yet, when I include other controls like GDP per capita in 1890 the tax variable loses
significance (most likely because of the sample size). It is still interesting to see that the
coefficients in specifications 7 and 10 have negative signs and similar magnitudes
(approximately an increase in taxes of 1% reduces stock market cap by almost 17 percentage
points of GDP, say from 100 percent of GDP to 83 percent of GDP). Further data will render this
test more robust, though.


Creditor Rights c. 1910
        An alternative way of looking at the persistent effect of legal institutions is to examine if
we find systematic differences in investor protections in the past, just like we do today. Today
there are clear differences in the way countries and their governments protect creditors in their
bankruptcy laws. According to LLSV (1998), countries with bankruptcy laws that afford
stronger protections for creditors, in particular, bondholders, tend to have more developed
credit and bond markets. In their survey of bankruptcy laws in 1995 they find that common law




                                                   20
countries afford creditors the significantly more protection than civil law countries, with French
civil law countries offering the weakest protections. Moreover, Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer’s
(2007) study of creditor protections in the bankruptcy law of six cross-sections of countries
between 1978 and 2003 finds differences in the level of creditor protections between French and
common law countries to persist over time.
        This marked difference in terms of creditor rights protections and credit market
development between common and French civil law countries today would be expected to have
persisted over time. If the statistical work presented in the previous section did not uncover
clear differences in credit market development, perhaps looking at bankruptcy laws in common
and French civil law countries will.
        But in contrast to what researchers find with recent data, circa 1910 the norm across
countries was convergence on relatively strong creditor protections. Differences in creditor
rights in the bankruptcy laws of the largest countries in Europe and the Americas were
minimal. In Table 9, which compares creditor rights for a cross-section of six common law
countries and five French civil law countries circa 1910, it can be seen that, on average, both
French civil law and common law countries had three of the four protections LLSV (1998) and
Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2007) find explain significant differences in credit market
development today. This table also reveals significant differences in creditor rights in these
same countries in the past and today. Even if fragmentary, this evidence against the persistence
of effects hypothesis provides a plausible explanation for the weak coefficients for the legal
origin dummies when used to explain creditor market development in the past. The evolution
of creditor rights from 1910 to 1995 can thus be inferred from an examination of the table. The
findings regarding variation in creditor rights at the cross-sectional level are (1) that French civil
law countries (and some common law countries such as Australia and Canada) started with
pro-creditor laws and ended up, on average, with pro-debtor laws, and (2) that common law
countries (primarily former British colonies) in some instances had weaker creditor protections
in the past.


        [TABLE 9 AROUND HERE]




                                                  21
        The leniency of bankruptcy laws in some common law countries and colonies reflects
the greater power accorded the judiciary to approve corporate reorganizations and decide
whether creditors can take possession of assets. For example, according to a contemporary
bankruptcy expert, the United States Bankruptcy Law of 1898 was quite different from those of
Continental Europe (and England) because ―no one can be made bankrupt against his will, and
mere non-payment of debt does not form an act of bankruptcy entitling the creditors to take the
estate into their own hands‖ (Brown, 1900, p. 268).
        In contrast, most French civil law countries circa 1910 strictly enforced repossessions and
granted creditors more power to run receiverships and take companies to the liquidation stage.
Table 9 tries to bias the figures for French civil law countries towards being debtor-friendly by
coding them as permitting management to stay during reorganization, although this was not
strictly the case. In French civil law countries, reorganizations run by incumbent management
had to be approved by creditors, and there was no debtor-in-possession reorganization under
the protection of the court that could be applied across the board as in Hong Kong and the
United States. In French civil law countries (as well as in Germany), if creditors did not approve
compositions, companies went into liquidation under the management of selected trustees,
mostly from the largest creditors (Brown, 1900).
        The evidence presented in this chapter and the historical evidence presented in other
recent works suggest that the decline of creditor rights in civil law countries and emergence of
strong creditor rights in common law countries occurred mostly during the twentieth century.
For example, using more comprehensive indices of debtor punishment, Sgard (2006) found the
bankruptcy laws of common law countries to be more lenient than those of civil law countries
throughout the nineteenth century. Civil law countries’ harsh punishments for debtors were
eliminated only in the second half of the nineteenth century. Additionally, most countries in
Europe adopted procedures that facilitated reorganization (e.g., the concordat préventif, a form of
debtor-in-possession reorganization) and continuation of the going concern (always with
creditor approval). The reason for this convergence on a more lenient bankruptcy system is not
clear, but probably has to do with the fact that before World War I there was close
communication among lawyers and policy makers across countries. According to Sgard,
businessmen across the continent pressured lawyers and lawmakers for a more uniform set of
laws.




                                                22
       In sum, the evidence on creditor rights points in the direction of convergence rather than
divergence across countries that belong to different legal families. In the next section, the less
standardized evidence on shareholder protections across countries is examined.


Shareholder Protections in Company Laws and Corporate Governance
Practices before WWI
       If neither the financial data nor the survey of creditor rights in the previous section
support the persistence of effects hypothesis, it might be the case that there are persistent
differences in shareholder rights across countries that have not been captured because the data
on stock market development are rather limited. In this section, fragmentary evidence compiled
on the extent of shareholder protections across countries circa 1900 and 1913 is examined. Yet,
the analysis reveals no clear differences in the way shareholders were protected across countries
that belong to different legal families.
       Most studies of investor protections in national company laws conclude that the initial
boom in stock market development in the early part of the century occurred despite a lack of
protection for small shareholders. Table 10 examines the extent of shareholder rights included
in national laws for five countries for which detailed data are available. Most countries that
have been subjects of documented studies had no more than two of the shareholder protections
LLSV (1997, 1998) consider necessary for the development of a large stock market with a high
proportion of widely held corporations.


       [TABLE 10 AROUND HERE]


       Even if investor protections were weak in most countries’ national laws, we know from
Rajan and Zingales (2003) that stock market activity first peaked in the twentieth century in
1913. Thus, if investors participate in financial markets to a large extent when they know their
returns are safe from the abuses or expropriation by insiders and directors, there had to be a
system of shareholder protections in place that encouraged investors to buy equity during this
period. Perhaps what mattered for the development of equity markets was not the protections
for minority shareholders in national company laws, but the conditions that facilitate the the
private enforcement of protections. For instance, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2006)
find that stock markets tend to be larger in countries in which the governments require more



                                                 23
detailed disclosure of information about company promoters and directors at the time of an
initial public offering, or simplify the burden of proof necessary for smaller shareholders to sue
directors for fraudulent behavior.
        Indeed, at the turn of the twentieth century, legislators took seriously the need for
disclosure of financial information about companies and the identities and intentions of
promoters of new share or bond issues. English law was the strictest in this respect, companies
being required to publish their statutes, shareholder list, shares each director had on deposit,6 a
list of securities issued in the last two years, names of the underwriters and fees paid them, and
detailed explanations of the fees paid to promoters, among other things, every time they
wanted to issue shares. A copy of the prospectus, dated and signed, had to be deposited at the
local registry before the securities could be issued.7
        It is unclear whether requirements for disclosing information about companies and
company promoters were influenced by legal tradition. The United States had no disclosure
requirement for corporations across the board. In fact, financial disclosure was not mandatory
at the New York Stock Exchange until 1895 (Hannah, 2007b, pp. 15–17) and there were no
mandatory disclosure requirements for prospectuses in other exchanges or for general issues of
shares or bonds. Requirements for disclosure were not as strict in French civil law countries as
in England, but new issues of shares or bonds required the publication of balance sheets,
complete shareholder lists, names of the directors, and other information that varied by
country. For instance, in France after 1907 the law mandated the publication of balance sheets,
shareholder lists, and a complete list of the company’s debts and bonds in the Journal Officiel
(Wellhoff, 1917, p.27). In other places (such as Brazil since 1891) the law mandated that ―the
prospectus for a new share issue should have names of the company founders, a detailed
explanation of the contracts with the bankers or financiers involved in the operation, and the
amounts that company was paying to these intermediaries in the form of commissions or fees.
More importantly, the prospectus had to be accompanied by a copy of the company statutes
after their publication in a newspaper of wide circulation‖ (Musacchio, 2007, pp. 13–14). Italy


        6 It was common circa 1900 to ask directors to own shares and deposit them at the company

during their tenure. This served to align the directors’ incentives and constituted a sort of ―guarantee
deposit‖ in the event a director committed fraud. For examples of how these deposits operated in
England, see Hannah (2007b).
        7 A detailed description of the disclosure requirements for new issues in England can be found in

Wellhoff (1917, pp. 20–24).



                                                   24
required as well the disclosure of the fees paid to founders. In contrast, countries such as Egypt
had no provisions regulating the publication of a prospectus (Wellhoff, 1917, p. 20).
       In German civil law countries, the evidence is mixed, too. In Germany, the law of 1896,
which regulated the operation of the stock exchanges, required that to have its shares admitted
to quotation a company had to publish a prospectus that included all of the provisions required
by English law (Wellhoff, 1917, p. 25). The Chinese legislation followed the German model and
demanded detailed information about the promoters of a company and the company itself. For
instance, it literally required details on ―whether or not the organizers obtain any extra profits
or have been promised such advantage by others‖ as well as about the ―sort of financial
agreement with others have been entered into beforehand by the Organizers in order to
establish the Company‖ and provided clear bright-line rules about the fees and penalties for
company promoters who committed any fraud against investors (Williams, 1905). But in other
German civil law countries, the requirements for prospectuses were less strict. Franks, Mayer,
and Miyajima (2007) found in Japan there were no requirements to publish a prospectus. In
sum, there was no clear lead in terms of disclosure requirements at the time of new share or
bond issues, and significant variation in level and requirements by country.
       Disclosure of information was not the only way shareholders were protected from the
abuses of managers or corporate insiders at the turn of the twentieth century. Many large
corporations gained investors’ trust by including in their charters bylaws that limited the power
of large shareholders, for instance, by limiting the maximum number of votes per shareholder
or by using graduated voting scales that gave shareholders fewer votes as their shareholdings
increased. It is unclear whether legal tradition influenced the level of protection shareholders
enjoyed because significant variation within legal families makes it difficult to sustain the
persistence of effects hypothesis and the evidence, even if fragmentary, shows less differences
across countries than one would expect from looking at the variation in these protections today.
In England, for example, companies commonly included maximum vote provisions or
graduated voting scales. According to Campbell and Turner (2007), in 1883, 43% of the 716
companies listed on the London Stock Exchange for which they have data incorporated
graduated voting scales and 23% maximum vote provisions in their bylaws. In the aggregate,
52% of corporations had caps on voting, graduated voting schemes, or a combination thereof.
The percentage of companies with graduated voting was even higher for railways (88%), banks




                                                 25
(59%), insurance companies (49%), and docks (67%). In banking, textiles, insurance, and canals,
approximately 40% of companies had maximum vote provisions.
       Yet, in the United States, although some companies used voting rights to protect small
shareholders in the nineteenth century, abuses of the rights of minority shareholders were
common and increased towards the turn of the twentieth century. Many of the protections
afforded small investors during the first half of the nineteenth century were backed by state
laws that incorporated specific voting or common-law provisions. Virginia, for example,
mandated between 1849 and 1860 a graduated voting scale for all corporations (Dunlavy, 2004),
and Massachusetts mandated a graduated voting scale for railways until the end of the
nineteenth century (Dunlavy, 1998). But less regulated corporations such as manufacturing
companies had ample leeway to include in their charters bylaws that would attract outside
shareholders. Hilt (2007), for example, finds the use of graduated voting schemes and
maximum votes to have been common in corporations chartered in New York in the early part
of the nineteenth century, though he notes that ―far more common were firms controlled by
directors holding or controlling large numbers of shares‖ (p. 30).
       By the 1880s, regulations mandating graduated voting in many of the most
industrialized states of the United States had disappeared, most states beginning to mandate
instead one-share, one-vote provisions (Dunlavy, 1998). Lamoreaux and Rosenthal (2006) find
protection for minority shareholders to have been relatively weak during the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries. Using an extensive set of court cases to show that directors and
large shareholders ―engaged in a variety of…actions from which they benefited at the expense
of their associates,‖ they argue that private benefits of control for insiders were large and
positive because ―directors of corporations large and small frequently negotiated contracts with
other companies in which they had a financial interest.‖ Even if bounded, these benefits were
positive, and their ―magnitude seems if anything to have increased‖ (p. 147) over time. But even
if private benefits of control were positive, investors continued to buy equity in American
corporations because, ―to the extent that these large projects also yielded returns that were high
relative to government bonds or other similar assets, the private benefits of control that majority
shareholders were able to extract were more an annoyance than a serious deterrent to
investors‖ (Lamoreaux and Rosenthal, 2006, p. 148).




                                                 26
       In civil law countries, the evidence is also mixed. For some of the countries for which
detailed information at the company level is available, maximum vote provisions and
graduated voting scales are known to have been common. For instance, more than one fourth of
the companies in Brazil circa 1910 had maximum vote provisions. In fact, Musacchio (2007)
shows that companies with maximum vote provisions had significantly lower concentration of
ownership and control than companies without such provisions, and that, thanks to the lower
ownership concentration in those companies, average ownership concentration before 1910 was
lower than for any period in the twentieth century. In the case of Chile, Islas Rojas (2007)
demonstrates that, notwithstanding the lack of protections for shareholders in Chile’s national
laws, by the 1870s the Chilean stock market represented 17% of GDP (more than any other Latin
American market at the time). Using all of the corporate charters issued in Chile from the 1850s
to 1902, he shows that the majority of companies had relatively diffused ownership and strong
firm-level protections for shareholders. Forty-five percent of the population of Chilean
corporations chartered in the second half of the twentieth century had maximum vote
provisions and nearly 10% graduated voting scales, and Islas Rojas estimates that most
companies’ bylaws included about four of the shareholder protections identified in Table 10. It
is perhaps because of these protections that ownership dispersion was common in Chilean
corporations during the latter part of the nineteenth century.
       Miwa and Ramseyer (2000) show that in contrast to the concentrated ownership that
characterizes Japanese companies today, the cotton industry in Japan between the 1880s and
1890s had diffused ownership, firms having, on average, 331 shareholders. ―[T]he largest
investors held about eight percent of the stock, the five largest together held 24 percent, and the
10 largest held 33 percent… [I]n no firm did the largest shareholder hold 50 percent or more of
the stock, and in only three firms did a shareholder hold 20 percent‖ (Miwa and Ramseyer,
2000, p. 180). These corporations, according to the authors, attracted investors through charter
provisions that aligned the incentives of managers with their firms (as by tying managerial pay
to profits), by restricting managerial discretion ―by charter and statute,‖ and by hiring reputable
industrialists to their boards of directors. For example, even though ―the Commercial Code
provided a one-share-one-vote default rule, firms could legally reduce the voting power of the
largest shareholders‖ (Miwa and Ramseyer, 2000, pp. 198–199) by, for example, adopting
graduated voting scales. Miwa and Ramseyer estimate that before 1893, 112 out of 134




                                                27
companies used some form of voting rights to restrict the power of large shareholders. This
number decreased after 1893, but still 20% of companies used graduated voting between 1893
and 1900. Finally, companies hired reputable industrialists to monitor their managers, knowing
that their reputations were too valuable to them for these distinguished gentlemen to do a poor
job. This last finding has been confirmed by Franks, Mayer, and Miyajima (2007), who argue
that one way in which new corporations gained the trust of investors was by including among
their founders either prominent industrialists or experienced and reputable investors.
         In Germany, the combination of strong laws mandating disclosure and actions of
bankers on the boards of directors of large corporations helped to uphold the rights of minority
shareholders. According to Franks, Mayer, and Wagner (2006), ownership concentration around
1890 was at its lowest point until after 1950. Although the precise nature of the provisions
included in corporate charters to protect shareholders is not known, the literature that studies
corporate governance in Germany claims that corporations were motivated by the
intermediation of universal banks to respect the interests of small shareholders. ―[S]ince banks
acted as custodians of minority investors shares, they could also in principle encourage firms to
uphold minority shareholders as well as their own interests‖ (Franks, Mayer, and Wagner, 2006,
p. 582). According to O’Sullivan (2000, p. 237), to attract investors ―the banks encouraged
industrial companies to maintain stable dividends.‖ Banks became custodians not only because
accountholders wanted to purchase securities, but also because accountholders could buy and
sell securities with other accountholders at the same bank without incurring the turnover tax
imposed on exchange transactions in the market after 1894 (Fohlin, 2007). With the shares they
had in custody, banks accumulated enough power to select directors and steer the direction of
corporations to their benefit and that of their accountholders (Fohlin, 2007; Fear and Kobrak,
2007).
         This does not imply that all firms in either common or civil law countries provided
better shareholder protections or that ownership concentration was lower in countries that
embraced any particular legal tradition. But it does question one channel through which we
expect legal origin to determine clear differences across countries, namely investor protections.
Perhaps the fact that most countries had weak protections in national laws did not operate in
the same way in practices. For example, using ownership concentration in a country as a
reflection of how protected are small shareholders from the abuses of managers and insiders,




                                                28
LLS (1999) find systematic differences in the concentration of ownership and control in the
largest companies of the world according to the legal tradition of their home country. They find
that ownership dispersion is higher in common law countries, again with French civil law
countries exhibiting the highest concentration of ownership in the world.
       The evidence of ownership concentration does not allow us to make bold statements
about the differences in ownership concentration in civil and common law countries. For
instance, Aganin and Volpin (2006) find in Italy before 1940 lower ownership concentration
than during most of the twentieth century. Musacchio (2007) and Islas Rojas (2007) also find
lower concentration of ownership in Brazil and Chile circa 1900 than today. And although
France today has highly concentrated ownership, Hannah (2007a) argues that circa 1900, in
sectors such as ‖railways, financials, and the Suez Canal,‖ there was widespread ownership
dispersion (other sectors such as industrials exhibiting more concentrated ownership).
Government guarantees in the French railway sector also help to explain why investors
participated actively in the ownership of these large enterprises. Cohen (2007, p. 7) defends the
idea that shareholders participated actively in the ownership of railways because shares
―always carried government guarantees on their dividends, interest, and amortization, which
insulated them from economic volatility.‖ In French commercial and government-supported
banks, share ownership was also widely dispersed, as was the case in Crédit Foncier, which had
―39,510 shareholders as early as 1900,‖ with an average holding of ―eight and a half shares‖
(Hannah, 2007a, p. 17).
       Common law countries such as the United States had the opposite experience. Whereas
today we find wide ownership dispersion in most large publicly traded corporations, in the past
ownership concentration seems to have been the rule rather than the exception. Lipartito and
Morii (2007) maintain that the separation of ownership and control observed by Berle and
Means (1932) in the early 1930s was not as pronounced as those researchers thought. Using data
on the concentration of ownership in the 200 largest U.S. corporations, Lipartito and Morii make
the case that the norm was concentrated ownership and almost no separation of ownership and
control. Hannah (2007a) found tight ownership of controlling blocks in large corporations more
common in the United States than in Europe circa 1900, especially among banking, insurance,
mining, and industrial companies. Brecht and DeLong (2006) find the regulation of stock market
activity and ownership dispersion that characterize American corporations today to be in sharp




                                                29
contrast with the past, noting that ―before 1900 America did not lack for powerful family
groups, for parent companies, or for financial intermediaries that aggressively embraced the
role of monitoring and supervising corporate managers‖ (p. 614).
       In the case of Britain, too, it would be difficult to conclude that concentrated or diffused
ownership prevailed. It would be safer to say that ownership took, as in French civil law
countries, two distinct forms: family or tightly held, and widely held. Campbell and Turner
(2007) observe that ―many of the publicly-traded companies in late Victorian Britain had
diffused ownership. In particular, banks and railways.…‖ Banks tended to exhibit less
concentrated ownership because some limited the proportion of equity that could be held by a
single shareholder. Campbell and Turner (2007, pp. 4–5) report that ―shareholder constituencies
exceeding 1,000 were typical in the following sectors: docks, gas, water, telegraph, and
shipping,‖ but that despite evidence of diffused ownership in many companies in these sectors,
―it is believed that many commercial and industrial publicly-traded companies in Victorian
Britain had concentrated ownership.‖ Franks, Mayer, and Rossi’s (2004, 2006) research reveals
family ownership to have been far more common in England at the turn of the twentieth
century than today, and concentrated ownership to have been more common then as well.
       The evidence on investor protections and disclosure requirements across countries at the
turn of the twentieth century thus does not allow us to draw clear lines separating along the
lines of legal families the degree to which investors were protected in the past. The fragmentary
evidence on ownership concentration also does not allow us to distinguish countries or legal
families according to corporate governance practices, as is done today. For instance, La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) find a clear separation between common law and French
civil law countries (and civil law countries in general) with respect to concentration of
ownership, something that would have been nearly impossible to do circa 1900 when common
law countries had high ownership concentration and some civil law countries had lower
ownership concentration. This evidence is still preliminary, but as more research is done on the
history of corporate governance practices and financial development around the world, the
evidence points more and more towards relative convergence rather than divergence across
countries.




                                                30
From Convergence to Divergence in the Twentieth Century

       If the evidence presented on investor protections in the past points in the direction of
relative convergence or not so clear differences across countries, then it must be the case that
most of the divergence took place in the twentieth century. Some countries embraced weak
shareholder and creditor protections, concentrated ownership, business groups, and industrial
concentration, others restricted ownership concentration and regulated the actions of powerful
market participants such as large shareholders, managers, and investment bankers (La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999; Khanna and Yafeh, 2007). In the United States, after the
government eliminated the power of investment bankers to ―regulate‖ the financial market
(because of the excessive concentration of power and poor results after the crash of 1929), the
Securities and Exchange Commission was established and a strong mandate to protect small
investors permeated the ideology of regulators and judges thereafter. In other countries such as
Brazil, Canada, and India, and most countries in continental Europe, government action, new
regulations, and changes in taxation led to concentrated ownership, large conglomerates
dominating the corporate landscape, and somewhat concentrated markets for manufactures
and some services (Morck, Percy, Tian, and Yeung, 2006; Khanna and Palepu, 2006; Rajan and
Zingales, 2003; Pagano and Volpin, 2005).
       What explains, then, the divergence in financial development in the twentieth century?
According to Rajan and Zingales (2003), much of the development of stock markets observed
worldwide in 1913 was reversed in the course of the century, recovering (especially in civil law
countries) only at the end of the 1990s. Analyzing this ―great reversal,‖ Rajan and Zingales
observe that the reduction in capital and trade flows after WWI (especially in the 1930s) affected
the development of financial markets and changed the incentives of domestic industrialists. In
their interpretation of events, industrialists promoted the initial development of markets to
finance the expansion of their operations in the face of the intense international competition that
prevailed before World War I. But once they had become well established and international
competition had become less intense, further development of credit and stock markets that
facilitated entry by new competitors did not hold great appeal for them. Rajan and Zingales
view the Great Depression as a key inflexion point because it generated a coordinated effort by
governments worldwide to restrict capital flows and increase tariffs. In this scenario, labor and
industrialists welcomed self-sufficiency. The latter lobbied for government policies that would




                                                31
limit financial development, preferring a growth strategy whereby the source of corporate
financing shifted largely from the stock markets to government subsidized loans.
       Other recent works have developed theoretical models that add an important nuance to
the stylized model of Rajan and Zingales (2003). According to Perotti and von Thadden (2006),
it was the reaction to the inflationary shock of the 1920s that caused the asymmetries observed
today in investor protections and financial development, the intuition of their model being that
the inflationary shock affected countries asymmetrically. In countries in which the median voter
held equity and there was no strong inflationary shock, voters demanded improved regulation
and strengthening of the control rights of dispersed equity holders. In countries in which the
inflationary shock drastically reduced the financial holdings of the median voter, voters
demanded that their labor income be protected, even at the expense of protections for outside
shareholders. Albeit a highly stylized picture of what happened after WWI, this model suggests
that post-war inflation eroded financial wealth and generated support for governance and
regulation less concerned with protecting investors than with protecting labor, as reflected in
bankruptcy laws that favored incumbent entrepreneurs and labor over creditors and a
corporate governance system that emphasized stability even if it implied concentrated
ownership, greater dependence on bank credit, and an important role for the government as an
owner and controller of corporations. This view is rather convincing, but empirical tests to date
have not been done with financial development indicators. Perotti and Schwienbacher (2007)
develop such a test to explain the differences in pension funding schemes across countries, but
they do not look at financial development.
       Recently, some papers have tried to link the current divergence in corporate governance
across countries to differences in electoral systems. For instance, Pagano and Volpin (2005)
argue that differences in shareholder protections in OECD countries can be explained by
differences in their electoral systems. In proportional electoral systems, in which winning a
majority of votes is crucial for competing parties, parties shape their platforms to the interests of
large cohesive groups such as entrepreneurs and labor, thus favoring low investor protections
and high labor protections. On the other hand, in majoritarian electoral systems in which the
winner needs to win more districts, parties cater to the pivotal group, which could be the group
of equity and bondholders (i.e., rentiers and unemployed and self-employed workers). The
winning platform in this scenario is thus greater investor and lesser labor protections. As




                                                 32
powerful as this can be in explaining the differences in OECD countries, because many of the
changes in corporate governance after the 1930s took place under authoritarian regimes (e.g.,
under Mussolini in Italy, Hitler in Germany, Vargas in Brazil, and others), we need an
explanation that goes beyond electoral systems.
         Roe (2003) tried to explain differences in corporate governance in OECD countries using
ideology (or how social democratic a country is), the idea being that concentrated ownership is
a response not only to agency problems between owners and mangers, but also a reaction to the
conflict between labor and the corporation. In societies in which labor has more power in the
political system and in the system of corporate governance, concentrated ownership and less
distance between principals and agents helped to mitigate conflicts between management and
labor.
         Gourevitch and Shinn (2005) try to explain the divergence in corporate governance
using a political model that applies to countries with different political regimes including
authoritarian countries. For them, what matters is how in different countries in the twentieth
century the preferences of owners, managers, and labor changed and shaped regulation to
protect shareholders. In societies in which owners and workers were in conflict with managers,
protections for shareholders are stronger and ownership is less concentrated. Yet, they argue
that beyond shareholder protections there is, in some countries, greater coordination among
individuals and groups (more ―degrees of coordination‖) that led to more concentrated
ownership, greater reliance on bank credit, and strong state intervention.8 These authors,
together with Rajan and Zingales (2003), Roe (2003), Pagano and Volpin (2005), and Perotti and
von Thadden (2006), agree that if shareholder protections in national laws are the product of
politics, to comprehend the divergence in investor protections and corporate governance
regimes across countries we need to understand the political process and the shocks that caused
a change in preferences as well as the interaction of politics and legal origins.


Conclusions
         The evidence presented in this paper reveals three things. First, the data on financial
development across countries in the first part of the twentieth century does not provide strong


         8  See Peter A. Gourevitch and James Shinn, Political Power & Corporate Control: The New Global
Politics of Corporate Governance, Princeton, N.J. and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2005. Their
argument is summarized on pp. 10-11 and 277–278.



                                                     33
support for the persistence of effects of legal tradition hypothesis. That is, the significant
differences observed today in financial development across legal traditions and legal families
are not so clear when cross-sections in the past are examined. Neither the data on stock market
capitalization to GDP, private credit to GDP, number of companies traded per million people,
or bond market capitalization yield robust results to support the idea that there are clear
differences in financial development across legal families. The only evidence that supports the
persistence of effects hypothesis is associated with a rather unconventional measure of financial
development, specifically, data on deposits per capita, which show common law countries to
have had larger banking systems than countries that belonged to other legal families. Even if
common law countries had larger financial markets according to some indicators, it is not clear
they dominated in all of them.
        Second, whereas the law and finance literature argues that the differences observed in
credit market development today are largely a product of clear differences in creditor
protections contained in national laws (LLSV, 1998; Djankov, McLeish, and Shleifer, 2007), circa
1910 we find convergence in the extent of creditor protections included in the bankruptcy laws
of common and French civil law countries. The evidence on creditor rights thus does not
support the persistence of effects hypothesis, but does support the idea of relative convergence
in financial development across countries.
        Third, the evidence on shareholder rights at the turn of the twentieth century also shows
that in most countries for which we have data, investor protections included in national
company laws were weak. That is, there was convergence on weak shareholder rights in
national laws across countries. The evidence makes it hard to discern clear differences in the
level of investor protections by country because investors were protected from the abuses of
managers and company insiders in the bylaws of many, but not all, of the largest corporations
and through the actions of investment and universal banks. For instance, we find in countries
belonging to all legal families companies that limited the power of large shareholders through
the use of maximum vote provisions and graduated voting scales. But no legal family seems to
have provided a specific set of rights that were unmatched in countries that belonged to other
legal families.
        Thus, the evidence suggests that we do not have a clear idea on whether there were
significant differences in financial development among countries of the different legal families.




                                                  34
Yet, investor protections and disclosure requirements at the time of the initial public offering,
which are the main channels through which the literature assumes the systematic differences in
financial development are generated, do not seem to have been that different across countries in
the past. Perhaps that these investor protections are not the actual channel through which legal
origin is related to financial development.
       Now, obviously because the sample presented here is rather small, one could object to
some of the implications of the findings of this paper. But it is not clear what the inclusion of
other countries (mostly poor) would imply. Just because the sample includes mostly rich
countries and the richest of the then ―emerging‖ economies, does that imply that we find no
differences in financial development because the sample excludes poor countries? Is it then the
case that legal origins have more perverse effects in those countries? If this is the case, then the
theory that links legal origin to financial development needs to be expanded or revised to
explain how the effects of legal traditions manifest themselves more clearly in poor economies.
Perhaps there is an interaction effect with income that has not been taken into account.
       Furthermore, the findings of this paper do not imply that legal origin cannot be a
significant explanatory variable of the differences observed in financial development today.
Instead, they suggest a need for more research into how shocks of the twentieth century such as
the inflationary shock after WWI and the Great Depression triggered a political process that led
to state intervention and regulation, which ended up making legal origin matter more. Perhaps
the divergence in financial development and investor protections in countries of different legal
origins is related to the fact that in French civil law countries the lawmaking process is highly
centralized, rendering it more easily captured by interest groups. In contrast, in common law
countries judges have an easier time adapting the statutes and guaranteeing that the rules that
work best in practice end up prevailing (Glaeser and Shleifer, 2002; Beck, Demirguç-Kunt, and
Levine, 2003a). Even if this is the case, the starting point for this adaptation process was not
hundreds of years ago (when legal systems were introduced), but only a few decades ago, and,
in any case, the effects of legal origin manifested themselves in the institutions that sustain
financial development only after the political economy of these countries digested the shocks of
the early part of the twentieth century. But even if this is the case and legal origin matters, we
need a better explanation of why Canada and India ended up with concentrated ownership and
weak investor protections whereas the United Kingdom and United States ended up with




                                                 35
ownership concentration and strong shareholder rights. Perhaps there are missing variables
that need to be taken into account. For instance, Roe and Siegel (2007) find econometric
evidence that in countries with more political instability financial markets are smaller, no matter
their legal origin. In fact, after controlling for political instability, they find that the effects of
legal origin in most of their regressions disappear.




                                                    36
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James Robinson. 2001. ―The Colonial Origins of Comparative
         Development: An Empirical Investigation.‖ American Economic Review 91: 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. 2005. ―The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade,
         Institutional Change and Economic Growth.‖ American Economic Review 95 (2005): 546-579.
Aganin, Alexander and Paolo Volpin. 2006. ―The History of Corporate Ownership in Italy.‖ In Randall
         Morck (ed.) A History of Corporate Governance Around the World: Family Business Groups to
         Professional Managers. Chicago and London, University of Chicago Press and NBER.
Argentine Yearbook 1902. Buenos Aires: J. Grant & Son, 1902.
Argentine Yearbook 1914. Buenos Aires: J. Grant & Son, 1914.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Lakshmi Iyer. "History, Institutions and Economic Performance: The Legacy of
         Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India." American Economic Review 95, no. 4 (September 2005):
         1190-1213.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2003a. ―Law and Finance: Why Does Legal Origin
         Matter?‖ Journal of Comparative Economics 31: 653- 675.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2003b. ―Law, Endowments, and Finance.‖ Journal
         of Financial Economics 70-2: 137–181.
Berle, Adolf A. and Gardiner C. Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. New York:
         Hartcourt, Brace & World, Inc.
Bértola, Luis. 1998. El PIB de Uruguay 1870-1936 y otras estimaciones. Montevideo, FCS-CSIC.
Bolsa de Comercio de Buenos Aires. 1902. Boletin de la Bolsa de Buenos Aires.
Bolsa de Comercio de Buenos Aires. 1913. Boletin de la Bolsa de Buenos Aires.
Bordo, Michael, Michael J. Dueker, and David C. Wheelock. 2007. ―Monetary Policy and Stock Market
         Booms and Busts in the 20th Century.‖ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2007-
         020A.
Bordo, Michael and Hugh Rockoff. 1996. ―The Gold Standard as a 'Good Housekeeping seal of
         Approval'.‖ Journal of Economic History 56-2: 389-428.
Bordo, Michael and Peter Rousseau. 2006. ―Legal-political factors and the historical evolution of the
         finance-growth link.‖ European Review of Economic History 10: 421–444.
Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004.
         ―The Regulation of Labor.‖ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119-4: 1339-1382.
Bozio, Antoine. ―La Capitalization Boursière en France au Xxe Siècle.‖ Unpublished masters’ thesis, Ecole
         Normale Supérieure, ENSAE, Ecole Polytechnique, 2002.
Braun, Juan, Matias Braun, Ignacio Briones, José Díaz, Rolf Lüders, and Gert Wagner. 2000. ―Economía
         Chilena 1810–1996.‖ Pontifícia Universidad Católica de Chile, Instituto de Economía, Working
         Paper 187.
Brecht, Marco and Bradford DeLong. 2006. ―Why Has There Been So Little Block Holding in America?‖
         In Randall Morck (ed.) A History of Corporate Governance Around the World: Family Business Groups
         to Professional Managers. Chicago and London, University of Chicago Press and NBER.
Brown, Richard. 1900. ―Comparative Legislation in Bankruptcy.‖ Journal of the Society of Comparative
         Legislation 2: 251-270.
Campbell, Gareth and John D. Turner. 2007. ―Protecting Outside Investors in a Laissez-faire Legal
         Environment: Corporate Governance in Victorian Britain.‖ Paper presented at the Business
         History Conference, Cleveland, June.
Carlos, Anne and Frank D. Lewis. 1995. ―International Financing of Canadian Railroads: The Role of
         Information.‖ In Michael Bordo and Richard Sylla (eds.) Anglo-American Finance: Financial
         Institutions and Markets in the Twentieth Century. New York and Burr Ridge, Ill.: New York
         University Press and Irwin Press, pp. 383-414.
Carosso, Vincent P. 1970. Investment Banking in America, A History. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
         University Press.




                                                    37
Cohen, Jim. 2007. ―Divergent Paths: How Capital Market Development Affected Differentiation in
         Transportation Structures, U.S. and France, 1840–1940.‖ Paper presented at Financer le
         Entreprises face aux Mutations Économiques do XX Siècle, Institut de la Gestion Publique et du
         Développment Économique, Paris, France, March.
Crouchley, Arthur Edwin. 1977. Investment of Foreign Capital in Egyptian Companies and Public Debt. New
         York: Arno Press.
Davis, Lance E. and Robert E. Gallman. 2001. Evolving Financial Markets and International Capital
         Flows: Britain, the Americas, and Australia, 1865-1914. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
         University Press.
De Jong, Abe and Ailsa Röell. 2006. ―Financing and Control in the Netherlands: A Historical
         Perspective.‖In Randall Morck (ed.) A History of Corporate Governance Around the World: Family
         Business Groups to Professional Managers. Chicago and London, University of Chicago Press and
         NBER.
DeLong, Bradford. 1991. ―Did J.P. Morgan’s Men Add Value? An Economist’s Perspective on Financial
         Capitalism.‖ In Peter Temin (ed.) Inside the Business Enterprise: Historical Perspectives on the Use of
         Information. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 205-250.
Denmark, Det Statistiske Department, Statistik Årbog, various years.
Deutsche Bundesbank. 1976. Deutsches Geld- und Bankwesen in Zahlen 1873-1975. Deutsche Bundesbank:
         Frankfurt A.M.
Dimson, Elroy, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton. 2002. The Triumph of the Optimists: 101 Years of Global
         Investment Returns. Princeton, N.J. and Oxford, U.K.: Princeton University Press.
Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. 2007. ―Private Credit in 129 Countries.‖ Journal
         of Financial Economics 84: 299–329.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. ―The Regulation
         of Entry.‖ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117-1: 1-37.
Drummond, Ian M. ―Capital Markets in Australia and Canada, 1895-1914.‖ Unpublished Ph.D.
         dissertation, Yale University, Conn., 1959.
Dunlavy, Colleen. 1998. ―Corporate Governance in Late 19th-Century Europe and the U.S.: The Case of
         Shareholder Voting Rights.‖ In Klaus J. Hopt et al. (eds.) Corporate Governance: The State of the Art
         of Emerging Research. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 5–39.
Dunlavy, Colleen. 2004. "From Citizens to Plutocrats: 19th-Century Shareholder Voting Rights and
         Theories of the Corporation." In Kenneth Lipartito and David B. Sicilia (eds.) Constructing
         Corporate America: History, Politics, Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Eitrheim, Øyvind, Jan T. Klovland and Jan F. Qvigstad. 2004. "Historical Monetary Statistics for Norway
         1819-2003." Norges Bank Occasional Papers No 35.
Fear, Jeffrey and Christopher Kobrak. 2007. ―Banks on Board: Banks in German and American Corporate
         Governance, 1870-1914.‖ Mimeo, Harvard Business School and European School of Management,
         May.
Fohlin, Caroline. 2007. ―Does Civil Law Tradition and Universal Banking Crowd Out Securities Markets?
         Pre-World War I Germany as a Counter-Example.‖ Enterprise & Society 8-3: 602–641.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Hannes F. Wagner. 2006. "The Origins of the German Corporation—
         Finance, Ownership and Control." Review of Finance 10-4.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Hideaki Miyajima. 2007. ―Evolution of Ownership: The Curious Case of
         Japan.‖ Mimeo, Waseda University.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi. 2004. ―Ownership: Evolution and Regulation.‖ Institute of
         Finance and Accounting Working Paper FIN 401, London Business School.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi. 2006. ―Spending Less Time with the Family: The Decline
         of Family Ownership in the UK.‖ In Randall Morck (ed.) A History of Corporate Governance Around
         the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers. Chicago and London, University of
         Chicago Press and NBER.
Glaeser, Edward and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. ―Legal Origins.‖ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117-4:
         1193-1230.



                                                      38
Goetzmann, William and Elisabeth Koll. 2006. ―The History of Corporate Ownership in China: State
         Patronage, State Legislation, and the Issue of Control.‖ In Randall Morck (ed.), A History of
         Corporate Governance Around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers. Chicago
         and London, University of Chicago Press and NBER, pp. 149–181.
Goldsmith, Raymond W. 1985. Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978.
         Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Gourevitch, Peter A. and James Shinn. 2005. Political Power & Corporate Control: The New Global Politics of
         Corporate Governance. Princeton, N.J. and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Hannah, Leslie. 2007a. ―The Divorce of Ownership From Control from 1900: Re-calibrating Imagined
         Global Historical Trends.‖ CIRJE Discussion Papers, University of Tokyo, Japan, January.
Hannah, Leslie. 2007b. ―Pioneering Modern Corporate Governance: A View from London in 1900.‖ CIRJE
         Discussion Papers, University of Tokyo, Japan, March.
Hautcoeur, Pierre-Cyrille. 1994. "Le Marché Boursier et le Financement des Enterprises Françaises
         (1890-1939)." Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Université de Paris I Panthéon-Sorbonne.
Hilt, Eric. 2007. ―When Did Ownership Separate from Control? Corporate Governance in the Early
         Nineteenth Century.‖ NBER Working Paper 13093.
Islas Rojas, Gonzalo. 2007. ―Does Regulation Matter? An Analysis of Corporate Charters in a Laissez-faire
         Environment.‖ Mimeo, University of California Los Angeles, September.
Jones, Matthew T. and Maurice Obstfeld. 2001. "Saving, Investment, and Gold: A Reassessment of
         Historical Current Account Data." In Guillermo A. Calvo, Rudi Dornbusch, and Maurice Obstfeld
         (eds.) Money, Capital Mobility, and Trade: Essays in Honor of Robert Mundell. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
         Press, pp. 303-364.
Khanna, Tarun and Krishna Palepu. 2004. ―The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India: Broad
         Patterns and a History of the Indian Software Industry.‖ In Randall Morck (ed.) A History of
         Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers. Chicago
         and London: University of Chicago Press and NBER, pp. 283–324.
Khanna, Tarun and Yishay Yafeh. 2007. ―Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites?‖
         Journal of Economic Literature 45-2: 331–372.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 1999. ―Corporate Ownership around
         the World.‖ Journal of Finance 54-2: 471-517.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2006. ―What Works in Securities
         Laws?‖ Journal of Finance 61-1: 1–32.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. ―The Economic Consequences of
         Legal Origins.‖ Journal of Economic Literature (forthcoming).
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997. ―Legal
         Determinants of External Finance.‖ Journal of Finance 52-3: 1131-1150.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. ―Law and
         Finance.‖ Journal of Political Economy 106-6: 1113-1155.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2000. "Investor
         Protection and Corporate Governance." Journal of Financial Economics 58-1: 1-25
Lamoreaux, Naomi and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2006. ―Corporate Governance and the Plight of Minority
         Shareholders in the United States before the Great Depression.‖ In Edward Glaeser and Claudia
         Goldin (eds.) Corruption and Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 125-152.
Leacy, F. H. (ed.) 1983. Historical Statistics of Canada. Ottawa: Social Science Federation of Canada and
         Statistics Canada, available at http://www.statcan.ca/english/freepub/11-516-
         XIE/sectiona/toc.htm
League of Nations. 1927. International Statistical Yearbook 1926. Geneva.
League of Nations. 1930. International Statistical Yearbook 1929. Geneva.
Levy-Leboyer, Maurice and François Bourguignon. 1985. l'Economie Française au XIXe siècle: Analyse
         macro-économique, Economica, Paris.
Lipartito, Kenneth and Yumiko Morii. 2007. ―Rethinking the Separation of Ownership from Management
         in American History.‖ Mimeo, Johns Hopkins University.



                                                    39
Maddison, Angus. 2003. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: OECD.
Marc Flandreau and Frédréric Zumer. 2004. The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913, OECD: Paris.
Marshall, Monty G. and Keith Jaggers. 2002. Polity IV Data Set. [Computer file; version v2004] College
         Park, Md.: Center for International Development and Conflict Management, University of
         Maryland.
Maurer, Noel and Tridib Sharma. 2001. ―Enforcing Property Rights through Reputation: Mexico's Early
         Industrialization, 1878-1913.‖ Journal of Economic History 61 (December): 950-973
Michèle Saint Marc. 1974. ―Introduction aux Statistiques Monétaires et Financières Françaises (1807-
         1970).‖ Revue International d’Histoire de la Banque 8.
Michie, Ranald C. 2006. The Global Securities Markets: A History. New York and Oxford: Oxford University
         Press.
Miwa, Yoshiro and J. Mark Ramseyer. 2000. ―Corporate Governance in Transitional Economies: Lessons
         from the Prewar Japanese Cotton Textile Industry.‖ Journal of Legal Studies 29-1: 171–203.
Moore, Lyndon. 2006. ―The Effect of World War One on Stock Market Integration.‖ Mimeo Victoria
         University of Wellington.
Morck, Randall K., Michael Percy, Gloria Y. Tian, and Bernard Yeung. 2006. ―The Rise and Fall of the
         Widely Held Firm: A History of Corporate Ownership in Canada.‖ In Randall Morck (ed.) A
         History of Corporate Governance Around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers.
         Chicago and London, University of Chicago Press and NBER.
Moss, David. 2002. When All Else Fails: Government as the Ultimate Risk Manage. Cambridge, Mass. and
         London, England: Harvard University Press.
Musacchio, Aldo. 2007.‖Experiments in Financial Democracy: Corporate Governance and Financial
         Development in Brazil, 1882–1950.‖ Unpublished book manuscript, Harvard Business School.
Musacchio, Aldo. 2008. "Can Civil Law Countries Get Good Institutions? Lessons from the History of
         Creditor Rights and Bond Markets in Brazil." Journal of Economic History 68-1 (March).
Nakamura, Leonardo and Carlos E. J. M. Zarazaga. 2003. ―Banking and finance, 1900–1935.‖ In Gerardo
         della Paolera and Alan Taylor (eds.) A New Economic History of Argentina. Cambridge and New
         York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 295–324.
Neymarck, Alfred. 1901. Congrès des Valeurs Mobilières. 4 vols. Paris: Impremerie Paul Dupont.
Neymarck, Alfred. 1902. ―La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières.‖ In Bulletin de l’Institute
         International de Statistitque. Vol. XIV. Berlin: Imprimerie Julius Sittenfeld.
Neymarck, Alfred. 1914. ―La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières.‖ Bulletin de l’Institute
         International de Statistitque. Vol. XIX. Vienna: Imprimerie Frederic Jaspers.
Neymarck, Alfred. 1915. ―La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières.‖ Bulletin de l’Institute
         International de Statistitque. Vol. XX. Vienna: Imprimerie Frederic Jaspers.
O’Sullivan, Mary. 2000. Contests for Corporate Control: Corporate Governance and Economic Performance in the
         United States and Germany. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Sullivan, Mary. 2007. ―The Expansion of the U.S. Stock Market, 1885–1930: Historical Facts and
         Theoretical Fashions.‖ Enterprise & Society 8: 489–542.
Pagano, Marco and Paolo Volpin. 2005. ―The Political Economy of Corporate Governance.‖ American
         Economic Review 95-4: 1005-1030.
Perotti, Enrico and Armin Schwienbacher. 2007. ―The Political Origin of Pension Funding.‖ Mimeo
         University of Amsterdam, March.
Perotti, Enrico and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden. 2006. ―The Political Economy of Corporate Control and
         Labor Rents.‖ Journal of Political Economy 114-1: 145–175.
Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan. 1994. ―The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence
         from Small Business Data.‖ Journal of Finance 49-1: 3-37.
Prados de la Escosura, Leandro. 2003. El Progreso Económico de España 1850-2000. Madrid, Fundación
         BBVA.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales. 2003. ―The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development
         in the 20th Century.‖ Journal of Financial Economics 69: 5-50.




                                                     40
Roe, Mark and Jordan Siegel. 2007. ―Political Instability and Financial Development.‖ Mimeo, Harvard
         Law School and Harvard Business School, February.
Roe, Mark J. 2003. Political Determinants of Corporate Governance. New York and Oxford: Oxford University
         Press.
Sgard, Jerôme. 2006. ―Do Legal Origins Matter? Bankruptcy Laws in Europe (1808-1914).‖ European
         Review of Economic History 10-3: 389–419.
Sheppard, David K. 1971. The Growth and Role of the UK Financial Institutions 1888–1962. London: Methuen
         & Co.
Siegel, Jordan. 2005. ‖Can Foreign Firms Bond Themselves Effectively by Renting U.S. Securities Laws?‖
         Journal of Financial Economics 75-2: 319-359.
Sylla, Richard. 2006. ―Schumpeter Redux: A Review of Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales’s Saving
         Capitalism from the Capitalists.‖ Journal of Economic Literature 44.
Union of South Africa. Union Office of Census and Statistics. 1918. Official Year Book of the Union of South
         Africa, no. 2.
Uruguay. 1917. Anuario Estadistico de la Republica Oriental del Uruguay 1915, Montevideo.
Uruguay. Cámara Nacional de Comercio. Departamento de Estudios Económicos. "Historia Monetaria,
         Bancaria y del Mercado de Capitales del Uruguay." Mimeo, Montevideo, July 1983.
Wellhoff, S. 1917. Sociétés par Actions. Alexandria: Société de Publications Égyptiennes.
Williams, E. T. 1905. Recent Chinese Legislation Relating to Commercial, Railway and Mining Enterprises.
         Shanghai: Shanghai Mercury.
Wood, E.R. Review of the Bond Market in Canada… Montreal: Dominion Securities Corporation, 1911–
         1914.




                                                    41
Appendix A. New Estimates of Stock Market Capitalization for the
United Kingdom
        I estimated stock market capitalization for the United Kingdom in 1895, 1900, 1913, and
1929 using all the quotations of the Investor’s Monthly Manual. Because the location information
for each company was not standard, it was often difficult to determine the best domicile code.
As a rule, I used the company headquarters as the domicile according to the information of
Stock Exchange Official Intelligence.9 If a company seemed to be based in a country other than
Britain or outside the empire because of the Stock Exchange Official Intelligence chapter in which
it appears (e.g., Foreign Railways) or because of the title (e.g., Moscow-Windau-Rybinsk
Railway), and no headquarters or head office was listed, but instead a London agent, I coded
this security as foreign. If there was no other indication of a domicile (no office or agent address
or description of financial/managerial home), but there was a description such as ―accounts
submitted in London,‖ I coded the security as having the nationality of the location in which the
accounts were submitted.10
        There are three striking features of the estimates of stock and bond market capitalization
to GDP for the United Kingdom presented in Table 10-2. First, looking only at domestic stocks
listed in stock markets of the United Kingdom, it can be seen that stock market capitalization to
GDP was between 34% and 44% of GDP between 1895 and 1913. Second, the United Kingdom
had a relatively large bond market for domestic corporate bonds. Third, the largest share of
listings in the U.K. stock markets were of bonds from countries outside the British Empire.
        These findings explain why authors such as Sylla complained about the accuracy of the
figures available for the United Kingdom. Stock markets in this nation seem to have been


        9  All the information on headquarters is available at The stock exchange official intelligence for ...
London: Spottiswoode, Ballantyne, 1899-1930. Using the headquarters as the main criteria to define
nationality might overestimate the size of domestic issues in the United Kingdom, but this is not a
problem as it biases upwards the estimate of average stock market capitalization for common law
countries, thus going against my hypothesis of relative convergence across legal traditions circa 1913.
         10 Most often, the location information came from the address of the company headquarters,

which could have been a street name, city name, province name, or country name (or none of these). In
cases in which provinces in Australia (e.g., New South Wales, Transvaal, or British Colombia), Canada,
New Zealand, and South Africa were given as the location of the headquarters, I labeled them with the
collective modern country name, and also coded them as part of the British Empire since their legal
systems were extremely similar to those of the United Kingdom, and, according to Niall Ferguson, ―they
retained the monarch as head of state and their foreign and defense policies were emphatically not
independent.‖ Niall Ferguson, personal correspondence with the author, July 31, 2007.



                                                       42
smaller than the literature assumes. The problem is not that bonds were added to the stock
market capitalization figures, but that the cross-listings to the stock market capitalization of the
United Kingdom were added, which would not be a problem if what was being studied was not
the relationship between national laws and the development of domestic markets. Because this
is precisely what I am studying, I use the average estimates for stock market capitalization that
take only domestic firms into account.
 Table A1 Estimates of Stock and Bond Market Capitalization, United Kingdom, 1895, 1900,
             1913, 1929 (at Market Prices by Origin of Listing and as a % of GDP)

                                                  1895         1900         1913       1929
            Lower bound estimates of stock market capitalization
            Total stock market cap.           33.8         55.9             33.9       100.6
                Domestic                      20.3         29.2             18.9        71.4
                British Empire                 7.0         11.4              4.5        20.1
                Other countries                6.5         15.2             10.4         9.1
            Total corporate bonds                 418.7        436.4       762.9       163.3
                Domestic                          114.7         95.6        99.8        48.0
                British Empire                     87.7        117.8       253.9        29.6
                Other countries                   216.2        223.0       409.2        85.8
            Upper bound estimates of stock market capitalization
            Total stock market cap.           66.2        102.6            112.2       118.4
                Domestic                      47.6         58.3             47.3        86.3
                British Empire                 7.0         11.7              6.5        20.8
                Other countries               11.5         32.7             58.5        11.4
            Total corporate bonds                 183.9        176.2       330.9       67.9
                Domestic                           87.4         66.6        71.4       33.1
                British Empire                     13.8          9.3        53.6        7.5
                Other countries                    82.7        100.4       205.8       27.3
             Average estimates for the United Kingdom (domestic companies only)
             Stock market capitalization
             (avg.)                                  34.0       43.7        33.1       78.8
             Stock of corporate bonds (avg.)        101.1       81.1        85.6       40.5
     Note: The lower bound estimation of stock market capitalization assumes that all the securities
     difficult to identify as stocks or bonds are bonds; the upper bound estimation assumes them to be
     stocks.
     Source: Stock market capitalization is estimated using the capitalization and market prices from
     Investor’s Monthly Manual, London, 1895, 1900, 1913, and 1929 (estimated as total listed capital, paid
     up, times the ratio of market price to par/face value). GDP figures used to normalize the stock
     market capitalization are from Jones and Obstfeld (2001).


       Is there any way to know how far off these estimates are? Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton
(2002, p. 23) estimate that the stock market capitalization of the London Stock Exchange at




                                                   43
market prices at the end of 1899 was $4.3 billion dollars, or about 46% of GDP. This is quite
close to my average estimate of stock market capitalization for the United Kingdom of 43.7% of
GDP in 1900. Sheppard (1971) estimated the total market value of all private securities quoted in
London in 1900 and 1913 at $40 and $54 billion dollars in 1900 and 1913, respectively, which is
equivalent to 435% and 445% of GDP. The sum of my estimates for those years (bonds plus
stocks) equals 278.9% and 443.1%, respectively. Although the 1900 estimate is lower in my case,
our estimates for 1913 match up almost exactly.11




         11 My estimates might be lower in 1900 because Sheppard’s estimates were taken directly from

the The Stock Exchange Official Intelligence at market prices. I estimate stock market capitalization from the
Investor’s Monthly Manual (IMM), and in cases in which no last price is reported I use either the face value
or paid up value per share. Because for many companies that did not report a price or face value in the
IMM, the paid up value is smaller than the face value, it might be possible that I underestimated the
value of some companies in 1900. But if this were the case, why would my estimates match those of
Dimson et al.? For Sheppard’s estimates, see Sheppard (1971), pp. 188–189.



                                                      44
Appendix B. Sources of Estimates of Stock Market Capitalization by Country
Unless noted, all estimates of stock market capitalization for 1913 are from Rajan and Zingales, ―The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in the 20 th Century,‖
Journal of Financial Economics 69 (2003): 5-50, Table 3. Most of GDP data are from Matthew T. Jones and Maurice Obstfeld, "Saving, Investment, and Gold: A Reassessment of Historical
Current Account Data," in Guillermo A. Calvo, Rudi Dornbusch, and Maurice Obstfeld (eds.) Money, Capital Mobility, and Trade: Essays in Honor of Robert Mundell, Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press, 2001, pp. 303-364, unless explicitly noted.
Country                 Source

Argentina             Stock market capitalization for 1900 is estimated using the Argentine Yearbook 1902, Buenos Aires: J. Grant & Son, 1902 (which has the paid up capital for
                      companies traded domestically at the end of 1902), converted to market prices using the annual report of the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange from Bolsa de
                      Comercio de Buenos Aires, Boletin Oficial de la Bolsa de Comercio de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 1903.
Australia             Stock market capitalization to GDP for 1900 is from Leslie Hannah, "Why were African and European stock markets "better developed" than American and
                      Asian ones in 1900?" presented at the Asia-Pacific Economic and Social History Meeting, Sydney, February 2007 (data are for Sydney only).
Austria               The estimate for 1900 is from Alfred Neymarck, ―La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières,‖ in Bulletin de l’Institute International de Statistitque vols.
                      XIV, 1903 (the data likely reflect the capitalization in 1901). GDP for Austria-Hungary is from Marc Flandreau and Frédréric Zumer, The Making of Global
                      Finance, 1880-1913, OECD: Paris, 2004, Table 12.
Belgium               Stock market capitalization for 1900 is estimated using Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978,
                      Appendix A.
Brazil                For a complete description of methodology and sources, see Appendix 2A (Chapter 2).
Canada                Stock market capitalization for 1900 is from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978, Appendix A.
Chile                 Stock market data are from Ignacio Briones, "Capital Market Development and Economic Performance: A General Overview of the Chilean Experience 1870 –
                      1995," paper presented at the European Historical Economics Society (EHES), Summer School, Trinity College, Ireland, 2001. Data for 1900 are actually for
                      1902. All GDP and exchange rate data are from Juan Braun, Matias Braun, Ignacio Briones, José Díaz, Rolf Lüders, and Gert Wagner, ―Economía Chilena 1810–
                      1996,‖ Pontifícia Universidad Católica de Chile, Instituto de Economía, Working Paper 187, January 2000, Sections I.I and IV.I.4.
Egypt                 Data for 1902 and 1913 are from Arthur Edwin Crouchley, Investment of Foreign Capital in Egyptian Companies and Public Debt, New York: Arno Press, 1977, p.
                      152, and national income estimates are from Robert L. Tignor, State, Private Enterprise, and Economic Change in Egypt, 1918-1952, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
                      University Press, 1984, p. 25.
France                Stock market capitalization is from Antoine Bozio, ―La Capitalization Boursière en France au XXe Siècle,‖ unpublished masters’ thesis, Ecole Normale
                      Supérieure, ENSAE, Ecole Polytechnique, 2002. GDP is from Maurice Levy-Leboyer and François Bourguignon, l'Economie Française au XIXe siècle: Analyse
                      macro-économique, Economica, Paris, 1985.
Germany               Stock market capitalization for 1900 is from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978, Appendix A.
Greece                Stock market capitalization is from Alfred Neymarck, ―La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières,‖ in Bulletin de l’Institute International de Statistitque
                      XIV, Book 2, 1903, pp. 312--313. GDP estimates are from Marc Flandreau and Frédréric Zumer, The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913, Table 12.
India                 Data for 1900 are from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978, Chicago and London: University of
                      Chicago Press, 1985, Appendix A.

Italy                 Stock market capitalization for 1900 is estimated using Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978,
                      Appendix A.




                                                                                             45
Country          Source

Japan            Stock market capitalization for 1900 is from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978, Appendix A. GDP
                 is from Global Financial Data.
South Africa     1913 estimates represent the market capitalization of all stocks traded at the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and are from the database Lyndon Moore used for
                 his paper, ―The Effect of World War One on Stock Market Integration,‖ mimeo Victoria University of Wellington, 2006.
Switzerland      Stock market capitalization for 1900 and 1913 is from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978,
                 Appendix A. GDP and exchange rates are from Marc Flandreau and Frédréric Zumer, The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913, OECD: Paris, 2004, Table 12.
United Kingdom   See Appendix A.
United States    Estimates for 1900 and 1913 are from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978, Appendix A, as
                 suggested by Richard Sylla, ―Schumpeter Redux: A Review of Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales’s Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists.‖ Journal of
                 Economic Literature 44 (June 2006): 391–404.
Uruguay          For Uruguay, the estimates are from Uruguay, Anuario Estadistico de la Republica Oriental del Uruguay 1915, Montevideo 1917 (GDP estimates are from Luis
                 Bértola, El PIB de Uruguay 1870-1936 y otras estimaciones. Montevideo, FCS-CSIC, 1998).




                                                                                    46
Appendix C. Sources of Estimates of the Stock of Bonds by Country
Unless noted below, all estimates of the stock of bonds are from Goldsmith (1985) and all of the GDP estimates from Jones and Obstfeld (2001).
Country               Source

Argentina             I use the scant data on bonds quoted in Buenos Aires obtained from the Boletin de la Bolsa de Buenos Aires 1902 and 1913 and the Argentine Yearbook, 1902 and 1914.
Australia             1895 and 1900 bond and GDP data for Australia are from Davis and Gallman, Evolving Financial Markets, Table 5, pp. 4–8 (1895 estimated using the 1889 data over
                      1895 GDP); 1913 data were estimated by adding the new issues of bonds in Australia from 1900 to 1913 from Drummond, Capital Markets, Table B, p. 293 (this is
                      clearly an overestimate).
Austria               Data for 1900 are from Alfred Neymarck, Congrès des Valeurs Mobilières. 4 vols., Paris: Impremerie Paul Dupont, 1915, Tome I, and for 1913 I used the 1912 estimate
                      from Alfred Neymarck, ―La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières,‖ Bulletin de l’Institute International de Statistitque, Vol. XX, Tome II, Vienna:
                      Imprimerie Frederic Jaspers, 1915. GDP for Austria-Hungary is from Marc Flandreau and Frédréric Zumer, The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913, OECD: Paris,
                      2004, Table 12.
Belgium               Data for Belgium for 1895 and 1900 are based on estimates of Alfred Neymarck, Congrès des Valeurs Mobilières, 4 vols., Paris: Impremerie Paul Dupont, 1915, Tome
                      I; data for 1913 were kindly provided by Marc Deloof and Franz Bulens using the SCOB Database, University of Antwerp, Belgium.
Brazil                See Aldo Musacchio, Experiments in Financial Democracy: Corporate Governance and Financial Development in Brazil, 1882–1950, unpublished book manuscript, Harvard
                      Business School, 2007, Appendix 2A.
Canada                1913 figure uses 1912 estimate of the stock of bonds from E. R. Wood, Review of the Bond Market in Canada… Montreal: Dominion Securities Corporation, 1911–1914.
Egypt                 Data for 1902 and 1913 are from Arthur Edwin Crouchley, Investment of Foreign Capital in Egyptian Companies and Public Debt, New York: Arno Press, 1977, p. 152,
                      and national income estimates from Robert L. Tignor, State, Private Enterprise, and Economic Change in Egypt, 1918-1952, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
                      1984, p. 25.
France                High boundary estimates for France are from Michèle Saint Marc, ―Introduction aux Statistiques Monétaires et Financières Françaises (1807-1970),‖ Revue
                      International d’Histoire de la Banque 8 (1974), pp. 72–104 (this is an overestimate because it counts railway bonds with government guarantees and foreign railway
                      bonds). The low boundary estimates are from Hautcoeur, ―Le Marché‖ (includes bonds traded or registered in Paris, either at the parquet or the coulisse, and
                      excludes French colonial companies, foreign companies, and companies with government guaranteed dividends or bonds). For most statistical analyses, I take the
                      average of these two estimates.
Germany               All data are from Deutsche Bundesbank, Deutsches Geld- und Bankwesen in Zahlen 1873-1975, Deutsche Bundesbank: Frankfurt A.M., 1976, Table 1.01a.
Japan                 Data for 1910 are from Alfred Neymarck, ―La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières,‖ Bulletin de l’Institute International de Statistitque, Vol. XIX. Vienna:
                      Imprimerie Frederic Jaspers, 1914.
South Africa          For South Africa, the estimate of bonds for 1913 is from Union of South Africa, Official Year Book, No. 2, 1918, p. 729 (this is clearly an overestimate because it counts
                      all bonds registered in South Africa; Lyndon Moore found no bonds traded on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange).
Spain                 1900 represents data from 1902 obtained from Alfred Neymarck, ―La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières,‖ in Bulletin de l’Institute International de
                      Statistitque XIV, Book 2, 1903, p. 388; data for 1913 use the figure for 1911 obtained from vol. XX. GDP is from Leandro Prados de la Escosura, El Progreso Económico
                      de España 1850-2000, Madrid, Fundación BBVA, 2003.
U. Kingdom            See Appendix A.
Uruguay               Anuario Estadistico de la Republica Oriental del Uruguay 1915, Montevideo 1917 (and GDP estimates from Bértola, El PIB de Uruguay, 1998).




                                                                                            47
Appendix D The Leading Stock Exchanges in the World and the Representativeness of the Stock
Exchange Data Used in the Paper
                                                                          In current sample 1900 or 1913
                                                                                                 Country         In
Country                    Main stock exchanges                         Exchanges in sample       count        process   Missing
Common law (n=10)                                                        In sample or missing              6         0         5
Australia                  Melbourne, Sydney, Wellington                All?                               1
Burma                      Rangoon                                                                                             1
Canada                     Montreal, Toronto                            All                                1
Ceylon                     Colombo                                                                                             1
India                      Bombay, Calcutta                             Bombay, Calcutta                   1
Malaya                     Singapore                                                                                           1
New Zealand                Wellington                                                                                          1
Rhodesia                   Bulawayo                                                                                            1
South Africa               Johannesburg                                 Johannesburg                       1
United Kingdom             London, Liverpool, etc.                      All in IMM                         1
                           NYSE, Boston, Chicago, San Francisco,
USA                        L.A., Philadelphia                           All?                               1
German civil law (n=6)                                                   In sample or missing              4        1          1
Austria-Hungary            Vienna, Budapest, Prague                     Vienna                             1
Bulgaria                   Sofia                                        Sofia                                       1
Germany                    Berlin, Frankfurt                            All                                1
Japan                      Tokyo, Osaka, Yokohama                       All?                               1
Serbiaa                    Belgrade                                                                                            1
Switzerland                Geneva, Zurich                               All?                               1
Scandinavian civil law (n=4)                                             In sample or missing              3        2          1
Denmark                    Copenhagen                                   Copenhagen                         1
Finland                    Helsinki                                                                                            1
Norway                     Oslo                                         Oslo                               1
Sweden                     Stockholm                                    Stockholm                          1
  Russian civil law (n=1)                                                In sample or missing                       1
  Russia                   St. Petersburg, Moscow                                                                   1
a Most companies were traded on the Vienna Stock Exchange.




                                                                   48
Appendix D. The Leading Stock Exchanges in the World circa 1913 and the Representativeness of the Sample Used in the Paper (continues).
                                                                  In current sample 1900 or 1913
                                                                                                   Country     In
Country                   Main stock exchanges           Exchanges in sample                        count    process   Missing

French civil law (n=21)                                                    In sample or missing         13        2          6
Belgium                   Brussels                       Brussels                                        1
France                    Paris, Lyon, Marseille         All                                             1
Greece                    Athens                         Athens                                          1
Italy                     Milan, Genoa                   Mostly Milan                                    1
Netherlands               Amsterdam                      All                                             1
Portugal                  Lisbon                                                                                             1
Rumania                   Bucharest                                                                                          1
Spain                     Madrid, Barcelona              All?                                            1
Egypt                     Alexandria, Cairo              Alexandria                                      1
Morocco                   Casablanca                                                                                         1
Mozambique                Beira                                                                                              1
Argentina                 Buenos Aires                   Buenos Aires                                    1
Brazil                    Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo   Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo                    1
Chile                     Santiago and Valparaiso        Santiago and Valparaiso                         1
Cuba                      Havana                         Havana                                          1
                          Mexico City, Monterrey,
México                    Guadalajara                                                                             1
Perú                      Lima                           Lima                                            1
Uruguay                   Montevideo                     Montevideo                                      1
Venezuela                 Caracas                                                                                            1
Indonesia                 Batavia                                                                                            1
Turkey                    Istanbul                                                                                1
Total countries = 51                                                  Total in sample or missing        26        4         21
Source: Michie (2006), with some additions.




                                                                   49
Appendix A. New Estimates of Stock Market Capitalization for the
United Kingdom
        I estimated stock market capitalization for the United Kingdom in 1895, 1900, 1913, and
1929 using all the quotations of the Investor’s Monthly Manual. Because the location information
for each company was not standard, it was often difficult to determine the best domicile code.
As a rule, I used the company headquarters as the domicile according to the information of
Stock Exchange Official Intelligence. 9 If a company seemed to be based in a country other than
Britain or outside the empire because of the Stock Exchange Official Intelligence chapter in which
it appears (e.g., Foreign Railways) or because of the title (e.g., Moscow-Windau-Rybinsk
Railway), and no headquarters or head office was listed, but instead a London agent, I coded
this security as foreign. If there was no other indication of a domicile (no office or agent address
or description of financial/managerial home), but there was a description such as “accounts
submitted in London,” I coded the security as having the nationality of the location in which the
accounts were submitted. 10
        There are three striking features of the estimates of stock and bond market capitalization
to GDP for the United Kingdom presented in Table 10-2. First, looking only at domestic stocks
listed in stock markets of the United Kingdom, it can be seen that stock market capitalization to
GDP was between 34% and 44% of GDP between 1895 and 1913. Second, the United Kingdom
had a relatively large bond market for domestic corporate bonds. Third, the largest share of
listings in the U.K. stock markets were of bonds from countries outside the British Empire.
        These findings explain why authors such as Sylla complained about the accuracy of the
figures available for the United Kingdom. Stock markets in this nation seem to have been


        9  All the information on headquarters is available at The stock exchange official intelligence for ...
London: Spottiswoode, Ballantyne, 1899-1930. Using the headquarters as the main criteria to define
nationality might overestimate the size of domestic issues in the United Kingdom, but this is not a
problem as it biases upwards the estimate of average stock market capitalization for common law
countries, thus going against my hypothesis of relative convergence across legal traditions circa 1913.
         10 Most often, the location information came from the address of the company headquarters,

which could have been a street name, city name, province name, or country name (or none of these). In
cases in which provinces in Australia (e.g., New South Wales, Transvaal, or British Colombia), Canada,
New Zealand, and South Africa were given as the location of the headquarters, I labeled them with the
collective modern country name, and also coded them as part of the British Empire since their legal
systems were extremely similar to those of the United Kingdom, and, according to Niall Ferguson, “they
retained the monarch as head of state and their foreign and defense policies were emphatically not
independent.” Niall Ferguson, personal correspondence with the author, July 31, 2007.



                                                       50
smaller than the literature assumes. The problem is not that bonds were added to the stock
market capitalization figures, but that the cross-listings to the stock market capitalization of the
United Kingdom were added, which would not be a problem if what was being studied was not
the relationship between national laws and the development of domestic markets. Because this
is precisely what I am studying, I use the average estimates for stock market capitalization that
take only domestic firms into account.
 Table A1 Estimates of Stock and Bond Market Capitalization, United Kingdom, 1895, 1900,
             1913, 1929 (at Market Prices by Origin of Listing and as a % of GDP)

                                                  1895         1900         1913       1929
            Lower bound estimates of stock market capitalization
            Total stock market cap.           33.8         55.9             33.9       100.6
                Domestic                      20.3         29.2             18.9        71.4
                British Empire                 7.0         11.4              4.5        20.1
                Other countries                6.5         15.2             10.4         9.1
            Total corporate bonds                 418.7        436.4       762.9       163.3
                Domestic                          114.7         95.6        99.8        48.0
                British Empire                     87.7        117.8       253.9        29.6
                Other countries                   216.2        223.0       409.2        85.8
            Upper bound estimates of stock market capitalization
            Total stock market cap.           66.2        102.6            112.2       118.4
                Domestic                      47.6         58.3             47.3        86.3
                British Empire                 7.0         11.7             6.5         20.8
                Other countries               11.5         32.7             58.5        11.4
            Total corporate bonds                 183.9        176.2       330.9       67.9
                Domestic                           87.4         66.6        71.4       33.1
                British Empire                     13.8          9.3        53.6        7.5
                Other countries                    82.7        100.4       205.8       27.3
             Average estimates for the United Kingdom (domestic companies only)
             Stock market capitalization
             (avg.)                                  34.0       43.7        33.1       78.8
             Stock of corporate bonds (avg.)        101.1       81.1        85.6       40.5
     Note: The lower bound estimation of stock market capitalization assumes that all the securities
     difficult to identify as stocks or bonds are bonds; the upper bound estimation assumes them to be
     stocks.
     Source: Stock market capitalization is estimated using the capitalization and market prices from
     Investor’s Monthly Manual, London, 1895, 1900, 1913, and 1929 (estimated as total listed capital, paid
     up, times the ratio of market price to par/face value). GDP figures used to normalize the stock
     market capitalization are from Jones and Obstfeld (2001).


       Is there any way to know how far off these estimates are? Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton
(2002, p. 23) estimate that the stock market capitalization of the London Stock Exchange at




                                                   51
market prices at the end of 1899 was $4.3 billion dollars, or about 46% of GDP. This is quite
close to my average estimate of stock market capitalization for the United Kingdom of 43.7% of
GDP in 1900. Sheppard (1971) estimated the total market value of all private securities quoted in
London in 1900 and 1913 at $40 and $54 billion dollars in 1900 and 1913, respectively, which is
equivalent to 435% and 445% of GDP. The sum of my estimates for those years (bonds plus
stocks) equals 278.9% and 443.1%, respectively. Although the 1900 estimate is lower in my case,
our estimates for 1913 match up almost exactly. 11




         11 My estimates might be lower in 1900 because Sheppard’s estimates were taken directly from

the The Stock Exchange Official Intelligence at market prices. I estimate stock market capitalization from the
Investor’s Monthly Manual (IMM), and in cases in which no last price is reported I use either the face value
or paid up value per share. Because for many companies that did not report a price or face value in the
IMM, the paid up value is smaller than the face value, it might be possible that I underestimated the
value of some companies in 1900. But if this were the case, why would my estimates match those of
Dimson et al.? For Sheppard’s estimates, see Sheppard (1971), pp. 188–189.



                                                      52
Appendix B. Sources of Estimates of Stock Market Capitalization by Country
Unless noted, all estimates of stock market capitalization for 1913 are from Rajan and Zingales, “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in the 20th Century,”
Journal of Financial Economics 69 (2003): 5-50, Table 3. Most of GDP data are from Matthew T. Jones and Maurice Obstfeld, "Saving, Investment, and Gold: A Reassessment of Historical
Current Account Data," in Guillermo A. Calvo, Rudi Dornbusch, and Maurice Obstfeld (eds.) Money, Capital Mobility, and Trade: Essays in Honor of Robert Mundell, Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press, 2001, pp. 303-364, unless explicitly noted.
Country                 Source

Argentina             Stock market capitalization for 1900 is estimated using the Argentine Yearbook 1902, Buenos Aires: J. Grant & Son, 1902 (which has the paid up capital for
                      companies traded domestically at the end of 1902), converted to market prices using the annual report of the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange from Bolsa de
                      Comercio de Buenos Aires, Boletin Oficial de la Bolsa de Comercio de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 1903.
Australia             Stock market capitalization to GDP for 1900 is from Leslie Hannah, "Why were African and European stock markets "better developed" than American and
                      Asian ones in 1900?" presented at the Asia-Pacific Economic and Social History Meeting, Sydney, February 2007 (data are for Sydney only).
Austria               The estimate for 1900 is from Alfred Neymarck, “La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières,” in Bulletin de l’Institute International de Statistitque vols.
                      XIV, 1903 (the data likely reflect the capitalization in 1901). GDP for Austria-Hungary is from Marc Flandreau and Frédréric Zumer, The Making of Global
                      Finance, 1880-1913, OECD: Paris, 2004, Table 12.
Belgium               Stock market capitalization for 1900 is estimated using Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978,
                      Appendix A.
Brazil                For a complete description of methodology and sources, see Appendix 2A (Chapter 2).
Canada                Stock market capitalization for 1900 is from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978, Appendix A.
Chile                 Stock market data are from Ignacio Briones, "Capital Market Development and Economic Performance: A General Overview of the Chilean Experience 1870 –
                      1995," paper presented at the European Historical Economics Society (EHES), Summer School, Trinity College, Ireland, 2001. Data for 1900 are actually for
                      1902. All GDP and exchange rate data are from Juan Braun, Matias Braun, Ignacio Briones, José Díaz, Rolf Lüders, and Gert Wagner, “Economía Chilena 1810–
                      1996,” Pontifícia Universidad Católica de Chile, Instituto de Economía, Working Paper 187, January 2000, Sections I.I and IV.I.4.
Egypt                 Data for 1902 and 1913 are from Arthur Edwin Crouchley, Investment of Foreign Capital in Egyptian Companies and Public Debt, New York: Arno Press, 1977, p.
                      152, and national income estimates are from Robert L. Tignor, State, Private Enterprise, and Economic Change in Egypt, 1918-1952, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
                      University Press, 1984, p. 25.
France                Stock market capitalization is from Antoine Bozio, “La Capitalization Boursière en France au XXe Siècle,” unpublished masters’ thesis, Ecole Normale
                      Supérieure, ENSAE, Ecole Polytechnique, 2002. GDP is from Maurice Levy-Leboyer and François Bourguignon, l'Economie Française au XIXe siècle: Analyse
                      macro-économique, Economica, Paris, 1985.
Germany               Stock market capitalization for 1900 is from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978, Appendix A.
Greece                Stock market capitalization is from Alfred Neymarck, “La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières,” in Bulletin de l’Institute International de Statistitque
                      XIV, Book 2, 1903, pp. 312--313. GDP estimates are from Marc Flandreau and Frédréric Zumer, The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913, Table 12.
India                 Data for 1900 are from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978, Chicago and London: University of
                      Chicago Press, 1985, Appendix A.

Italy                 Stock market capitalization for 1900 is estimated using Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978,
                      Appendix A.




                                                                                             53
Country          Source

Japan            Stock market capitalization for 1900 is from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978, Appendix A. GDP
                 is from Global Financial Data.
South Africa     1913 estimates represent the market capitalization of all stocks traded at the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and are from the database Lyndon Moore used for
                 his paper, “The Effect of World War One on Stock Market Integration,” mimeo Victoria University of Wellington, 2006.
Switzerland      Stock market capitalization for 1900 and 1913 is from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978,
                 Appendix A. GDP and exchange rates are from Marc Flandreau and Frédréric Zumer, The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913, OECD: Paris, 2004, Table 12.
United Kingdom   See Appendix A.
United States    Estimates for 1900 and 1913 are from Raymond Goldsmith, Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688-1978, Appendix A, as
                 suggested by Richard Sylla, “Schumpeter Redux: A Review of Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales’s Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists.” Journal of
                 Economic Literature 44 (June 2006): 391–404.
Uruguay          For Uruguay, the estimates are from Uruguay, Anuario Estadistico de la Republica Oriental del Uruguay 1915, Montevideo 1917 (GDP estimates are from Luis
                 Bértola, El PIB de Uruguay 1870-1936 y otras estimaciones. Montevideo, FCS-CSIC, 1998).




                                                                                    54
Appendix C. Sources of Estimates of the Stock of Bonds by Country
Unless noted below, all estimates of the stock of bonds are from Goldsmith (1985) and all of the GDP estimates from Jones and Obstfeld (2001).
Country               Source

Argentina             I use the scant data on bonds quoted in Buenos Aires obtained from the Boletin de la Bolsa de Buenos Aires 1902 and 1913 and the Argentine Yearbook, 1902 and 1914.
Australia             1895 and 1900 bond and GDP data for Australia are from Davis and Gallman, Evolving Financial Markets, Table 5, pp. 4–8 (1895 estimated using the 1889 data over
                      1895 GDP); 1913 data were estimated by adding the new issues of bonds in Australia from 1900 to 1913 from Drummond, Capital Markets, Table B, p. 293 (this is
                      clearly an overestimate).
Austria               Data for 1900 are from Alfred Neymarck, Congrès des Valeurs Mobilières. 4 vols., Paris: Impremerie Paul Dupont, 1915, Tome I, and for 1913 I used the 1912 estimate
                      from Alfred Neymarck, “La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières,” Bulletin de l’Institute International de Statistitque, Vol. XX, Tome II, Vienna:
                      Imprimerie Frederic Jaspers, 1915. GDP for Austria-Hungary is from Marc Flandreau and Frédréric Zumer, The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913, OECD: Paris,
                      2004, Table 12.
Belgium               Data for Belgium for 1895 and 1900 are based on estimates of Alfred Neymarck, Congrès des Valeurs Mobilières, 4 vols., Paris: Impremerie Paul Dupont, 1915, Tome
                      I; data for 1913 were kindly provided by Marc Deloof and Franz Bulens using the SCOB Database, University of Antwerp, Belgium.
Brazil                See Aldo Musacchio, Experiments in Financial Democracy: Corporate Governance and Financial Development in Brazil, 1882–1950, unpublished book manuscript, Harvard
                      Business School, 2007, Appendix 2A.
Canada                1913 figure uses 1912 estimate of the stock of bonds from E. R. Wood, Review of the Bond Market in Canada… Montreal: Dominion Securities Corporation, 1911–1914.
Egypt                 Data for 1902 and 1913 are from Arthur Edwin Crouchley, Investment of Foreign Capital in Egyptian Companies and Public Debt, New York: Arno Press, 1977, p. 152,
                      and national income estimates from Robert L. Tignor, State, Private Enterprise, and Economic Change in Egypt, 1918-1952, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
                      1984, p. 25.
France                High boundary estimates for France are from Michèle Saint Marc, “Introduction aux Statistiques Monétaires et Financières Françaises (1807-1970),” Revue
                      International d’Histoire de la Banque 8 (1974), pp. 72–104 (this is an overestimate because it counts railway bonds with government guarantees and foreign railway
                      bonds). The low boundary estimates are from Hautcoeur, “Le Marché” (includes bonds traded or registered in Paris, either at the parquet or the coulisse, and
                      excludes French colonial companies, foreign companies, and companies with government guaranteed dividends or bonds). For most statistical analyses, I take the
                      average of these two estimates.
Germany               All data are from Deutsche Bundesbank, Deutsches Geld- und Bankwesen in Zahlen 1873-1975, Deutsche Bundesbank: Frankfurt A.M., 1976, Table 1.01a.
Japan                 Data for 1910 are from Alfred Neymarck, “La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières,” Bulletin de l’Institute International de Statistitque, Vol. XIX. Vienna:
                      Imprimerie Frederic Jaspers, 1914.
South Africa          For South Africa, the estimate of bonds for 1913 is from Union of South Africa, Official Year Book, No. 2, 1918, p. 729 (this is clearly an overestimate because it counts
                      all bonds registered in South Africa; Lyndon Moore found no bonds traded on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange).
Spain                 1900 represents data from 1902 obtained from Alfred Neymarck, “La Statistique Internationale des Valeurs Mobilières,” in Bulletin de l’Institute International de
                      Statistitque XIV, Book 2, 1903, p. 388; data for 1913 use the figure for 1911 obtained from vol. XX. GDP is from Leandro Prados de la Escosura, El Progreso Económico
                      de España 1850-2000, Madrid, Fundación BBVA, 2003.
U. Kingdom            See Appendix A.
Uruguay               Anuario Estadistico de la Republica Oriental del Uruguay 1915, Montevideo 1917 (and GDP estimates from Bértola, El PIB de Uruguay, 1998).




                                                                                            55
Appendix D The Leading Stock Exchanges in the World and the Representativeness of the Stock
Exchange Data Used in the Paper
                                                                          In current sample 1900 or 1913
                                                                                                 Country         In
Country                    Main stock exchanges                         Exchanges in sample       count        process   Missing
Common law (n=10)                                                        In sample or missing              6         0         5
Australia                  Melbourne, Sydney, Wellington                All?                               1
Burma                      Rangoon                                                                                             1
Canada                     Montreal, Toronto                            All                                1
Ceylon                     Colombo                                                                                             1
India                      Bombay, Calcutta                             Bombay, Calcutta                   1
Malaya                     Singapore                                                                                          1
New Zealand                Wellington                                                                                         1
Rhodesia                   Bulawayo                                                                                           1
South Africa               Johannesburg                                 Johannesburg                       1
United Kingdom             London, Liverpool, etc.                      All in IMM                         1
                           NYSE, Boston, Chicago, San Francisco,
USA                        L.A., Philadelphia                           All?                               1
German civil law (n=6)                                                   In sample or missing              4        1          1
Austria-Hungary            Vienna, Budapest, Prague                     Vienna                             1
Bulgaria                   Sofia                                        Sofia                                       1
Germany                    Berlin, Frankfurt                            All                                1
Japan                      Tokyo, Osaka, Yokohama                       All?                               1
Serbiaa                    Belgrade                                                                                            1
Switzerland                Geneva, Zurich                               All?                               1
Scandinavian civil law (n=4)                                             In sample or missing              3        2          1
Denmark                    Copenhagen                                   Copenhagen                         1
Finland                    Helsinki                                                                                            1
Norway                     Oslo                                         Oslo                               1
Sweden                     Stockholm                                    Stockholm                          1
  Russian civil law (n=1)                                                In sample or missing                       1
  Russia                   St. Petersburg, Moscow                                                                   1
a Most companies were traded on the Vienna Stock Exchange.




                                                                   56
Appendix D. The Leading Stock Exchanges in the World circa 1913 and the Representativeness of the Sample Used in the Paper (continues).
                                                                  In current sample 1900 or 1913
                                                                                                   Country     In
Country                   Main stock exchanges           Exchanges in sample                        count    process   Missing

French civil law (n=21)                                                    In sample or missing         13        2          6
Belgium                   Brussels                       Brussels                                        1
France                    Paris, Lyon, Marseille         All                                             1
Greece                    Athens                         Athens                                          1
Italy                     Milan, Genoa                   Mostly Milan                                    1
Netherlands               Amsterdam                      All                                             1
Portugal                  Lisbon                                                                                             1
Rumania                   Bucharest                                                                                          1
Spain                     Madrid, Barcelona              All?                                            1
Egypt                     Alexandria, Cairo              Alexandria                                      1
Morocco                   Casablanca                                                                                         1
Mozambique                Beira                                                                                              1
Argentina                 Buenos Aires                   Buenos Aires                                    1
Brazil                    Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo   Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo                    1
Chile                     Santiago and Valparaiso        Santiago and Valparaiso                         1
Cuba                      Havana                         Havana                                          1
                          Mexico City, Monterrey,
México                    Guadalajara                                                                             1
Perú                      Lima                           Lima                                            1
Uruguay                   Montevideo                     Montevideo                                      1
Venezuela                 Caracas                                                                                            1
Indonesia                 Batavia                                                                                            1
Turkey                    Istanbul                                                                                1
Total countries = 51                                                  Total in sample or missing        26        4         21
Source: Michie (2006), with some additions.




                                                                   57
                                                     Table 1 Financial Development Indicators, 1900 and 1913
Panel A: Financial development indicators and means by legal family, 1900 and 1913
                                                       Stock Market Capitalization to GDP                      Stock of bonds to GDP
                                                                                                                                                      Co.'s per
                                                                  La Porta et al.      New           New          New          New         Private    million
                                          Rajan and Zingales          (2008)         Estimates     Estimates    Estimates    Estimates   credit/GDP    people
                                           1999         1913           1913            1913          1900          1900        1913         1913        1913
Common law                                 1.30          0.53          0.64            0.44          0.36          0.36        0.27         0.71        25.2
Australia                                  1.13          0.39          0.39            0.39          0.39          0.01        0.01                     61.7
Canada                                     1.22          0.74          0.74            0.74          0.23                      0.10         0.42        14.7
India                                      0.46          0.02          0.02            0.02          0.03                                                0.8
South Africa                               1.20                                        0.22                                    0.04         0.40        22.4

United Kingdom                             2.25          1.09          1.09            0.33          0.44          0.81        0.86         1.07        47.1
United States                              1.52          0.39          0.95            0.95          0.71          0.26        0.37         0.96         4.8
German civil law                           1.26          0.57          0.57            0.73          0.46          0.19        0.12         1.04        33.9
Austria                                    0.17          0.76          0.76            0.76          0.50          0.21        0.20                     38.7
Germany                                    0.67          0.44          0.44            0.44          0.20          0.06        0.07         1.66        28.0
Japan                                      0.95          0.49          0.49            0.49          0.32          0.05        0.02         0.58         7.5
Switzerland                                3.23          0.58          0.58            1.23          0.82          0.46        0.18         0.88        61.5
French civil law                           0.81          0.71          0.40            0.37          0.32          0.14        0.15         0.74        28.7
Argentina                                  0.15          0.17          0.17            0.17                        0.01        0.01         0.37        15.3
Belgium                                    0.82          0.99          0.99            0.99          0.65          0.17        0.25         1.00        108.7
Brazil                                     0.45          0.25          0.25            0.20          0.17          0.05        0.15         0.38        12.4
Chile                                      1.05          0.17          0.17            0.17          0.10                                               20.6
Cuba                                                     2.19          0.33            0.33                                                             12.7
Egypt                                      0.29          1.09          0.40            0.44          0.40          0.02        0.06                     16.6
France                                     1.17          0.78          0.54            0.54          0.52          0.47        0.38         1.50        13.3
Greece                                                                                               0.27          0.05
Italy                                      0.68          0.17          0.17            0.17          0.14          0.07        0.05         0.48         6.3
Netherlands                                2.03          0.56          0.56            0.56          0.60                                               65.9
Peru                                                                                                 0.07
Spain                                      0.69                                        0.31          0.24          0.31        0.31
Uruguay                                                                                0.16                                    0.01         0.71        15.6
Scandinavian civil law                     0.69          0.26          0.26            0.51          0.51          0.04        0.06         1.67        35.9
Denmark                                    0.67          0.36          0.36            0.86          0.76          0.03        0.03         2.23        38.2
Norway                                     0.70          0.16          0.16            0.16          0.26          0.06        0.10         1.12        33.5
Sweden                                     1.77          0.47          0.47            0.47                                                             20.6
Full Sample                                1.06          0.58          0.48            0.46          0.37          0.18        0.17         0.92        29.0




                                                                                              58
Table 2 Summary Statistics for Financial Development Data and Controls
                                                         Full Sample                                            Common Law Sample                 Civil Law Sample
                    Variable                   Obs            Mean        Std. Dev.      Min        Max        Obs       Mean   Std. Dev.   Obs         Mean     Std. Dev.
Rajan & Zingales stock mkt data 1913            22             1.51          4.38        0.02       21.00       5        0.53       0.41    16            0.60      0.51
La Porta et al. stock mkt data 1913             22             1.41          4.38        0.02       21.00       5        0.64       0.43    16            0.43      0.23
Stock Market Cap/GDP 1900                       21             0.37          0.24        0.03       0.82        5        0.36       0.25    16            0.38      0.24
Stock Market Cap/GDP 1913                       24             0.46          0.31        0.02       1.23        6        0.44       0.34    18            0.47      0.31
Change in stock mkt cap 1900-1913               27             1.04          4.99       -0.27       26.00       6        0.11       0.23    20            0.07      0.15
Bond Market Cap / GDP 1900                      17             0.18          0.22        0.01       0.81        3        0.36       0.41    14            0.14      0.16
Bond Market Cap / GDP 1913                      19             0.17          0.21        0.01       0.86        5        0.27       0.35    14            0.13      0.12
Private credit /GDP 1913                        14             0.93          0.56        0.37       2.23        4        0.71       0.35    10            1.02      0.62
Traded companies/million people 1913            23            29.00         25.61        0.82      108.70       6        25.23     24.27    17           30.33     26.65
Average inflation (1880-1913)                   26             0.01          0.02        0.00       0.05        6        0.01       0.01    20            0.02      0.02
Growth rate 1870-1900                           23             0.01          0.01        0.01       0.03        5        0.01       0.01    18           0.01       0.00
Growth rate 1870-1913                           22             0.03          0.01        0.01       0.06        5        0.03       0.01    17           0.03      0.01
Growth rate 1890-1900                           24            0.02          0.01         0.00       0.05        5        0.02       0.01    19           0.02      0.01
Growth rate 1890-1913                           24            0.03          0.01         0.00       0.06        5        0.03       0.02    19           0.03      0.01
GDP per cap in 1870 (1990 mill PPP$)            22            1875           837         533        3915        6        2295      1265     16           1718       591
GDP per cap in 1890 (1990 mill PPP$)            24            2247          1013         575        4708        5        2878      1541     19           2081       803
Common law                                      26            0.23          0.43           0          1         6          1         0
French civil law                                26            0.50          0.51           0          1                                     20          0.65        0.49
German civil law                                26            0.15          0.37           0          1                                     20          0.20        0.41
Scandinavian civil law                          26            0.12          0.33           0          1                                     20          0.15        0.37
*Note: All GDP per capita and real GDP growth rates used as controls from Maddison (2003) (1990 PPP/International Geary-Khamis Dollars).




                                                                                      59
Table 3 Simple conditional correlates of financial development and the common law dummy

Ordinary least square regression using as dependent variable different measures of financial development in 1900 and 1913. Controls include log of GDP per capita in 1890 (in 1990 PPP/International Geary-Khamis Dollars), the number of years on the gold standard,
and average inflation since 1880. Robust standard errors in brackets. Coefficients marked as follows + significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Panel A: OLS regressions using different estimates of stock market capitalization (1913, 1900) as dependent variables


                                     R&Z mkt cap R&Z mkt cap R&Z mkt cap R&Z mkt cap LLS mkt cap LLS mkt cap LLS mkt cap LLS mkt cap Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/
                                     / GDP 1913 / GDP 1913 / GDP 1913 / GDP 1913 /GDP 1913 /GDP 1913 /GDP 1913 /GDP 1913              GDP 1913    GDP 1913    GDP 1913    GDP 1913    GDP 1900    GDP 1900    GDP 1900    GDP 1900
                                          (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)           (10)           (11)          (12)           (13)          (14)          (15)           (16)
Common law dummy                        -0.076         0.007         -0.065        -0.024        0.211          0.152         0.117         0.123         -0.028        -0.046        -0.133         -0.103         -0.017        -0.077        -0.145        -0.086
                                        [0.215]       [0.174]       [0.181]        [0.179]       [0.192]       [0.152]       [0.154]       [0.156]       [0.153]        [0.145]       [0.148]        [0.149]       [0.122]        [0.086]       [0.091]       [0.085]
Ln(GDP per cap 1890)                                   0.117          0.05         0.039                        0.26          0.228         0.186                       0.282          0.22          0.182                         0.243         0.16          0.197
                                                      [0.173]       [0.171]        [0.196]                    [0.108]**     [0.112]+       [0.139]                    [0.098]***     [0.083]**      [0.101]+                     [0.069]***    [0.049]***    [0.084]**
Years on gold                                                         0.01                                                    0.005                                                    0.009                                                     0.012
                                                                    [0.007]                                                  [0.005]                                                 [0.004]+                                                  [0.004]**
Avg. Inflation since 1880                                                          -5.406                                                  -5.148                                                    -7.684                                                   -3.486
                                                                                   [3.625]                                                 [3.292]                                                 [2.547]***                                                 [3.685]
Constant                                 0.602         -0.387        -0.105        0.283         0.428         -1.534        -1.397        -0.897         0.469         -1.658        -1.378         -0.776         0.376         -1.452         -0.95        -1.062
                                       [0.131]***     [1.342]       [1.223]        [1.544]     [0.059]***     [0.816]+       [0.803]       [1.087]      [0.075]***     [0.725]**     [0.584]**       [0.783]      [0.061]***     [0.512]**     [0.344]**      [0.665]
Observations                              21            20             20            20            21            20            20            20            24             22            22             22            21             21            21            21
Adjusted R-squared                      -0.048         -0.065        0.049         -0.061         0.05          0.271         0.274         0.298         -0.044        0.156          0.276         0.283          -0.052         0.295         0.476         0.291
F-statistic                              0.12           0.23          1.73          0.93           1.2          3.26           2.9           3.9           0.03          4.16           5.6           4.88           0.02          6.58          10.88         4.01
F-test p-value                           0.73           0.80          0.20          0.45          0.29          0.06          0.07          0.03          0.86           0.03          0.01           0.01           0.89          0.01          0.00          0.02
Panel B: OLS regressions using bond market capitalization (1900, 1913), private credit to GDP (1913) and companies per million people (1913) as dependent variables

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Co's per      Co's per      Co's per      Co's per
                                       Bond mkt      Bond mkt      Bond mkt      Bond mkt      Bond mkt      Bond mkt      Bond mkt       Bond mkt    Private credit Private credit Private credit Private credit million pop   million pop   million pop   million pop
                                       cap 1900      cap 1900      cap 1900      cap 1900      cap 1913      cap 1913      cap 1913       cap 1913    to GDP 1913 to GDP 1913 to GDP 1913 to GDP 1913                1913          1913          1913          1913
                                          (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)           (10)           (11)          (12)           (13)          (14)          (15)           (16)
Common law dummy                         0.217         0.147          0.13         0.176         0.144          0.171         0.17          0.165         -0.307        -0.495        -0.585         -0.512         -5.094        -10.742       -15.639       -13.517
                                        [0.210]       [0.233]       [0.246]        [0.215]       [0.153]       [0.183]       [0.192]       [0.179]       [0.260]        [0.295]      [0.311]+       [0.277]+       [11.518]      [10.977]      [12.312]      [11.967]
Ln(GDP per cap 1890)                                   0.098         0.087         -0.035                       0.052         0.052        -0.024                       0.697          0.158         0.261                        27.426        23.646        23.001
                                                      [0.066]       [0.063]        [0.100]                     [0.057]       [0.058]       [0.071]                     [0.245]**      [0.247]        [0.285]                     [8.262]***    [6.991]***    [7.827]***
Years on gold                                                        0.002                                                      0                                                      0.031                                                     0.597
                                                                    [0.004]                                                  [0.002]                                                 [0.010]**                                                 [0.294]+
Avg. Inflation since 1880                                                          -6.356                                                  -4.284                                                   -17.588                                                  -334.619
                                                                                  [3.235]+                                                [1.870]**                                                 [7.434]**                                                [215.214]
Constant                                 0.144         -0.595        -0.535        0.494          0.13         -0.263        -0.261         0.381          1.02         -4.267        -0.906         -0.719        30.326        -176.385      -160.764      -137.131
                                       [0.044]***     [0.466]       [0.459]        [0.779]     [0.033]***      [0.418]       [0.428]       [0.559]      [0.201]***     [1.711]**      [1.709]        [2.221]      [6.563]***    [59.549]***   [52.367]***    [58.413]**
Observations                              17            17             17            17            19            18            18            18            14             13            13             13            23             21            21            21
Adjusted R-squared                       0.093         0.078         0.019         0.169         0.047          0.075         0.009         0.134         -0.012        0.171          0.427         0.308          -0.039         0.283         0.336         0.291
F-statistic                              1.07           1.74          1.06          2.53          0.88          0.91          0.57          2.21          1.39            5.4          4.87           4.47           0.2           5.51          4.15          3.76
F-test p-value                           0.32           0.21          0.40          0.10          0.36          0.42          0.65          0.13          0.26           0.03          0.03           0.03           0.66          0.01          0.02          0.03




                                                                                                                                     60
Table 4A Stock Market Capitalization to GDP Regressions (OLS) Rajan and Zingales and La Porta et al. Data, 1913



Ordinary least square regression of a sample of 19 countries of different legal families. The dependent variable is stock market capitalization to
GDP in 1913 according to Rajan and Zingales (2003) or La Porta et al (2008). Controls include the growth rate of real GDP from 1870/1890 to 1913
and the natural logarithm of GDP per capita in 1870/1890 (all GDP figures for controls in 1990 PPP/International Geary-Khamis Dollars), average
inflation from 1880 to 1913, dummies indicating whether the country adheres to the common law or French civil law families, and a dummy for
countries that follow the civil law tradition (German, French, and Scandinavian civil law countries).Robust standard errors in brackets.
Coefficients marked as follows + significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Panel A: Correlates of Stock Market Capitalization in 1913 using data from Rajan and Zingales (2003)

                                    Rajan and     Rajan and      Rajan and      Rajan and       Rajan and     Rajan and      Rajan and      Rajan and
                                    Zingales      Zingales       Zingales       Zingales        Zingales      Zingales       Zingales       Zingales
                                      1913          1913           1913           1913            1913          1913           1913           1913
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
Ln(GDP per cap 1870)                  0.337          0.342          0.336          0.334
                                    [0.118]**       [0.269]       [0.116]**       [0.206]
GDP growth 1870-1913                  -6.518        -6.697         -6.545         -6.432
                                     [4.341]        [8.718]        [4.079]        [7.090]
Ln(GDP per cap 1890)                                                                              0.215          0.14           0.209          0.17
                                                                                                 [0.157]        [0.230]        [0.155]        [0.213]
GDP growth 1890-1913                                                                             -11.295        -9.023         -11.367        -10.301
                                                                                                 [6.532]        [8.702]       [6.506]+        [8.548]
Avg. inflation since 1880                            0.251                        -0.152                        -4.317                        -2.089
                                                    [9.785]                       [6.060]                       [7.296]                       [5.917]
Legal origin dummies
Common law                            -0.024        -0.024                                        0.056          0.062
                                     [0.172]        [0.182]                                      [0.197]        [0.204]
French civil law                      -0.013        -0.016                                        0.068          0.132
                                     [0.146]        [0.226]                                      [0.135]        [0.176]
Civil law Tradition                                                 0.017          0.017                                       -0.021         -0.008
                                                                   [0.150]        [0.160]                                      [0.193]        [0.194]
Constant                              -1.828        -1.861         -1.843         -1.824         -0.878         -0.339         -0.778         -0.494
                                     [0.863]+       [1.845]       [0.843]**       [1.426]        [1.216]        [1.708]        [1.263]        [1.652]
Observations                           17             17             17             17             20             20             20             20
Adjusted R-squared                     0.18          0.11           0.24           0.18           0.01           -0.03          0.07           0.01
F-statistic                            2.51          2.93           3.21           3.69           1.28            1.8            1.8           2.03
F-test p-value                         0.1           0.06           0.06           0.04           0.32           0.18           0.19           0.14
Panel B: Correlates of Stock Market Capitalization in 1913 using data from LLS (2008)
                                  La Porta et al La Porta et al La Porta et al La Porta et al La Porta et al La Porta et al La Porta et al La Porta et al
                                      1913           1913           1913           1913           1913           1913           1913           1913
                                       (9)            (10)           (11)           (12)           (13)           (14)           (15)           (16)
Ln(GDP per cap 1870)                  0.343          0.279          0.338          0.267
                                    [0.134]**       [0.287]       [0.132]**       [0.222]
GDP growth 1870-1913                  -2.528         -0.19         -2.657          0.168
                                     [4.357]        [8.241]        [4.398]        [6.732]
Ln(GDP per cap 1890)                                                                               0.3           0.211          0.302          0.224
                                                                                                [0.133]**       [0.190]       [0.125]**       [0.179]
GDP growth 1890-1913                                                                             -5.115         -2.439          -5.09         -2.948
                                                                                                 [4.728]        [5.837]        [4.661]        [5.488]
Avg. inflation since 1880                           -3.279                        -3.825                        -5.085                        -4.198
                                                   [10.323]                       [6.793]                       [5.871]                       [4.455]
Legal origin dummies
Common law                            0.072          0.084                                        0.146          0.154
                                     [0.176]        [0.178]                                      [0.177]        [0.176]
French civil law                      -0.061        -0.021                                       -0.024          0.053
                                     [0.142]        [0.222]                                      [0.117]        [0.161]
Civil law Tradition                                                -0.104         -0.094                                       -0.158         -0.132
                                                                   [0.156]        [0.165]                                      [0.166]        [0.172]
Constant                              -1.971         -1.54         -1.856         -1.372         -1.691         -1.056         -1.561         -0.989
                                     [1.003]+       [1.998]       [0.973]+        [1.556]        [0.979]        [1.396]       [0.890]+        [1.303]
Observations                           17             17             17             17             20             20             20             20
Adjusted R-squared                     0.21          0.15           0.27           0.22           0.22           0.22           0.27           0.26
F-statistic                            2.05          2.12           2.49            2.8           1.71           2.39           2.12           3.12
F-test p-value                         0.15          0.14           0.11           0.07            0.2           0.09           0.14           0.05




                                                                                           61
Table 4B Stock Market Capitalization to GDP Regressions (OLS), 1900 and 1913



Ordinary least square regression of a sample of 21 countries of different legal families. The dependent variable is stock market capitalization to
GDP in 1913 and 1900. Controls include the growth rate of real GDP from 1870 to 1900/1913 or 1890 to 1900/1913 and the natural logarithm of
GDP per capita in 1870 or 1890 (all GDP figures for controls in 1990 PPP/International Geary-Khamis Dollars), average inflation from 1880 to
1900/1913, dummies indicating whether the country adheres to the common law or French civil law families, and a dummy for countries that
follow the civil law tradition (German, French, and Scandinavian civil law countries).Robust standard errors in brackets. Coefficients marked as
follows + significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Panel A: Correlates of Stock Market Capitalization in 1900 (new estimates of stock market capitalization)


                              Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/
                               GDP 1900    GDP 1900    GDP 1900    GDP 1900    GDP 1900    GDP 1900    GDP 1900    GDP 1900

                                    (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)
Ln(GDP per cap 1870)              0.256          0.187         0.233          0.139
                                [0.051]***     [0.096]+      [0.052]***      [0.100]
GDP growth 1870-1900              -4.023        -1.572         -1.394         1.346
                                 [5.862]        [8.418]        [6.978]       [9.363]
Ln(GDP per cap 1890)                                                                         0.244          0.229          0.24          0.224
                                                                                           [0.065]***     [0.064]***    [0.064]***     [0.064]***
GDP growth 1890-1900                                                                         8.386          7.401          9.77          8.691
                                                                                           [4.086]+        [4.786]       [3.647]**      [4.292]+
Avg. inflation since 1880                       -4.515                        -6.639                       -1.831                        -1.921
                                                [5.314]                      [5.477]                       [2.845]                      [2.779]
Legal origin dummies
Common law                        -0.188        -0.173                                       -0.103        -0.107
                                 [0.137]        [0.133]                                     [0.128]        [0.130]
French civil law                  -0.162        -0.126                                       -0.067        -0.065
                                 [0.128]        [0.135]                                     [0.112]        [0.114]
Civil law                                                      0.105           0.11                                       0.063          0.068
                                                               [0.101]       [0.103]                                      [0.088]       [0.087]
Constant                          -1.341        -0.838         -1.389         -0.673         -1.604        -1.451          -1.7          -1.543
                                [0.369]***      [0.706]      [0.380]***      [0.743]       [0.450]***     [0.476]***    [0.527]***     [0.543]**
Observations                        18            18             18             18            20             20             20             20
Adjusted R-squared                0.185          0.156          0.137         0.162          0.498          0.472         0.515          0.493
F-statistic                        7.22          3.97           8.35           5.12          7.15           5.08          10.02           6.72
F-test p-value                     0.00          0.02           0.00           0.01          0.00           0.01           0.00           0.00
Panel B: Correlates of Stock Market Capitalization in 1913 (new estimates of stock market capitalization)


                              Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/ Market cap/
                               GDP 1913    GDP 1913    GDP 1913    GDP 1913    GDP 1913    GDP 1913    GDP 1913    GDP 1913


                                    (9)          (10)           (11)           (12)           (13)          (14)           (15)           (16)
Ln(GDP per cap 1870)              0.265          -0.01         0.237          -0.054
                                 [0.107]**      [0.137]       [0.115]+       [0.140]
GDP growth 1870-1913              0.368         13.469         -0.369         15.072
                                 [5.231]        [7.847]        [6.444]       [7.708]+
Ln(GDP per cap 1890)                                                                         0.289          0.167         0.307          0.143
                                                                                           [0.119]**       [0.134]       [0.116]**      [0.120]
GDP growth 1890-1913                                                                         -2.881         1.864         -2.838         3.073
                                                                                            [5.446]        [5.920]        [6.027]       [5.367]
Avg. inflation since 1880                       -14.674                      -16.669                       -6.947                        -8.693
                                               [5.750]**                    [5.439]***                    [3.928]+                     [3.198]**
Legal Origin Dummies
Common law                        -0.257        -0.217                                       -0.173        -0.165
                                 [0.209]        [0.164]                                     [0.188]        [0.175]
French civil law                  -0.307        -0.102                                       -0.226        -0.114
                                 [0.181]        [0.194]                                     [0.140]        [0.170]
Civil law                                                       0.073         0.167                                       0.043          0.114
                                                               [0.170]       [0.121]                                      [0.160]       [0.140]
Constant                          -1.282         0.486         -1.307         0.571          -1.501         -0.65         -1.814         -0.652
                                 [0.766]        [0.934]        [0.822]       [0.958]       [0.837]+        [0.949]       [0.792]**      [0.871]
Observations                        19            19             19             19            22             22             22             22
Adjusted R-squared                0.073          0.252         -0.047         0.289          0.186          0.229          0.12          0.252
F-statistic                        3.63          2.88           1.64           3.85           2.29          2.57           2.81           3.26
F-test p-value                     0.03          0.06           0.22           0.03           0.1           0.07           0.07           0.04




                                                                                              62
Table 5 Bond Market Capitalization to GDP Regressions (OLS), 1900 and 1913


Ordinary least square regression of a sample of 15 to 17 countries of different legal families. The dependent variable is the face
value of all corporate bonds to GDP in 1900 or 1913. Controls include the growth rate of real GDP from 1870 to 1900 and 1913 or
1890 to 1913 and the natural logarithm of the 1870 and 1890 GDP (all GDP figures for controls in 1990 PPP/International Geary-
Khamis Dollars), average inflation from 1880 to 1900 or 1913, dummies indicating whether the country adheres to the common law
or French civil law families, and a dummy for countries that follow the civil law tradition (German, French, and Scandinavian civil
law countries).Robust standard errors in brackets. Coefficients marked as follows + significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.
Panel A: Correlates of Bond Market Capitalization in 1900

                                Bond         Bond         Bond         Bond         Bond         Bond         Bond         Bond
                              cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP
                                1900         1900         1900         1900         1900         1900         1900         1900
                                 (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
Ln(GDP per cap 1870)            -0.029       -0.15        -0.023       -0.079
                               [0.108]      [0.175]      [0.106]      [0.169]
GDP growth 1870-1900           -25.459      -18.588      -25.103      -21.412
                              [12.221]+     [14.888]    [12.460]+     [13.411]
Ln(GDP per cap 1890)                                                                0.119        -0.099       0.116        -0.07
                                                                                   [0.099]      [0.189]      [0.096]      [0.170]
GDP growth 1890-1900                                                                -1.84        3.511        -1.93        1.961
                                                                                   [4.922]      [6.131]      [4.582]      [5.457]
Avg. inflation since 1880                    -5.092                    -2.545                    -9.024                    -7.158
                                            [5.480]                   [4.611]                   [5.437]                   [4.622]
Legal origin dummies
Common law                      0.284        0.354                                  0.141         0.26
                               [0.163]      [0.161]+                               [0.244]      [0.272]
French civil law                0.041         0.1                                   0.019        0.111
                               [0.088]      [0.086]                                [0.087]      [0.119]
Civil law                                                 -0.256       -0.272                                 -0.133       -0.194
                                                         [0.159]      [0.167]                                [0.232]      [0.225]
Constant                        0.656        1.486        0.883        1.292        -0.721        0.87        -0.551       0.916
                               [0.857]      [1.307]      [0.903]      [1.343]      [0.639]      [1.307]      [0.688]      [1.329]
Observations                      16           16           16           16           17           17           17           17
Adjusted R-squared               0.29         0.27         0.34         0.30        -0.06         0.09         0.02         0.11
F-Test                           1.48         1.49         1.67         1.04         1.1          1.68         1.52         1.73
Prob>F                           0.27         0.28         0.23         0.43         0.4          0.22         0.26         0.21
Panel B: Correlates of Bond Market Capitalization in 1913

                                Bond         Bond         Bond         Bond         Bond         Bond         Bond         Bond
                              cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP      cap/GDP
                                1913         1913         1913         1913         1913         1913         1913         1913
                                 (9)          (10)         (11)         (12)         (13)         (14)         (15)         (16)
Ln(GDP per cap 1870)            0.055        0.039        0.066        0.084
                               [0.084]      [0.156]      [0.088]      [0.130]
GDP growth 1870-1913           -10.281       -9.482       -9.772      -10.864
                               [5.118]+     [7.757]      [5.397]+     [7.151]
Ln(GDP per cap 1890)                                                                0.122        0.062        0.107        0.079
                                                                                   [0.084]      [0.152]      [0.080]      [0.143]
GDP growth 1890-1913                                                                -7.95        -5.795       -7.872       -6.975
                                                                                   [4.001]+     [6.520]      [4.038]+     [5.990]
Avg. inflation since 1880                    -0.897                    1.126                     -2.983                    -1.218
                                            [4.535]                   [3.049]                   [4.480]                   [3.628]
Legal origin dummies
Common law                      0.283        0.284                                  0.224        0.233
                               [0.150]+     [0.154]+                               [0.172]      [0.169]
French civil law                0.093        0.106                                  0.074        0.114
                               [0.057]      [0.102]                                [0.044]      [0.075]
Civil law                                                 -0.222       -0.231                                 -0.191       -0.187
                                                         [0.148]      [0.166]                                [0.163]      [0.176]
Constant                        -0.043       0.058        0.134        0.024        -0.624       -0.203       -0.276       -0.073
                               [0.604]      [1.041]      [0.640]      [0.854]      [0.599]      [1.050]      [0.529]      [0.921]
Observations                      17           17           17           17           18           18           18           18
Adjusted R-squared               0.31         0.25         0.32         0.27         0.24         0.21         0.26         0.21
F-Test                           1.83         2.02         1.27         1.35         1.76         2.27         1.52         1.61
Prob>F                           0.19         0.15         0.33         0.31         0.2          0.11         0.25         0.23




                                                                                      63
Table 6 Private Credit to GDP and Traded Companies per Million People Regressions (OLS), 1913


Ordinary least square regression of a sample of 13 countries of different legal families. The dependent variable is private credit (stock of bonds +
the stock of private loans) to GDP in 1913 or the number of traded companies per million people in 1913. Controls include the growth rate of real
GDP from 1870/1890 to 1913 and the natural logarithm of GDP per capita in 1870/1890 (all GDP figures for controls in 1990 PPP/International
Geary-Khamis Dollars), average inflation from 1880 to 1913, and dummies indicating whether the country adheres to the common law. Robust
standard errors in brackets. Coefficients marked as follows + significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                                                                                              Co's per       Co's per       Co's per      Co's per
                                  Priv. credit/ Priv. credit/ Priv. credit/ Priv. credit/    million pop    million pop    million pop   million pop
                                   GDP 1913      GDP 1913      GDP 1913      GDP 1913           1913           1913           1913          1913
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)
Ln(GDP per cap 1870)                  0.862          0.462                                      34.228         33.707
                                    [0.353]**       [0.378]                                    [9.189]***    [13.469]**
GDP growth 1870-1900                  -5.884         4.188                                     -607.735       -580.418
                                     [9.948]       [11.022]                                    [396.357]      [529.636]
Ln(GDP per cap 1890)                                               0.693           0.257                                      35.868        35.447
                                                                  [0.279]**       [0.448]                                   [8.426]***     [9.701]***
GDP growth 1890-1900                                              -12.811          0.231                                     -993.031      -978.414
                                                                   [8.963]        [15.533]                                 [370.235]**    [409.973]**
Avg. inflation since 1880                           -15.802                       -17.733                     -29.592                       -22.379
                                                   [11.456]                       [16.486]                    [398.163]                    [260.613]
Legal origin dummies
Common law                            -0.631        -0.659         -0.405         -0.514        -14.037       -14.199        -10.314        -10.506
                                     [0.377]       [0.353]+        [0.308]        [0.349]       [9.779]       [10.266]       [8.445]        [8.871]
Constant                              -5.093        -2.235         -3.874         -0.696       -202.929       -199.397       -214.429      -211.244
                                     [2.509]+       [2.729]       [1.990]+        [3.285]     [59.180]***    [90.740]**    [52.817]***    [63.931]***
Observations                            13            13             13             13            19             19             21            21
Adjusted R-squared                     0.27          0.286         0.183           0.221         0.314         0.265          0.456          0.422
F-statistic                            2.84          2.91            3.3           4.76          4.76           3.85           6.76          4.74
F-test p-value                         0.10          0.09           0.07           0.03          0.02           0.03           0.00          0.01




                                                                             64
Table 7 Deposits per capita, 1913, 1925, 1929
Panel A: Summary statistics, deposits per capita
                                                  Obsa           Mean          Std. Dev.     Min      Max
Full Sample
Deposits per capita 1913                            28                 56.3           64.8      0.2    234.9
Deposits per capita 1925                            41                 74.9           94.9      0.0    370.4
Deposits per capita 1929                            38                 92.2          110.4      1.3    454.6
Change in deposits 1913-1929                        26                 57.3           59.1     -0.5    219.7
Common law
Deposits per capita 1913                             7               108.4            71.9      0.2    206.9
Deposits per capita 1925                             8               185.7           118.8      1.2    370.4
Deposits per capita 1929                             7               223.8           106.3     58.8    389.6
Change in deposits 1913-1929                         6               110.0            54.0     31.7    182.7
German civil law
Deposits per capita 1913                             3                87.8           127.4     11.5    234.9
Deposits per capita 1925                            11                53.0            86.5      0.0    299.3
Deposits per capita 1929                            10                80.6           133.7      4.9    454.6
Change in deposits 1913-1929                         3               107.1            97.6     47.4    219.7
French civil law
Deposits per capita 1913                            14                 19.8           24.0      0.9     75.1
Deposits per capita 1925                            18                 27.4           35.4      1.3    133.1
Deposits per capita 1929                            17                 33.5           38.2      1.3    138.7
Change in deposits 1913-1929                        13                 17.1           18.1     -0.5     63.6
Scandinavian civil law
Deposits per capita 1913                             4                69.2            19.4     42.1     84.3
Deposits per capita 1925                             4               127.4            59.0     52.4    185.5
Deposits per capita 1929                             4               140.8            54.0     67.3    184.3
Change in deposits 1913-1929                         4                71.6            34.8     25.1    102.3
a
 Sample size differs from that used for regressions because there is no GDP data for all the
countries in the sample
Panel B: Means test, t-statistics
                                                       Deposits per capita
                                                      1913       1925        1929
Common vs. all civil law                         -2.71**    -4.46***    -4.20***
Common vs. French civil law                     -4.25***    -5.26***    -6.58***
Common vs. German civil law                       -0.33      -2.82**     -2.35**
Common vs. Scandinavian civil law                 -1.05          -0.91          -1.43#
French vs. common and civil law                  3.56***        3.13***         3.32***
German vs. common and civil law                   -0.88           0.89           0.38
# significant at 20%; + significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                          65
Table 8 Deposits per capita regressions, 1913, 1925, 1929
Ordinary least square regression of a sample of 24 to 33 countries of different legal families. The dependent variable is
deposits per capita in 1913, 1925, and 1929. Robust standard errors in brackets. Coefficients marked as follows + significant
at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Panel A: Deposits per capita regressions, 1913, 1925, 1929

                          Deposits Deposits Deposits Deposits           Deposits Deposits       Deposits Deposits Deposits
                           per cap    per cap    per cap   per cap      per cap  per cap        per cap  per cap per cap
                              1913      1913       1913       1925       1925     1925           1929     1929     1929
                                (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)            (7)      (8)      (10)
Ln(GDP per cap 1890)           57.9      60.5       56.5
                           [16.2]*** [13.7]*** [14.7]***
GDP growth since 1890         922.2    1227.5      921.6
                           [443.7]+ [659.8]+ [361.5]**
Ln(GDP per cap 1913)                                           92.4        99.5        84.6     103.80      106.00     88.50
                                                           [24.6]***    [28.7]***   [25.1]***   [43.1]**    [59.0]+   [38.0]**
GDP growth since 1913                                         220.8        47.7       206.3     366.10       91.60    373.40
                                                            [298.2]      [213.5]     [340.0]    [376.3]     [247.7]   [466.4]
Avg. inflation since 1880               (541)                             -557.9                              -618
                                      [624.6]                           [258.6]**                           [405.2]
Common law                     56.9      61.3                 117.5        101.3                126.40      113.40
                           [19.9]*** [20.2]***             [32.7]***     [50.4]+                [48.1]**     [88.5]
French civil law                                   -76.9                             -134.4                             -159.4
                                                [15.5]***                          [34.1]***                          [41.5]***
German civil law                                   -17.6                             -119.6                             -116.5
                                                  [62.4]                            [47.4]**                           [68.2]+
Scandinavian c.l.                                  -33.3                              -67.4                              -82.8
                                                 [15.0]**                           [34.6]+                            [37.7]**
Constant                     -416.3    -433.1     -347.8     -627.4       -644.6     -449.4      -704.9      -677.3     -457.1
                          [106.9]*** [88.2]*** [110.7]*** [175.3]***    [199.1]*** [199.4]**    [309.7]**   [405.5]    [306.8]
Observations                  24.00     20.00      24.00      33.00        21.00      33.00       32.00      19.00       32.00
Adjusted R-squared             0.48      0.47       0.56       0.58         0.51       0.60        0.49       0.36        0.51
F-Test                        18.48     18.00      10.59      17.68         7.04      13.07       16.87       6.10       19.09
Prob>F                         0.00      0.00       0.00       0.00         0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00        0.00
Panel B: Change in deposits per capita 1913-1929
                            Δ Dep.    Δ Dep.     Δ Dep.     Δ Dep.
                           per cap    per cap    per cap   per cap
                           1913-29 1913-29 1913-29 1913-29
                                (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)
GDP growth 1913-1929         -253.1     160.6     -528.4     -265.1
                            [359.7]   [370.0]    [467.3]    [386.8]
Avg. inflation 1913-1929                          -127.3     -186.3
                                                 [132.8]    [163.5]
Common law                     76.5                 67.2
                           [25.1]***             [31.3]**
French civil law                       -108.3                 -93.3
                                     [21.7]***             [27.8]***
German civil law                        -19.9                    4
                                       [55.1]                [69.5]
Scandinavian c.l.                       -55.2                 -51.8
                                      [26.2]**              [29.3]+
Constant                       54.5     122.2       73.2      136.4
                            [19.9]** [18.2]*** [32.7]** [20.4]***
Observations                    23        23         23         23
Adjusted R-squared             0.25      0.49       0.24       0.51
F-Test                         8.44      9.02       7.71       7.35
Prob>F                         0.00      0.00       0.00       0.00




                                                                   66
Table 9 Creditor Rights for a Cross-section of Common and French Civil Law Countries, c. 1910 and 1995
                                                                                     Common law countries                                              French civil law countries                             Means




                                                                    om




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      French civil law
                                                        United Kingdo




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Common law
                                                                         United States




                                                                                                              Hong Kong




                                                                                                                                  Singapore




                                                                                                                                                                          Argentina
                                                                                                  Australia




                                                                                                                                                                                      Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                        Belgium
                                                                                         Canada




                                                                                                                                              France




                                                                                                                                                                                                Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                  Spain
                                                                                                                          India
Creditor Rights in 1910
No automatic stay on assets                                 1                0             1         1           0         1         0          1         1        1         1          1         1      0.6          1.0
Secured creditors have first priority                       1                1             1         1           1         1         1          1         1        1         1          1         0      1.0          0.8
Creditors approve reorganization                            1                1             1         1           1         0         1          1         1        1         1          1         1      0.9          1.0
Management does not stay during reorganization              1                0             1         1           0         1         0          0         0        0         0          0         1      0.6          0.2
                          Creditor Rights
                                      g   Index 1910        4                2             4         4           2         3         2          3         3        3         3          3         3      3.0          3.0
Creditor Rights in 1995
No automatic stay on assets                                 1                1             0         0           1         1         1          0         1        1         0          0         0      0.7          0.4
Secured creditors have first priority                       1                0             1         1           1         1         1          0         1        1         1          1         0      0.8          0.6
Creditors approve reorganization                            1                0             0         0           1         1         1          0         0        0         0          1         1      0.5          0.2
Management does not stay during reorganization              1                0             0         0           1         1         1          0         0        0         0          0         0      0.5          0.0
                           Creditor Rights Index 1995       4                1             1         1           4         4         4          0         2        2         1          2         1      2.7          1.3
Sources: All creditor rights for 1995 from La Porta et al., “Law and Finance,” Table 4. Creditor rights for 1910 from the country sections of Oscar
Borchardt and Josef Kohler (eds.), Die Handelsgesetze des Erdballs : umfassend das Handels-, Wechsel-, Konkurs- und Seerecht aller Kulturvölker, mit
Ergänzungen und Erläuterungen aus dem Zivilrecht, Prozessrecht und der Gerichtsverfassung und einer Zusammenstellung der handelsrechtlichen
Nebengesetze in der Landessprache mit gegenüberstehender deutscher Übersetzung ... Berlin : R. v. Decker, [1906-1914], vols. I to XIV. Australia and
Canada coded as following British bankruptcy law according to Richard Brown, “Comparative Legislation in Bankruptcy.” Journal of the Society of
Comparative Legislation 2 (1900): 251-270.




                                                                                                  67
                                      Table 10. Shareholder Rights Across countries
                                            Common
                                              law                           German civil law                                          French civil law                                       Scandinavian




                                           England 1880s


                                                           England 1908




                                                                                                                                 France before




                                                                                                                                                               Chile XIX c.

                                                                                                                                                                              Egypt before
                                                                                                                  Italy before
                                                                          before 1987




                                                                                                     China 1904




                                                                                                                                                               th
                                                                                                                                                 Brazil 1910
                                                                                        Japan 1900




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sweden c.
                                                                          Germany




                                                                                                                  1942


                                                                                                                                 1917




                                                                                                                                                                              1917




                                                                                                                                                                                                 1910
        Shareholder protection\Country:
Proxy voting                                  0               0               0            1            1            1?               1             1            0                1                 ?
Shares not blocked before meeting             0               1               0            0            0             ?               0             0            0                0                 ?

Cumulative voting or proportional rep.        0               0               0            0            0             0               0             0            0                0                 ?
Provision for minorities to challenge
directors' decisions                          0               0               0            0            0              ?              0             1            0                0                 1
Shareholders have 1st right to buy new
stock                                         0               0               0            0            0              ?              1             0            0                1                 ?

Capital needed to call an extraordinary
meeting is less than or equal to 10%          0               0               1            1            1             ?               0             0            0                0                 1
Anti-director rights index                    0               1               1            2            2             1               2             2            0                2                 2
Sources: England in the 1880s from Campbell and Turner (2007), England in 1908 from Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2004), Germany
from Franks, Mayer and Wagner (2006), Japan from Franks, Mayer, and Miyajima (2007), China from Williams (1905), Italy from
Aganin and Volpin (2006), Brazil from Musacchio (2007), Chile from Islas Rojas (2007), and France, Egypt, and Sweden constructed
from information in Wellhoff (1917).




                                                                                        68
Table 11. Taxation of Securities in Selected Countries (Taxes in Percentage Points), 1905
Panel A Taxes for either registering or listing securities on the stock exchange
                                                       France       Germany    Austria       Bulgaria    Belgium    Spain       Great Britain     Denmark     Greece       Hungary    Italyd        Netherlands    Portugal    Russiae       Sweden       Norway    Switzerlandf    Turkey       Luxembourg Romania      Serbia
Domestic securities
   Shares (co. authorized for <10yrs)                       0.6           2      0.3125            0.5        0.5         2                 0.5       0.15             1       0.32   0.07-4.2               0.2    0.15-1.5    0.04-0.4           3         none       0.15-0.75          1            0.05       0.1        0.4
   Shares (co. authorized for >10yrs)                       1.2           2       0.625            0.5          1         4                 0.5       0.15             1       0.32   0.07-4.2               0.2    0.15-1.5    0.04-0.4           3         none       0.15-0.75          1            0.05       0.1        0.4
   Corporate bonds                                          1.2           6      0.3125            0.5          1       2-4           0.125-0.5      0.125             1       0.32   0.07-4.2                 1    0.15-1.5    0.04-0.4           3         none            0.06        0.5            0.05       0.1        0.4
   Government bonds                                     exempt       exempt     exempt         exempt     exempt    exempt             exempt      exempt              1       0.32   0.07-4.2           exempt     exempt      exempt        exempt         none        exempt      exempt          exempt    exempt     exempt
Foreign securities
   Shares (unsubscribed)*                                      2         2.5      0.625                                 2-4                 0.5       0.66             1       0.32   0.07-4.2               0.3    0.15-1.5    0.04-0.4              3      none       0.15-0.75            1          0.05       0.1    exempt
   Shares (subscribed)                                       0.6         2.5      0.625                                 2-4                 0.5       0.66             1       0.32   0.07-4.2               0.3    0.15-1.5    0.04-0.4              3      none       0.15-0.75            1          0.05       0.1    exempt
   Corporate bonds                                           0.6           1      0.625                                 2-4                 0.5       0.66             1       0.32   0.07-4.2               0.3    0.15-1.5    0.04-0.4              3      none            0.06            1          0.05       0.1    exempt
   Government bonds                                            1           6      0.625                                 2-4                 0.5       0.66             1       0.32   0.07-4.2               0.2    0.15-1.5    0.04-0.4              3      none        exempt              1          0.05       0.1    exempt
Panel B Taxes on the turnover of securities
                                                       France       Germany    Austria       Bulgaria    Belgium    Spain       Great Britain     Denmark     Greece       Hungary    Italyd        Netherlands    Portugal    Russiae       Sweden       Norway    Switzerlandf    Turkey       Luxembourg Romania      Serbia
Domestic securities
   Nominal Shares/bonds                                     0.5          0.2                                 0.65           1              0.5           0             0              0.15-1.5                0           0        3-10         none         none          none        none                                 none
   Bearer shares/bonds                                      0.2          0.2                                 0.65           1              0.5           0             0              0.15-1.5                0           0        3-10         none         none          none        none                                 none
   Government bonds                                     exempt           0.2                              exempt            1          exempt            0             0              exempt                  0           0        3-10         none         none          none        none                                 none
Foreign securities
   Shares (unsubscribed)                                  0.5a           0.3                                 0.65           1               0.5          0             0              0.15-1.5                0           0        3-10         none         none          none        none                                 none
   Shares (subscribed)                                     0.2           0.3                                 0.65           1               0.5          0             0              0.15-1.5                0           0        3-10         none         none          none        none                                 none
   Corporate bonds                                        1.25           0.3                                 0.65           1               0.5          0             0              0.15-1.5                0           0        3-10         none         none          none        none                                 none
   Government bonds                                                      0.2                                 1.65           1               0.5          0             0              exempt                  0           0        3-10         none         none          none        none                                 none
Panel C Taxes on interests and dividends or by broker transaction
                                                       France       Germany    Austria       Bulgaria    Belgium    Spain       Great Britain     Denmark     Greece       Hungary    Italyd        Netherlands    Portugal    Russiae       Sweden       Norway    Switzerlandf    Turkey       Luxembourg Romania      Serbia
On interests and dividends
  Private securities                                            4                     2             2       none        3-5               5.83      1.3-2.5            2        10             10       0.01-1.5        8-12             5            1       2-5        1.5-3.75            5            3         5        6-10
  Government and guaranteed bonds                               0                    10                     none         20               5.83      1.3-2.5            2        10             20       0.01-1.5        8-12             5            1       2-5                            5       exempt         5        6-10
On stock market transactions (brokers)
                                                                                         b                                                                             c
   Shares and corporate bonds                             0.00125           0       0.5-1                                   0.1         0.1                 0.1-4          0.01    0.22-2.0         none       none         3-5      none        none          0.2-1      fixed                      0.1
   Government bonds                                       0.00125           0     exempt                                    0.1         0.1                 0.1-4c         0.01    0.22-2.0         none       none         3-5      none        none          0.2-1      fixed                      0.1
Source: "Régime fiscal des valeurs mobilières en Europe" in Bulletin de L'Institut International de Statistique XIV- 3 (1905): 295-311.
a One 1/10 of the shares had to be traded and 2/10 of the bonds
b Taxes on stock market transactions for shares and bonds in Austria were fixed in kreuzner, at around 50 for most bonds and 20 for most shares. Most of the securities traded in Austria were quoted at around 400-500 Kr, so approximately the tax would be equivalente to something between 0.5 and 1%, obviously
c The stamp tax was 1 drachma, with stock and bond prices ranging from 10 to 250 dr, this tax would be equivalent to 0.001 to 0.05%
d Broad ranges of taxes given for Italy because the taxes were in lira and ranged depending on the "dimension" the paper. The percentage equivalent estimated using a range of securities prices from 100 to 1400 liras.
e All rates as a percent estimated using a range of prices from 60 to 350 rubbles
f Swiss rates estimated by looking at the min and max ranges for Basel, Zurich, and Geneva, thus ignoring other financial centers




                                                                                                                                                                69
Table 12 OLS Regressions using Taxation on Listing and Interest/Dividend Gains.
Ordinary least square regression of a sample of between 9 and 11 European countries for which data on taxes is available.
                                                                                                                       available The hypothesis tested in
specifications 1 through 6 is that higher taxes on the listing of corproate bonds (txlistbonds) or on interest gains (txintdiv) reduces the stock of bonds
to GDP in a country. In the same why specifications 4 through 9 test if higher taxes on the listing of company shares (txlisteq) or on dividends
reduces stock market capitalization to GDP. Robust standard errors in brackets. Coefficients marked as follows + significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%.
             bond
             bo   d mktt bo
                         bond  d mktt bo
                                      bond d mktt mktt cap     mktt cap   mktt cap    mktt cap    mktt cap    mktt cap      mktt cap  mktt cap    mktt cap
                1913         1913        1913       1913         1913        1913        1913        1913        1913         1913       1913        1913
                  (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)           (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)       (11)        (12)
lntxlistbond -0.018          0.026       0.015
               [0.050]     [0.066]     [0.073]
lntxlisteq                                                                              -0.172      -0.081      -0.079
                                                                                      [0 062]**
                                                                                      [0.062]**    [0.079]
                                                                                                   [0 079]     [0
                                                                                                               [0.082]
                                                                                                                    082]
lntxintdiv                                         0.134         0.252       0.244                                           -0.174     -0.091       -0.08
                                                  [0.249]      [0.196]     [0.263]                                          [0.091]+   [0.136]     [0.155]
lngdpc90                     0.483       0.525                   0.653       0.664                   0.562       0.524                   0.691       0.639
                           [0.453]     [0.505]                 [0.345]     [0.336]                 [0.505]     [0.552]                 [0.463]     [0.503]
french                                   0.08                                0.018                              -0.079
                                                                                                                 0.079                              -0.136
                                                                                                                                                     0.136
                                       [0.207]                             [0.182]                             [0.162]                             [0.163]
Constant        0.252       -3.517      -3.887     0.086        -5.124      -5.207      0.567       -3.816      -3.483        0.718     -4.728      -4.289
              [0.081]**    [3.483]     [3.886]    [0.258]      [2.733]     [2.664]   [0.079]***    [3.881]     [4.234]     [0.156]***  [3.607]     [3.938]
Observatio         9            9           9         8             8            8         11          11          11           10         10          10
Adjusted R -0.129           -0.095      -0.285     -0.085        0.305       0.132       0.234       0.263        0.18        0.058      0.287       0.229
FT t
F-Test           0 14
                 0.14         0 59
                              0.59        0 41
                                          0.41      0 29
                                                    0.29          2 15
                                                                  2.15        11.96
                                                                                 96       7 79
                                                                                          7.79        3 83
                                                                                                      3.83        3 01
                                                                                                                  3.01         3 64
                                                                                                                               3.64       3 27
                                                                                                                                          3.27        3 85
                                                                                                                                                      3.85
Prob>F           0.72         0.58        0.75      0.61          0.21        0.26        0.02        0.07         0.1         0.09        0.1        0.08




                                                                               70
Table 13 Pairwise correlation table of main variables used in the analysis
                        mkt1913 mkt1900 bon~1900 bon~1913 rzm~1913 lls~1913 avginf               gdpcmad18gdpcmad18gold1900 gold1913 yrsgold1900
Mkt. Cap/GDP 1913                 1
Mkt. Cap/GDP 1900           0.8700*           1
Bond mkt. Cap/GDP 1          0.2414      0.3407        1
Bond mkt. Cap/GDP 1           0.152       0.213  0.9200*          1
R&Z mkt cap 1913             0.2214      0.4556  0.5556*    0.5476*          1
LLS mkt cap 1913            0.6749*     0.6015*  0.6867*    0.7268*    0.9949*        1
Avg. inf since 1880        -0.5249*    -0.4645* -0.4973*    -0.4336    -0.2041 -0.5206*        1
GDP per cap 1870             0.2568      0.4186   0.3085     0.4256    0.5348*  0.5794*  -0.3824          1
GDP per cap 1890            0.4851*     0.6075*   0.3414     0.2931     0.2509  0.5544*  -0.3634    0.8889*        1
Gold dummy 1900              0.3875     0.4912*   0.2227      0.155     0.3327   0.3384 -0.4763*      0.246   0.2872        1
Gold dummy 1913               0.161      0.2683  -0.0326    -0.0418     0.1885   0.1579  -0.0083     0.1247   0.0983  0.5860*        1
Yrs. On gold 1900           0.4879*     0.6077*   0.2847     0.2232     0.0893  0.4718* -0.5173*    0.4642*  0.4788*  0.8507*  0.4985*           1
Yrs. On gold 1913           0.4404*     0.5526*   0.2345     0.1654     0.1544   0.4248 -0.4458*     0.3917   0.4034  0.9040*  0.6694*     0.9689*
* denotes significance at the 5% level




                                                                        71
                                                                Figure 1 Measures of Financial Development vs. Legal Origin in 1900 and 1913
Panel A: Stock market cap to GDP by legal family in                                          Panel B: Bond market cap to GDP by legal family in                                               Panel C: Companies traded per million people and
1900 and 1913                                                                                1900 and 1913                                                                                    private credit to GDP, 1913

                                                  SWI                                                                               UK                                                                                                                                  BEL




                                                                                                            .8
                .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                       DEN
                                        US




                                                                                                                                                                                               Companies per Million Pop. 1913
 Stock Market Capitalization 1900




                                                                                              Bond Market Capitalization 1900
                                                                          BEL




                                                                                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                          NED
                            .6




                                                                          FRA
                                                  OST                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NED
                                                                                                                                                   SWI                     FRA                                                       AUS       SWI




                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                        UK




                                                                                                           .4
                                                                          EGY
               .4




                                        AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UK
                                                  JAP                                                                                                                      SPA




                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OST                                    DEN
                                                                          Greece       NOR                                          US
                                                                          SPA                                                                                                                                                                                                         NOR
                                        CAN                                                                                                        OST                                                                                         GER




                                                                                                .2
                                                  GER
    .2




                                                                          BRZ                                                                                              BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SA                                 CHI           SWE




                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                          ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CAN                                EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        URU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ARG
                                                                          CHI                                                                                                                                                                                           FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CUB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BRZ
                                                                          Peru                                                                     GER                     ITA          NOR
                                                                                                                                                   JAP                     Greece
                                                                                                                                                                           BRZ                                                                 JAP
                                        IND                                                                                                                                             DEN                                          US                                 ITA
                                                                                                                                    AUS                                    ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IND




                                                                                                            0
                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                    1         2                       3            4                                            1              2                       3            4                                            1         2                        3             4
                                                        legalorigin                                                                                      legalorigin                                                                                 legalorigin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5
                1.5




                                                                                                                                    UK




                                                                                                            .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DEN
                                                  SWI
 Stock Market Capitalization 1913




                                                                                              Bond Market Capitalization 1913




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Private Credit to GDP 1913
                                                                                                                      .6


                                                                          BEL
                        1




                                        US
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GER
                                                                                       DEN




                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FRA
                                        CAN       OST
                                                                                                          .4




                                                                                                                                                                           FRA
                                                                                                                                    US
                                                                          NED
                                                                          FRA                                                                                              SPA                                                                                                            NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UK
        .5




                                                  JAP                                  SWE                                                                                                                                                                                  BEL




                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                  GER                     EGY                                                                                              BEL                                                       US
                                        AUS                                                                                                                                                                                                    SWI
                                                                                                                                                   OST
                                                                                                .2




                                        UK                                CUB
                                                                          SPA                                                                      SWI
                                                                                                                                                                           BRZ
                                        SA                                BRZ
                                                                          ARG
                                                                          CHI
                                                                          ITA
                                                                          URU          NOR                                          CAN                                                 NOR                                                    JAP
                                                                                                                                                   GER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .5
                                                                                                                                    SA                                     ITA                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                                                                                   JAP                                  DEN                                          CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SA
                                        IND                                                                                         AUS                                    URU
                                                                                                                                                                           ARG                                                                                              BRZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ARG
                                                                                                            0
                0




                                    1         2                       3            4                                            1              2                       3            4                                            1         2                            3             4
                                                        legalorigin                                                                                      legalorigin                                                                                 Legal origin




                                                                                                                                          72
Figure 2 Bank Deposits per capita 1913, 1925, and 1929
                                                     Panel A: Deposits per capita 1913




                   250
                                                                   SWI


                                              US




                             200
    Deposits per capita 1913
                   150
                                              AUS
                                              CAN
                                              UK

                                              NZ
        100
                                                                                                       DEN
                                                                                                       SWE
                                                                                            ARG
                                                                                            BEL        NOR
                   50



                                                                                                       FIN
                                              SAF                                           FRA
                                                                                            URU
                                                                   GER                      CHL
                                                                                            HOL
                                                                   JAP                      ITA
                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                            GRE
                                                                                            SAL
                                                                                            BOL
                                                                                            POR
                                              IND                                           VEN
                                                                                            PER
                   0




                                          1                    2                        3         4
                                                                         Legal Origin




                                                     Panel B: Deposits per capita 1925
                          400




                                              US
                                    300




                                                                   SWI
             Deposits per capita 1925




                                              CAN
                                              AUS
                                              UK
                       200




                                                                                                      SWE
                                              NZ
                                                                                                      DEN
                                              IRE
                                                                                            ARG
                                                                                                      NOR
           100




                                                                                            BEL
                                                                   ROM
                                                                   JAP
                                                                   CZK                                FIN
                                              SAF                  OST                      HOL
                                                                                            CHL
                                                                                            SPA
                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                            URU
                                                                   GER
                                                                   YUG                      ITA
                                                                                            BRA
                                              IND                  BUL
                                                                   POL
                                                                   LAT                      BOL
                                                                                            POR
                                                                                            COL
                                                                                            VEN
                                                                                            GRE
                                                                                            MEX
                                                                                            SAL
                                                                                            ECU
                                                                                            PER
                                                                   HUN
                          0




                                          1                    2                        3         4
                                                                         Legal Origin




                                                    Panel C: Deposits per capita in 1929
                        500




                                                                   SWI
                                  400




                                              US
         Deposits per capita 1929
                        300




                                              CAN

                                              AUS
                                              UK
             200




                                              NZ                                                      SWE
                                                                                                      DEN
                                              IRE
                                                                                            ARG       NOR
                        100




                                                                                            BEL
                                                                   GER
                                                                   CZK                                FIN
                                              SAF                  JAP
                                                                   OST                      SPA
                                                                                            HOL
                                                                                            URU
                                                                                            FRA
                                                                   HUN                      CHL
                                                                   ROM
                                                                   YUG
                                                                   BUL                      ITA
                                                                                            POR
                                                                   POL                      VEN
                                                                                            COL
                                                                                            GRE
                                                                                            MEX
                                                                                            BOL
                                                                                            SAL
                                                                                            ECU
                                                                                            PER
                        0




                                          1                    2                        3         4
                                                                         Legal Origin




                                                                          73
