NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A LITNER MODEL OF PAYOUT AND MANAGERIAL RENTS
Bart M. Lambrecht
Stewart C. Myers
Working Paper 16210
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16210
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

We thank the editors, an associate editor, an anonymous referee, Michael Brennan, Ken Peasnell, John
O'Hanlon, Neng Wang, Robert Merton, Alan Schwartz, Ivo Welch, Steve Young, seminar participants
at Columbia Business School, EDHEC, Goethe University Frankfurt, Imperial Business School, Lancaster
University Management School, Manchester Business School, MIT Sloan School, Université Catholique
de Louvain, University College Dublin, University of Reading, Warwick Business School and participants
to the 2011 AFA and SED meetings, the Penn/NYU conference on Law and Finance and the World
Congress of the Bachelier Finance Society for helpful comments or discussions. Financial support
from the ESRC (grant RES-062-23-0078) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Bart M. Lambrecht and Stewart C. Myers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A Litner Model of Payout and Managerial Rents
Bart M. Lambrecht and Stewart C. Myers
NBER Working Paper No. 16210
July 2010, Revised November 2011
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
We develop a dynamic agency model where payout, investment and financing decisions are made
by managers who attempt to maximize the rents they take from the firm, subject to a capital market
constraint. Managers smooth payout in order to smooth their flow of rents. Total payout (dividends
plus net repurchases) follows Lintner's (1956) target-adjustment model. Payout smooths out transitory
shocks to current income and adjusts gradually to changes in permanent income. Smoothing is accomplished
by borrowing or lending. Payout is not cut back to finance capital investment. Risk aversion causes
managers to underinvest, but habit formation mitigates the degree of underinvestment.
Bart M. Lambrecht
Lancaster University Management School
Room C-42
Bailrigg
Lancaster LA1 4YX, UK
b.lambrecht@lancaster.ac.uk
Stewart C. Myers
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sloan School of Management
E62-620
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
scmyers@mit.edu

I.

Introduction

THIS PAPER PRESENTS A THEORY OF PAYOUT by mature public corporations in a dynamic
agency setting. The theory says that payout follows Lintner’s (1956) target adjustment
model. If payout is restricted to cash dividends, Lintner’s model is:
∆Dividendt = κ + SOA (Target Dividendt − Dividendt−1 ) + et

(1)

∆Dividendt is the change from the previous dividend at period t - 1, SOA < 1 is the speed
of adjustment, κ is a constant and et is an error term. The target dividend is the product of
a target payout ratio and net income at t. The target payout ratio and the coefficients κ and
SOA are assumed constant over time, although they can vary across firms. Thus dividends
are based on current net income, but smoothed.
Lintner did not derive his model. He came to it inductively, based on interviews with
28 large, public manufacturing firms. The model has been confirmed as a good fit to the
time series of cash dividends, although the fit has degraded as repurchases have become more
important. But Lintner’s model has, as far as we can tell, never been derived formally. There
has been no underlying theory. Thus it has been difficult to interpret coefficient estimates
and empirical results. It has been difficult to know under what conditions or for what type
of firms the Lintner model applies, or what forms of payout the model should explain.
Our paper addresses these issues. Our agency setting leads to the Lintner model exactly,
with closed-form expressions for the coefficients κ and SOA. We note two key differences,
however. First, our theory says that the Lintner model should not apply to cash dividends
but to total payout, defined as cash dividends plus repurchases. Thus we have a fresh
prediction, that the Lintner model should fit better to total payout than to cash dividends.
This prediction is confirmed in Skinner (2008) for mature corporations that pay regular cash
dividends. Second, our theory says that target payout depends on the firm’s permanent
income, not net income as reported. Permanent income is the annuity equivalent of the
present value of all the firm’s future income.
We also derive implications for debt policy. If payout is smoothed, something else has to
absorb fluctuations in operating profitability and capital investment. Consider the budget
constraint:
∆Debt + Net income = CAPEX + Payout
Lintner’s formula says that changes in payout absorb only part of the changes in net income.
1

The remainder must be absorbed by changes in borrowing (∆Debt) or by capital investment
(CAPEX). If payout follows Lintner’s model and CAPEX is nailed down by the firm’s investment opportunities, then ∆Debt must be the shock absorber in the firm’s budget constraint.
First, ∆Debt must soak up most of the transitory noise in net income. Second, ∆Debt must
accommodate the delayed adjustment of payout to changes in permanent income. With
reasonable parameters, that adjustment takes several years.
Corporate finance theories tend to ignore the budget constraint. First, there are many
separate theories of payout, debt and investment. But there can be no more than two
independent theories. Given this period’s net income, a theory of payout plus a theory of
investment must imply a theory of debt. This paper presents a combined theory of payout,
debt and investment. Second, most existing theories are static and do not explicitly recognize
the inter-temporal budget constraint, which requires that the firm’s sources and uses of cash
match over the firm’s lifetime. As we will show, the constraint is essential to understanding
the dynamics of payout.
We assume that financial decisions are made by a coalition of managers, who maximize
the present value of their utility from current and future rents that they will take from the
firm. The managers in our model are entirely self-interested and have no loyalty to outside
shareholders. We simplify by giving shareholders only the most basic property right, which
is the ability to take over the firm and throw out the managers if sufficiently provoked.
The managers therefore have to observe a capital-market constraint: they have to deliver an
adequate return to investors in each period by paying out a sufficient amount. In equilibrium
the managers do deliver adequate returns, and shareholders do not intervene.
Our model follows Fluck (1998, 1999), Myers (2000), Jin and Myers (2006) and Lambrecht
and Myers (2007, 2008). But those papers assumed risk-neutral managers and did not
analyze payout, debt and investment jointly. Here we assume a more realistic utility function,
with risk aversion and habit formation. We do adopt those papers’ view of managerial rents,
however. We are not defining rents as psychological private benefits, such as the CEO’s
warm glow from leading a big public firm. We define rents as real resources appropriated
by a broad coalition of managers and staff, including above-market salaries, job security,
generous pensions and perks. Rich labor contracts can generate a flow of rents to blue-collar
employees.
Rents follow naturally from agency issues and imperfect corporate governance. Rents can
be efficient, however. They are necessary to reward managers’ investment in firm-specific

2

human capital. Burkart, Gromb and Panunzi (1997) show that even when tight control by
shareholders is ex post efficient, it creates an ex ante hold-up threat, which reduces managerial initiative and non-contractible investment. A dispersed ownership structure dilutes
the hold-up threat.1 This gain has to be weighed against the loss in control due to inadequate monitoring. Myers (2000) and Lambrecht and Myers (2008) show how rents can align
managers’ and shareholders’ interests if the managers maximize the present value of rents
subject to a capital-market constraint.
We assume perfect, frictionless financial markets. Investors in our model do not care
whether payouts are stable or erratic. (There are clienteles of investors who want smooth
dividends – see Baker, Nagel and Wurgler (2007), for example – but we do not invoke them
to explain smoothing.) The market value of the firm does not depend on debt or payout
policy, as in Modigliani-Miller (1958, 1961).
We now give a summary of the paper’s insights and main results. A more comprehensive
discussion of the empirical implications is deferred to section II.
1. Managers pay out cash to investors because they want to take out rents. Payout is
smoothed because managers want to smooth their flow of rents. Rents and payouts move
in lockstep. An attempt to smooth rents without smoothing payouts would violate the
capital-market constraint. We believe that the idea that payout smoothing follows from rent
smoothing is new.
2. Risk aversion means that rents depend on managers’ permanent income, which is the
annuity equivalent of the present value of all future net income. The response of rents and
payouts to transitory changes in net income is an order of magnitude less than the response
to changes in permanent income. Thus payouts smooth out transitory shocks to income.
3. Habit formation means that rents and payouts respond gradually to changes in managers’ forecasts of permanent income. The managers’ risk aversion and habit formation
together lead to payout smoothing according to Lintner’s target-adjustment model.
4. Changes in payout signal changes in managers’ view of permanent income. Thus
changes in payout can have “information content” for investors. The smaller the firm’s
SOA, the greater the stock-price response to an unanticipated payout change.
5. Managers do not maximize market value. They underinvest. Higher risk aversion and
1

Myers (2000) makes the same point with respect to venture-capital financing and IPOs.

3

profit volatility increase underinvestment. Habit formation mitigates underinvestment. As
far as we know, this is the first paper to consider how habit formation affects investment in
an agency model.
6. Given investment (CAPEX), changes in debt absorb all changes in income that are
not soaked up by changes in payouts and rents. Once managers smooth rents and payouts,
the change in debt is the only free variable in the budget constraint. Thus we arrive at a
theory of debt dynamics, similar to the pecking order, but not by relying on asymmetric
information and adverse selection, as in Myers and Majluf (1984) and Myers (1984). (Our
model allows equity issues to finance part of CAPEX, however.) Debt does not follow a
target-adjustment model. The sources = uses constraint rules out that payout and leverage
simultaneously follow a target-adjustment model. If the capital stock is fixed, and payout
adjusts smoothly to a permanent-income target, then debt cannot adjust smoothly to a
target debt ratio. If debt does so adjust, then payout cannot be smoothed, and in addition
the volatility of payout must amplify the volatility of net income.
7. Investment determines permanent income, which determines payout. Therefore managers decide on payout and investment simultaneously. Once investment is set, payout
smoothing proceeds according to the Lintner model. Payout does not have to be cut back
to finance CAPEX, however, because smoothing is effected by borrowing or lending. Cash
outlays for CAPEX can increase payout simultaneously by increasing permanent income.
Our theory is consistent with the survey evidence by Brav, Graham, Harvey and Michaely
(2005) that the dividend and investment decisions are co-determined.
We are not attempting a Theory of Everything. Our model applies to mature, profitable,
creditworthy public corporations that have access to debt and the ability to use borrowing
and lending to balance their budget constraints. Such firms account for most of the aggregate
payout to investors.2
Our model would not apply to zero-payout growth firms or to firms in financial distress.
It would not apply to declining firms that should disinvest, as in Lambrecht and Myers
(2007). Our goal is to understand payout policy and how payout interacts with borrowing
and investment. Therefore we focus on mature companies that can make regular payouts to
shareholders.
2

Hsieh and Wang (2006) study payout by U.S. industrial firms. The top 100 (500) payers contributed

about 64% (90%) of total payout in 1978 and 77% (97%) in 2003. Dividend payments have also become
increasingly concentrated. See DeAngelo, DeAngelo and Skinner (2004).

4

Section I of the paper solves for the managers’ optimal rents, payouts and debt policy.
We prove that rent smoothing necessarily implies payout smoothing. We obtain Lintner’s
target-payout model and show how payout policy affects the firm’s stock price. We derive
the managers’ optimal investment policy and its implications for payout and debt policy.
We analyze the robustness of our results to the introduction of taxes, adjustment costs and
growth options. Section II discusses empirical implications. Section III concludes and notes
issues remaining for further research.
The rest of this introduction does two things. First, it explains why rent smoothing
necessarily implies payout smoothing. The explanation will introduce the assumptions, setup
and economic intuition of our model. Second, it reviews relevant literature in more detail.

A.

Rent Smoothing and Payout Smoothing
The following example illustrates how payout smoothing follows from rent smoothing.

Start with the following market-value balance sheet. The firm holds a capital stock K, which
Vt (K)

(1 + ρ) Dt−1

Interest on debt = ρ Dt−1

Rt

Annual rents = rt

St

Annual Payout = dt

——–

——–

Vt

Vt

generates income with present value Vt (K). The capital stock includes plant and equipment,
plus intellectual property that could be used efficiently by investors if they intervene and
boot out managers.3 There are three claims on firm value: outstanding debt ((1 + ρ)Dt−1 ),
including one period’s accrued interest at the constant interest rate ρ; the present value of
managerial rents (Rt ), and outside equity (St ), with Rt + St = Vt (K) − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 . Debt
service is senior to both rents and payouts. The flow of rents is rt . (In practice the rents will
often be received as job security, perks and future retirement benefits, but here we model
3

Labor (or human capital) is not part of K. We do not model labor explicitly. One could, however, think

of labor as varying optimally with the state of the economy (ηt ), so that optimal profits πt explicitly depend
on K and the state of the economy only.

5

rents as just a flow of cash to managers.) Payout is dt . We assume that lenders and equity
investors are risk-neutral.4
Managers maximize the present value of their lifetime utility from all future rents, subject
to a capital-market constraint. They are constrained by the shareholders’ property right to
intervene and take over the company. If they do so, the managers get nothing (Rt = 0).
But the shareholders face a cost of collective action. Their net payoff from intervening is
α(Vt (K) − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 ), with α < 1. (Think of α as a governance parameter capturing
the shareholders’ practical property rights and the effectiveness of corporate governance.5 6 )
In equilibrium the shareholders do not intervene, because it is in the managers’ interest to
deliver an adequate return of ρα(Vt (K) − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 ). The conditions for this equilibrium
are described in Myers (2000) and in Section I.
The gross profits πt (K) generated over the period (t − 1, t] are realized at time t. Net
income (after interest but before rents) is πt (K) − ρDt−1 . Suppose that capital is sunk and
constant at K. With no CAPEX, the budget constraint for period t is:
dt + r t = π t (K ) − ρD t−1 + (Dt − Dt−1 )

(2)

If debt is kept constant (∆D = Dt − Dt−1 = 0), the equilibrium payout and rent policies
simply split net income, α(πt (K) − ρDt−1 ) to payout and (1 − α)(πt (K) − ρDt−1 ) to rents.
With these policies, payouts and rents follow net income, always in the ratio α/(1 − α).
Because all future income will also be split in this ratio, St = α(Vt (K) − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 ) and
Rt = (1−α)(Vt (K)−(1+ρ)Dt−1 ). Managers would of course like to reduce payouts and take
more rents, but cannot do so without violating the capital-market constraint. The managers
pay out no more than necessary, so the capital-market constraint pins down payouts, rents
and values exactly.
4

If investors are assumed risk-averse, then cash flows should be interpreted as certainty equivalents to

investors.
5
Lambrecht and Myers (2007) show that collective action by raiders or hostile acquirers can act as a
substitute for collective action by shareholders. Given that raiders or hostile acquirers are more organized
and specialized in taking over a firm than outside shareholders, it is reasonable to assume that their cost of
collective action is lower. This is the main reason why it is much more likely for management to get unseated
by a hostile acquirer than by dispersed shareholders. To avoid being taken over, managers either have to
pay out more or put in place anti-takeover protections.
6
The cost of collective action could also reflect the loss in human capital, including managers’ specialized
knowledge and expertise, that shareholders suffer if they take over the firm. This cost could be captured by
a smaller value of α.

6

Thus value is split between managers and shareholders. From the shareholders’ viewpoint,
the managers own the fraction (1 − α) of the equity. But the managers, unlike the investors,
are assumed to be risk-averse. Their claims to future rents are not tradeable, for the usual
reasons of moral hazard and non-verifiability. If the managers could trade their claims, their
risk aversion and habit formation would not matter for the timing of rents and payout.
Now suppose that managers want to smooth rents, for example by taking more than
(1 − α)(πt (K) − ρDt−1 ) when profitability declines. They cannot maintain rents by cutting
payout. But they can maintain both rents and payout by taking on more corporate debt.
If the firm borrows ∆D, they can keep (1 − α)∆D as additional rents, provided that they
simultaneously increase payout by α∆D. Thus rents can be smoothed by changes in debt,
but payout must be smoothed along the same time pattern.
Suppose that α = .8. For the managers to take $1 in additional rents, the firm has to
borrow ∆D = $5 and pay out $4. The shareholders’ claim is reduced by 80% of ∆D, so
they have to be given $4 extra. The managers’ claim is reduced by 20% of ∆D, but they
get $1 in extra rents.
Smoothing also means gradual adjustment of rents when profitability increases. If growth
in rents is held back, then payout growth has to be held back to exactly the same extent.
Otherwise shareholders would get a free gift from the managers. The cash released by holding
back rents and payouts has to be used to pay down debt, however. For example, reducing
growth in rents by $1 requires reducing growth in payout by $4 and paying off $5 of debt.
(If paying down debt is inconvenient in the short run, the firm can invest the $5 in moneymarket or other debt securities. Net debt is still reduced by $5. Net debt is what matters
in our model.)
When a corporation borrows, the debt is partly a claim against equity and partly a
claim against the present value of managers’ future rents (Lambrecht and Myers (2008)). If
not invested, the proceeds of additional borrowing must be distributed to shareholders and
managers in the ratio α/(1 − α). If cash flow is used to pay down debt, rents and payout
must be reduced in the same proportions. Thus rents and payouts have to move in lockstep.
The shock absorber is corporate debt.
The managers in our model are using corporate borrowing and lending to shift rents
forward or back in time. In a completely frictionless world, the managers could do this just
as well on their own by managing their personal balance sheets. The managers would care
about the present value of their future rents, but not about whether the rents are smoothed.
7

Thus by not considering manangers’ personal balance sheets, we may be missing something
important. On the other hand, there are good reasons why wealth-constrained managers
prefer smoothed rents to rents that are irregular or deferred. Consider a manager who wants
to consume more today, but has not yet accumulated significant liquid wealth. The manager
therefore wants to borrow against his or her future rents, but finds borrowing difficult and
expensive because of personal moral hazard problems. This manager is better off if the firm
borrows to increase current rents. The firm is in effect borrowing on the manager’s behalf.
The firm avoids the individual manager’s moral-hazard problem, because its borrowing is
backed by its assets, earnings and the aggregate rents paid to its managers collectively. The
firm’s borrowing is also backed up by shareholders’ governance rights. These rights help
assure lenders that the firm’s assets and cash flows will not be tunneled out.
Our utility function will implicitly treat managers’ rents as consumption. In other words,
we will assume that managers do not borrow personally against future rents and do not save
and invest current rents. This assumption is valid (and could indeed be obtained as a result)
if managers can borrow or save more efficiently through the firm.
We have explained why corporate borrowing is efficient for managers who want to consume today out of the firm’s permanent income. It is harder to claim that the firm can always
invest “extra” rents at a higher rate than the managers. But some rents are difficult for the
manager to save and invest. For example, the firm can easily defer award of perks. But the
manager will have a hard time receiving a perk and then turning it back into investible cash.
Corporate rather than personal borrowing can also protect the manager against dismissal.
The manager who is relieved of his or her job is also relieved from claims by the firm’s
creditors on the manager’s future rents. There is no such relief if the manager borrows
personally.7
Thus we expect a demand for rent smoothing from many managers, including those with
limited liquid personal wealth. Senior managers with secure positions and plenty of liquid
personal assets should not care about rent smoothing, but have no reason to resist it. Thus
for purposes of this paper we assume that managers are wealth-constrained and depend on
the firm to smooth rents and consumption.
7

There is an opposite danger, that managers nearing retirement, or managers who fear dismissal or

who have easy access to jobs elsewhere, will try to accelerate rents, at the expense of colleagues with longer
horizons. Thus the equilibrium we describe may in practice require additional internal controls and discipline.
See Acharya, Myers and Rajan (2011).

8

B.

Prior Research
Most research on payout has focused on cash dividends, although in many theory papers

“dividends” could just as well be interpreted as total payout. We start with the Miller
and Modigliani (1961) proof that payout decisions do not affect market value in frictionless
financial markets with complete information. Subsequent research has focused on the roles
of taxes, information, agency costs and other imperfections. A full review of this literature is
impossible here. We refer instead to excellent surveys by Allen and Michaely (2003), Kalay
and Lemmon (2008), DeAngelo, DeAngelo and Skinner (2008), and also the survey evidence
in Brav et al. (2005). Marsh and Merton (1987), who investigate aggregate dividends, also
review research through the mid-1980s. Guttman, Kadan and Kandel (2010) and Leary and
Michaely (2011) survey research on dividend smoothing. These surveys cite no derivations
of the Lintner (1956) model.
Lintner’s paper was a breakthrough contribution to empirical corporate finance, but his
target-adjustment specification does not fully explain cash dividends today. Brav et al.
(2005) find that target dividend payout ratios are less important now than in Lintner’s
day. They and Leary and Michaely (2011) find that the speed of adjustment has declined.
Also the volume of repurchases has grown enormously. Skinner (2008, p. 584) concludes that
repurchases have substituted for cash dividends and “are now the dominant form of payout.”
Some mature, blue-chip firms – Exxon Mobil, for example – pay steady cash dividends and
also repurchase shares year in and year out.
Casual explanations of dividend smoothing sometimes start with the “information content of dividends.” One might overhear the following: “Dividends have information content
because investors expect managers to smooth dividends and to increase dividends only when
they are confident about future income. Managers smooth dividends because they don’t
want to send a false positive signal to investors.” Statements like this either assume some
kind of smoothing or are close to circular.
The causes of dividend smoothing are not clear in prior theory. The dividend signaling
models of Bhattacharya (1979), Miller and Rock (1985), and John and Williams (1985)
explain why dividends can convey information, but do not explain smoothing. They are
one-period exercises that explain dividend levels but not dividend changes.8 Some other
papers suggest smoothing but not the Lintner model specifically. Kumar (1988) derives a
8

Miller (1987) reviews conditions for a dividend signaling equilibrium, but finds no satisfactory explana-

tion of Linter-style dividend smoothing or the information content of dividends.

9

coarse signaling equilibrium in which a firm’s dividends are more stable than its performance
and prospects. Guttman, Kadan and Kandel (2010) derive an equilibrium in a Miller-Rock
(1985) setup in which dividends are constant over a range of earnings. Allen, Bernardo and
Welch (2000) argue that well-managed firms pay dividends to attract institutional investors
and to weed out tax-paying retail investors. The less well-managed firms turn to retail
investors. This theory could accommodate smoothing if the dividing line between high- and
low-dividend payers is stable.9
The surveys by Allen and Michaely (2003) and Leary and Michaely (2011) conclude that
dividend policy is better explained by agency problems than by signalling. Roberts and
Michaely (2007) show that private firms smooth dividends less than their public counterparts, suggesting that the scrutiny of public capital markets leads firms to pay and smooth
dividends. Leary and Michaely (2011), who explore cross-sectional differences in the degree
of dividend smoothing, conclude that smoothing is more prevalent when (proxies for) agency
costs are high. Ours is an agency model, but with a capital-market constraint that forces
managers to smooth payouts if they decide to smooth rents. La Porta et al. (2000) survey
dividend policies worldwide and conclude that companies pay dividends because investors
have (more or less imperfect) governance mechanisms that force payout.
Most agency models focus on the amount of payout in a given period, not on payout
policy over time. We use a dynamic agency framework. Some recent papers also include
payout within a dynamic model of the firm. DeMarzo and Fishman (2007) study the effect
of agency problems on investment, payout and capital structure. Bolton, Chen and Wang
(2011) focus on the role of investment and corporate risk management for a financially
constrained firm. Korinek and Stiglitz (2009) analyze the effects of changes in tax policy
using a dynamic, discrete-time life-cycle model of the firm. DeMarzo and Sannikov (2011)
consider the contracting problem between a principal and risk-neutral agent. The agent and
the firm start out with zero cash, but accumulate cash in order to build a buffer stock to
absorb cash and avoid inefficient liquidation. Once sufficient cash is accumulated, dividends
9

Fudenberg and Tirole (1995) develop a model in which managers smooth income in order to protect

their jobs and private benefits. All reported income is paid out as dividends, which are thus also smoothed.
Acharya and Lambrecht (2011) present a theory of income smoothing in which outside shareholders can
observe sales but not costs. Sales can be used to create a noisy proxy of income. They show that reported
income is a distributed lag model of sales. Payout to outside shareholders equals their share of reported
income and is therefore smoothed relative to sales. But the Lintner model, backed up by ample facts, says
that dividends are smoothed relative to income.

10

are paid, and the optimal dividends are smoother than earnings. None of these models
generates the payout dynamics of the Lintner model.
Our paper uses insights and methods from theories of household consumption, starting
with the permanent income hypothesis (PIH) of Friedman (1957). The PIH states that
consumers’ consumption choices are determined not by their current income but by their
longer-term income expectations. Therefore transitory, short-term changes in income have
little effect on consumer spending behavior. Hall (1978) formalizes the PIH by deriving a
relation between income and consumption in an intertemporal stochastic optimization framework. The assumption of quadratic utility in Hall (1978) (and in many subsequent models)
switches off consumers’ motives for precautionary savings, however. Caballero (1990) shows
that when marginal utility is convex, agents have an incentive to accumulate savings as a
precautionary measure against income shocks.
The standard assumption in the household consumption literature is that agents’ utility
only depends on contemporaneous consumption. Research on asset pricing has, however,
stressed the importance of habit formation and the links between today’s consumption and
the marginal utility of future consumption. We allow managers’ utility to depend on previous
as well as current rents. Our paper belongs to the strand of “internal habit” models such
as Muellbauer (1988), Sundaresan (1989), Constantinides (1990) and Alessie and Lusardi
(1997).
Of course we are not modeling an individual CEO’s utility function, but the combined
utility of a coalition of managers.10 One can think of a “representative manager”, like a
representative agent in asset-pricing theory, or simply accept the idea of a coalition as a
reduced-form description of how managers behave. (Acharya, Myers and Rajan (2011) show
how a coalition of managers can form to invest and operate the firm, even with weak or no
outside governance.) But it is clearly reasonable to assume that managers as a group are
risk averse. Habit formation also comes naturally. Many forms of rents, including abovemarket wages, job security and pension benefits, are not normally changed on short notice.
The assumption of a rent-seeking coalition of managers has proved fruitful in prior work,
including Myers (2000), Jin and Myers (2006) and Lambrecht and Myers (2007, 2008).
10

The notion that the CEO runs the firm on his or her own, like a puppet master who pulls all the strings,

makes no sense for large firms. Nor can we assert that the CEO captures all the rents. But the compensation
that goes to the CEO and other top managers is probably correlated with aggregate rents. Thus it may be
interesting to explore the co-movement of payout and top-management compensation.

11

We assume that managers’ compensation comes only from rents (plus their immediate
opportunity wages). We could extend the model by allowing the managers to hold (restricted)
stock, which gives them a fraction of payout in addition to rents. (The managers could
pay for the stock by taking lower rents or with personal savings or sweat equity.) The
managers’ future compensation would come in part from payout by the firm. This would
not affect rent and payout policies, however, because equilibrium rents and payout would
vary proportionally. (Large block-holdings by managers could impede shareholders’ property
rights, however.)
Much of the research on corporate payout policy focuses on cash dividends, not on total
payout. Thus we have referred to theories and empirical results about cash dividends. But
our agency theory applies tototal payout. In the next section we define payout as the net
cash paid out to shareholders, that is, cash dividends plus repurchases minus stock issues.

II.

How Managers Set Rents and Payout

We start with a coalition of managers, who undertake financing, rent and payout decisions
in order to maximize the present value of their life-time utility. Investors are risk neutral,
but managers are risk averse with a concave utility function. The managers are also subject
to habit formation. We assume their utility of current rents is u(rt − hrt−1 ). The reference
point hrt−1 is determined by last period’s rents rt−1 and the habit persistence coefficient
h ∈ [0, 1). Habit formation means that utility is no longer time-separable.
At each time t the infinitely-lived managers choose payout and rent policies (dt , rt ) that
maximize the objective function:
"
max Et

∞
X

#
ω j u(rt+j − hrt+j−1 )

(3)

j=0

where ω is the managers’ subjective discount factor and
market discount factor is β ≡

1
1+ρ

1
ω

measures “impatience.” The

where ρ is the risk-free rate of return.

We assume

ω ≤ β, so that managers can be more impatient than investors.11
Managers maximize their life-time utility subject to the following constraints that must
11

Managers will also be more impatient if they face a probability of termination (e.g. due to dismissal,

illness or death) in each future period. In that case ω = β ζ, where ζ is managers’ constant survival
probability.

12

be satisfied at all times:
St ≡ dt + β Et [St+1 ] ≥ α [Vt − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 ]

(4)

Dt = Dt−1 (1 + ρ) + dt + rt − K φ πt (ηt )
Dt+j
lim
= 0
j→∞ (1 + ρ)j
∞
X
where Vt ≡
β j K φ Et [πt+j (ηt+j )]

(5)
(6)

j=0

K φ πt is the operating profit at time t. For now we take the capital stock K as fixed and
constant. (Later in this section we will allow the managers to set capital stock and payout
simultaneously.) The amount of output produced each period is K φ , with decreasing returns
to scale (φ < 1). πt (ηt ) is the operating profit per unit of output, which depends on the
realization of a demand shock ηt . The demand shock is exogenous and not affected by rents
and payout at time t. Payout and rents are paid at the end of each period, after operating
profit is realized and interest is paid on start-of-period debt.
Dt is net debt. If Dt > 0, the firm is a net borrower. If Dt < 0, the firm holds a surplus
in liquid assets and is a net lender. The rate of interest ρ is the same for financial assets and
liabilities. For simplicity we ignore default risk, and assume that the firm can borrow and
lend at the risk-free rate ρ.12
Eq. (4) is the capital market constraint, which requires that payout policy always supports an equity value St that at least equals what shareholders can get from taking over.
The net payoff to shareholders from taking over is α (Vt − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 ), with 0 < α < 1.13
14

Eq. (5) is the firm’s budget constraint. The operating profit K φ πt is used for interest
(ρDt−1 ), for net cash paid out to shareholders (dt ) and for rents (rt ). Any surplus or deficit
leads to a reduction or increase in debt. Debt is therefore a balancing variable that follows
12

Default risk should be second-order for mature corporations that make regular payouts and have ample

debt capacity. Modeling a default put would add a heavy layer of complication. See Lambrecht and Myers
(2008), who analyze the effect of default risk on rents, payout, debt and investment.
13
For α = 0 shareholders have no stake in the firm and the capital market constraint disappears. For
α = 1 managers can no longer capture rents and their objective function is no longer defined. Therefore
α ∈ (0, 1).
14
The alternative is to assume a net payoff from collective action of αVt − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 . But then managers’
claims on the firm would be senior to debt, and debt could not discipline managers. This is not a realistic
case, so we do not consider it. See also Lambrecht and Myers (2008).

13

from the rent and payout policies (rt , dt ) (and from investment policy, as will become clear
later). The optimal debt policy allows the managers to take their optimal rents. The
accounting equality between sources and uses of cash pins down debt once rents and payout
have been chosen.
Eq. (6) is a constraint that prevents the managers from running a Ponzi scheme in which
they borrow to achieve an immediate increase in rents and then borrow forever after to pay
the interest on the debt. The constraint prevents debt from growing faster than the interest
rate ρ, so that claim values are bounded.
Since the budget constraint needs to be satisfied for all future times t, repeated forward
substitution of the budget constraint Eq. (5), combined with the no-Ponzi constraint Eq.
(6) gives the following intertemporal budget constraint (IBC):
∞
X



β j K φ πt+j − dt − rt = (1 + ρ)Dt−1

(7)

j=0

The IBC gives a condition that a feasible rent and payout plan {rt+j , dt+j } (j = 0, 1, 2, ...)
must satisfy. The condition essentially states that the sum of the managers’, lenders’ and
shareholders’ claims must add up to the present value of all future operating profits. Since K
is fixed and the profit process πt+j is exogenous (and not affected by rent and payout policy),
the IBC requires that any increases in rents and payout at time t must be compensated for
by future decreases. After taking expectations and simplifying, the IBC becomes:
Rt ≡

∞
X

β j Et (rt+j ) = Vt − St − (1 + ρ)Dt−1

(8)

j=0

Note that Rt equals the market value of the managers’ present and future rents, which is
not the same as the private value of rents that is being optimized.
The following proposition describes the linkage between total payout and managers’ rents.

Proposition 1 : Total payout dt is proportional to managers’ rents rt , with dt =

α
1−α



rt ≡

γrt .
Thus payout and rents are locked together in the ratio

dt
rt

=

α
1−α

≡ γ. We show in the

appendix that this result is a direct consequence of the collective action constraint and does
not depend on managers’ utility function nor on the stochastic process πt . The payout dt
is set by managers so that shareholders are indifferent between taking collective action at
14

time t and letting managers carry on for another period. As managers raise the rent level
rt , this increases net debt and therefore reduces the payoffs shareholders can expect from
taking collective action at time t + 1, so shareholders require a higher payout dt . Payout
therefore moves in lockstep with rents.
Next we consider how managers set rents and therefore payout. Their decision problem
is sequential. At time t they decide on the optimal level for rt and dt , given the values for
rt−1 , dt−1 , Dt−1 , the exogenous demand shock ηt and managers’ expectations about future
shocks ηt+j (j > t)). To solve their optimization problem explicitly, we need to make
assumptions about the managers’ utility function u(.) and the stochastic process πt (ηt ). We
assume that managers have exponential utility u(x) = 1 − 1θ e−θx . This utility function has
been used extensively in the household consumption literature because of its tractability.
The empirical workhorse model for earnings and cash flows is the first-order autoregressive
process (see Dichev and Tang (2009) and Frankel and Litov (2009), among others). We
assume therefore that πt follows the AR(1) process πt = µπt−1 + ηt with µ ∈ [0, 1]. The
shocks ηt+j (j = 0, 1, ...) are independently and identically normally distributed with zero
mean and volatility ση .15 Thus Et (ηt+j ) = 0, Et (ηt+j 2 ) = ση 2 and Et (ηt+j ηt+j+1 ) = 0 for all
j.
The following proposition gives the solution to the managers’ dynamic optimization problem.

Proposition 2 : The managers’ optimal rent policy rt at time t is:
rt = βhrt−1 + (1 − hβ)(1 − α)Yt + c


where

c ≡

β
(1 − β)θ



 
β
(1 − α)2 β(1 − β)(1 − hβ)2 θ 2φ 2
K ση
ln
−
ω
(1 − βµ)2
2

(9)

(10)

Yt is the firm’s permanent income:
Yt = ρβ

∞
X



β j Et K φ πt+j (ηt+j ) − ρDt−1

(11)

j=0
15

Our assumption of exponential utility and normally distributed shocks can lead to negative rents and

payouts, which we would interpret as the managers’ sweat equity and stock issues, respectively. These
assumptions could also lead to negative stock prices, which are impossible with limited liability. But default
risk is remote for the mature and stable firms that our model is designed for. Therefore we ignore default
risk for simplicity.

15

Permanent income Yt is the rate of return on the sum of current and the present value of
all future net income, net of debt service, but before rents. It is an annuity payment that,
given expectations at time t, could be sustained forever.
Proposition 2 contains the paper’s core results, which allow us to analyze (1) optimal
payout policy, (2) how it influences stock prices, (3) how payout policy interacts with debt
policy and (4) how much managers decide to invest.

A.

Optimal Payout Policy
Eq. (9) implies that in the presence of habit formation (h > 0) payouts follow Lintner’s

target-adjustment model. Subtracting rt−1 from both sides of Eq. (9) and expressing rents
rt in terms of payout (using dt = γrt ) gives the following corollary:

Corollary 1 : The firm’s payout policy is given by the following target-adjustment model:
dt − dt−1 = (1 − βh) (αYt − dt−1 ) + κ

where κ ≡

αc
= γc
1−α

(12)

This is Lintner’s model. The speed of adjustment SOA ≡ (1 − βh) depends on the market
discount factor β and managers’ habit persistence parameter h. Absent habit formation
(h = 0), the gap between the target payout and previous period’s actual payout would be
fully adjusted for each period, that is, dt − dt−1 = (αYt + κ − dt−1 ). The target payout
αYt + κ/(1 − βh) depends on permanent income Yt . A higher level of investor protection α
reduces rents and increases target payout.
The constant κ in the partial-adjustment model can be expressed as the difference between acceleration of rents due to managers’ impatience and their precautionary savings due
to risk-aversion. The first term is positive (zero) for ω < β (ω = β). Increased impatience
(i.e. higher

β
)
ω

raises current payout at the expense of future payout. This property fol-

lows directly from the first order condition (see appendix), which requires that the expected
marginal utility from rents grows by a factor

β
ω

along the optimal path. Increased investor

protection (higher α) raises the dissavings term.
The second, negative term in the formula for the constant κ corresponds to the standard precautionary savings term from the household consumption literature (see Caballero
(1990)). A higher risk aversion coefficient (θ) or autoregressive coefficient (µ) each increase
16

the amount of precautionary savings and therefore reduce payout. The higher the earnings
volatility K φ ση , the more managers cut rents in order to save for a rainy day. More uncertainty therefore leads to higher planned payout growth. Precautionary savings decrease
with habit formation (h). Since habit formation by itself induces cautious payout behavior,
it reduces the need for additional precautionary savings.
The following corollary summarizes how our model’s parameters affect the Lintner constant κ.
Corollary 2 : If managers have exponential utility, then the constant term in the Lintner
model increases with managers’ impatience and habit formation but decreases with risk aversion and earnings volatility. The constant is a U-shaped function of investor protection.16
The speed of adjustment SOA is determined by the risk-free rate ρ and the managers’
habit persistence coefficient h. As h increases, managers’ cost of adjusting towards a new
target rent level goes up, so payout becomes “stickier” and less responsive to changes in
permanent income.
The market discount factor β does not enter directly into the managers’ utility function,
but β matters because of the IBC. The discount rate ρ sets the terms at which managers can
move cash through time by changes in corporate borrowing. When ρ is high and β is low,
it costs more to borrow against future cash flows, so managers smooth less and adjust more
quickly to shocks ( ∂SOA
< 0). The overall effect of the market discount rate ρ on payout
∂β
is more complicated, however, because ρ affects not only the speed of adjustment SOA, but
also permanent income Yt .
A dollar increase in the firm’s permanent income leads to an immediate increase in payout
of only SOAα . The lagged incremental effects in subsequent periods are given by SOA αβh,
SOA α (βh)2 , SOA α (βh)3 , ... . The long-run effect of a dollar increase in permanent
P
j
income on payout equals SOA α ∞
= α.17 Our derivation of the Lintner model
j=0 (βh)
can therefore be expressed as a distributed lag model in which current payout is a function
of current and past permanent income. Repeated backward substitution of (12) gives:
∞
X
κ
dt = (1 − hβ) α
(βh)j Yt−j +
(13)
1 − βh
j=0
16
17

The constant term approaches zero from below as α → 0 and goes towards positive infinity as α → 1.
Recall that permanent income is defined before rents. In the long-run, shareholders get the fraction α

of permanent income. They get 100% of permanent income after rents.

17

Now we turn to permanent income Yt and its effect on payout. Using the IBC it is
straightforward to prove the following property.

Property 1 : The following property results directly from the IBC and is valid for all utility
functions:
Et [Yt+1 ] = Yt + ρ (Yt − (1 + γ)rt )

(14)

Therefore permanent income follows a martingale process if and only if shareholders’ plus
managers’ payout ((1 + γ)rt ) equals Yt . Proposition 2 gives this result if and only if both
ω = β and h = ση = 0. The martingale property no longer holds in all other cases. For
example, if current payout is above (below) the target payout, then permanent income is
expected to go down (up) next period.
The IBC implies that the long run payout target is proportional to permanent income
Yt . Proposition 2 implies that a lower level of expected permanent income Et [Yt+1 ] reduces
expected payout:
Et [dt+1 ] − dt = βh(dt − dt−1 ) + (1 − βh)α [Et [Yt+1 ] − Yt ]

(15)

Substituting property 1 of permanent income for expected payout changes gives:
Et [dt+1 ] − dt = βh(dt − dt−1 ) + (1 − βh)ρ [αYt − dt ]

(16)

Expected payout changes are therefore a weighted average of lagged payout changes and the
deviation of the long run payout target αYt from current payout.
If there is no habit formation and uncertainty (h = ση = 0), and if ω = β, then payout
is always on target with Et [dt+1 ] = dt . Payout is still smoothed, however, because the firm
gears payout to permanent income (Yt ) rather than current net income πt − ρDt−1 .

B.

Payout and Stock Prices
The managers’ optimal rent and payout policies give the following valuation for the firm’s

stock:

18

Corollary 3 : Ex-dividend market capitalization St ex is independent of payout policy and
given by:
St ex =

∞
X

"
Et [dt+j ]β j = α

j=1

=

∞
X

#
β j K φ Et [πt+j ] − Dt

= α [Et [βVt+1 ] − Dt ]

(17)

j=1

α Yt
− dt ≡ St − dt
ρβ

(18)

The corollary shows that the firm’s share price and overall market capitalization depend
on the firm’s permanent income Yt but not on payout policy. A dollar of extra payout reduces
the equity value by the same amount, which is the standard Miller and Modigliani (1961)
result.
The corollary also shows that an extra dollar of debt reduces the firm’s market capitalization by α, which is equity’s share of income after interest. The rest of debt is covered by
managers, who pay the fraction 1 − α of debt service by reducing rents. The ModiglianiMiller (1958) leverage irrelevance result still holds, however, because total firm value includes
the present value of rents.

C.

Permanent and Transitory Income Shocks

The earnings shock ηt affects not only current earnings but also the expected value of
all future earnings. But earnings will also include transitory gains and losses. We introduce
transitory shocks by assuming that πt = pt + τt with pt = µ pt−1 + ηt , where ηt and τt are
iid shocks. Set K = 1, so that a $1 transitory shock τt increases operating profits at time t
by exactly $1. Therefore:
∂πt
= 1 and
∂τt

∂πt+j
= µj with µ > 0 for j = 0, 1, 2...
∂ηt

Thus transitory shocks have a smaller effect on permanent income than persistent shocks:
∂Yt
∂πt
= ρβ
= ρβ
∂τt
∂τt


∂Yt
∂πt
∂πt+1
ρβ
2 ∂πt+2
= ρβ
+ β
+ β
+ ... =
∂ηt
∂ηt
∂ηt
∂ηt
1 − µβ
The transitory effect is of order ρβ and the permanent effect is of order

ρβ
.
1−βµ

The transitory

effect ρβ is probably less than 0.05 for reasonable discount rates. The effect of a permanent
19

shock is much larger. For example, for a random walk (µ = 1) a permanent shock contributes
dollar for dollar to permanent income.
Habit formation means that payout responds gradually to changes in permanent income
from temporary and permanent earnings shocks. Proposition 2 gives:


∂dt
∂dt
ρβ
= (1 − βh) α ρβ and
= (1 − βh) α
∂τt
∂ηt
1 − βµ

(19)

The increase in payout and rents from a $1 transitory income shock is very small, about
1 cent for typical values of SOA and α. Almost all of that $1 is used to pay down debt. The
reduction in debt interest increases permanent income by ρ times the debt repayment. The
increase in permanent income then allows an increase in rents and payout. The increase in
payout from a permanent income shock is much larger. Assuming a random walk (µ = 1), a
$1 persistent income shock raises payout by about 30 cents for typical values of SOA and α.
Thus total payouts are smoothed in two ways. First, payouts are linked to permanent
income, not to contemporaneous income. Payouts do not respond much to transitory earnings. This type of smoothing is a result of managers’ risk aversion. Second, payouts adjust
gradually to changes in permanent income. This type of smoothing or “stickiness” results
from habit formation.

D.

Payout and Debt Policy

Proposition 2 shows how payout policy drives debt policy once investment is fixed. Repeated substitution of the optimal policy for rt−j and dt−j gives the following corollary.

Corollary 4 : The dynamics of the firm’s debt (assuming the capital stock K is fixed)
are:
Dt − Dt−1 = ρDt−1 + dt + rt − K φ πt
h
i
κ
φ
= Yt +
− K πt − ρDt−1 + βh [dt−1 + rt−1 − Yt ]
(20)
α
t−1
h
X
κi
φ
= ρDt−1 − K πt +
+ (βh)t (d0 + r0 ) (21)
(βh)j (1 − βh)Yt−j +
α
j=0
20

The corollary has interesting implications. First, the change in debt is a residual determined by the constraint that sources equal uses of cash in each period. Debt follows a
pecking order, as in Myers and Majluf (1984) and Myers (1984), but not because of asymmetric information and adverse selection.
Second, the change in debt includes a fixed component that is proportional to κ/α, where
κ is defined in corollary 1. Whether this change is positive or negative depends on whether
dissavings from managerial impatience or precautionary savings dominates. For example,
more impatient managers derive more utility from today’s rents and are therefore prepared
to incur additional borrowing. Of course, extra borrowing raises rents and payouts now, but
reduces expected future permanent income, which in turn tightens the intertemporal budget
constraint (IBC) on future rents and payouts. The IBC means that borrowing cannot sustain
rents that exceed managers’ share of permanent income. Borrowing by the firm smooths rents
and tailors them to managers’ preferences. Strict enforcement of the IBC also means that
debt policy can never spiral out of control.18
Third, changes in debt depend on the complete history of permanent income (Yt−j ), the
firm’s current operating profits (K φ πt ) and the initial level of payout plus rents (d0 + r0 ). If
there is no habit formation (h = 0) then Eq. (20) shows that the debt level goes up (down)
if the total – i.e. rents plus payout – target payout, Yt + κ/α, exceeds (is below) current
income. With habit formation (h > 0), a second term is added, which reflects the difference
between the firm’s payout plus rents in last period (dt−1 + rt−1 ) and current permanent
income (Yt ). If last period’s payout and rents are above (below) current permanent income,
debt increases (decreases). The increase or decrease is not completed immediately, however,
because βh < 1. Since last period’s rents and payout themselves depend on last period’s
permanent income, changes in debt can be expressed as a distributed lag model of current
and past levels of permanent income as illustrated by Eq. (21).
18

The IBC does not rule out financial distress if the firm’s operating earnings fall so far that managers and

shareholders decide to default. See Lambrecht and Myers (2008) for an analysis of default with risk-neutral,
rent-seeking managers. In this paper we have assumed mature, blue-chip corporations and ignored default
for simplicity.

21

The evolution of debt will clearly be path dependent. The path dependence is caused by
earnings shocks, which lead to revisions in expectations about future income and therefore
permanent income. A shock in earnings is also propagated over time through its effect on
payouts and rents. If the firm’s payout is off target, then adjustment to the target must
occur over time because of the IBC. Debt policy acts as a shock absorber that allows the
firm gradually to adjust towards the new targets for rents and payouts.
We can distinguish the effects on debt of a transitory shock τt and a persistent shock ηt .
Using our earlier expressions for

∂Yt
∂τt

and

∂Yt
∂ηt

(and assuming again that K = 1), the marginal

effects are:
∂ [Dt − Dt−1 ]
= (1 − βh)ρβ − 1 < 0
∂τt
∂ [Dt − Dt−1 ]
(1 − βh)ρβ
=
−1 < 0
∂ηt
1 − βµ

(22)
(23)

A dollar of transitory earnings decreases debt by almost a full dollar, because only a small
fraction (1 − βh)ρβ of the windfall cash flows is immediately paid out to stockholders or
managers. An extra dollar of permanent earnings decreases debt by a much smaller amount
because a larger fraction (1 − βh) is paid out.

E.

Investment

Now we consider managers’ optimal investment policy. At time t the firm makes an
irreversible investment K that generates a future stream of operating profits of K φ πt+j ,
where πt+j is the autoregressive process πt+1+j = µπt+j + ηt+1+j .19 Managers first decide
on K and then set rents and payouts rt and dt . Of course managers take into account how
investment will affect current and future rents.
Since managers are wealth constrained (we assume they do not borrow or save on their
own behalf) the investment has to be paid for by issuing debt and equity, so K = ∆D + ∆S.
The capital market constraint implies that the proceeds from an equity issue are ∆S =
19

It’s easiest to think of the firm starting from scratch, with no capital stock or debt. If the firm has

pre-existing capital, then think of old capital as rolled over costlessly into new capital. Any old debt would
likewise be carried forward and rolled into new debt.

22

α (∆V − ∆D).

The additional debt required to finance the investment K is ∆D(K) ≡
h
i
P
j
(K − α∆V )/(1 − α) = K − αK φ ∞
β
E
(π
)
/(1 − α).20 21
t t+j
j=1
The budget constraints at the time of investment t and later times t + j are:
Dt = (1 + γ) rt + ∆D(K)

(24)

Dt+j = (1 + γ) rt+j + (1 + ρ)Dt+j−1 − K φ πt+j

j = 1, 2, ...

(25)

Investing the amount K has two effects. First, it increases the outstanding debt at t by an
amount ∆D(K).

Second, it scales all future operating profits by a factor K φ . Repeated

substitution of the budget constraint leads to the following intertemporal budget constraint:

(1 + γ)

∞
X

j

β rt+j = Πt + K

φ

∞
X

β j πt+j − (1 + ρ) (Dt−1 + β∆D(K))

(26)

j=1

j=0

where Πt is the operating income at t. If the risk-neutral shareholders were in charge, they
would simply maximize the present value of expected payout over the firm’s infinite life.
Optimizing the right hand of this equality with respect to K and taking expectations, we
get the shareholders’ first-best investment policy:

Proposition 3 : The investment policy K ∗ that maximizes shareholder value is the solution
to:
φK

φ−1

∞
X

β j Et [πt+j ] − 1 = 0

(27)

j=1
∗

The efficient investment policy K is given by:
K

∗


=

βφEt [πt+1 ]
1 − βµ

1
 1−φ

(28)

Consider next the managers’ investment decision. We have derived managers’ optimal
rent policy rt for any given constant level of investment and for any level of debt. Once the
20

If the investment has a high NPV then ∆D could be negative. The firm could use the proceeds of the

equity issue to pay down existing debt or pile up cash.
21
If managers were for some reason unable to issue any new equity and had to rely exclusively on debt
(∆D(K) = K), then managers’ optimal investment is the same as Eq. (33) below, except that (1 − α)2 is
replaced by 1 − α. Financing 100% by debt therefore increases the degree of underinvestment and reduces
rents and payout.

23

investment K is sunk, the managers’ optimal rent policy is described in proposition 2, that
is:22
rt = βhrt−1 + (1 − βh)(1 − α)Yt [K] + c
"
#
∞
X
where Yt [K] ≡ ρβ Πt +
K φ β j Et [πt+j ] − ρ (Dt−1 + β∆D(K))

(29)
(30)

j=1

Payout still moves in lockstep with rents and follows the same process.23 Managers choose
K in order to maximize:24
max
K

∞
X

ω j Et [u(r̂t+j )]

where r̂t+j ≡ rt+j − hrt+j−1

(31)

j=0

The first-order condition is:
∞
X
j=0



∂r̂t+j
ω Et u (r̂t+j )
∂K
j

0


= 0

(32)

After lengthy calculations (see appendix) this first-order condition simplifies to:


 j
∞
∞
∂ r̂t
X
X
e−θr̂t ∂K
∂r̂t+j
β
j
0
−θr̂t ∂r̂t
j
ω Et u (r̂t+j )
= 0
=e
ω
=
∂K
∂K j=0
ω
1−β
j=0
which ultimately leads to the following proposition.25

Proposition 4 : The managers’ optimal investment policy K is the solution to:
φK φ−1

∞
X

β j Et [πt+j ] − 1 =

j=1

θση 2 (1 − α)2 β(1 − hβ)φK 2φ−1
(1 − βµ)2

(33)

Managers underinvest if they are risk-averse (θ > 0) and if profits are uncertain (ση > 0).
22

If there is no rent history prior to time t, then a benchmark value for rt−1 can be picked as an initial

starting value.
23
But note that investment may be partly financed by issuing shares. In practice the firm could cut back
payout, rather than issuing the extra shares necessary to maintain payout.
24
Managers do not invest directly, but they can co-invest by keeping current rents rt as low as possible.
The budget constraint Eq. (24) shows that a dollar cutback in rt reduces debt Dt by 1 + γ dollars. When
managers set K, they take account of its effect on immediate and future rents (see the first-order condition
Eq. (32)).
25

Calculating

as r̂t+j

∂ r̂t+j
∂K

may seem like a daunting task. However, the optimal rent policy can be expressed
Pj
= r̂t + j Γ + K φ i=1 δ ηt+i (where Γ and δ are constants defined in the proof of proposition 2).

Therefore, under the optimal policy, habit-adjusted rents r̂t follow a random walk with drift. This allows us
to express

∂ r̂t+j
∂K

as a simple function of

∂ r̂t
∂K

(see Eq. (A31)).

24

The proposition has several interesting implications. First, investment is efficient only if
the right side of Eq. (33) is zero. But this expression is positive, so risk-averse managers
underinvest. Comparing Eqs. (33) and (10) reveals that the term on the right is proportional
to the precautionary savings term. Risk aversion causes managers to save for a rainy day,
which leads to underinvestment.
Consider next the role of risk-aversion and profit volatility. All outcomes in the first-order
condition Eq. (32) are weighed by u0 (rt+j ), the managers’ marginal utility of rents at t + j.
Since rents increase with the realization of the economic shock η, and since marginal utility
is declining exponentially in rents, the managers’ first order condition puts relatively more
weight on bad outcomes than on good outcomes. Therefore the degree of under-investment
increases with managers’ risk-aversion coefficient (θ) and with profit volatility (ση ).
Habit formation mitigates underinvestment. The managers’ optimal investment decreases
with the speed of adjustment (1 − βh), because habit formation reduces the managers’ need
for precautionary savings. Habit formation and the resulting partial adjustment of rents
smooths the rent stream and dampens the effect of volatility.
A higher level of investor protection makes investment policy more efficient. Notice
how the squared factor (1 − α)2 pushes the right side of Eq. (33) rapidly towards zero
as α increases. As investor protection approaches perfection (α → 1), the risks borne by
managers approach zero, and their investment policy approaches the shareholders’ first best.
This result is fragile and misleading near the limit of α = 1, however, because the managers’
rents also go to zero at this limit. “Perfect” investor protection gives managers no hope of
future rents and no reason to invest in firm-specific human capital.26 The managers do not
care how much the firm invests.
Our prediction of underinvestment is opposite to the free-cash-flow theory, which proposes
that managers of mature firms always want to invest if there is cash lying around.27 Of course
26

Firms that depend on firm-specific human capital go public (Myers (2000)) or adopt a dispersed owner-

ship structure (Burkart, Gromb and Panunzi (1997)) in order to reduce investors’ bargaining power and to
create space for managerial rents.
27
The free cash flow theory starts with Jensen (1986). Note also Shleifer and Vishny’s (1989) theory of
entrenching investment, which we would interpret as an attempt by managers to reduce α.

25

the managers in our model would be happy to increase K if they could invest only the
shareholders’ money, for example by cutting payouts while maintaining rents. The capitalmarket constraint prevents this, however. Managers might be tempted to overinvest and
finance the investment by borrowing (or by drawing down cash reserves, which reduces net
borrowing), but on second thought would not do so, because this strategy would reduce the
present value of their rents.
Payout depends on investment, because investment determines permanent income. Once
investment is set, payout follows the Lintner model. Payout is not cut back to finance
CAPEX, because smoothing is effected by borrowing or lending. CAPEX and payout can
increase simultaneously.
We assume that investment takes place only once. A more general model would endow the
firm with opportunities for future investment. This would complicate the analysis, especially
if current investment preserves or expands future growth options. We discuss growth and
growth options below.
Our model does not rely on psychological private benefits, but this is one place where such
benefits may enhance efficiency by offsetting risk aversion and mitigating underinvestment.
Suppose that managers get private benefits bK from investment (b > 0), and that these
benefits do not impose a financial drain on the firm. Then there is a level for b that is just
right and leads to value-maximizing investment. Of course a b that is too high would lead to
overinvestment. We see no good way of gauging the actual or optimal magnitude of private
benefits for the managers of large, public corporations. This is a problem for theories that
rely on private benefits to motivate managers.

F.

Extensions and Robustness

Our model and its results have been derived under simplifying assumptions. Before
turning to empirical implications, it’s useful to consider how our results could be affected by
the introduction of adjustment costs, taxes and growth. For this discussion we take capital
stock as fixed.
26

F.1.

Adjustment Costs

Some papers on dividend behavior argue that there are costs of adjusting dividends. For
example, Garrett and Priestley (2000) propose an econometric model that assumes managers
minimize the costs of adjustment associated with being away from their target dividend
payout. These type of adjustment costs have sometimes been invoked as a rationale for the
stickiness of payout and managerial compensation.
We could add adjustment costs to our model, for example by adding an adjustment cost
parameter a to the managers’ optimization problem:
"∞
#
i
X h
a
2
max Et
β j u(rt+j − hrt+j−1 ) − (rt+j − rt+j−1 )
2
j=0

(34)

subject to the previous constraints Eqs. (4), (5) and (6). (The adjustment costs would
affect payout as well as rents, because rents and payout are proportional.) As this objective
function shows, adjustment costs and habit formation affect managers’ total utility in very
different ways. Managers’ direct utility u(rt , rt−1 ) is monotonically increasing in rt in the
presence of habit formation, but the disutility of adjustment,

a
2

(rt − rt−1 )2 is a U-shaped

function of rt that reaches a minimum at rt = rt−1 .
Note that this objective forces managers to pay for the costs of adjusting rents. Shareholders will not pay, because they do not care whether payout is volatile or smooth. We do
not include adjustment costs for payout, because such costs should be at most second-order
for maturing firms that repurchase shares regularly.
The adjustment costs for rents could include financing frictions. Changes in rents are
”financed” at the margin by corporate borrowing or lending. Adjustment costs for rents
could represent transaction costs of issuing or retiring debt. These transaction costs would
have to be paid for by the managers as reduced rents. (Stockholders in our model do not
care about smoothing and would not pay for debt transactions that they would not execute
if they were in control.)28
28

But if investors want smooth payout and are willing to pay for it, then the value impact of smoothing

would show up in the constraints, which would probably make the optimization problem intractable. We
leave this as a possible topic for future research.

27

For tractability we adopt for this example the quadratic utility function u(rt , rt−1 ) =
− 21 (b − rt + hrt−1 )2 and we assume that managers have the same discount factor as the
market (ω = β). We get the following rent policy:29
rt = βrt−1 + (1 − β)Yt
where :
q
m − m2 − β4
1 + a(1 + β) + βh2
 =
and m ≡
and 0 ≤  < 1
2
(h + a)β

(35)
(36)

This solution indicates that habit formation and adjustment costs would reinforce each other
and increase rent and payout smoothing. Also habit formation is not strictly necessary to a
Lintner model. With no habit formation (h = 0) but a positive adjustment cost (a > 0), we
still obtain a partial adjustment model with SOA ≡ 1 − β < 1.
Adjustment costs for rents may matter, but we believe our habit-formation setup is more
tractable, more interesting and more easily interpreted. For example, we can see how the
SOA depends on both habit formation and the interest rate. Also, the SOA is highly
sensitive to the habit formation coefficient (SOA = 1 − βh for h > a = 0), but large changes
in adjustment costs have relatively small impact. Increasing the adjustment cost parameter
from a = 0.1 to a = 1 pushes the SOA down from 0.92 to 0.64. It seems that very high
adjustment costs would be required to get SOAs in the ballpark of empirical estimates.30

F.2.

Taxes

Introducing taxes could complicate our model massively, not by changing our analysis of
payout smoothing, but by making debt policy value-relevant. If interest tax shields contribute
to firm value, then we would need to introduce (at least) default and costs of financial
distress as an offset. We would have to consider managers’ and shareholders’ optimal default
strategies, moral hazard and debt overhang issues, etc. Lambrecht and Myers (2008) consider
29

The absence of a Lintner constant in Eq. (35) follows from our assumption here that ω = β. If ω < β

then the solution includes a positive Lintner constant.
30
Garrett and Priestley (2000, p. 174) report that their adjustment-cost “model yields a substantially
higher speed of adjustment toward the target dividend payout than other models, suggesting that managers
adjust toward their target much quicker than previously thought.”

28

some of these issues, but with simplifying assumptions, including the assumption of riskneutral managers. We cannot attempt to unite that and this paper here. But we can show
how taxes affect our payout results when debt policy is not value-relevant, as in Miller (1977).
Assume that corporate profits are taxed at the rate τc and that rents rt are taxed at a
personal rate τp . Thus rents and interest on debt are both tax-deductible at the corporate

level.31 Corporate taxes paid at time t are τc K φ πt − ρDt−1 − rt .
The managers’ optimization problem is now given by:
"∞
#
X 
1
max Et
ω j 1 − e−θ(1−τp )(rt+j − hrt+j−1 )
θ
j=0
subject to the constraints:
∞
X

"
j

β Et [dt+j ] = αEt

j=0

∞
X

β j (1 − τc )K φ πt+j − (1 + ρ(1 − τc ))Dt−1

j=0

+

∞
X

#
β j Dt+j (1 − β [1 + ρ(1 − τc )])

(37)

j=0

Dt = Dt−1 (1 + ρ(1 − τc )) + dt + (1 − τc )rt − (1 − τc )K φ πt (ηt )

(38)

lim β j Dt+j = 0

(39)

j→∞

When β = 1/(1+ρ), the third term in brackets in the capital-market constraint (37) simplifies
P
j
to the present value of interest tax shields, i.e. ∞
j=0 β τc ρDt+j .
Corporate taxes change the capital market constraint Eq. (37) and the budget constraint
Eq. (38). Both constraints now depend on the after-tax cost of debt ρ(1 − τc ), the aftertax cost of managerial rents (1 − τc )rt and after-tax operating profits (1 − τc )K φ πt . The
capital market constraint Eq. (37) states that the firm’s stock market capitalization equals
the present value of all free cash-flows after corporate taxes, multiplied by the governance
parameter α < 1. Using a derivation similar to the one for Eq. (A13) (see appendix), the
31

Rents that the company pays for are tax-deductible expenses. Such rents include above-market salaries,

perks, generous retirement packages and the excess costs of empire building. Intangible private benefits, for
example the psychological value of power and prestige, may not require cash outlays and thus may not be
tax-deductible. Intangible benefits are possible, but we do not invoke them in this paper.

29

IBC with taxes is now given by:
∞
∞
X
X
j
β (rt+j (1 − τc ) + dt+j ) =
β j K φ πt+j (1 − τc ) − (1 + ρ(1 − τc )) Dt−1
j=0

j=0

+

∞
X

β j Dt+j (1 − β (1 + ρ(1 − τc )))

(40)

j=0

With corporate taxes the IBC (and therefore permanent income) and the capital market
constraint depend on the entire future path of net debt. With valuable interest tax shields,
increasing the net debt level at any point in time loosens the IBC and increases permanent
income. Solving for the value of interest tax shields is beyond the scope of this paper.
But suppose we cancel out the value of interest tax shields, as in a Miller (1977) equilibrium. In that equilibrium, the risk-free rate for valuing equity claims is after-tax, and
the marginal investors’ tax rate equals the corporate rate. Thus we use the after-tax rate
ρ(1 − τc ) and an after-tax discount factor β ∗ = 1/(1 + ρ(1 − τc )). Then the capital market
constraint only depends on Dt−1 and not on the future levels of debt. We focus on this case
to see how taxes affect payout in our model.
Using a similar derivation as for proposition 1, we now find that:


α
dt =
(1 − τc )rt ≡ γ(1 − τc )rt
1−α

(41)

Because rents are tax-deductible by the firm, only their after-tax cost, (1 − τc )rt , matters to
outside shareholders. Payout and rents still move in lockstep, but payout is now a smaller
multiple of rents. Corporate taxes therefore squeeze payout relative to managerial compensation.
Substituting β ∗ = 1/(1 + ρ(1 − τc )) and Eq. (41) into Eq. (40) gives the following
after-tax IBC:
(1 + γ)(1 − τc )

∞
X
j=0

∗j

β rt+j =

∞
X

β ∗ j (1 − τc )K φ πt+j − (1 + ρ(1 − τc ))Dt−1

(42)

j=0

Comparing the current optimization problem with the one without taxes, one can show that
both problems are equivalent if we make the following substitutions in the original problem:
β → β ∗ , ρ → ρ(1−τc ), ω → ω ∗ , θ → θ(1−τp ), K φ → (1−τc )K φ and (1+γ) → (1+γ)(1−τc ).32
32

On might question how personal taxes should affect managers’ subjective discount factor ω. This is a

further complication that could be explored.

30

Implementing those substitutions gives the following rent and payout policies:



1−α
∗
∗
rt − rt−1 = (1 − β h)
Yt − rt−1 + c∗
1 − τc
α(1 − τc ) ∗
c
dt − dt−1 = (1 − β ∗ h) [αYt ∗ − dt−1 ] +
1−α

(43)
(44)

where Yt ∗ and c∗ are the after-tax versions of Yt and c as defined in proposition 2.
We still obtain a Lintner model for payout. The main effect of corporate taxes is that the
payout and rent policy now depend on the after-tax permanent income Yt∗ , which in turn
depends on the after-tax cost of debt ρ(1 − τc ) and after-tax profits ((1 − τc )K φ πt ). The ratio
of shareholders’ target payout to managers’ target rents now equals α(1 − τc )/(1 − α). The
sum of shareholders’ target payout and managers’ target rents exceed Yt∗ because managers’
rents are levied before taxes. This allows rents to be scaled up by a factor 1/(1 − τc ). The
after-tax cost to shareholders of managers’ target rents equals (1 − α)Yt∗ .
Personal taxes do not affect the IBC nor the capital market constraint because they are
not levied at the firm level. Personal taxes do enter into the managers’ objective function,
however, and by recalculating the Euler equation, one can show that the effect of personal
taxes is to scale down the risk aversion coefficient by a factor 1 − τp .
All else equal, a higher personal tax rate decreases the net payout to managers. This
causes the firm to reduce precautionary savings (by increasing net debt) and to increase
dissaving due to managers’ impatience. We do assume, however, that rents are paid in cash
and show up on managers’ personal tax returns. There may be more tax-efficient ways
of paying rents, for example as untaxed perks. Of course, it may also be tax-efficient to
distribute payout as repurchases rather than cash dividends. Our model does not predict
the form of payout, only the total amount.33
To summarize: We have shown that a Lintner model of payout still holds, with a closedform solution, when corporate taxes are introduced. Our qualitative predictions are unchanged.34 The main effect of corporate taxes is to expand rents, which are tax-deductible,
33

Korinek and Stiglitz (2009) analyze the effects of changes in dividend tax policy using a life-cycle model

of the firm. They show that anticipated dividend tax changes create incentives for firms to engage in
inter-temporal tax arbitrage so as to reduce investors’ tax burden.
34
Thus it is useful to “take the model to the data” on payout, even in the absence of a combined theory

31

relative to payout, which is not. But we have not tackled the next challenge, which is to
introduce valuable interest tax shields (rather than the Miller (1977) equilibrium), costs of
financial distress, or other factors emphasized in models of capital structure.
There are obvious conflicts between a Lintner model of payout smoothing and standard
models of capital structure. Suppose we hold capital stock constant, and introduce a target
debt ratio representing the value-maximizing tradeoff of valuable interest tax shields and
costs of financial distress. This tradeoff suggests a target-adjustment model of capital structure. But if the firm follows a target-adjustment model of capital structure, then it cannot
implement a target-adjustment model of payout. The two target-adjustment models cannot
coexist.
For example, suppose the firm’s payout in the prior period was exactly on target, with
rents and payout accounting for 100% of permanent income of $100. By chance the firm is also
exactly at its target debt ratio. Now there is an unexpected downward shock to permanent
income from $100 to $80. If the firm smooths rents and payout, they must decrease by
less than 20%, say to $95. But that leaves a cash deficit of $15, which must be covered
by additional borrowing. Thus the firm ends up borrowing more when a target-adjustment
model of debt says it should be paying down debt.
Suppose instead that the firm implements a target-adjustment model of capital structure.
It pays down $20 of debt to get part way to the target debt level at the firm’s new, lower
value. That leaves only $60 for rents and payout, which fall by 40%. Thus the volatility of
rents and payout is not smoothed but amplified.
A target-adjustment model of debt implies that changes in debt are smoothed and have
lower volatility than permanent income and value. Then the volatility of rents and payout
must be higher than the volatility of permanent income and value. If one believes on the
contrary that rents and payout are smoothed, then changes in debt cannot be smoothed,
leaving no space to also believe in a target-adjustment model of capital structure.
These points follow from the firm’s sources-uses constraint. There can be no more than
of payout and debt policy. We discuss empirical implications and results below.

32

two independent theories of capital investment, payout and borrowing. Given CAPEX,
there can only be one. We present a joint theory of payout and borrowing, but under
the simplifying and restricting assumption that corporate borrowing is not value-relevant.
Introducing value-relevant debt policy is a challenge for future work.

F.3.

Growth

We focus on stable, mature firms and hold capital stock K constant. Therefore we
assume an autoregressive profit process with no drift. Introducing growth as positive drift
is relatively easy. One can show (see for example Wang (2003)) that introducing a non-zero
drift µ0 (i.e. πt = µ0 + µπt−1 + ηt ) adds an additional term in µ0 to the expression for the
Lintner constant κ. A higher (lower) drift µ0 increases (reduces) the constant κ.
Therefore managerial impatience (ω < β) is not strictly necessary to generate a positive
Lintner constant, provided that the drift term µ0 is sufficiently high. For example, Japanese
firms are said to be more long-term oriented and to offer more job security and less turnover.
This may translate in more managerial patience and a higher value for ω. This should shift
current payout and rents to the of future. All else equal, this leads to a lower value of the
Lintner constant. But this negative effect on current payout and rents could be offset by a
positive drift in profits, leaving the Lintner constant still positive.
We model a one-time investment decision and do not consider future investment. Future
investment opportunities are real options. Even the mature firms that we consider have
some growth options. Thus we have another challenge for future research: How would the
introduction of growth options affect current payout?
If growth options contribute to current firm value, in addition to the value of assets in
place, then permanent income should increase. This suggests that valuable growth options
should increase current rents and payout. Perhaps so, but the conclusion rests on the premise
that managers can and will borrow against the growth options to pay for the increase in
current rents and payout. But it seems that growth firms are also low-payout firms. It may
be that managers of growth firms are reducing rents and payout (thus retaining earnings) in

33

order to co-invest and grow. Borrowing to increase rents and payout could also generate the
classic debt-overhang problem described by Myers (1977). In our agency setup, the moral
hazard caused by debt overhang would apply to managers as well as shareholders. But these
or other possibilities must be left to another paper.

III.

Empirical Implications

This section discusses the model’s empirical implications. First we summarize the empirical specifications that our model calls for and note problems that arise when the Lintner
model is fit to reported net income rather than permanent income. Second, we interpret
the Lintner constant and SOA. We summarize our model’s main predictions about payout
and relate them to existing empirical evidence. Third, we cover “the information content of
dividends” and other empirical implications. We close this section with a brief comment on
“the new dividend puzzle.”

A.

Estimation

Corollary 1 gives a partial-adjustment model that connects current payouts to lagged
payouts and permanent income. The model would be estimated as:
dt = a0 + a1 dt−1 + a2 Yt + et

(45)

where a0 , a1 and a2 are the regression coefficients and et the error term. Our model says that
a0 = κ, a1 = βh and a2 = (1 − βh) α. Permanent income Yt is not observable, but could be
be estimated from current operating profit and the market’s expectation of future profits.
If the profit margin πt follows the autoregressive process πt = µπt−1 + ηt , then permanent

ρ
income is Yt = 1+ρ−µ
K φ πt − (1 + ρ − µ)Dt−1 . In the limiting case where πt follows a
random walk (µ = 1), permanent income equals K φ πt − ρDt−1 , that is, current net income,
measured before rents but after interest.
Writing the target-adjustment model (45) in first differences gives:
∆dt = a1 ∆dt−1 + a2 ∆Yt + ∆et
34

(46)

Here we need an expression for ∆Yt , the change in permanent income. But in principle it is
possible to identify the habit coefficient and SOA without knowing Yt or ∆Yt . After lengthy
derivations (see appendix) we obtain the following proposition:

Proposition 5 : If managers have negative exponential utility then the changes in payouts
and rents are:
αρc
+ α(1 − βh)νt
1−α
− ρc + (1 − α)(1 − βh)νt

∆dt = h∆dt−1 −

(47)

∆rt = h∆rt−1

(48)

Payouts and rents are smoothed relative to income:




var(∆dt ) = Λ2 α2 K 2φ ση2 and var(∆rt ) = Λ2 (1 − α)2 K 2φ ση2
where Λ =

(1−βh)(1−β)
1−βµ

< 1 and νt is white noise given by νt =

(49)

ρβK φ ηt
.
1−βµ

Since νt is white noise, h can be estimated from the vector autoregression (47), which
allows us to calculate the speed of adjustment 1 − βh. The advantage of this regression is
that we do not need to know permanent income. In fact, our estimate for h allows us to
calculate the permanent income that is implied by a payout series as:
Yt =

(dt − βhdt−1 ) − αc
α(1 − βh)

(50)

The variance of payout changes is a fraction Λ2 α2 of the variance of operating income
(K 2φ ση2 ). This confirms that payouts are smoothed relative to income.
Our model also says that transitory income shocks have a much smaller effect on payout
than persistent income shocks. This result highlights the perils of an econometric model for
payout that lumps earnings all in one basket. Ideally, the econometrician should distinguish
transitory and persistent earnings.35 This can be illustrated as follows. Assume as before
that K = 1 and that πt = pt + τt . Then permanent income is given by:
ρβ
pt + ρβτt − ρDt−1
1 − βµ
ρβ
ρβ(1 − µ)
ρβ 2 µτt
=
Et −
Dt−1 −
1 − βµ
1 − βµ
1 − βµ

Yt =

35

(51)
(52)

The accounting literature may provide further guidance on these topics. For example, see Ohlson (1999)

and Barth et al. (1999).

35

where the current reported earnings is Et ≡ pt + τt − ρDt−1 . The Lintner model as
traditionally estimated is:
∆dt = b0 + b1 Et + b2 dt−1 + ut

(53)

The coefficient b2 on lagged payouts is interpreted as (the negative of) the SOA and the
coefficient b1 on earnings as the product of the payout ratio and the SOA.
According to our theory, the true model is:
∆dt = κ +

ρβαSOA
ρβ 2 µαSOA
ρβ(1 − µ)αSOA
Et − SOA dt−1 −
τt −
Dt−1 + et (54)
1 − βµ
1 − βµ
1 − βµ

The estimates for the coefficients b0 , b1 and b2 from Eq. (53) will be biased and inconsistent, unless the omitted variables Dt−1 and τt are orthogonal to the included variables
(Greene (1993), p. 246). The omitted variables are likely to be correlated with the included
variables, given the definition of the earnings variable Et , and because dt−1 is linked with
Dt−1 through the budget constraint. The variance of the estimates and of the error term are
also biased. Thus the usual confidence interval and hypothesis testing procedures can give
misleading conclusions about statistical significance.
In practice, however, the misspecification of the traditional Lintner model in Eq. (53)
may not be all that severe. First, corporate earnings or cash-flows are highly persistent
for mature, stable companies with low earnings volatility (see Dichev and Tang (2009) and
Frankel and Litov (2009)).36 As µ → 1 the term in Dt−1 in Eq. (54) vanishes and the omitted
variable problem with respect to Dt−1 disappears. Second, the transitory income component
τt may account for only a small part of the total earnings Et of a mature company. Thus
the correlation between τt and Et may be be small too. In other words, current earnings
Et may be highly correlated with permanent income when transitory income is small. Of
course Et becomes a noisy measure of permanent income when transitory income is volatile
36

Dichev and Tang (2009) run an AR(1) earnings model for quintiles formed on earnings volatility. They

find a strong, monotonic, negative relationship between volatility and earnings persistence. The persistence
coefficient declines from 0.93 in the lowest volatility quintile to 0.51 in the highest. Frankel and Litov (2009)
find similar results when the AR(1) model is run on cash flows rather than earnings, with coefficients of 0.85
in the lowest volatility quintile and 0.51 in the highest.

36

and important. Then the traditional Lintner regression Eq. (53) may give quite different
results from the model specified in Eq. (54).
While our paper presents the first formal model linking payout to permanent earnings,
some empirical papers have already tested the link between dividends and permanent income. Marsh and Merton (1987) use common-stock price changes to measure changes in
permanent income. Garrett and Priestley (2000) propose a method for extracting an estimate of permanent earnings from an observed earnings series. Their results show, at least
at the aggregate level, that information about expected permanent earnings is captured by
lagged stock prices. In our model, stock-market capitalization is proportional to permanent
income. In an efficient market, unanticipated changes in market value would reveal unanticipated changes in permanent income. One could estimate a version of Eq. (13) in first
differences, with a distributed lag on past stock market returns instead of on past changes
in permanent income. Of course there could be complications, for example if managers,
who set rents and payouts, have a better fix on permanent income than investors. In that
case stock prices do not anticipate changes in payouts; they react to them. We discuss this
“information content” in section C.

B.

The Lintner Constant and SOA

Lintner (1956) said that “The constant will be zero for some companies but will generally
be positive to reflect the greater reluctance to reduce than to raise dividends ... as well as
the influence of the specific desire for a gradual growth in dividend payments found in about
a third of the companies visited.” Fama and Babiak (1968) found that the constant in
the Lintner model was positive but small, with a sample mean and median of 0.109 and
0.028, although for most firms the constant was not significantly different from zero. A
small positive constant suggests that dissavings due to impatience marginally outweighed
managers’ precautionary savings. This might come as a surprise if one believes that the
subjective discount rate approximately equals the market discount rate, and therefore that
dissavings due to impatience are small. Habit formation dramatically reduces the amount
of precautionary savings, however. Note that the precautionary savings term in Eq. (12)
37

includes the squared speed of adjustment (1 − βh)2 . For a typical Lintner SOA of, say, 0.3
this implies that habit formation reduces precautionary savings by over 90%! Therefore, even
if dissavings due to managerial impatience are small, they could still outweigh precautionary
savings and generate a positive constant. A positive drift term in profits also increases the
Lintner constant, as we showed in section F.3.
The speed of adjustment SOA is determined by the risk-free rate ρ and the managers’
habit persistence coefficient h. As h increases, managers’ cost of adjusting towards a new
target rent level goes up, so payout becomes “stickier” and less responsive to changes in
permanent income. The SOA implies a half-life for adjustment of payout to changes in
permanent income. Half-life is the time needed to close the gap between the actual and
target payout by 50%, after a one-unit shock to the error term in the Lintner model Eq.
(1). When payout follows an AR(1) process) half-life is log(0.5)/ log(1 - SOA). If the SOA
equals, say, 0.3 then the half-life is about 2 years, and it would take the firm about 6.5
years to close the gap between the actual payout and the target by 90%. Thus payout is
history-dependent, and for reasonable parameters the history extends back several years.
Lintner (1956) found a SOA of about 0.3 using aggregate data on corporate earnings
and dividends. Fama and Babiak (1968) tested Lintner’s model for individual firms over a
20-year period and reported a mean SOA of 0.32 and a mean target payout ratio of 0.52.
Skinner (2008) found a speed of adjustment for total payout of 0.4 and 0.55 for the periods
1980-1994 and 1995-2005.
These estimates of SOA allow some inferences about underlying parameters. Assume a
market discount factor of β = 0.95. Since h = (1 − SOA)/β, Skinner’s estimates imply habit
persistence coefficients of 0.63 for 1980-1994 and 0.47 for 1995-2005. The habit coefficent in
Lintner’s (and Fama and Babiak’s) days is about h = 0.74. It appears that managers’ habit
persistence has declined substantially over time. Declining habit persistence coincided with
(and might be one possible explanation for) the rising popularity of share repurchases.
Our agency theory of payout predicts that the Lintner model should not apply to cash
dividends, but to net total payout, defined as dividends plus repurchases minus equity issues.
Our theory should be tested on mature firms with free cash flow available for payout, good
38

credit and unimpeded access to debt. Skinner (2008, Table 6) has fit the Lintner model to
total payout and dividends by a sample of 345 firms that paid regular dividends in at least
16 years and repurchased shares in at least 11 years from 1980 to 2005. These firms should
qualify as mature.37 As we predict, the Lintner target-adjustment model works better for
total payout than for dividends, at least in the last decade of the Skinner sample (1995-2005).
In this period, the average SOA for the dividend regression was .29 and insignificant (t =
1.48). The average SOA for the total-payout regression was .55 and highly significant (t =
8.93).

38

The Lintner constant was significantly negative for the dividend regression but

positive and insignificant in the total-payout regression.
Skinner’s (2008) results for total payout may seem to contradict other recent tests of
Lintner’s model that generally report lower SOAs than Lintner (1956) or Fama and Babiak
(1968). (See Choe (1990), Brav et al. (2005), DeAngelo et al. (2008) and Leary and Michaely
(2011), for example). However, the comparison is misleading. First, recent studies have
focused on cash dividends, not total payout. Second, transitory payouts were almost always
packaged as specially designated dividends (SDDs) during the 1950s and 1960s. Lintner
and Fama and Babiak included SDDs in the dividends used to fit the target-adjustment
model. But now stock repurchases account for most transitory payouts and SDDs are rare.
Thus most transitory payouts are now excluded from dividends, pushing estimated SOAs
for dividends downward. It appears that share repurchases have given financial managers an
extra degree of freedom, allowing them to make cash dividends more stable while maintaining
payout according to Lintner’s model.
Skinner (2008) finds that the SOA coefficients in his total-payout regressions are larger
and more significant when a period is defined as two years rather than one. It appears that
firms time repurchases based on stock prices and other tactical considerations, and that the
timing shifts total payout from one year to another. That result is OK in our model, which
37

Nothing in our theory requires mature firms to pay cash dividends. In future work it would be better

to drop cash dividends as a requirement for sample selection.
38
Leary and Michaely (2011) estimate SOAs based on total payout by a larger sample of 1,200 firms from
1985 to 2005. The median SOA is .38, vs. .11 for cash dividends alone. Leary and Michaely are mostly
concerned with cross-sectional differences in the degree of dividend smoothing, not with whether the Lintner
model is a better fit to cash dividends or to net total payout.

39

does not specify the length of period t. But our model does not explain why repurchases
are timed tactically and dividends are not. Nor can we distinguish between the information
content of changes in dividends and changes in repurchases. Here we are in good company
with the literature on payout policy, however.
Skinner (2008) also fits the Lintner target-adjustment model for 351 firms that repurchase
regularly but do not pay cash dividends. The estimated coefficients of the Lintner targetadjustment model are much higher than for the mature-firm sample. For example, the
average SOA for two-year periods from 1995-2005 was .92 (t = 5.79) and the implied target
payout ratio was 81% of reported earnings. These coefficients seem unusually high, although
some of these firms may have smoothed less because they did not have easy access to debt
markets. More empirical work is clearly in order.
We do not say that Skinner (2008) has proved our model. For example, we say that
target payout and the firm’s stock price are determined by permanent income. Skinner’s
tests used reported net income. Net income may be a good proxy for permanent income if
earnings are highly persistent and transitory income is a small part of total income. Further
empirical work should check that these conditions hold. If they do not hold, coefficients and
standard errors from fitting the Lintner model to reported net income will be biased, and a
better empirical proxy for permanent income will be necessary. Past changes in stock price
are a leading candidate.

C.

Information Content

The “information content of dividends” refers to the good news conveyed to investors by
dividend increases and the bad news conveyed by dividend cuts. We say “the information
content of payout.” The good and bad news conveyed by changes in payout is obvious in our
model, because payout is proportional to rents, and managers set rents depending on their
view of the firm’s permanent income. Thus an unanticipated increase in payout signals an
unanticipated increase in permanent income. Whether changes in payout actually predict

40

changes in permanent income is an open empirical issue.39
The effects of changes in payout on stock price are clear in Eq. (45), where dt depends on
permanent income Yt and the previous payout dt−1 , and in Eq. (18), which states that cumdividend stock-market value is proportional to permanent income. If investors only observe
payouts, then Eqs. (50) and (18) say that an unanticipated payout increase of ∆dt should
increase cum-dividend and ex-dividend stock-market value by ∆St = ∆dt / [(1 − βh)ρβ] and
∆St ex = ∆dt [1 + ρβh] / [(1 − βh)ρ]. The higher the habit parameter h, the more good news
is conveyed by a given payout change ∆dt . A change in payouts means more to investors
when they know that managers are averse to changes in rents.
The information content of dividends is clear from the reaction of stock prices to initiation
or changes in dividends.40 Testing our predictions about the information content of total
payout will be more challenging. Dividend announcements are suitable for event studies.
Payout evolves over months and years.
Also shareholders may learn about payout through different information channels. Note
that shareholders can’t protect their property rights if they observe only payout. They must
also observe or infer rents – otherwise they would have no clue about when to intervene, and
the capital-market constraint would not work. Hiring accountants to report net income is a
partial remedy, but net income is calculated after rents, and rents are mixed in with other
business expenses. So accounting (and other monitoring and governance mechanisms) also
have to provide sufficient detail about expenses so that shareholders can estimate rents with
tolerable accuracy. The mechanisms have to prevent the managers from actively concealing
39

But there is extensive research on whether cash dividends send a signal about permanent income. Brick-

ley (1983), Healy and Palepu (1988) and Aharony and Dotan (1994) find that an increase in dividends leads
to an increase in future accounting earnings. Marsh and Merton (1987) specify the target dividend as a function of permanent earnings, which they measure by lagged stock prices. Kao and Wu (1994) find a positive
relation between unexpected changes in dividends and permanent earnings. Garrett and Priestley (2000) find
evidence that dividends convey information about current unexpected earnings. In contrast, Watts (1973)
and Gonedes (1978) find no relation between current dividends and future earnings, and Benartzi, Michaely
and Thaler (1997) suggest that dividend changes provide information about current and past earnings.
40
See DeAngelo, DeAngelo and Skinner (2008, Ch. 8) for a review of evidence on stock price reactions to
dividend announcements.

41

rents or from suddenly tunneling out massive rents and leaving shareholders with an empty
shell.
The information about rents does not have to be verifiable or contractible. The shareholders in our model are not relying on legal enforcement, but on their ability to take over
(at a cost) and toss out the incumbent managers.

D.

More Empirical Implications

1. We predict that total payout by mature firms should follow the Lintner model. We
do not have a theory of how payout is split between repurchases and cash dividends, but
we do predict that these two payout channels are managed jointly. For example, if cash
dividends are more or less locked in for the short- or medium-term, then repurchases cannot
be random or erratic. Repurchases must be managed over time in order for total payout to
follow the Lintner model. In other words, repurchases must have a history and predictable
future. Future empirical work should try to unpack total payout and understand, at least
descriptively, how dividends and repurchases evolve jointly.
2. Payout can change not only with permanent income, but also as a result of shifts in
the characteristics of the firm or its managers, including profit volatility or the managers’
risk aversion or impatience. Changes in managers’ characteristics cannot be observed directly, but changes in earnings volatility should be measurable. Our model predicts that
higher volatility increases precautionary savings, retards payout and increases cash holdings
or decreases debt.41 Payout should also respond to new investment, because profitable investment increases permanent income. But the response of payout to investment depends on
the investment’s future profitability, which is also not directly observable. Investors’ profit
forecasts will be picked up in stock prices, however.
3. We predict that target payout increases with stronger corporate governance, as in
41

Increased profit volatility in conjunction with precautionary savings could help explain why U.S. corpo-

rations have increased average cash holdings over the past two decades (see Bates, Kahle and Stulz (2009))
and why firms start paying out later and later (Fama and French (2001)).

42

La Porta et al. (2002), who find higher average payout in countries with better protection
of investors. Their several measures of investor protection can be regarded as proxies or
instruments for our governance parameter α. In our model payout is proportional to α. It is
worth running the Lintner model on international data, because α should vary more across
than within countries. α may also be influenced by internal as well as external governance
mechanisms, such as board composition or anti-takeover provisions.
4. To our knowledge there is little or no empirical research on the link between payout and
management compensation. Our theory predicts that payout moves in lockstep with rents.
We have interpreted rents not as top-management compensation, but as value extracted
by a broad coalition of top and middle managers. Nevertheless, it is worth trying topmanagement compensation as a proxy for rents overall. If the proxy works, then increases in
payout by mature firms should coincide with increases in compensation. Increased variability
in payout (possibly by a shift from cash dividends to share repurchases) should translate into
higher variability in compensation, for example through a shift from salaries and bonuses to
stock-based compensation.
5. Consistent with the findings of Brav et al. (2005), we show that payout is set on par
with investment policy. CAPEX should not upset payout smoothing, provided that the firm
can borrow efficiently against the future cash flows that investment projects generate. Debt
and cash are the shock absorbers that enable firms to implement the optimal payout and
investment policies. Again we stress, however, that our predictions apply to mature firms,
not growth firms, especially not to growth firms that have limited access to debt financing.
6. Our theory of payout also generates a theory of corporate debt. If the capital stock is
fixed, smoothing of payout requires that changes in debt are the shock-absorber or residual.
We do not present a complete theory of capital structure, because we have not included
interest tax shields, costs of financial distress or other costs or frictions that can make capital
structure value-relevant. Nevertheless our theory has important implications for empirical
research on capital structure. We have shown that target adjustment models for payout and
capital structure cannot coexist. If the capital stock is taken as fixed, and payout adjusts
smoothly to a permanent-income target, then debt cannot adjust smoothly to a target debt

43

ratio. If debt does so adjust, then payout cannot be smoothed, and in addition the volatility
of payout must amplify the volatility of net income. This suggests empirical work on the
volatility of payout and changes in debt, relative to the volatility of net income.

E.

The New Dividend Puzzle

DeAngelo and DeAngelo (2004, p. 1) characterize the dividend puzzle as follows:
As posed by Black (1976), the dividend puzzle is actually two distinct enigmas which share
the common element that observed payout decisions are tax-inefficient for stockholders. The
first, which we label “the payout puzzle”, is that firms make large payouts despite the tax
advantages of retention. The second, which we call “the repurchase puzzle”, is that stock
repurchases have not displaced dividends as the preferred form of payout, despite their tax
advantages.
Corporate-finance practice has largely answered the second enigma. As Skinner (2008, p.
584) notes, repurchases are now “the dominant form of payout”. Our paper sheds some light
on the first enigma. We say that mature firms pay out cash to investors because a broad
coalition of managers wants to take out a flow of rents. The capital market constraint forces
payout to move in lockstep with rents. If managers want a smooth flow of rents, shareholders
receive a smooth payout stream. This result holds with corporate taxes, although taxes
squeeze payout relative to rents.
A new puzzle is emerging. Why has the speed of adjustment for dividends (for companies
that pay regular cash dividends) declined to barely significant levels? It may be that repurchases now absorb most of the variance in permanent income, allowing financial managers
to stabilize cash dividends in order to better appeal to the widows and orphans who want
a dependable quarterly check in the mail. But our model cannot explain why dividends are
smooth relative to repurchases. Other models are, as far as we can see, similarly deficient.

44

IV.

Conclusion

This paper has presented a theory of payout policy. Our original goal was to explain
dividend smoothing and to see whether Lintner’s (1956) target-adjustment model could be
derived from deeper principles. It was quickly clear, however, that net total payout, not
cash dividends, is what matters in an agency model of payout. It was also clear that the
dynamics of payout policy had to be modeled jointly with debt and investment policy. The
three policies are tied together by the firm’s budget constraint. A dynamic theory of payout
and investment defines a dynamic theory of capital structure.
We show how investment policy affects debt policy and payout policy. Managers’ risk
aversion leads to underinvestment – the managers do not maximize market value. Once
payout and investment policy are set, changes in debt must serve as the shock absorber.
The residual cash flow is not payout –because managers smooth payout and rents– but
changes in borrowing (or lending, for cash-rich firms). For example, a positive transitory
earnings shock is used primarily to reduce net debt. Only a small fraction (less than 5% for
realistic parameter values) of transitory earnings are paid out. A positive persistent shock
in earnings leads to a much smaller decrease in net debt, however, and may even increase
debt if the shock leads to expanded investment.
Several important issues are not addressed in this paper. We assume that corporate
debt is risk-free. Therefore our model does not apply to distressed firms or firms in declining
markets that sooner or later must disinvest. We also ignore the forces that drive conventional
theories of capital structure, including interest tax shields, costs of financial distress and
information. We do not consider the dynamics of investment. Expanding our model on
these dimensions should generate further insights, but will probably pose serious technical
challenges.
Given permanent income, Lintner’s target-adjustment regression would fit in our model
with an R-squared of 1.0. But we have simplified by bright-line assumptions that cannot
be so bright in practice. For example, we assume that shareholders know rents exactly and
that they and the managers know the tipping point for shareholder intervention exactly.

45

A more ”realistic” version of the model would have the managers estimating an increasing
probability of shareholder intervention as the managers’ take of rents relative to dividends
and repurchases increases.42 The shareholders’ decision to intervene would depend on their
estimate of rents and their trust in accounting and governance to stop runaway rents and
tunneling. Also the shareholders would not rely exclusively on the threat of all-or-nothing
intervention. For example, they would encourage compensation schemes to help align top
managers’ economic interests with their own. The schemes would reward top managers
based on income after rents and on stock-price performance. (Recall that we distinguish
total rents, which go to a broad cohort of managers and staff, from compensation to the
CEO and his or her inner circle.) Thus one can think of more complex models in which
rents and payouts do not move in exact lockstep, as in our model, but nevertheless move
together on average and in the longer run. Rents and payouts would still be smoothed in
such models, and Lintner’s target-adjustment specification should still work when fitted to
blue-chip firms that make regular cash payouts to investors.

42

See Myers (2000, pp. 1017-1018) for a discussion of equilibrium when managers do not know shareholders’

cost of intervention.

46

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1: The payoff to shareholders from taking collective action at time t
(instead of accepting the proposed payout) is by assumption given by:


∞
X
St = α πt − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 +
β j Et [πt+j ]

(A1)

j=1

The payoff to shareholders from accepting the payout dt and not taking collective action at t is
given by:
St = dt + βEt [St+1 ]

= dt + αβ Et [πt+1 ] − (1 + ρ)Dt +

∞
X


β j Et [πt+1+j ]

(A2)

j=1

The payout set by managers is such that shareholders are indifferent between taking collective
action and keeping managers in place for another period. Substituting the budget condition at


α
time t into Dt and solving for dt gives: dt = 1−α
rt ≡ γrt . Hence payout plus rents (rt + dt ) at
time t can be expressed as (1 + γ)rt .
Proof of Proposition 2: The managers’ decision problem is to solve for an optimal rent policy

o , ... . The first order condition for the decision variable r can be found
plan P o = rt o , rt+1 o , rt+2
t
by applying a variational argument as, for example, in Hall (1978). Define a variation P 1 on the
optimal plan that varies rents at t.
Pt 1 (e) = {(rt o + e; rt−1 ), (ro t+1 − (1 + ρ)e; rt o + e), (ro t+2 ; ro t+1 − (1 + ρ)e), (ro t+3 ; ro t+2 ), ...}
For clarity’s sake we have added a second argument representing the habit stock. If the optimal
plan Pt o satisfies the budget constraint at t (as it must, by definition) then by construction the
variation Pt 1 (e) will also. Let Mt (1) (e) denote the managers’ expected utility as of time t associated
with the plan Pt (1) (e). Since the variation equals the optimal plan when e = 0 and since the optimal
plan maximizes expected utility, it follows that

dMt (1) (e)
de
e=0

= 0, or equivalently rt o must satisfy:


 ω 

Et u0 (rt − hrt−1 ) − ωhu0 (rt+1 − hrt ) = Et u0 (rt+1 − hrt ) − ωhu0 (rt+2 − hrt+1 )
β
The condition says that along the optimal path the managers must receive the same present utility
from an extra dollar of rents today as from (1 + ρ) dollars tomorrow. In the absence of habit formation (h = 0) this condition simplifies to the traditional Euler equation u0 (rt ) =
43

ω
0
43
β Et [u (rt+1 )].

See, for example, equation (16.26) on page 556 in Acemoglu (2009). A more detailed derivation of the

Euler equation can be found in Acemoglu (2009) or in Stokey, Lucas and Prescott (1989).

47

Following Muellbauer (1988) we define the transformed variable: r̂t+j ≡ rt+j − hrt+j−1 (for
j = 0, 1, 2...). Substituting into the above condition and replacing u(.) by the exponential utility
function u(r) = 1 − 1θ e−θr gives:
 
h
i
β
e−θr̂t = Et e−θr̂t+1 (1 + βh) − ωhe−θr̂t+2
ω

(A3)

The transformed condition encapsulates the Caballero (1990) model as a special case. The proof
follows closely Caballero (1990). The first step in finding a feedback solution is to make a guess on
the form of the stochastic process followed by r̂t . The functional form of this process is chosen by
using the Euler equation. In this particular case with exponential utility we know from the existing
literature that the best guess is to assume that the process r̂t is linear in levels:
r̂t+j = φt+j−1 r̂t+j−1 + Γt+j−1 + vt+j j = 0, 1, 2, ...

(A4)

where vt+j , φt+j−1 and Γt+j−1 remain to be determined and where vt+j is the shock to rents that
results from the shock ηt in earnings.
Substituting the conjecture for r̂t+1 and r̂t+2 into (A3) gives:
 
i
h
i
h
β
e−θr̂t = e−θφt r̂t e−θΓt (1+βh) Et e−θvt+1 −ωhEt e−θΓt+1 e−θvt+2 e−θφt+1 (φt r̂t + Γt + vt+1 ) (A5)
ω
Rearranging gives:
 
h
i
h
i
β
e−θr̂t (1−φt ) + θΓt = (1+βh)Et e−θvt+1 − ωhEt e−θ[Γt+1 + vt+2 + φt r̂t (φt+1 − 1) + vt+1 φt+1 + Γt (φt+1 − 1)]
ω
It must be the case that φt = φt+1 = 1 as otherwise rents would be determined by the Euler
equation regardless of the budget constraint. Therefore:
 
h
i
h
i
β
eθΓt = (1 + βh)Et e−θvt+1 − ωhEt e−θ[Γt+1 + vt+2 + vt+1 ]
ω
h
n
oi
= Et e−θvt+1 (1 + βh) − ωhe−θ(Γt+1 + vt+2 )

(A6)

Since the shocks ηt+j in earnings are i.i.d., we conjecture that the shocks in rents vt+j are also
i.i.d. and verify this conjecture below. Using a property of the moment generating function of the
normal distribution, it follows that:
 



θ2
θ2
β
2
2
eθΓt = e−θEt [vt+1 ]+ 2 σv (1 + βh) − ωhe−θΓt+1 e−θ Et [vt+2 ] + 2 σv
ω
 
θ
θ
2
2
β
eθ[Γt + Et [vt+1 ] − 2 σv ] = 1 + βh − ωh e−θ[Γt+1 + Et [vt+2 ] − 2 σv ]
(A7)
ω

48

For the equality to hold at all times, it must be the case that:
Γt −

θ 2
θ
σv + Et [vt+1 ] = Γt+1 − σv 2 + Et [vt+2 ] ≡ g
2
2

(A8)

The constant g can be found by solving for the positive root of the following quadratic equation:
  
2
β
eθg − (1 + βh)eθg + ωh = 0
(A9)
ω
 
Solving gives: eθg = ωβ or g = 1θ ln ωβ . Consequently:
 
θ 2
1
ω
Γt =
σv − Et [vt+1 ] + ln
2
θ
β
 
θ 2
1
ω
(A10)
Γt+1 =
σv − Et [vt+2 ] + ln
2
θ
β
We now substitute the solution for r̂t into the Intertemporal Budget Constraint (IBC). To derive
this intertemporal constraint first note that the budget constraint at times t, t+1, t+2,... can be
written as:
(1 + γ)rt = Dt − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 + K φ πt
(1 + γ)βrt+1 = Dt+1 β − Dt + βK φ πt+1
(1 + γ)β 2 rt+2 = Dt+2 β 2 − βDt+1 + β 2 K φ πt+2
(1 + γ)β 3 rt+3 = ...

(A11)

Summing the above budget conditions it must be the case that for any time interval T :
(1 + γ)

T
X

β j rt+j = β T Dt+T +

j=0

T
X

β j K φ πt+j − (1 + ρ)Dt−1

(A12)

j=0

Taking the limit as T → ∞ and enforcing the no-Ponzi condition (6) gives the Intertemporal Budget
Constraint (IBC):
(1 + γ)

∞
X

∞
X

j

β rt+j =

j=0

β j K φ πt+j − (1 + ρ)Dt−1

(A13)

j=0

Therefore,
h

∞
X
j=0

j

(1 + γ)β rt+j−1 = h

∞
X

β j K φ πt+j−1 − h(1 + ρ)Dt−2

j=0
∞
X

= hβ

β j K φ πt+j − h(1 + ρ)Dt−2 + hK φ πt−1

(A14)

j=0

Using the definition of r̂t+j and the budget constraint −K φ πt−1 + (1+ρ)Dt−2 = Dt−1 −(1+γ)rt−1
gives, after simplifying, the transformed IBC:


∞
∞
X
X
(1 + γ)β j r̂t+j = (1 − hβ) 
β j K φ πt+j − (1 + ρ)Dt−1  − h(1 + γ)rt−1
j=0

j=0

49

(A15)

Since r̂t+1 = r̂t + Γt + vt+1 , repeated substitution means that our conjectured solution for r̂t+j is
P
r̂t+j = r̂t + ji=1 (Γt+i−1 + vt+i ). Substituting r̂t+j into the IBC gives:
j
∞
X
X
(1 + γ)r̂t
j
+ (1 + γ)
β
(Γt+i−1 + vt+i ) + h(1 + γ)rt−1
(1 − β)
j=1
i=1


∞
X
= (1 − hβ) 
β j K φ πt+j − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 

(A16)

j=0

Furthermore,
∞
X

βj

j=1

j
X

(Γt+i−1 + vt+i )

i=1

= β (Γt + vt+1 ) + β 2 (Γt + vt+1 + Γt+1 + vt+2 ) + ...


= (Γt + vt+1 ) β 1 + β + β 2 + β 3 + ... + (Γt+1 + vt+2 ) β 2 1 + β + β 2 + β 3 ... + ...
∞
1 X j
=
β (vt+j + Γt+j−1 )
(A17)
1−β
j=1

Substituting (A17) into (A16) gives:
∞
(1 + γ) X

(1 + γ)r̂t
+
1−β
1−β

β j (Γt+j−1 + vt+j )+h(1+γ)rt−1



∞
X
= (1−hβ) 
β j K φ πt+j − (1 + ρ)Dt−1 

j=1

j=0

Taking expectations (on both sides of the equation) conditional on the information available at t,
using our conjecture that the shocks vt+j in rents are i.i.d. with zero mean, and solving for r̂t gives:


∞
∞
X
X
(1+γ)r̂t = ρβ(1−hβ) 
β j K φ Et [πt+j ] − (1 + ρ)Dt−1  − (1+γ)ρβhrt−1 − (1+γ)
β j Γt+j−1
j=0

j=1

where we used the fact that 1 − β = ρβ. Since r̂t ≡ rt − hrt−1 , simplifying gives:
(1 + γ) rt = (1 − hβ) Yt + hβrt−1 (1 + γ) − (1 + γ)

∞
X

β j Γt+j−1

j=1

where Yt is permanent income as defined by equation (11). The stochastic sequence for vt+j can be
derived by substituting the solution for r̂t back into the (ex-post) IBC (A16). Using the assumption
that πt = µπt−1 + ηt , the IBC simplifies to the following condition:
∞
∞
(1 − hβ) X j φ
1+γ X j
β vt+j =
β K ηt+j
1−β
(1 − βµ)
j=1

(A18)

j=1

Consequently, this pins down the stochastic sequence {vt+j } as a function of the earning shocks
sequence {ηt+j }
vt+j =

K φ (1 − α)(1 − β)(1 − hβ)ηt+j
≡ δ K φ ηt+j
(1 − βµ)

50

(A19)

One can verify our conjecture that the shocks vt+j are indeed i.i.d. with zero mean because ηt+j
are i.i.d. with zero mean. It follows that σv = δK φ ση . Since vt+j are i.i.d. shocks with zero mean,
it follows from (A10) that Γt = Γt+1 = ... ≡ Γ and therefore:
∞
X
j=1

j

β Γt+j−1


 
 
β
θ 2 1
β(1 − β)(1 − α)2 (1 − hβ)2 θ 2φ 2
ω
β 1
ω
=
=
σv + ln
K ση +
ln
2
(1 − β) 2
θ
β
(1 − βµ)
2
1−βθ
β

Substituting into the solution for rt gives:
Yt
(1 − α)2 β(1 − β)(1 − hβ)2 θ 2φ 2
rt = (1 − hβ)
+ hβrt−1 −
K ση +
1+γ
(1 − βµ)2
2



β
(1 − β)θ



 
β
ln
ω

Proof of Property 1:

Yt+1 = ρ β

∞
X


Et+1 [πt+1+j ] K φ β j − Dt 

(A20)

j=0



∞
X
= ρ
K φ Et+1 [πt+j ] β j − Dt−1 (1 + ρ) − (1 + γ)rt + K φ πt 

(A21)

j=1



∞
X
D
t−1 
− ρ(1 + γ)rt
Et [Yt+1 ] = ρ 
K φ Et [πt+j ] β j −
β
j=0


∞
X
ρ
=
β
K φ Et [πt+j ] β j − Dt−1  − ρ(1 + γ)rt
β

(A22)

(A23)

j=0

= Yt (1 + ρ) − ρ(1 + γ)rt

Proof of Proposition 4: The proof will require the evaluation of the following integral:
Z +∞
2
1 (x−µ)
1
√
I ≡
xetx e− 2 σ2 dx
σ 2π −∞


Z +∞
2 2
2 2
1 (x−µ−tσ )
1
µt + σ 2t
σ2
√
= e
xe− 2
dx
σ 2π −∞


2 2

µt + σ 2t
= e
µ + tσ 2

(A24)

(A25)
(A26)
(A27)

The first equality is obtained by completing the square. The final step follows from the fact that
the second integral calculates the expected value of a normally distributed value with mean µ + tσ 2 .
The proof requires us to solve the following first order condition (see Eq. (32)):
∞
X
j=0



∂ r̂t+j
0
= 0
ω Et u (r̂t+j )
∂K
j

51

(A28)

We know from the proof to proposition 2 that:


j
X
θ 2
1
ω
r̂t+j = r̂t + j σv + ln( ) +
vt+i
2
θ
β

(A29)

i=1

j

X
j
β
θ
ηt+i
= r̂t + j δ 2 K 2φ ση 2 − ln( ) + δK φ
2
θ
ω

(A30)

i=1

where δ ≡

(1−α)(1−β)(1−hβ)
.
(1−βµ)

It follows that:
j

X
∂ r̂t+j
∂ r̂t
=
+ jθδ 2 K 2φ−1 φση 2 + φδK φ−1
ηt+i
∂K
∂K

(A31)

i=1

Before we substitute this into the first order condition note the following results:
h
i
Pj
j 2 2 2φ
2
φ
Et e−θδK i=1 ηt+i = e 2 θ δ K ση
h
i
1 2 2 2φ
φ
2
Et ηt+j e−θδK ηt+j
= −θδK φ ση 2 e 2 θ δ K ση

(A32)
(A33)

where the second result is a special case of the above integral I (for µ = 0, σ = ση and t = −θδK φ ).
We can now calculate:
" j
#
P
X
−θδK φ ji=1 ηt+i
Et
ηt+i e
i=1

h

i 1 2 2 2φ 2
h
i 1 2 2 2φ 2
φ
φ
= Et ηt+1 e−θδK ηt+1 e 2 θ δ K ση (j−1) + Et ηt+2 e−θδK ηt+2 e 2 θ δ K ση (j−1)
i 1 2 2 2φ 2
h
φ
+ ... + Et ηt+j e−θδK ηt+j e 2 θ δ K ση (j−1)
1 2 2 2φ
δ K ση 2

= −θδK φ ση 2 e 2 θ
1

= −jθδK φ ση 2 e 2 jθ

1 2 2 2φ
δ K ση 2 (j−1)

j e2θ

2 δ 2 K 2φ σ 2
η

(A34)

where we make use of the fact that ηt+i are i.i.d. shocks. Define now the following auxiliary
variables:
at ≡ r̂t +
bt ≡

j 2 2φ 2
β
j
θδ K ση − ln( )
2
θ
ω

∂ r̂t
+ jφθδ 2 K 2φ−1 ση 2
∂K

(A35)
(A36)

Using these results allows us to calculate:
"
!#


j
Pj
X
φ
∂
r̂
t+j
Et u0 (r̂t+j )
= Et e−θ(at + δK i=1 ηt+i ) bt + φδK φ−1
ηt+i
∂K
i=1
h
i
1
2 2 2φ
2
= e−θat e 2 jθ δ K ση bt − jφθδ 2 K 2φ−1 ση 2
1
2 2 2φ
2 ∂ r̂t
= e−θat e 2 jθ δ K ση
∂K
 j
β
∂
r̂
t
= e−θr̂t
ω
∂K

52

(A37)

Substituting this into the first order condition gives:
∞
X
j=0

!
 2
 
β
2 β
1+ω
+ω
+ ...
ω
ω



∂ r̂t+j
∂ r̂t
0
ω Et u (r̂t+j )
= e−θr̂t
∂K
∂K
j

∂ r̂t
e−θr̂t ∂K
∂ r̂t
= 0 ⇐⇒
= 0
1−β
∂K

=

(A38)

We know from the proof of proposition 2 that:
θση 2 δ 2 K 2φ
1
β
+
ln( )
2ρ
ρθ
ω

r̂t = (1 − α)(1 − hβ)Yt [K] − hρβrt−1 −

(A39)

Using equation (30) and differentiating r̂t with respect to K gives:


∂ r̂t
φK φ−1 βµπt
φ
= ρβ(1 − βh)
− 1 − θση 2 δ 2 K 2φ−1 = 0
∂K
1 − βµ
ρ

(A40)

which gives the condition in proposition 4.
Proof of Proposition 5: Using the definition of permanent income it follows:
Yt − Yt−1 = ρβ

∞
X

β j K φ [Et (πt+j ) − Et−1 (πt+j−1 )] − ρ (Dt−1 − Dt−2 )

j=0

The budget constraint requires that Dt−1 − Dt−2 = ρDt−2 + (1 + γ)rt−1 − K φ πt−1 . Substituting
into the above expression gives:
Yt − Yt−1 = ρβ

∞
X

j

φ

β K [Et (πt+j ) − Et−1 (πt+j )] + ρβ

j=0

−ρβ

∞
X

β j K φ Et−1 (πt+j )

j=0

∞
X

h

β j K φ Et−1 (πt+j−1 ) − ρ ρDt−2 + (1 + γ)rt−1 − K φ πt−1

i

j=0

= νt + ρβ

∞
X

j

φ

β K Et−1 (πt+j ) − ρβ

j=0

∞
X

β j K φ Et−1 (πt+j−1 )

j=0

h
i
− ρ ρDt−2 + (1 + γ)rt−1 − K φ πt−1


∞
X
= νt − ρ ρβ
β j K φ Et−1 (πt+j−1 ) − Yt−1 + (1 + γ)rt−1 − K φ πt−1 
j=0

+ρβ

∞
X

j

φ

β K Et−1 (πt+j ) − ρβ

j=0

= νt − (1 + ρ)ρβ

∞
X

β j K φ Et−1 (πt+j−1 )

j=0
∞
X

β j K φ Et−1 (πt+j−1 ) + ρβ

j=0

∞
X

β j K φ Et−1 (πt+j )

j=0

h

φ

+ ρ Yt−1 − (1 + γ)rt−1 + K πt−1

53

i

(A41)

P
j φ
where νt ≡ ρβ ∞
j=0 β K [Et (πt+j ) − Et−1 (πt+j )]. Using the fact that
P∞ j φ
P
φ
j φ
β ∞
j=0 β K Et−1 (πt+j−1 ) = −K πt−1 , it follows that:
j=0 β K Et−1 (πt+j ) − β(1 + ρ)
Yt − Yt−1 = νt − K φ ρπt−1 + ρYt−1 − ρ(1 + γ)rt−1 + K φ ρπt−1
= νt + ρYt−1 − ρ(1 + γ)rt−1

(A42)
(A43)

Finally, from πt = µπt−1 + ηt , it follows that Et (πt+j ) − Et−1 (πt+j ) = µj ηt . Consequently,
νt =

ρβK φ ηt
1−βµ .

Using Eq. (9) one can write Yt−1 as a function of rt−1 and substitute for Yt−1 into equation
(A43), which gives ∆Yt as a function of rt−1 and rt−2 . Substitute the resulting expression for ∆Yt
into
∆rt = βh∆rt−1 + (1 − βh) ∆Yt

(A44)

This gives ∆rt as a function of the exogenous variables rt−1 and rt−2 only, which is the expression
for ∆rt in the proposition. We obtain ∆dt as a function of the exogenous variables dt−1 and dt−2
in a similar fashion. The expressions for var(∆dt ) and var(∆rt ) can be derived using the previous
result that νt =

ρβK φ ηt
1−βµ .

References
Acemoglu, Daron, 2009, Introduction to Modern Economic Growth,(Princeton University Press:
Princeton, New Jersey).
Acharya, Viral, and Bart M. Lambrecht, 2011, A theory of income smoothing when insiders
know more than outsiders, Working paper, Lancaster University Management School.
Acharya, Viral, Stewart C. Myers, and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2011, The internal governance of
firms, Journal of Finance 66, 689-720.
Aharony, J., and A. Dotan, 1994, Regular dividend announcements and future unexpected earnings:
An empirical analysis, Financial Review 29, 125-151.
Alessie, Rob, and Annamaria Lusardi, 1997, Consumption, saving and habit formation, Economics
Letters 55, 103-108.
Allen, Franklin, Antonio Bernardo, and Ivo Welch, 2000, A theory of dividends based on tax
clienteles, Journal of Finance 55, 2499-2536.

54

Allen, Franklin, and Roni Michaely, 2003, Payout Policy, in G. M. Constantinides, Milton Harris,
and Rene Stulz ed.: Handbook of the Economics of Finance, 337-430, (Elsevier Science B.V.:
Amsterdam).
Baker, Malcolm, Stefan Nagel, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2007, The effect of dividends on consumption,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 277-291.
Barth, Mary E., William H. Beaver, John R. M. Hand, and Wayne R. Landsman, 1999, Accruals,
cash flows, and equity values, Review of Accounting Studies 4, 205-229.
Bates, Thomas W., Kathleen M. Kahle, and René M. Stulz, 2009, Why do U.S. firms hold so much
more cash than they used to?, Journal of Finance 64, 1985-2021.
Benartzi, Shlomo, Roni Michaely, and Richard Thaler, 1997, Do changes in dividends signal the
future or the past?, Journal of Finance 52, 1007-1034.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto, 1979, Imperfect information, dividend policy, and the bird in the hand
fallacy, Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science 10, 259-270.
Black, Fischer, 1976, The dividend puzzle, Journal of Portfolio Management 2, 5-8.
Bolton, Patrick, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang, 2011, A unified theory of Tobins q, corporate
investment, financing, and risk management, Journal of Finance 66, 1545-1578.
Brav, Alon, John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Roni Michaely, 2005, Payout policy in the
21st century, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 483-528.
Brickley, James, 1983, Shareholder wealth, information signaling, and the specially designated
dividend: An empirical study, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 187-209.
Burkart, Mike, Denis Gromb, and Fausto Panunzi, 1997, Large shareholders, monitoring, and the
value of the firm, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 693-728.
Caballero, Ricardo J., 1990, Consumption puzzles and precautionary savings, Journal of Monetary
Economics 25, 113-136.
Choe, Hyuk, 1990, Intertemporal and cross-sectional variation of corporate dividend policy, Ph.D.
dissertation, (University of Chicago: Chicago).

55

Constantinides, George M., 1990, Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium puzzle,
Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-543.
DeAngelo, Harry, and Linda DeAngelo, 2004, Payout policy irrelevance and the dividend puzzle,
SSRN working paper 528704, University of Southern California.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Douglas J. Skinner, 2004, Are dividends disappearing?
Dividend concentration and the consolidation of earnings, Journal of Financial Economics 72,
425-456.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Douglas J. Skinner, 2008, Corporate Payout Policy,
Foundations and Trends in Finance 3, 95-287.
DeMarzo, Peter, and Michael Fishman, 2007, Agency and optimal investment dynamics, Review of
Financial Studies 20, 151-188.
DeMarzo, Peter, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2011, Learning, termination, and payout policy in dynamic
incentive contracts, Working paper, Stanford Business School.
Dichev, Ilia D., and Vick Wei Tang, 2009, Earnings volatility and earnings predictability, Journal
of Accounting and Economics 47, 160-181.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm
characteristics or lower propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-43.
Fama, Eugene F. and H. Babiak, 1968, Dividend policy: An empirical analysis, Journal of the
American Statistical Association 63, 1132-1161.
Fluck, Zsuzsanna, 1998, Optimal financial contracting: Debt versus outside equity, Review of
Financial Studies 11, 383-419.
Fluck, Zsuzsanna, 1999, The dynamics of the management-shareholder conflict, Review of Financial
Studies 12, 379-404.
Frankel, Richard, and Lubomir Litov, 2009, Earnings persistence, Journal of Accounting and
Economics 47, 182-190.
Friedman, Milton, 1957, A Theory of the Consumption Function, (Princeton University Press:

56

Princeton, New Jersey).
Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole, 1995, A Theory of income and dividend smoothing based on
incumbency rents, Journal of Policitical Economy 103, 75-93.
Garrett, Ian, and Richard Priestley, 2000, Dividend behavior and dividend signaling, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 173-189.
Gonedes, Nicholas .J., 1978, Corporate signaling, external accounting, and capital market
equilibrium: Evidence on dividends, income, and extraordinary items, Journal of Accounting
Research 16, 26-79.
Greene, William H., 1993, Econometric Analysis, (Macmillan Publishing Company: New York).
Guttman, Ilan, Ohad Kadan, and Eugene Kandel, 2010, Dividend stickiness and strategic pooling,
Review of Financial Studies 23, 4455-4495.
Hall, Robert E., 1978, Stochastic implications of the life cycle-permanent income hypothesis:
Theory and evidence, Journal of Political Economy 91, 249-265.
Healy, Paul M., and Krishna G. Palepu, Earnings information conveyed by dividend initiations and
omissions, Journal of Financial Economics 21, 149-175.
Hsieh, Jim, and Qinghai Wang, 2006, Determinants of the trends in aggregate corporate payout
policy, Working paper, George Mason University.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers, American
Economic Review 76, 323-329.
Jin, Li, and Stewart C. Myers, 2006, R2 around the world: New theory and new tests, Journal of
Financial Economics 79, 257-292.
John, Kose, and Joseph Williams, 1985, Dividends, dilution, and taxes: A signaling equilibrium,
Journal of Financial Economics 49, 1053-1070.
Kalay, Avner, and Michael Lemmon, 2008, Payout policy, in Bjorn E. Eckbo, Handbook of Corporate
Finance - Empirical Corporate Finance, (Elsevier North Holland: Amsterdam).
Kao, Chihwa, and Chunchi Wu, 1994, Tests of dividend signaling using the Marsh-Merton model:

57

A generalized friction approach, Journal of Business 67, 45-68.
Korinek, Anton, and Joseph Stiglitz, 2009, Dividend taxation and intertemporal tax arbitrage,
Journal of Public Economics 93, 142-159.
Kumar, Praveen, 1988, Shareholder-manager conflict and the information content of dividends,
Review of Financial Studies 1, 111-136.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopes-De-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2000, Agency
problems and dividend policies around the world, Journal of Finance 55, 1-33.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopes-De-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2002, Investor
protection and corporate valuation, Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.
Lambrecht, Bart M., and Stewart C. Myers, 2007, A theory of takeovers and disinvestment, Journal
of Finance 62, 809-845.
Lambrecht, Bart M., and Stewart C. Myers, 2008, Debt and managerial rents in a real-options
model of the firm, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 209-231.
Leary, Mark T., and Roni Michaely, 2011, Determinants of dividend smoothing: Empirical evidence,
Review of Financial Studies 24, 3197-3249.
Lintner, John, 1956, Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained earnings,
and taxes, American Economic Review 46, 97-113.
Marsh, Terry A., and Robert C. Merton, 1987, Dividend behavior for the aggregate stock market,
Journal of Business 60, 1-40.
Miller, Merton, 1977, Debt and taxes, Journal of Finance 32, 261-275.
Miller, Merton H., 1987, The informational content of dividends, in J. Bossons, R. Dornbusch,
and S. Fischer, Macroeconomics and Finance: Essays in Honor of Franco Modigliani, 37-59,
(MIT Press).
Miller, Merton H., and Franco Modigliani, 1961, Dividend policy, growth and the valuation of
shares, Journal of Business 34, 411-433.
Miller, Merton H., and Kevin Rock, 1985, Dividend policy under asymmetric information, Journal

58

of Finance 40, 1031-1051.
Modigliani, Franco, and Merton H. Miller, 1958, The cost of capital, corporation finance, and the
theory of investment, American Economic Review 58, 261-297.
Muellbauer, John, 1988, Habits, rationality and myopia in the life-cycle consumption function,
Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 9, 47-70.
Myers, Stewart C., 1977, Determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics 5,
147-176.
Myers, Stewart C., 1984, The capital structure puzzle, Journal of Finance 39, 575-592.
Myers, Stewart C., 2000, Outside equity, Journal of Finance 55, 1005-1037.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions
when firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13,
187-221.
Ohlson, James A., 1999, On transitory earnings, Review of Accounting Studies 4, 145-162.
Roberts, Michael R., and Roni Michaely, 2007, Corporate dividend policies: Lessons from private
firms, SSRN Working Paper 927802.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1989, Management entrenchment: The case of managerspecific investments, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 123-139.
Skinner, Douglas J., 2008, The evolving relation between earnings, dividends, and stock repurchases,
Journal of Financial Economics 87, 582-609.
Stokey, Nancy L., Robert E. Lucas, and Edward C. Prescott, 1989, Recursive Methods in Economic
Dynamics, (Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Massachusetts).
Sundaresan, Suresh, 1989, Intertemporally dependent preferences and the volatility of consumption
and wealth, Review of Financial Studies 2, 73-89.
Wang, Neng, 2003, Caballero meets Bewley: The permanent-income hypothesis in general
equilibrium, American Economic Review 93, 927-936.

59

Watts, Ross, 1973, The information content of dividends, Journal of Business 46, 191-211.

60

