NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RETHINKING THE AREA APPROACH:
IMMIGRANTS AND THE LABOR MARKET IN CALIFORNIA, 1960-2005.
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 16217
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16217

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

I am grateful to Will Ambrosini, David Card, Gordon Dahl, Christian Dustmann, Ethan Lewis, Leah
Platt-Bustan, Steve Raphael and participants to several seminars for suggestions. I am grateful for
the "Population Study Grant" awarded to me by the UC Davis Gifford Center and used in part to fund
the present research. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Rethinking the Area Approach:¸˛ Immigrants and the Labor Market in California, 1960-2005.
Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 16217
July 2010
JEL No. F22,J61,R23
ABSTRACT
I show that a CES production-function-based approach with skill differentiation and integrated national
labor markets has predictions for the employment effect of immigrants at the local level. The model
predicts that if I look at the employment (rather than wage) response by skill to immigration in a state,
I can estimate the substitutability-complementarity between natives and immigrants. This allows me
to infer, other things constant, how immigrants stimulate or depress the demand for native labor. I
also use a novel instrument based on demographic characteristics of total Central American migrants
or of the Mexican Population to predict immigration by skill level within California. Looking at immigration
to California between 1960 and 2005 my estimates support the assumption of a nationally integrated
labor market by skill and they support the hypothesis that natives and immigrants in the same education-experience
group are not perfectly substitutable. This, in turn, explains the counter-intuitive fact that there is a
zero correlation between immigration and wage and employment outcomes of natives.

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

The recent literature on the eﬀect of immigration on US labor markets has made important progress from
the simple area-based approach of the early studies1 . Following the lead of Borjas, Freeman and Katz (1997),
Borjas (2003) and Borjas and Katz (2007) economists have recognized that there can be small (or null) wage
eﬀects of diﬀerential immigration flows at the local level if natives respond by moving out. As a result, the
search for the wage eﬀects of immigration has been in part relocated to the national level. The recent literature
has also carefully separated workers into a finer classification of observable skills (experience and education)
and has examined the impact of national immigration on the wage of natives by skill group. The estimates of
wage eﬀects have been usually based on a nested constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production function.
This approach allows economists to estimate elasticity of substitutions and to analyze the substitutability and
complementarity of workers across skills enabling them, in turn, to calculate the eﬀects of immigrants on the
wages of natives, accounting for own- and cross-skill eﬀects (Borjas 2003, Borjas and Katz, 2007, Ottaviano and
Peri, 2008).
There is still some disagreement on the extent to which the supply of immigrant workers depresses (or
stimulates) the demand for native workers overall and within each skill group. This depends, crucially, on
the estimates of some elasticities of substitution. An important one is the substitutability between immigrant
and native workers of similar observable characteristics (see Ottaviano and Peri 2008 and Borjas, Grogger and
Hanson 2008) as that would determine to what extent immigrants compete with or are complements of native
workers of the same observable characteristics.
The national approach, however, has two weaknesses relative to the area approach and has failed, so far,
to explain one puzzle at the local level. The first weakness of the national approach is that in estimating the
wage response to immigration it makes no use of instrumental variables to proxy for supply-driven immigrant
shocks. The area approach, to the contrary, has been eminently concerned with the issue of endogeneity of
immigrants flows to wage and it has used for a long time (at least since Card 2001) the historical location
of immigrants across states by national group and the aggregate flow by nationality to impute supply-driven
immigrant changes. While the national approach includes several sets of fixed eﬀects to absorb demand shocks,
if immigrants to the US in a skill group are attracted by lingering skill-specific productivity shocks the OLS
estimates of the fundamental elasticities may still be biased. The second issue is that, by aggregating at the
national level, the variation of immigrant workers across skill groups is much reduced. By using state data one
would exploit much larger identifying variation. Finally, an unsolved issue of the national approach, as already
emphasized by Card and DiNardo (2000) and several studies after them, is that it rests on the assumption of
integrated national markets. Under such assumption, at least in the long run, native workers of a certain skill
1 E,g,

Altonji and Card (1989) or Grossman (1982).

2

(education-experience group) should move out of the area that receives a disproportionate inflow of immigrants
re-balancing the relative supply in that skill group. The failure to identify such outflow of natives by skill group
in response to immigration, combined with the very small eﬀects of immigrants on native wages by skill (found
by Card 2001, Card and DiNardo 2000 and confirmed in Card 2009) cannot be explained by a national model in
the way of Borjas (2003) or Borjas and Katz (2007). This has convinced some authors to keep considering local
labor markets (cities, states) as somewhat segmented so that local evidence on wage eﬀects is still informative
(Card 2009). The problem of explaining the lack of native employment eﬀects with imperfect labor mobility
in the long run is that the evidence relative to responses to other types of demand shocks (e.g. Blanchard and
Katz 1992) suggests a high degree of labor mobility of workers across US states in the long run.
This paper’s main contribution is to adapt the structure of the national approach to the local area analysis,
maintaining the nested CES production structure and the assumption of nationally integrated skill-specific labor
markets. I use local (California) data to estimate substitutability between native and immigrants of identical
observable characteristics. The basic estimated specification, regresses inter-census changes in native labor
inputs in California relative to the rest of the US on changes in immigrant labor inputs (also for California
relative to the rest of the US) by education-experience cells controlling for education-experience and education
year eﬀects. Several empirical papers using data from US states or cities, such as Card and DiNardo (2002),
Card (2001), Card (2007) and Card and Lewis (2007) use a similar empirical specification. A novel implication
of this framework, however, is that using this specification I can test whether the degree of complementarity
between natives and immigrant workers is diﬀerent from the degree of complementarity between workers of
diﬀerent experience groups. The principal finding of the paper is that when I perform this test, I cannot reject
that these levels of complementarity are the same. The model predicts, furthermore, that if this is true than
there should be zero correlation between immigration and native employment outcomes. This is precisely the
zero correlation observed in the data. These IV estimates are compared with the direct national estimates
from Ottaviano and Peri (2008) and Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008). The result is an estimate of the
complementarity between natives and immigrants somewhat larger than those found by those approaches.
The two results of integrated national markets for native workers and imperfect substitution with immigrants,
together, explain the puzzle of insignificant wage and employment eﬀects at the local level in response to
immigration. Intuitively this is what happens: US-born workers are perfectly mobile and would respond to wage
diﬀerentials by moving across states. The inflow of immigrants in the state, however, has two eﬀects on native
of similar education and age. On the one hand, it provides some competition that would depress their wage,
as the observable skills are similar. On the other hand, it stimulates their demand through complementarity
as their actual skills are not identical. The size of these two opposite eﬀects depend on the substitutability
between workers of diﬀerent age groups (within an education group) and on the substitutability between native

3

and immigrants within an age group. The two eﬀects are equal and oﬀ-set each other when those elasticity of
substitution are equal. Hence even with perfect mobility the inflow of migrants does not change real wages of
natives and does not trigger their cross-state migration.
Such explanation uses a framework that is perfectly compatible with the national approach using the variation
proposed by Ottaviano and Peri (2008). This paper, therefore, represents a resolution of the disparities between
the area and national approaches. The only other paper that proposes a reconciliation of the estimates of the
eﬀects of immigrants on wage and employment at the area and at the national level is Borjas (2006). In that
paper the author argues that using local markets (cities-states) as units of analysis one does not find a wage
eﬀect but only a negative employment eﬀect of immigration. To the contrary at the Census region level most of
the eﬀects of immigration are on wages. The author argues that this is due to the compensating eﬀect of native
migration, that is strongest between cities and states. My results, consistently with those of Borjas (2006) do
not identify any wage eﬀect of immigrants at the state level. However, contrary to that paper, I do not identify
any employment eﬀect at the local level either2 .
I apply my analysis to California whose recent experience with immigration makes it one of the best laboratories for testing the consequences of immigration on native wages and employment. California, in every decade
since 1960, has had immigrant inflows into its workforce of the same magnitude as those from the famous Mariel
boatlift to Miami or from the post-Communist migrations to Israel or those experienced recently by Spain3 .
As with all these cases, California poses a dramatic test of the popular notion that immigration harms natives’
employment opportunities in those labor markets where immigrants settle. And that dramatic test has an
equally dramatic resolution: there has been no systematic association between immigration and employment
outcomes of natives. By focusing on California I can also address the two limitations of the national approach.
First, the large initial share of Mexicans and Central Americans in California (relative to other states)
combined with the large total migration rates of these groups in the 1960-2005 period allows me to use an
instrument in the spirit of the enclave one proposed by Card (2001). The change in demographic structure of all
Mexican migrants (and more in general of the Mexican population) is a supply driven change in the number of
foreign-born by cell that aﬀected California more then the rest of the US. Hence I use the changes in distribution
of all Mexican and central American migrants and, even more conservatively, the change in population of
2 Most of the other empirical studies at the state and city level (Card 2001, Card 2005, Card and Lewis 2007) fail to find negative
employment eﬀects of immigrants on natives. The specification used in the employment analysis of Borjas (2006) is unusual in this
literature. It regresses native employment in an education-experience-state group on the share of immigrants in the same group. As
argued in Peri and Sparber (2008) the presence of native employment at the denominator of the explanatory variable (which equals
foreign-born employment divided by native plus foreign born employment) induces mechanically a negative correlation which is
larger the larger is the variance of native employment. This may explain the unusual negative and significant eﬀect of immigrants
on employment found by Borjas (2006).
3 California, the largest immigrant recipient over 45 years among US states, received in each decade between 1970 and 2000
an inflow of immigrants equal to 8% of its population. Miami’s working population increased by 7% in 1980 due to the Mariel
boatlift. Israel received an inflow of immigrant between 1989 and 1994 equal to 10% of its population, but much less in any other
period outside it. And Spain, the European country with largest recent immigration surge, experienced an inflow equal to 9% of
its population between 1998 and 2007, but none before and has had negative immigration since then.

4

Mexican origin across education-experience groups, obtained from the Mexican Censuses, as instruments. I
also add several diﬀerent sets of dummies to account for unobservable demand shocks. Additionally, I perform
several model and measurement related robustness checks. I use diﬀerent measures of employment and hours
worked; I group workers by skills in diﬀerent ways; I select only some decades or some skill groups; and finally,
I control for initial conditions and for lagged employment growth. While each of these specifications may be
criticized on its own, the stability of the estimated coeﬃcient of the domestic labor response to immigrants gives
me some confidence in my results.
Second, as California is the state with largest inflow of immigrants, by using its diﬀerences with the rest of
the US, I am exploiting the largest variation in the labor supplied by immigrants among the US states. Finally,
focusing on California also allows me to address another issue raised by the critics of the area approach (e.g.
Aydemir and Borjas 2007). Local area estimates, they argue, are based on less precise measures of immigrant
shares, as they include states or cities for which there are small samples. This measurement error can induce
attenuation bias in the estimated coeﬃcient of the wage regression. By limiting my analysis to California
and using IPUMS Census (and American Community Survey) data I rely on several thousands of individual
observations in each skill cell. Hence such error in measuring immigrant as share of employment (or population)
is likely to be negligible.
In the last section of the paper I compare the employment based estimate of native-immigrant substitutability
from this paper with previous estimates that are mainly based on national wage regressions. I provide some
explanation to reconcile the diﬀerences and I review some reasons proposed by the literature for the imperfect
substitution between natives and immigrants. I also consider alternative explanations for the small wage and
employment eﬀect of immigrants. Namely, immigrants may improve eﬃciency of production by improving skill
to task matches or by encouraging the adoption of technologies appropriate to the skill group. Lewis (2005)
and Peri (2009) pursue these alternative productivity channels to explain the lack of negative labor market
eﬀects of immigrants. I also show, for completeness, what is the implication of the estimated immigrant-native
substitutability on simulated national eﬀect of immigrants on wages over the period 1990-2005.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical model and the derived
empirical framework used to analyze the eﬀect of immigration on the labor demand for natives. Section 3
describes the data on immigration, employment and wages in California, relative to the rest of the US, and
presents some tendencies and facts. Section 4 tests the hypothesis of integrated national markets by skill.
Section 5 presents the estimates of the main parameter of interest—the eﬀect of immigration on employment
of US-born workers in California— and derives the implications for the substitutability between natives and
immigrants. Section 6 reconciles this estimates with those obtained using the direct method at the national
level and other empirical evidence. I also present some alternative explanations proposed in the literature for

5

the null eﬀect of immigration on local employment and wages. Section 7 derives the implications of my estimates
for the national eﬀects of immigration on wages. Section 8 provides some concluding remarks.

2

The Framework: National Labor Markets and Local Employment
Response

Let me consider a smaller economy California () and a larger economy, the rest of the US ( ), whose labor
markets are integrated in the sense that workers can move between them. The subscript  will indicate one of
this two economies. Total output in California (or the rest US),   is tradable, it is the numeraire good and
it is produced by combining Labor,  , Physical Capital,  and Productivity  . The function used is the
popular Cobb-Douglas production function, with elasticity of output to capital equal to :

 1−
 =  


(1)

The recent literature using the national approach considers the aggregate labor input  as a nested CES
combination of labor inputs by workers with diﬀerentiated skills. The relevant skills are education, and potential
experience, (or age) plus the attribute of being foreign-born or US-born. Consistently with Ottaviano and Peri
(2008) I assume that cells diﬀering by each category of skill are separate and nested into a cell in the upper
category. The type of nest used is illustrated in Figure 1, and generalizes the model in Borjas (2003) following
the specification preferred in Ottaviano and Peri (2008). The partitions into groups, from the more general
to the more specific category are as follow. There are two broad education groups (  for High and Low);
within each of them I allow for two education () sub-groups (No degree and High School Graduates within
 and Some College and College Graduates within ). Then within each education sub-group I nest 8 potential
experience groups () dividing into 5-year-intervals the range from 0 to 40 years of experience. Finally
within each education-experience group I separate immigrants and natives4 . At each level of the nest I allow
for constant elasticity of substitution across groups in the category, the notation for these elasticities is shown
on the right part of Figure 1. I also allow for diﬀerences in the relative productivity of each group at each level
of the nest. From such production function I derive the marginal productivity of native and immigrant workers
in each cell5 .
The marginal productivity (  ) of each worker depends on the productivity parameters and on the supply
of labor in each other skill group. When the supply of workers in California or the rest of the US changes for
4 I also maintain the possibility of a segmentation by gender by considering males and females in separate and then combined
estimations.
5 Appendix A shows the exact expressions for the production function and the formulas (and simplifications) needed to obtain
the marginal productivity of labor of skill .

6

any reason (say a symmetric immigration from the rest of the world) the marginal productivity of each worker
changes as well. The total diﬀerential of the logarithmic   of a native worker of skill  = (   ) in
location  in response to a variation of labor supply in all other skill groups in location  can be simplified
(thanks to the nested CES structure) into the following expression:


∆ 

 

!

∆
=  +  −
−
−
 + 
 
 


!
¶Ã
µ

∆
1
1
1
−
+
− ∆ ln 
 + 
 
 
κ 


µ

1

¶Ã

1

(2)

where  and  are complicated function of all labor input changes but they only vary, for each
economy  over time and over education by time, respectively. The parameters   and   are, respectively, the constant elasticity of substitution between workers of diﬀerent experience levels and between workers
of diﬀerent native status (i.e. foreign-born and US-born). The terms


∆
 + 



and


∆
 +  capture



respectively

the change in labor inputs by immigrants ( as in foreign) and natives ( as in domestic) as a percentage of
the initial employment of skill group  in location . κ is the average share of wage bill to natives and ∆ ln 
is the change in productivity specific to group  in location 
I now assume that the wage of each group in each location  equals its marginal productivity   .
Moreover, in the long run, workers of each skill group  move between locations in order to eliminate diﬀerences
in wages6 so that ln  = ln   which also implies, taking the diﬀerentials in the long-run, the following
equality


∆



=


∆




Using the equality between wages and marginal products and expression 2 for each

location the wage equalization condition gives the following simple expression:

e
e +
0=

 −

µ

1
 

−

1
 

¶Ã

]
∆

 + 

!

−

µ

1
 

−

1
 

+

1
κ 

¶Ã

^
∆

 + 

!

− ∆ ln e


(3)

In expression 3 the tildee above a variable means that it is taken in diﬀerence between the  and the  
values. Hence, for instance,


]
∆
∆
=


 +
 +

∆ 


−   +
 . It expresses the percentage change in labor inputs




(employment or hours worked) of type  due to the inflow of immigrants in California vis-a-vis the rest of the
US. Similarly,

^
∆

 +

represents the change in labor inputs in skill group  due to changes in natives relative

to the initial inputs in the group for California vis-a-vis the rest of the US. From (3) I can solve for

^
∆

 + :

6 In Appendix B I show how the model would change if one assumes movement of workers in response to wage diﬀerentials but
not perfect movement (i.e. not to fully equalize wages). This would correspond to a case with upward sloping (not horizontal) labor
supply. I will show how expression 3 is modified to include the elasticity of supply and how the interpretation of the estimated
parameters is only slightly changed.

7

assuming that the term ∆ ln e
 is a relative skill-specific random technology shock uncorrelated with the inflow
of immigrants (  ) and I can re-write equation (3) in the following form:
^
]
∆
∆


= Φ + Φ + 
+  
 + 
 + 

where  = −

  −  
¢
¡
 
 + 1−κ
κ

(4)

Equation (4) is the basis of my empirical analysis. It provides an interpretation in terms of the elasticity
parameters for a simple “employment" regression that, in similar form, has been estimated in other studies (e.g.
Card 2001, Card and DiNardo, 2000, Card and Lewis 2007). The terms Φ and Φ

7

capture the eﬀects on

the overall aggregate labor input and on the education-specific labor input. Thanks to the nested CES form
the term Φ absorbs all the marginal productivity eﬀects due to labor input changes in the same education
group and the term Φ absorbs all the productivity eﬀects from changes in inputs in other education groups
as well as the eﬀects of capital mobility to equate the rate of returns of capital between California and the
rest of the US. The random disturbance   as noted above is a California-specific, skill-specific productivity
shock. I allow this shock to have a systematic time component and an education-time-specific component8 . In
order to estimate  consistently the remaining variation of   needs to be uncorrelated with
instrumental variable approach, one needs to use as an instrument a portion of the variation

]
∆
 + or, in the
]
∆
of  +
that is


uncorrelated with the relative productivity-demand shock of a skill group in California relative to the rest of
the US.
The coeﬃcient of interest,  can therefore be estimated in a regression of the change in the labor supply of
natives (relative to the initial total supply in the skill group) on the change in supply due to immigrants (also
relative to the initial supply) instrumented with a purely supply-driven change in immigrants. Both variables
are expressed for California relative to the rest of the US level; the unit of observations are the changes for 32
skill (education by experience) groups over the periods 1960-70, 1970-80, 1980-90, 1990-2000 and 2000-2005.
The important feature of equation 4 is that the parameter  has an interpretation in terms of   relative
to   9  First, if natives and immigrants are perfectly substitutable within the group (   = ∞) then I
would observe  = −1 independently of the value of   (as long as it is finite) The traditional literature
has called this case the “full crowding-out" case, in which one immigrant displaces exactly one native. Second,
since the denominator of  is always positive the sign of the eﬀect is determined by whether immigrants and
natives are more or less substitutable than workers with diﬀerent experience levels. If   =   then one
would estimate that  = 0 This case has been called in the empirical literature the "no crowding out" situation


1
 and 


terms are equal to 
− 1
+ κ 1

 divided by
 


8 As the exact expression of the terms Φ and Φ
is
complicated
I
will
absorb
them
into a set of time eﬀects and of education


by time eﬀects. Those fixed eﬀects will also absorb the variation of the systematic components of technological shocks.
9 Remember that I absorb any systematic variation by education group over time (Φ
 ) by using the set of fixed eﬀects. This
implies that neither the elasticity of substitution between education groups nor any other "higher level elasticity" (such as that one
between capital and labor) aﬀect the estimate of the coeﬃcient 
7 These

8

and occurs in my framework when immigrants and natives in a group substitute for each other to the same
extent as workers of diﬀerent experience levels. Alternatively, if immigrants and natives are closer substitutes
than workers with diﬀerent experience levels (    ), but not perfect substitutes, one would obtain
a negative value of  but smaller than one in absolute value. This is usually referred to as "partial crowding
out". Finally, if natives and immigrants are less substitutable than workers of diﬀerent experience levels then
one would obtain a positive estimate of  This would be called "crowding in". As there are several estimates
of  for the US available from the literature (Welch 1979, Card and Lemieux 2001, Borjas 2003, Ottaviano
and Peri 2008), and since the average κ is measurable one can identify the values of   implied by the
estimates of  from equation 4.

3

Immigration to California: Data

The inflow of the foreign-born into California over the period 1960-2005 has been remarkable. Using data from
the IPUMS for Censuses 1960 (1% sample), 1970 (1% sample), 1980 (5% sample), 1990 (5% sample), 2000 (5%
sample) and 2005 (ACS, 1% sample), I measure that the California population between 18 and 65 years of age
grew during those 45 years by 12.3 million people. Of these, natives had a net increase of 5.8 million while
foreign-born grew by 6.5 million. Among the foreign-born (identified as individuals born abroad without US
citizenship at birth) a net increase of 4 million was due to immigrants from Mexico and Central America. Hence
more than half of the net adult population growth in California over the period 1960-2005 was due to immigrants
and a 30% of it was due to Mexican and Central American immigrants. The evolution of immigrants as a share
of total employment in California vis-a-vis the entire US10 is shown in Figure 2, and the actual percentage
values, together with their breakdown by education group, are shown in Table A111 . Immigrants went from
9% (in 1960) to 36% (in 2005) of total employment in California while the corresponding percentages in the
US were 5% (in 1960) and 16% (in 2005)12 . Even more remarkably, Table A1 shows that the percentage of
immigrants in the group of workers with no high school diploma went from 12% to 78% in California (versus an
increase from 6% to 42% for the US as a whole). More than four fifth of this remarkable 66% increase was due
to the inflow of Mexican and Central American workers. By all accounts California experienced the extent and
type of immigration that many portray as disruptive to the job opportunities of natives, especially for native
workers with low levels of education. By way of comparison, the industrialized countries that experienced the
largest concentrated increase in employment due to immigrants in recent times where Israel that experienced an
1 0 The absolute number of immigrant and total employment in US and California is shown in Figures A1 and A2 in the Tables
and Figures Appendix.
1 1 I consider as "employed" those individuals between 18 and 65 year of age who worked at least one week in the reference year.
Moreover, I restrict the sample to those individuals with not more than 40 years of potential experience.
1 2 If compared to any OECD country in 2005, California had the largest share of foreign -born population (33%) relative to any
of them except Luxembourg (34%).

9

increase of population by 10% between 1989 and 1994 and Spain that experienced an increase of population of
8% due to immigrants between 1998 and 2008. California received an inflow comparable to those (as percentage
of population) in each of the decades between 1970 and 2000. Hence, if there is a US state, or an economy in
the world, where the labor market consequences of immigration should have been dramatic, California clearly
qualifies. California, however, is also an open labor market vis-a-vis the rest of the United States. Every
decade gross flows equal to more than 20 percent of its population move across its border to and from other
states. Hence, it would be very reasonable to expect that, in spite of these massive inflows of immigrant
workers, unevenly distributed across skill groups, the wages of natives in each skill group are not very diﬀerent
in California than in the rest of the country. This does not mean that there are no eﬀects of immigrants on
the labor demand for natives. Native workers may move in response to immigrant inflows and thereby equate
wages across the national market. As I have shown in section 2 the labor demand consequences of immigration
on native workers in an open labor market are captured through employment, rather than wage, eﬀects. I now
check that the data on wages by skill group are consistent with this “national labor market" assumption.

4

Testing the National Market Hypothesis

I begin with some simple evidence on correlations. I measure the percentage change in native wages for the
education-experience groups defined in section 2 over each inter-census period (1960-2000) plus 2000-2005, for
g  ( + ), the
California relative to the rest of the US. This variable is ∆
e 
e 13 . I plot this against ∆

increase in immigrant labor supply in the same skill group () over the same inter-census plus 2000-2005 periods,
divided by initial labor supply in the group (also relative to the US aggregate) The scatter-plot produced is
reported in Figure 3. It suggests no correlation at all (the point estimate is slightly positive and not significant)
between native wage changes and immigration rates by cell-decade.
Table 1 explores more systematically the proposition that there is no correlation between native wage changes
and inflows of immigrants at the skill-group level which is at the heart of the national integrated market
assumption. I run the following weighted least squares regression, using as weights the employment size of each
cell:
]
∆
e
∆

=  +  + 
+ 

e
 + 

(5)

In specification (5) I control for education-experience eﬀects  as well as education-time eﬀects  in
1 3 The average wage by education-experience group in each year is calculated by averaging the weekly wage of all working
individuals that are not self-employed, each one weighted by the number of hours worked times his sample weight (PERWT).
The definition of the four education groups, eight experience groups and the selection of working individuals along with the exact
procedure adopted to calculate the wages is identical to Ottaviano and Peri (2008). The Appendix to that paper describing the
details of data selection and econometric implementation.

10

order to allow for wage trends depending on skill type and common decade eﬀects by education group.  is a
zero-mean, random error uncorrelated with the explanatory variable. In the simplest specification (Column 1
of Table 1) I omit the fixed eﬀects, in column (2) I include them, in column (3) I limit the regressions to cells
containing workers with a high school degree or less, and in the last column, (4), I do not weight by cell size.
Each entry in Table 1 reports the estimates of the coeﬃcient  from regression 5 and the rows diﬀer by the
]
∆


measure used for labor supply changes (  +
) which is based, alternatively, on hours worked, employment or


population. Moreover, the top part of the table only includes male workers while the bottom part includes males
and females. The results could not be clearer. The estimated coeﬃcient is always very small, precisely estimated
and not diﬀerent from zero. The estimated correlations are consistent with the idea that even extremely large
inflows of immigrants into a skill cell (for California relative to the US average) have not been associated with
any significant wage change for native California workers relative to native workers across the rest of the US.
For instance, taking the estimates of Column 2 ( =0.02), which use hours worked to measure supply, I find
that an inflow of immigrants into a skill group equal to 60% of the group’s initial employment, which is the
largest observed data point for the whole period across cells, would be associated with a deviation in the wages
of California native workers (relative to US workers) of about 1% (and positive!). More ordinary inflows would
be associated with essentially no wage deviations. This is consistent with national labor markets, by skill, that
are perfectly integrated at least in the long run (over decades).

4.1

Instruments and 2SLS estimation

The OLS estimates of  produced above show no correlation between the change in immigrant labor input
and native wage changes across skill groups in California relative to the rest of the US. One concern is that,
in spite of the fixed eﬀects accounting for systematic education-by-year and skill-group specific eﬀects there
might still be some lingering changes in the productivity of specific age-education groups in California that are
correlated with inflow of immigrants. To reduce these concerns I use an instrumental variable strategy in this
and in the next section. California had a sizable community of Mexicans and Central Americans as of 1960
because of its proximity to that region and due to the Bracero program (1942-1964) that attracted agricultural
workers. The inflow of those groups of immigrants increased greatly over the considered period, especially
during the 1980’s and 1990’s. Those migrants, from Mexico and Central America had a particular age and
education distribution. For instance a “baby boom" generation was hitting the labor market in Mexico in the
1980’s and 1990’s and less educated workers did not have good job opportunities in Mexico (see Hanson and
McIntosh, 2009). As a result, total emigration of Mexican and Central American workers was characterized by
a specific age-education distribution: many young, poorly-educated workers emigrated while few middle-aged,
better-educated individuals did. This wave of emigrants from Mexico and Central America aﬀected California

11

disproportionately relative to the rest of the US because of the preferences of incoming immigrants to join
already existing communities of Latin Americans. In the spirit of the “enclave" instrument used in Card (2001),
Card (2009), and several other papers, I instrument the immigrant inflow to California (relative to the rest of
the US) by skill-cell in each decade with the distribution by skill-cell of Mexican-Central American migrants to
(+)

the US as a whole. In particular I construct the following variable

∆
(+)



( +)

+

The numerator measures

the net inflow of Mexican and Central American migrants in the whole US for a certain education-experience 
in decade . This inflow is standardized by the total initial population for the whole US in that group.
To the extent that the skill-distribution of all migrants from Mexico and Central America to the US was not
aﬀected by the skill-specific labor demand of California relative to the US, the instrument would capture a pure
supply shock as it will be correlated with the inflow of immigrants to California only through the demographics
of Mexican and Central American emigrants.
Table 2 reports the estimates of  using 2SLS methods with diﬀerent measures of labor supply (population,
employment and hours worked) considering alternatively all workers or males only for exactly the same specifications as the last three columns of Table 1. The lower part of the table shows the first stage coeﬃcient and
F-test of the instrument, and confirms that the instrument (Inflow of Mexican and Central American immigrants in the US as share of the population in the cell) is working in the correct direction and is relatively strong
(F-stats above 14). The scatter-plot in Figure A3 of the "Tables and Figures Appendix" shows that there is a
clear positive correlation between the instrument and the dependent variable by cell and decade. The following
scatter-plot in the figure appendix (Figure A4) is meant to confirm that the above correlation is not driven by
skill-specific demand pull factors shared by California and the US. In fact when I consider European immigrants
to the US (that likely shared the same US-wide pull factors but did not have specific age-education push factors
of the Mexican-Central American immigrants) I observe no correlation between their inflow and the relative
immigration to California by skill. Table 2 shows that, using 2SLS, the point estimates of the parameter  are
still always very small (ranging between -0.02 and 0.10) and insignificantly diﬀerent from 0. The standard errors
are larger than in Table 1 but still rather small on average (around 0.10). Even in this case I can never reject the
assumption of 0 wage eﬀect of immigrants which is consistent with nationally integrated labor markets. Hence,
the assumption incorporated in equation 3 stands and will be maintained throughout the rest of the analysis.

5
5.1

The Response of Native Employment to Immigrants
Basic Specification

The main goal of this empirical section is to estimate the coeﬃcient  in equation 4. As discussed above,
this coeﬃcient can be smaller than, equal to, or larger than zero depending on the size of the elasticity of

12

substitution between natives and immigrants (of similar skills) relative to the elasticity between workers in
diﬀerent experience groups. Before navigating the details of the empirical estimation, let me provide a simple
figure that conveys the basic result, which will be confirmed time and again by more demanding specifications
and 2SLS estimation techniques. Figure 4 presents a scatter-plot of the changes of immigrant employment as
percentage of the skill group (horizontal axis) and the change in native employment (vertical axis) also as a
percentage of the group, by cell and decade for California relative to the rest of the US. The figure demonstrates
that there is essentially no correlation whatsoever between the native and immigrant employment change. This
is, ultimately, what accounts for the zero coeﬃcient that will be estimated below. Moreover, the variation in
native employment growth (ranging between -50% and +50% of group employment) is larger than the variation
in immigrant employment (ranging between -20% and +40%). This, mechanically, implies that the standard
errors of the estimates will be relatively large.
The possibility of estimating  consistently rests on my ability to control for all the factors that may
induce a systematic correlation between the inflow of immigrants

]
∆
 +

and the productivity shock ∆ ln e


in equation (3) Only if the error is uncorrelated with the explanatory variable are the OLS estimates of 
consistent. In Table 3 I first present the estimates of  resulting from a simple OLS regression of
]
∆
 +

^
∆

 +

on

in Column 1. Then in column 2 I add the education by year eﬀects which absorb the terms Φ and

Φ of equation 4 and the education by experience eﬀect that capture any skill-specific employment trend.
I run these regressions using hours worked, employment or population as measures of labor supply and also,
alternatively, on male workers only (in the top panel) or on male and female together (in the bottom panel). All
specifications, except for one, produce an estimate of  not significantly diﬀerent from zero. Nine out of twelve
point estimates are positive. The estimates that include fixed eﬀects (column 2) are systematically smaller than
the “simple" estimates in column 1. This may indicate that without controlling for systematic California-specific,
skill-specific demand shocks one may obtain, spuriously, a slightly positive employment eﬀect. If there is some
persistence in demand shocks, captured by the lagged native-employment growth, one should also include that
lagged dependent variable in the regression. This is what I do in specification (3) and I still obtain estimates
of  insignificantly diﬀerent from zero14 . In order to inquire whether more recent immigration had a diﬀerent
eﬀect, I estimated specification (5) restricted to post-1980 years. Finally in (6) I did not weight cells for their
employment size. Both specifications still produce very small estimates of  in absolute value, never statistically
diﬀerent from zero. It is worth mentioning that specification (4), where the sample is restricted to include only
cells of less educated workers (defined as those with an high school degree or less) generates positive estimates
that are mostly significant at the 5% level. This implies (if the coeﬃcient estimate can be confirmed in other
specifications) that for cells with less educated workers, immigrants are even less substitutable with natives than
1 4 And

I do not find any significant correlation of change in immigrant employment by skill between decades.

13

in cells with high education levels. A value of  = 0 can be taken to be the "focal point" for my parameter
estimates as it is almost never rejected by a formal t-test. I remind the reader that most existing estimates of the
elasticity of substitution   across age groups (experience groups) for the US national market range between
4 and 14. More precisely, Welch (1979) (Table 9 page 90) estimates the elasticity of substitution between US
white male workers of diﬀerent experience groups and finds it to be between 4 and 12 (using one-year cells).
Card and Lemieux (2001) estimate an elasticity ranging from 4 to 10 (Table V of Card and Lemieux, 2001)
between US workers of diﬀerent experience groups (five-year cells). Borjas (2003) estimates an elasticity of
3.5 between US workers of diﬀerent experience groups (five-year cells). Ottaviano and Peri (2008) estimate an
elasticity ranging from 6.25 to 14 (Ottaviano and Peri 2008, Table 6) between US workers of diﬀerent experience
groups (five-year cells). The formula of equation 4 and my estimates therefore imply a similar range for   
the elasticity between natives and immigrants. In particular, I can always rule out perfect substitutability across
age groups (   = ∞ which would imply  = −1) while I never rule out   =   . I will discuss
and compare this range with the direct measures of   in section 6.

5.2

2SLS Estimation and Mexican Demographics

The magnitude and pattern of the 2SLS point-estimates reported in Table 4 is very similar to the OLS ones. In
Table 4 I use the inflow of Mexican and Central American migrants to the whole US by cell, described in section
4.1, as instrument. The preferred specification with all fixed eﬀects (column 2) shows for any measure and any
sample an insignificant (usually positive) estimate of . Including lagged native employment changes (column 3)
or excluding the older period (column 5) or dropping the regression weights does not change the estimates much.
The estimates with no fixed eﬀects tend to be positive and often significant, indicating the potential presence of
decade-specific, education-specific demand shocks in California correlated with the inflow of foreigners. However,
once fixed eﬀects are introduced the point estimates are very close to zero. The estimates including only less
educated workers tend to be positive indicating, possibly, a larger complementarity of immigrants to natives in
these groups. The 2SLS results thus uphold the findings of Table 3, confirming that an estimate of  = 0 cannot
be rejected in most cases (and when it can be rejected, the preferred alternative is   0). In Table 5 I push the
instrument a step further. I introduce estimates that use an instrument that is purely driven by the relative size
of age-education groups born in Mexico relative to the corresponding group in the US. In particular, to avoid
any lingering pull-eﬀect of the Californian economy on immigrants of diﬀerent skills I construct the following
variable as instrument:

∆
 +

 The variable ∆  is the decade-change in population in skill group

 of Mexican-born currently residing in Mexico or the US. This variable is obtained adding up residents of
Mexico (constructed from the Mexican Census micro data available at the international IPUMS, Ruggles et
al 2006) and Mexicans in the US and captures changes in the potential pool of migrants in the group, purely

14

driven by Mexican demographics. This cell-composition of Mexican-born population only aﬀects immigration
to California if the variation in size of the potential pool of Mexicans in each cell is correlated with actual
size of actual migrants to California by cell. As long as demographics in Mexico did not depend on California
skill-specific productivity shocks at the time a group is in the labor market, the instrument variation should be
completely exogenous and demography-driven15 . Table 5 show the estimates of  when using this instrument.
First, let me notice that the instrument is correlated with the endogenous variable but the correlation is not
too strong (the F-stats in the last row range from 2.31 to 11.4), especially when used with the fixed eﬀects16 .
Hence the standard errors of the estimates tend to be large and weak instrument bias may also be present17 .
However, neither when excluding fixed eﬀects (Column 1) nor when including them (Column 2) nor when I
consider only less educated workers (Column 3) can I find any negative and significant estimate of . In general
the estimate is positive and not significant. While the standard errors are sometimes as large as 1.1 I can never
reject a value of  = 0 in the estimates with fixed eﬀects. This implies again that the elasticity of substitution
between natives and immigrants is equal to the estimated elasticity of substitution between workers of diﬀerent
experience groups.

5.3

Eﬀect on Black Native Workers

It is interesting to analyze specifically the employment eﬀects of immigrants on African American workers.
African Americans are more concentrated in the skill-groups (young and less educated) most aﬀected by the
inflow of immigrants. Furthermore, their occupations and jobs are intensive in manual and physical tasks (as
pointed out in Peri and Sparber 2009) and this group may be in more direct competition with immigrants.
Hence I estimate the same regression 4 using the same specifications and variable definitions as in Table 4,
but restricting the measure of native employment change to African-American employment. Figure A6, in the
Tables and Figures Appendix, shows the scatter-plot of changes in African American employment by decade
(as a percentage of initial cell employment) versus the change in immigrant employment as a percentage of
initial cell-employment. In every cell and decade the changes in employment of African Americans in California
are much smaller than changes in immigrant employment and also there is no apparent correlation (possibly a
small positive one) between the two variables. Table 6 shows the estimates of  using the same specifications
and methods as in Table 4, but using the employment change of African Americans relative to the total initial
employment as the dependent variable. In particular, all estimates use the 2SLS method with the age-education
1 5 By

including education by period eﬀect I eﬀectively identify the coeﬃcients on variations across age groups within an education

cell.
1 6 Figure A5 in the Tables and Figure Appendix shows the scatter-plot of the instrument based on Mexican-Born population and
the explanatory variable based on total inflow of immigrants in California (relative to rest of the US). The correlation is clearly
positive but not too strong.
1 7 I also performed a LIML estimation, more robust to the issue of weak instruments, obtaining very similar point estimates and
only marginally larger standard errors.

15

composition of Mexican-Central American immigration to the US as an instrument for the immigrant inflow
by cell into California relative to the US. Consistent with the previous results, in the specifications including
fixed eﬀects and all skill groups the estimates of  are insignificantly diﬀerent from zero. In the case with no
fixed eﬀects (Column 1) or in the specification including less educated workers only (Column 4), the parameter
 is actually estimated to be positive and significant, between 0.10 and 0.20. The estimated eﬀects on African
Americans are even more convincing in ruling out a crowding-out of native employment by immigrants. In fact,
the point estimates are never smaller than -0.002 and the standard errors are between 0.03 and 0.09, which
implies that in most cases I can reject at the 5% level any negative eﬀect of immigrants on native employment
larger (in absolute value) than -0.1. In contrast, in several instances I cannot rule out positive eﬀects on the
order of 0.2-0.3. The response of African American employment to immigrants with similar age and education,
much like the response of all natives, does not exhibit any evidence of even mild crowding out. Applying the
interpretation from my model, based on the existence of a national labor market and mobility of natives in the
long-run18 , this implies that immigrants and natives are not perfect substitutes within a skill group but their
degree of substitution is similar to that of natives with diﬀerent experience levels. By choosing a conservatively
high value of the elasticity of substitution across age group, such as 10, and the 0 estimate of  prevailing in
this section, I will therefore consider an estimate of   = 10 as reasonable and supported by my empirical
evidence.

6

Explanations and Comparison with National Estimates

Summarizing the results of section 5, I can say that the inflow of immigrants to California within a certain
education-age cell stimulated the demand for native labor of that type enough that the jobs taken by immigrants
did not crowd out any jobs for natives. In fact, it is possible that the net eﬀect was a small amount of net job
creation for natives (especially in cells with low education) while I never found a net job-destruction eﬀect for
natives. Interpreting the results in light of the model in section 2 and summarized in equation 4, there are, in
fact, two possible explanations for this phenomenon. The first, which I have privileged so far, is that immigrants
and natives are not perfect substitutes in production, so that other things equal the inflow of immigrants not
only aﬀects the supply of that type of worker, but also positively aﬀects the marginal productivity (and demand)
for the native workers within that skill group. Given my controls for education-year eﬀects, if the degree of
substitutability between immigrants and natives is equal to that between natives of diﬀerent age groups, the
implied push in demand for natives exactly compensates the increased competition from immigrants in the same
age-education cell implying no employment eﬀect.
1 8 I also tested and never rejected the assumption that the wage changes of black native workers (in California relative to the rest
of the nation) are uncorrelated with immigration shocks. I used the same regressions, with wages of black workers as dependent
variable, as those of section 4 for all US-born workers.

16

An alternative possibility, however, is that the skill-specific productivity shock ∆ ln e
 , captured in equation

4 by the random error   is, in actuality, systematically positively correlated with the inflow of immigrants for
some structural reason, even after I control for the education by time and education-experience eﬀects. Following
the insight of Lewis (2005) it may be the case that by receiving large inflow of immigrants in some skill cells
(say among young and low educated) local economies such as California adopt technologies more eﬃcient in
the use of those skills benefiting productivity of all workers in that skill group, through an increase in ln e
 .
Alternatively, following the idea proposed in Peri and Sparber (2009), it may be the case that in education-age

cells with many immigrants the manual-physical skills are particularly abundant relative to communicationinteractive skills because immigrants have a comparative advantage in them. Hence in those cells, natives
specialize in communication tasks (hence the imperfect substitution) also improving skill-specific productivity,

∆


∆



ln e
  In such cases, the estimated coeﬃcient in the regression of  +
on the variable  +
would actually


³
´

∆ ln 
1
capture  + 1−
 This includes the term reflecting the native-immigrant elasticity of substitution  as

∆ ln 


∆ ln 


well as the productivity eﬀect of the inflow of immigrants ∆ ln   In this section I review the estimates of  


from California employment and compare them with the direct evidence, from wage data. The indirect evidence
presented so far (based on employment changes) suggests that   ≈   ≈ 10 (possibly as low as 4 or as

large as 14). I also present some stylized statistics that may indicate, following the specialization-productivity
theory, that immigrants into California also stimulated specialization and productivity.

This may represent

part of the explanation for the absence of crowding-out, i.e., a positive contribution from the

6.1

∆ ln 


∆ ln 

eﬀect.

Previous Estimates

There are three sets of recent estimates of the parameter   from the existing literature for the US. One is
from Ottaviano and Peri (2008) who use a national panel of 32 education-experience groups and Census years
between 1960 and 2000 plus 2006 and obtain values that cluster around   = 20 (from their Table 2, Basic
Specification). The second set is from Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) who use a similar methodology and
the national approach, but control for a larger set of fixed eﬀects and obtain, in general,    30 often not
significantly diﬀerent from infinity The third is from Card (2009) who uses cross-sectional city data in year 2000
and finds values ranging from 16 to 50, with most estimates around 25 and significantly diﬀerent from infinity.
In each of these estimates native and immigrants of identical education and experience groups are found to be
closer substitutes than what implied by the estimates of section 5 which, as I said above, are consistent with a
value of   = 10
All previous estimates are based on regressions of the following type:

ln(   ) =      +  ln(  ) + 

17

(6)

where   and  are, respectively, the wages of immigrants and natives in education-experience group
 and  and  are their respective employment. Expression 6 is consistent with a production function
(labor demand side) as in section 2, and if the variation of ln(  ) is purely driven by exogenous supply
1
shifts (and uncorrelated with relative productivity shocks) then the estimates of  would be equal to − 
.

However, as I showed in that same section 2 above, if the supply of native workers responds as they move across
states to equate wage diﬀerentials, even if one identifies exogenous changes of  , the responses of  and 
would systematically contribute to biasing towards zero the correlation between ln(   ) and ln(  )
Hence direct estimates of  based on local data (as Card 2009) will be systematically biased towards a zero
1
coeﬃcient and not consistently identifying − 
. On the other hand, national estimates of an equation

like (6) may suﬀer from another problem. In this case national employment by skill is not likely to change
in response to immigrants. However foreign workers in the US as a whole may be systematically attracted by
unobserved pull factors that increase their wages relative to that of similar natives. This would tend to generate
a systematic positive correlation between ln(  ) and the residual relative productivity term  in equation
(6). This introduces a positive bias in the estimate of  As that coeﬃcient is smaller than 0 the positive bias
will reduce the absolute value of the estimate, giving the impression of a smaller value of

1
 

and hence

larger substitutability than there really is between native and immigrants. Hence my renewed "area" approach,
accounting for the labor supply response of natives in a nationally integrated labor market and amenable to
the use of instruments, orthogonal to area-specific productivity shocks, addresses the problems whose solution
has eluded previous approaches and produces an interesting alternative estimate of the important parameter
  

6.2

Specialization in tasks and productivity eﬀects

There are potential mechanisms that may create a correlation between the inflow of immigrants in a state,
 
∆
 +

and the productivity change of the skill group ∆ ln e
 . I illustrate a mechanism and some stylized

evidence that supports the idea that production in California responded to immigration with eﬃcient specializ-

ation of natives in production tasks, thereby enhancing the productivity of those skill cells with larger inflows
of immigrants. In this case the lack of negative employment eﬀects would be in part due to improvement of
productivity for the whole skill group and not only to imperfect substitution between immigrants and natives.
Peri and Sparber (2009) show that among less educated workers immigrants in the last forty years have increasingly specialized in manual-intensive occupations, pushing natives to take communication-intensive jobs.
Such a reallocation mechanism, based on the productive comparative advantages of each group of workers, has
been eﬃcient. They show that the complementarity between the two types of tasks and the eﬃciency gains
from the reallocation enhanced the productivity and wages of natives. California is shown to have experienced

18

immigration inflows and reallocation of natives into communication tasks to the largest extent. Figure 5, based
on the data from Peri and Sparber (2009) updated to 2005, shows the strong and positive correlation between
the share of immigrants among less educated workers and the degree of specialization of native workers in
occupations with high Communication relative to Manual skills across 50 US states. The vertical axis of the
graph reports the average use of Communication relative to Manual skills for native workers in a state, imputed
by aggregating individual occupation data weighted by the intensity of Manual and Communication content of
the occupations (as measured by the O*NET variables). The horizontal axis reports the share of immigrants
among workers with a high school degree or less. The observation for California shows the highest concentration
of immigrants and the second highest specialization of natives in communication tasks, emphasizing that the
specialization mechanism was at its strongest in California. Moreover Peri (2009) shows that, across US states,
large immigration is associated (possibly causally) with higher total factor productivity growth, and particularly
high growth in the productivity (eﬃciency) of workers with low education levels. Figure 6, based on data from
Peri (2009) shows in fact that the total factor productivity in California has been larger and has grown faster relative to the national average, especially in the decades of highest immigration (1980’s and 1990’s). While these
are only aggregate correlations they are compatible with the idea that the large immigration flows produced a
particularly large task specialization in California and this was associated with more eﬃcient organization of
production and consequently higher productivity. These mechanisms suggest that when

 
∆
 +

was large for a

skill group and/or a period, ∆ ln e
 was also large for that group and/or period. Hence, the expected negative

impact of immigration on the employment of natives of similar skills, which would occur in an open economy

where native and immigrants are perfect substitutes, does not occur in part due to imperfect substitutability
between the two groups and in part because of positive productivity eﬀects of immigration on the skill group.

7

Implication of the Estimates on National Wages

The identification of the substitutability between native and immigrant workers of similar education and age
using California data allows me to calculate the wage eﬀects of immigrants nationally. As illustrated previously
in Borjas (2003), Borjas and Katz (2007) and Ottaviano and Peri (2008), the knowledge of the elasticity of
substitutions between groups in a nested CES model and the knowledge of inflow of immigrants over a certain
period allow for the calculation of the eﬀects on marginal products (wages) of native workers in each education
and experience group. So using the CES nested model described in section 2, the elasticity estimates for
education and experience groups consistent with the existing literature19 and the inflow of immigrants to the
1 9 In particular I choose the elasticity of substitution between more educated () and less educated () equal to 1.5. This is close
to the value in Katz and Murphy (1992). I choose the elasticity of substitution between education sub-group within  and  to be
equal equal to 10, which is compatible with Ottaviano and Peri (2008) and Goldin and Katz (2008). Finally I choose the elasticity
of substitution between experience groups to be equal to 10, which is in the high estimated range of Card and Lemieux (2001) and
Ottaviano and Peri (2008). These values are reported in Table 7.

19

US as observed in the 1990-2005 period I calculate the percentage eﬀects on native wages (by education group)
and wages of immigrants (also by group).

Tables 7 shows these calculated long-run eﬀects20 . In particular

the goal of the exercise is to show the diﬀerence in wage eﬀects between the case of perfect native-immigrants
substitutability (Column 1) and the case supported by the evidence of section 5 where   = 10 (column
3) and two cases situated at the extremes of the plausible range compatible with section 5 estimates, namely
  = 20 and   = 6 (Columns 2 and 4).
The main two diﬀerences in the calculated eﬀects between column 1 and 3 are easily described. First with
imperfect substitution the eﬀect on wages of all native workers are small and actually positive. In particular
the least educated native workers who would suﬀer a wage loss of 1.4 points with perfect native-immigrant
substitutability experience a small wage gain of 0.9. Second, all immigrants workers (new and long-time immigrants) receive a significant wage loss in the case of imperfect substitutability (on average -12.7%), while they
did not have such losses under perfect substitutability. In summary, the imperfect substitution implies that
new immigrants compete more with other immigrants than with natives, hence concentrating wage-competition
eﬀects on their more similar coworkers and projecting complementarity eﬀects on the less similar ones.

8

Conclusions

This paper has revisited the area approach by analyzing the eﬀects of immigrants on the labor demand for
natives in the US. First, I have obtained an estimating equation relating native employment to immigrant
employment in a skill group using assumptions about the production-function and the long-run mobility of
workers between California and the rest of the US. Second, I have focused on California, the largest US state
economy, and the largest immigrant destination. This ensures very small errors in the measures of immigrant
employment by skill group and very large variation in the explanatory variable. Third, I have proposed a new
instrument based on the age and education composition of migrants from Mexico and Central America and one
based on education and age composition of Mexican-born individuals.
Two separate results should be emphasized. First, the estimates of the wage and employment eﬀect of
immigrants on natives in an education-experience group are never negative and significant. These results, while
not new in the literature, are consistent with a specific interpretation of nationally integrated labor markets,
by skill, and imply no negative eﬀects of immigrants on the labor demand for natives. Second, adopting my
model and assumptions, this zero estimate implies an elasticity between natives and immigrants of similar skills
of around 10; equal, that is, to the elasticity of substitution between workers with similar education across age
cohorts. Such estimates are somewhat smaller than the direct estimates of substitutability between natives
2 0 In the calculations the physical capital is allowed to adjust to keep its return constant. This implies that the average overall
wage of the economy, that depends on capital-labor ratio only is unchanged by immigration.

20

and immigrants. I first emphasize that the previous area and national estimates could suﬀer from biases that
would produce smaller estimates, and such biases are likely reduced or eliminated by my approach. However
I also raise the possibility that, on top of imperfect substitution, part of the native labor demand stimulated
by immigrants, which oﬀsets the competition eﬀect and leads to no negative employment eﬀects on natives,
may be due to eﬃcient specialization and a positive productivity eﬀect within the skill group of the kind found
suggested by Lewis (2005) and Peri (2009).

21

References
Altonji, Joseph G. and David Card, (1989). "The Eﬀects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes of
Natives," NBER Working Papers 3123, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Ma.
Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas (2007) “A Comparative Analysis of the Labor Market Impact of
International Migration: Canada, Mexico, and the United States” (2007). Journal of the European Economic
Association . Vol. 5, issue 4, p. 663-708.
Borjas, George J. (2003) “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII (4), 1335-1374.
Borjas, George J. (2006) "Native internal migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration" Journal of
Human Resources, XLI (2), pp. 222-258.
Borjas, George J. and Lawrence F. Katz (2007) “The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce in the United
States” in Mexican Immigration to the United States, edited by George J. Borjas, University of Chicago Press,
2007, pp. 13-55.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz (1992). "Regional Evolutions," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Economic Studies Program, The Brookings Institution, vol. 23(1992-1), pages 1-76.
Card, David (2001) “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local labor Market Impacts of Higher Immigration”
Borjas, George J, Richard Freeman, and Larry Katz (1997) "How Much Do Immigration and Trade Aﬀect
Labor Market Outcomes?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1997, no1: 1-90ournal of Labor Economics,
XIX (2001), 22-64.
Card, David. (1990). The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market. Industrial and Labor
Relation Review 43, no 2: 245-257.
Card, David. (2001). Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher
Immigration. Journal of Labor Economics 19, no 1: 22-64.
Card, David. (2007). How Immigration Aﬀects U.S. Cities. CReAM Discussion Paper, no. 11/07.
Card, David (2009) "Immigration and Inequality" American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 99:2,
1-21.
Card, David & John DiNardo, (2000). "Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?," American Economic
Review, American Economic Association, vol. 90(2), pages 360-367.
22

Card, David and Lemieux, Thomas (2001) “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Returns to College for
Younger Men? A Cohort Based Analysis” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. CXVI, pg. 705-746.
Card, David and Ethan Lewis (2007) “The Diﬀusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Explanations
and Impacts” in Mexican Immigration to the United States, George J. Borjas editor, The University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, London, 2007.
Goldin, Claudia and Larry Katz. 2008. The Race Between Education and Technology. , Harvard University
Press, Cambridge Mass, 2008.
Grossman, Jean B. (1982) “The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in Production,” Review of Economics
and Statistics 64, no.4: 596-603.
Hanson G. and C. McIntosh (2009) "The Demography of Mexican Migration to the United States," American
Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 2009, 99:2, 22-27.
Katz, Larry, and K. Murphy (1992) “Changes in Relative Wages 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no.1: 35-78.
Lewis, Ethan (2005) “Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper #05-08, May 2005
Manacorda, Marco, Alan Manning and Jonathan Wadsworth (2006) “The Impact of Immigration on the Structure of Male Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain” manuscript, London School of Economics, June 2006.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Peri Giovanni (2008) “Immigration and National Wages: Clarifying the Theory
and the Empirics” NBER Working Paper 14188, July 2008.
Peri Giovanni (2009) “The Eﬀect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from U.S. States” NBER working
paper # 15507. November 2009.
Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber (2008) "The Fallacy of Crowding-Out: A Note on "Native Internal Migration
and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration"," Working Papers 2008-01, Department of Economics, Colgate
University.
Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber (2009) “Task Specialization, Immigration and Wages”, American Economic
Journal : Applied Economics, Vol 1:3.
Ruggles, Steven , Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly
Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander (2006). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:

23

Version 3.0

[Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor], 2004.
http://www.ipums.org.
Welch, Finis (1979) "Eﬀects of Cohort Size on Earnings: the Baby Boom babies’ financial Bust" Journal of
Political Economy, 87:5, pp.65-97

24

A

Details of the model

A.1

Nested CES specification

I assume that the composite labor input in location ,  is obtained by the following nested combination of
workers of diﬀerent characteristics.
"

 −1
 

 =  
"

  −1
 

+ (1 −  )

# −1

 −1
 

 −1


  =   1  + (1 −   )2 
⎡

  = ⎣

8
X

 −1
 

  

 =1

"

  −1


 =  

⎤ −1



(7)

# −1


 =  

(8)



⎦

 = {Some HS, HS, Some Co, Co graduates}

 −1
 

+ (1 −  )

# −1

(9)



 = 1 8

(10)

As can be seen in equations 7 and 8, two imperfectly substitutable education groups ( and ) that enter
production in a symmetric way and within each of them I include two more education subgroups. In practice
the groups of workers with no degree and high school degree are combined into  and those with some college
education and college graduates are combined into . Equation 9 suggests that workers of similar education can
be divided into eight imperfectly substitutable skill groups according to their potential experience (eight five-year
intervals between 0 and 40). Equation 10 suggests that domestic (native) workers  and foreign-born workers
 are also potentially imperfectly substitutable. The terms denoted with  capture the eﬃciency/productivity
of each group in production they are skill and location specific. The elasticity of substitution across education
groups, experience groups and natives-immigrants (       and   ) are structural parameters
and are assumed to be equivalent across locations. I also impose standardizations at each level of aggregation
8
P
as well as the following one:
  = 1  Together, they imply that all the productivity parameters in
 =1

each labor aggregate add up to one.

25

A.2

Wages and National Labor Markets by skill

Given this productive structure the logarithmic wage of domestic workers in skill group  in location  and year
 calculated as the (logarithm of the) marginal productivity of a domestic worker, is:

ln(  )

¢
¡
1
+
= ln  = ln  1−
ln( ) + ln   −


¶
µ
1
1
ln(  ) + ln   +
−
   
µ
¶
1
1
ln(  ) + ln   −
−
 
 
µ
¶
1
1
1
ln( ) + ln  −
−
ln( )
 

  

(11)

At this point I use the assumption of integrated national labor markets for each skill-type () for native
workers which implies that in the long-run the wages, ln   are equated between California and the rest of the
US. Taking the total diﬀerential of equation (11) over time with respect to the logarithmic change in immigrant
and native labor inputs in each skill group  for California and for the US average, and subtracting one from
the other ( ln  −  ln  ) should equal zero if the wage equalization condition across states
holds for each skill in the long-run. I impose such a condition and I use the fact that the total diﬀerential
¢
¡
1
+ 
of the term ln  1−
ln( ) which varies only over time, is common to all skill groups and hence


can be captured by a pure location-time-eﬀect,   I then use the fact that the total diﬀerential of the term
³
³
´
´
1
1
1
1
− 
− 
− 
ln(  )+ 
ln(  ) varies only across education groups and years and
hence can be captured by an education-by-year eﬀect,   Assuming that the productivity parameters  are
independent of the supply of each skill I can re-write the total diﬀerentials in a more compact form. Imposing
the condition that the labor markets are nationally integrated and therefore, the total (log) diﬀerential of (11)
for California has to be equal to the total (log) diﬀerential for the rest of the US I obtain:

µ

¶

 ln( ) ∆
−
−
 +  −
 
   ln( ) 
µ
¶
1
 ln( ) ∆
1
−
−
 
   ln( ) 
∆
1
− ∆ ln  =
  
¶
µ
1
 ln(  ) ∆ 
1
=   +   −
−
−
 
  ln( )  
µ
¶
1
 ln(  ) ∆ 
1
−
−
 
   ln(  )  
∆
1
− ∆ ln  
    
1

1

26

(12)

The term

∆


,

∆


represents the discrete logarithmic change in foreign-born and native-born (respect-

ively) of group  (for California when carrying the subscript  and for the rest of the United States when
carrying the subscript  ) over the inter-census period. It is easy to show that the partial derivative

 ln( )
 ln( )

is

equal to the share of wages going to native workers in the skill group , which I can call κ  and if natives and
immigrants in the same skill groups are paid roughly the same wage this is approximately equal to their share
in employment:  ( +  ) Similarly,
and is equal to  ( +  ). Hence
as

∆
 +

 ln( )
 ln( )

 ln( ) ∆
 ln( ) 

is the share of wages going to immigrants in skill group 
can be written as

∆
 +

and

 ln( ) ∆
 ln( ) 

can be written

using the appropriate subscripts for California and the US. This substitutions and the (first order)

approximation of κ with its average across cells  allows me to simplify 12 into 3.

B

Extension: Upward Sloping Labor Supply

There is an easy way to relax the assumption of perfect labor mobility between states. Rather than assuming
that workers move between California and the rest of the US to eliminate completely their wage diﬀerentials,
^
∆

 = 0,
^
∆

that  +


namely imposing

one can assume that their net flows is a log-linear increasing function of the wage

diﬀerentials so

=

^
∆



where   0 would be the supply elasticity of labor.  = 0 would imply

no mobility at all of labor between California and the rest of the US, while  = ∞ would correspond to the
assumption of perfect mobility. Under this specification of supply one can substitute the condition of change in
demand equal to change in supply (California relative to the US). This would imply that the left hand side of
^
∆


equation 3 would be (1)  +
rather than 0 and solving for


but now the expression of  would be:  = − 

^
∆

 +

  − 
1
( 1−
 )  + 

 +

would still produce an equation like 4



It is immediate to verify that even in this case, unless  = 0 which would imply no mobility at all, the only
case that would generate  = 0, is   =    Hence my main result, that   =   , supported
by the estimated value of  = 0, holds even when there is imperfect mobility of native workers, as long as their
mobility responds positively to wage diﬀerentials between areas, for a given skill.

27

Figures and Tables
Table 1,
Native wage changes and inflows of immigrants, OLS estimates
Units of observation: Decennial changes, 1960-2000 and 2000-2005 for 32 education-experience cells.
(1)
Simple
Measures of Immigrants’ Labor
Supply:
Hours Worked
Employment
Population

Hours Worked
Employment
Population
Education-by-Experience Effects
Education-by-year effects
Observations

(2)
With Fixed
Effects (FE)

Males Only
0.003
0.02
(0.02)
(0.03)
0.006
0.058
(0.037)
(0.037)
0.007
0.06
(0.03)
(0.05)
Males and Females
-0.005
0.028
(0.02)
(0.024)
0.001
0.04
(0.04)
(0.04)
-0.006
0.04
(0.04)
(0.04)
No
Yes
No
Yes
160
160

(3)
Low education
groups only, with
FE

(4)
Non weighted
with FE

0.02
(0.025)
0.01
(0.04)
0.02
(0.05)

-0.004
(0.25)
-0.01
(0.04)
-0.006
(0.04)

0.03
(0.02)
0.05
(0.04)
0.05
(0.04)
Yes
Yes
80

0.007
(0.025)
0.01
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
Yes
Yes
160

Note: Dependent variable: percentage change (inter-census 1960-2000 plus 2000-2005) in weekly wage of US-native California workers
relative to native workers in the rest of the US. The method of estimation is weighted least squares with analytical weights equal to the
employment (number of observations) in each cell. The standard errors reported in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by
education-experience group. Specification (1) does not include any fixed effects, specification (2) includes education-by-experience and
education-by-year effects, specification (3) includes only cells of workers with high school degree or less, specification (4) does not weight
cells in the least square estimates.

28

Table 2
Native wage changes and inflows of immigrants, 2SLS with Central American immigrant to US as IV
Units of observation: Decennial changes, 1960-2000 and 2000-2005 for 32 education-experience cells.

Measures of Immigrants’ Labor Supply:
Hours Worked
Employment
Population

Hours Worked
Employment
Population

(1)
With Fixed Effects
(FE)
Males
0.02
(0.07)
0.03
(0.09)
0.02
(0.09)
Males and Females
0.07
(0.09)
0.10
(0.13)
0.10
(0.13)

(2)
Non weighted
with FE

(3)
Low education groups
only, with FE

-0.01
(0.06)
-0.01
(0.08)
-0.02
(0.08)

0.01
(0.07)
0.02
(0.09)
0.02
(0.09)

0.05
(0.10)
0.08
(0.14)
0.08
(0.14)

0.06
(0.10)
0.09
(0.14)
0.09
(0.14)

Education-by-Experience Effects
Yes
Yes
Education-by-year effects
Yes
Yes
First Stage Statistics, Endogenous variable is Population, Male and Female,
Change population by Cell of Mexican-Central
2.21**
2.02**
American in the whole USA
(0.47)
(0.53)
F-stat
22.91
14.52
(p-value)
(0.00)
(0.00)
Observations
160
160

Yes
Yes
2.13**
(0.51)
17.36
(0.00)
80

Note: Dependent variable: percentage change (inter-census 1960-2000 plus 2000-2005) in weekly wage of Native California workers relative to
native workers in the rest of the US, measured across 32 skill cells. The method of estimation is 2SLS using the changes in total Mexican and
Central American migrants in each cell as an instrument for the increase of immigrants of California, relative to the whole US. The standard
errors reported in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by education-experience group. Specification (1) includes educationby-experience and education-by-year effects, specification (2) does not weight cells in the least square estimates, specification (3) includes only
workers with education equal or below high school diploma.

29

Table 3
Change in native labor in response to changes in immigrant labor, OLS estimates
Units of observation: Decennial changes 1960-2000 and 2000-2005 for 32 education-experience cells.
(1)
Simple

(2)
With Fixed
Effects (FE)

(5)
1980-2005
period only
With FE

(6)
Non weighted
with FE

0.28**
(0.08)
0.13
(0.07)
0.11
(0.07)

0.17
(0.12)
0.04
(0.10)
-0.02
(0.10)

0.09
(0.12)
0.07
(0.12)
0.04
(0.11)

0.21*
(0.10)
0.13
(0.08)
0.10
(0.08)

0.23
(0.14)
0.05
(0.12)
0.01
(0.12)
No

0.13
(0.20)
-0.06
(0.17)
-0.08
(0.15)
Yes

-0.07
(0.19)
-0.08
(0.17)
-0.06
(0.17)
Yes

0.20
(0.16)
0.06
(0.12)
0.05
(0.10)
Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

160

160

160

80

96

160

Measures of Labor
Supply:
Hours Worked
Employment
Population

Hours Worked
Employment
Population
Education-byExperience Effects
Education-by-year
effects
Observations

(4)
(3)
Low
FE plus
education
lagged
groups only,
dependent
with FE
variable
Male Only
0.15
0.29*
(0.15)
(0.10)
-0.04
0.19*
(0.14)
(0.08)
-0.06
0.17*
(0.12)
(0.07)
Male and Female
0.12
0.34*
(0.22)
(0.15)
-0.13
0.20*
(0.19)
(0.11)
-0.15
0.19*
(0.18)
(0.08)
Yes
Yes

Note: Dependent variable is the change (inter-census 1960-2000 plus 2000-2005) in native employment relative to total initial employment in the skill group for
California relative to the rest of the US. Explanatory variable is the change in immigrant employment relative to total initial employment in the skill group for
California relative to the average US. Each cell in the table shows the estimate of coefficient β from equation (4) in the main text. The method of estimation is
weighted least squares with analytical weights equal to the employment (number of observations) in each cell.
The standard errors reported in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by education-experience group. ** significant at 1%, * significant at 5%.

30

Table 4
Change in native labor in response to changes in immigrant labor, 2SLS estimates
Units of observation: Decennial changes 1960-2000 and 2000-2005 for 32 education-experience cells.

Hours Worked
Employment
Population

Hours Worked
Employment
Population

(1)
Simple

(2)
With Fixed
Effects (FE)

(3)
FE plus
lagged
dependent
variable
Male
0.21
(0.25)
0.10
(0.29)
0.07
(0.29)
Male and Female
0.16
(0.42)
-0.04
(0.42)
-0.09
(0.39)
Yes

(4)
Low education
groups only,
with FE

(5)
1980-2005
period only
With FE

(6)
Non weighted
with FE

0.81**
(0.27)
0.85**
(0.28)
0.67**
(0.21)

0.24
(0.20)
0.16
(0.25)
0.15
(0.24)

0.52**
(0.14)
0.36**
(0.13)
0.47*
(0.18)

0.15
(0.38)
0.13
(0.39)
0.13
(0.42)

0.35*
(0.16)
0.24
(0.15)
0.33
(0.20)

0.77*
(0.35)
0.84*
(0.39)
0.84*
(0.34)
No

0.14
(0.35)
-0.01
(0.49)
0.01
(0.33)
Yes

0.60**
(0.18)
0.59*
(0.29)
0.52**
(0.21)
Yes

-0.13
(0.54)
-0.18
(0.64)
-0.02
(0.54)
Yes

0.26
(0.27)
0.20
(0.33)
0.23
(0.26)
Yes

Education-by-Experience
Effects
Education-by-year effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
First Stage Statistics, Endogenous variable is Population, Male and Female,
Change population by Cell of
1.01**
2.21**
2.34**
2.13**
1.33*
Mexican-Central American in
(0.19)
(0.47)
(0.47)
(0.51)
(0.60)
the whole USA
F-stat of the instrument
26.17
22.91
24.12
17.36
5.01
(p-value)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.03)
Observations
160
160
128
80
96

Yes
2.02**
(0.53)
14.52
(0.00)
160

Note: Dependent variable is the change in native employment relative to total initial employment in the skill group for California relative to the rest of the US. Explanatory
variable is the change in immigrant employment relative to total initial employment in the skill group for California relative to the rest of the US. Each cell in the table shows
the estimate of coefficient β from equation (4) in the main text. The method of estimation is two stage least squares. The instrument used is the Mexican-Central American
population by cell in the US. The standard errors reported in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by education-experience group. ** significant at 1%, *
significant at 5%.

31

Table 5
2SLS using change in population of all individuals born in Mexico, by cell
Units of observation: Decennial changes 1960-2000 and 2000-2005 for 32 education-experience cells.
(1)
Simple
Measures of Immigrants’ Labor
Supply:

Hours Worked
Employment
Population

Hours Worked
Employment
Population
Education-by-Experience Effects
Education-by-year effects
Observations
Coefficient in the first stage
F-stat of the instrument

Males
0.90*
(0.47)
1.01*
(0.54)
0.87*
(0.43)
Males and Females
0.87*
(0.41)
1.01**
(0.46)
0.93**
(0.36)
No
No
160
First stage
0.30**
(0.09)
11.4

(2)
With
Education by
experience
Fixed Effects
(FE)

(3)
Low education
groups only, with
FE

0.03
(0.50)
0.16
(0.51)
0.13
(0.51)

0.49
(0.70)
0.86
(1.14)
1.01
(1.14)

-0.16
(0.52)
0.05
(0.51)
0.01
(0.44)
Yes
No
160

0.53
(0.64)
1.01
(1.16)
0.77
(0.70)
Yes
Yes
80

0.35**
(0.16)
4.66

0.21
(0.15)
2.31

Note: Dependent variable is the change in native employment relative to total initial employment in the skill group for California relative to the average US. Explanatory
variable is the change in immigrant employment relative to total initial employment in the skill group for California relative to the average US. Each cell in the table shows the
estimate of coefficient β from equation (4) in the main text. The method of estimation is two stage least squares. The instrument used is the population born in Mexico by cell
from the Mexican Census. The standard errors reported in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by education-experience group. ** significant at 1%, *
significant at 5%.

32

Table 6
Change in native African-American labor in response to changes in immigrant labor
Units of observation: Decennial changes 1960-2000 and 2000-2005 for 32 education-experience cells.
(1)
Simple

Hours Worked
Employment

Hours Worked
Employment

0.15**
(0.05)
0.18*
(0.06)
0.17**
(0.07)
0.20**
(0.08)
No

(2)
Basic
With Fixed
Effects (FE)

(3)
FE plus
lagged
dependent
variable

Male
0.05
0.05
(0.026)
(0.028)
0.044
0.042
(0.042)
(0.05)
Male and female
0.028
0.028
(0.058)
(0.053)
0.005
-0.003
(0.07)
(0.09)
Yes
Yes

(4)
Low
education
groups only,
with FE

(5)
1980-2005
period only
With FE

(6)
Non
weighted
with FE

0.10**
(0.02)
0.08**
(0.03)

0.10
(0.07)
0.08
(0.08)

0.06*
(0.02)
0.043
(0.027)

0.11**
(0.02)
0.09*
(0.03)
Yes

0.06
(0.12)
0.02
(0.011)
Yes

0.043
(0.039)
0.02
(0.04)
Yes

Education-by-Experience
Effects
Education-by-year effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
First Stage Statistics, Population Male and Female as endogenous variable
Change population by Cell of
1.01**
2.21**
2.34**
2.13**
1.33*
Mexican-Central American in
(0.19)
(0.47)
(0.47)
(0.51)
(0.60)
the whole USA
F-stat of the instrument
26.17
22.91
24.12
17.36
5.01
(p-value)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.03)
Observations
160
160
128
80
96

Yes
2.02**
(0.53)
14.52
(0.00)
160

Note: Dependent variable is the change in employment of US-born African American relative to total initial employment in the skill group for California
relative to the rest of the US. Explanatory variable is the change in immigrant employment relative to total initial employment in the skill group for
California relative to the rest of the US. Each cell in the table shows the estimate of coefficient β from equation (8) in the main text. The method of
estimation is two stage least squares. The Instrument used is the Mexican-Central American migrant population by cell in the US. The standard errors
reported in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by education-experience group. ** significant at 1%, * significant at 5%.

33

Table 7:
Implications of σIMMI for National wages
Simulated Wage Effects of Immigrants, 1990-2005, using a Nested CES production function (for US output):
Long Run Effects, i.e. with capital adjustment to keep return to capital constant

Parameters:

(2)
σIMMI=20

(1)
Perfect substitutability
σIMMI=infinity

1.5
1.5
σH-L
10
10
σ EDU
10
10
σEXP
infinity
20
σIMMI
% Real Wage Change of US-Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2006
Less than High School
-1.4%
-0.2%
High School graduates
0.0%
0.4%
Some College
0.7%
1.0%
College graduates
-0.2%
0.5%
Average US-born
0.0%
0.6%
% Real Wage Change of Foreign-Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2006
Less than High School
-1.4%
-5.5%
High School graduates
0.0%
-7.0%
Some College
0.7%
-3.9%
College graduates
-0.2%
-8.0%
Average Foreign-born
0.0%
-6.5%
0.0%
0.0%
Overall average

(3)
Preferred
estimated
σIMMI=10
1.5
10
10
10

(4)
σIMMI=6
1.5
10
10
6

0.9%
0.9%
1.3%
1.3%
1.2%

2.4%
1.6%
1.7%
2.3%
2.0%

-9.6%
-13.9%
-8.5%
-15.7%
-12.7%
0.0%

-15.0%
-23.1%
-14.6%
-26.0%
-21.1%
0.0%

Note: The percentage wage changes for each education group are obtained averaging the wage change of each education-experience group (calculated
using the CES nesting structure described in Figure 1 and the coefficient listed in the first 4 rows). Those percentage changes are weighted by the wage
share in the education group. The US-born and Foreign-born average changes are obtained weighting changes of each education group by its share in the
1990 wage bill of the group. The overall average wage change adds the change of US- and foreign-born weighted for the relative wage shares in 1990 and
it is always equal to 0 due to the long-run assumption that the capital-labor ratio adjusts to maintain constant returns to capital.

34

Figure 1: CES nesting structure
Characteristics:

Elasticities:

0: Labor

1: Broad
Education
2: Narrow
Education

3: Experience

Low

No

σH-L

High

High School

Degree

Some

College

College

Degree

[1-5] [6-10] [11-15] [16-20] [21-25] [26-31] [31-35] [36-40]

4: US-Foreign born
Domestic

Foreign

35

σEDU

σEXP
σIMMI

Figure 2
Share of immigrants in employment 1960-2005

Note: The data are from Census 1960-2000 and ACS 2005. Employed workers are defined as the
sum of individuals of ages between 18 and 65, not residing in group quarters, and who worked at least
one week during the preceding year with potential experience between 1 and 40 years.

36

-.2

Percentage change in wage, natives
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5

.6

Figure 3
Native wage changes and immigrant inflow
California, relative to rest of US, 32 skill groups,
decade changes 1960-2000 plus 2000-2005 change

-.2

0

.2
immigration rate

.4

.6

Changes by skill group
Fitted values

Note: The vertical axis measures the percentage change in weekly wages of native
workers in the cell for each inter-census period (1960-2005) plus 2000-2005. The
horizontal axis measures the inflow of immigrants as percentage of initial employment in
the cell for each inter-census period (1960-2005) plus 2000-2005.

37

percentage change in native employment
-.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

Figure 4
Native employment change and immigrant inflow
California, relative to rest of US, 32 skill groups,
decade changes 1960-2000 plus 2000-2005 change

-.5

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0
.1
.2
immigration rate

.3

.4

.5

.6

skill-cell decade change
Fitted values

Note: The vertical axis measures the change in employment of native workers as
percentage of initial employment in the cell for each inter-census period (1960-2005) plus
2000-2005. The horizontal axis measures the inflow of immigrants as percentage of
initial employment in the cell for each inter-census period (1960-2005) plus 2000-2005.

38

Communication/Manual average, Natives
.3
.35
.4
.45

Figure 5
Communication/Manual skill supply of natives and immigrants among less educated workers
US States, 2005

California

0

.1

.2
.3
.4
Share of Immigrants among less educated

.5

Fitted values
US States

Note: The data on average Communication/Manual skills by state are from Peri and Sparber (2009), obtained from the
manual and communication intensity of occupations, weighted according to the distributional occupation of natives.

Figure 6
TFP in California and the US 1960-2005

-1.4

-1.2

-1

-.8

-.6

Total factor Productivity in Logarithms

1960

1970

1980

1990
year
Average USA
California

Note: TFP for the US and California is calculated in Peri (2009)

39

2000

2010

Tables and Figure Appendix
Figure A1
Total employment of natives and immigrants,
California 1960-2005
12000000
10000000
8000000
6000000
4000000
Immigrants
2000000

Natives

0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2005

Figure A2
Total employment of natives and immigrants,
USA 1960-2005
120000000
100000000
Immigrants

80000000

Natives

60000000
40000000
20000000
0
1960

1970

1980

40

1990

2000

2005

immigrants to California relative to US as share of cell
-.2
0
.2
.4

Figure A3
Mexican-Central American Immigration in the US and relative immigration to California
Immigrants as percentage of the Education-Experience cell, decade-change 1960-2005

-.05

0
.05
.1
.15
.2
immigration of Mexican-Central American as share of population, USA
Education-Age Cells, inter-census changes
Fitted values

Immi. to California relative to US, share of cell
-.2
0
.2
.4

Figure A4
European Immigration in the US and relative immigration to California
Immigrants as percentage of the Education-Experience cell; decade-change 1960-2005

-.06

-.04
-.02
0
.02
Immigration of Europeans to US, share of cell
Education-age cells, inter-census changes
Fitted values

41

.04

change in population due to immigrants Cal-USA
-.2
0
.2
.4

Figure A5
Mexican population change relative to the US and relative immigration to California
Education-Experience cell, decade-change 1960-2005

-.4

-.2
0
.2
.4
percentage change in population by cell of mexican-born

.6

Education-Age cells, inter-census changes
Fitted values

-.2

employment growth, black natives
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5

.6

Figure A6
Relative employment change: Immigrants and Black
US-born. California relative to average US, by skill and decade

-.2

0

.2
immigration rate
change by skill group
Fitted values

42

.4

.6

Table A1:
Share of foreign-born workers by schooling, USA and California 1960-2005
Schooling

1960
1970
1980
1990
Census Census Census Census

2000
Census

2005
ACS

California
No Degree
High School Degree
Some College Education
College Degree

0.12
0.06
0.07
0.07

0.16
0.07
0.08
0.08

0.37
0.11
0.11
0.14

0.65
0.22
0.16
0.19

0.75
0.33
0.21
0.26

0.78
0.36
0.23
0.29

Average

0.09

0.10
USA

0.17

0.25

0.33

0.36

No Degree
High School Degree
Some College Education
College Degree
Average

0.06
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05

0.06
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.05

0.11
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.07

0.22
0.07
0.07
0.09
0.09

0.36
0.11
0.09
0.13
0.14

0.42
0.14
0.10
0.15
0.16

Note: Author’s calculation using Census 1960-2000 and American Community Survey 2005 IPUMS data.
Employment is calculated as the sum of individuals of ages between 18 and 65, not residing in group quarters,
and who worked at least one week during the preceding year with potential experience between 1 and 40 years.
Population in working age is calculated as the sum of all individuals aged 17 to 66 not residing in group
quarters with potential experience between 1 and 40 years.

43

