                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND INNOVATION:
                       EVIDENCE FROM THE HUMAN GENOME

                                         Heidi L. Williams

                                        Working Paper 16213
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16213


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2010




I am very grateful to Wes Cohen, Joe Doyle, Dan Fetter, Matt Gentzkow, Claudia Goldin, Sam Kortum,
Amanda Kowalski, Fiona Murray, Jesse Shapiro, Scott Stern, three anonymous referees, numerous
seminar participants, and especially my PhD advisers David Cutler, Amy Finkelstein, and Larry Katz
for comments. Several individuals from Celera, the Human Genome Project, and related institutions
provided invaluable guidance, including Sam Broder, Peter Hutt, and particularly Mark Adams, David
Altshuler, Bob Cook-Deegan, Eric Lander, Robert Millman, and seminar participants at the Broad
Institute. David Robinson provided valuable assistance with the data collection. Financial support
from NIA Grant Number T32-AG000186 to the NBER, NSF Grant Number 1151497, and the Center
for American Political Studies at Harvard is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Heidi L. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the Human Genome
Heidi L. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 16213
July 2010, Revised January 2013
JEL No. I10,I18,O3,O34

                                                ABSTRACT

Do intellectual property (IP) rights on existing technologies hinder subsequent innovation? Using newly-
collected data on the sequencing of the human genome by the public Human Genome Project and
the private firm Celera, this paper estimates the impact of Celera's gene-level IP on subsequent scientific
research and product development. Genes initially sequenced by Celera were held with IP for up to
two years, but moved into the public domain once re-sequenced by the public effort. Across a range
of empirical specifications, I find evidence that Celera's IP led to reductions in subsequent scientific
research and product development on the order of 20 to 30 percent. Taken together, these results suggest
that Celera's short-term IP had persistent negative effects on subsequent innovation relative to a counterfactual
of Celera genes having always been in the public domain.


Heidi L. Williams
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
Building E52, Room 274C
Cambridge MA 02142-1347
and NBER
heidiw@mit.edu
      Innovation is a key driver of economic growth, but competitive markets may under-incentivize
innovation due to the public good nature of ideas (Nelson, 1959; Arrow, 1962). Intellectual
property (IP) rights, such as patents and copyrights, aim to incentivize innovation by allowing
firms to capture a higher share of the social returns to their research investments. Traditional
evaluations of the effectiveness of IP have focused on whether the prospect of obtaining IP rights
stimulates the development of new technologies. However, in many markets technological change
is cumulative, in the sense that product development results from several steps of invention and
research. In markets where innovation is cumulative, the overall effectiveness of IP in promoting
innovation also depends on a second, less studied question: do IP rights on existing technologies
hinder subsequent innovation? The contribution of this paper is to provide empirical evidence
on this second question by investigating how one form of IP on the human genome influenced
subsequent scientific research and product development.
      To fix ideas, suppose the firm Celera holds IP on a human gene, and that Pfizer discovers a
genetic diagnostic test based on Celera’s gene. Will Celera’s IP discourage Pfizer from develop-
ing this test? In a perfect contracting environment with no transaction costs, Celera and Pfizer
would negotiate a licensing agreement such that cumulative research is not hindered. However,
transaction costs may cause licensing negotiations to break down, deterring some socially de-
sirable research. While the theoretical literature on this question is well-developed (Scotchmer,
1991; Green and Scotchmer, 1995; Bessen, 2004), empirical evidence is scarce.
      The empirical context analyzed in this paper is the sequencing of the human genome by the
public Human Genome Project and the private firm Celera. The public effort began in 1990,
and required that all sequenced genes be placed in the public domain. Celera’s effort began
in 1999, and ended in 2001 when Celera disclosed an incomplete draft genome. The public
effort continued, and by 2003 had sequenced all genes in Celera’s 2001 draft. Between 2001 and
2003, Celera used a contract law-based form of IP to protect genes sequenced by Celera but not
yet sequenced by the public effort. This IP enabled Celera to sell its data for substantial fees,
and required firms to negotiate licensing agreements with Celera for any resulting commercial
discoveries - even though it was publicly known at the time that all of Celera’s genes would be
sequenced by the public effort, and thus be in the public domain, by 2003. Figure 1 summarizes
a timeline of these key events.
      How did Celera’s gene-level IP influence subsequent scientific research and product devel-
opment? To investigate this question, I construct a new dataset that tracks the timing of gene
sequencing and Celera’s IP across the human genome, linked to gene-level measures of scien-
tific research and product development. Specifically, I trace cumulative innovation by compiling
data on links between genes and phenotypes, which are observable traits or characteristics. For
example, the link between variation on the HTT gene and Huntington’s disease represents a
genotype-phenotype link. For each gene, I collect data on publications investigating genotype-
phenotype links, on successfully generated knowledge about genotype-phenotype links, and on
the development of gene-based diagnostic tests available to consumers.1
  1
      Patent citations are a frequently-used measure of cumulative innovation (Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Henderson,



                                                        1
    A simple cross-tabulation illustrates how this data can be used to investigate how Celera’s IP
influenced subsequent innovation. Table 1 compares subsequent innovation outcomes for Celera
genes relative to non-Celera genes sequenced in the same year. Taken at face value, these data
suggest that Celera’s IP led to economically and statistically significant reductions in subsequent
scientific research and product development. Celera genes had an average of 1.2 publications
by 2009, relative to 2.1 publications for non-Celera genes sequenced in the same year. About
3 percent of Celera genes were used in a gene-based diagnostic test as of 2009, relative to 5.4
percent of non-Celera genes sequenced in the same year.
    These simple differences in means could reflect a negative effect of Celera’s IP on subsequent
research, or could reflect that Celera’s genes had lower inherent potential for follow-on research.
Because the institutional context suggests that selection bias could be a concern, I present
estimates from two additional empirical tests that directly address selection. First, I restrict
attention to within-gene variation in IP and test whether the removal of Celera’s IP increased
subsequent innovation. Second, I limit the sample to Celera genes and test for a link between the
amount of time a gene was held with Celera’s IP and subsequent innovation. These additional
empirical tests appear to eliminate selection bias in the following sense: within the sample of
∼1,600 Celera genes, proxies for the ex ante expected value of a gene do not predict the timing
of when genes were re-sequenced by the public effort. The estimates from these two additional
empirical tests are roughly the same magnitude as the estimates from the simple cross-tabulation:
Celera’s IP appears to have generated economically and statistically significant reductions in
subsequent scientific research and product development, on the order of 20 to 30 percent.
    This analysis does not evaluate the overall welfare consequences of Celera’s entry, which may
have been spurred by the prospect of obtaining IP. If Celera’s entry spurred faster sequencing
of the human genome, the overall timing of genome-related innovation likely shifted earlier in
time, which would have had welfare gains even if Celera’s IP in isolation hindered innovation.
Rather, these results suggest that, holding Celera’s entry constant, an alternative lump-sum
reward mechanism may have had social benefits relative to Celera’s chosen form of IP.2
    This paper joins a handful of recent papers documenting evidence that IP may hinder sub-
sequent innovation (Murray and Stern, 2007; Huang and Murray, 2009; Murray et al., 2008). Of
particular note is the work of Murray et al. (2008), who analyze short-term IP the firm DuPont
held on certain types of genetically engineered mice. Using a dataset of matched mouse-article
pairs, the authors document that the removal of IP increased citations to scientific papers on
affected mice by 20 to 40 percent relative to papers on unaffected mice - very similar to the
magnitude of my estimates.3
1993). However, by construction patent citations cannot measure cumulative innovation on non-patented tech-
nologies. The type of data constructed in this paper - measuring scientific research and product development
directly, rather than via patent citations - is critical in enabling a test of how IP affects cumulative innovation.
   2
     For example, under the patent buyout mechanism discussed by Kremer (1998), the public sector (or another
entity) could have paid Celera some fee to “buy out” Celera’s IP and place Celera genes in the public domain.
See Kremer and Williams (2010) for further discussion of other alternative mechanisms for rewarding innovation.
   3
     Murray et al. (2008) also provide evidence, consistent with the model of Aghion, Dewatripont and Stein
(2008), that IP reduces the diversity of scientific experimentation.



                                                         2
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides a brief scientific background and a de-
scription of my data construction. Section 2 describes the empirical context, and Section 3
presents the empirical results. Section 4 links the empirical results back to previous theoretical
and empirical analyses, in an attempt to interpret which types of transaction costs were likely
most important in this context. Section 5 concludes.


1        Preliminaries: Scientific primer and data construction
This section provides a brief scientific background and describes my data construction. An
appendix discusses my data construction in more detail.

1.1       Scientific primer
In classical genetics, a gene is defined as a unit of inheritance. Physically, a gene is defined as a
stretch of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which itself is a sequence comprised of four nucleotide
bases - adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T ).4 ‘Sequencing the genome’
refers to the process of determining the exact order of these nucleotide bases in the entire set of
hereditary information for a given organism.
        Genes affect health by generating proteins, which carry out functions in the human body.
More precisely, genes code for messenger ribonucleic acids (mRNAs): a gene’s sequence of
nucleotide bases dictates the sequence of nucleotide bases in a generated mRNA. In turn, mRNAs
code for proteins: an mRNA’s sequence of nucleotide bases dictates what protein is generated.
The intermediate step - mRNA - is important because a gene can code multiple proteins by
coding multiple mRNAs. Reflecting this, sequencing the genome involved sequencing mRNAs.
        Proteins induce variation in observable traits or characteristics of an organism, known as
phenotypes. Known genotype-phenotype links can be combined with sequenced genes to form
the basis for genetic tests. A gene can be involved in multiple genotype-phenotype links, and a
genotype-phenotype link can involve more than one gene.
        I use genes as my unit of analysis. Genes are stable scientific units, whereas the number
of known mRNAs and known genotype-phenotype links in part reflects the amount of research
invested in a given gene. Table 2 presents summary statistics on the gene-level data. My data
include 27,882 currently known genes. The median length of a gene is around 17,000 nucleotide
bases (Scherer, 2008).

1.2       Tracking the public and private genome sequencing efforts
I track the timing of the public sequencing effort using data from the US National Institutes of
Health’s RefSeq database. I define the year a gene was sequenced as the first year any mRNA
    4
    In recent years the exact definition of a gene has become more complicated than this basic description; for
a more detailed discussion see Snyder and Gerstein (2003). However, these subtleties are not important for the
empirical analysis in this paper; my use of the term “gene” follows the definitions set out in the US National
Institutes of Health’s RefSeq database, which is used internationally as the standard for genome annotation.



                                                      3
was disclosed for that gene. The median gene was sequenced in 2001 (Panel A of Table 2).5
       Istrail et al. (2004) compare Celera’s 2001 draft genome with a snapshot of the public data.
Building on their analysis, I am able to determine which genes were included in Celera’s 2001
draft genome and the dates at which those genes eventually appeared in the public data. I define
a Celera gene as a gene for which all known mRNAs were initially sequenced by Celera.6 Of
the 27,882 currently known genes, 1,682 - about 6 percent - were held with Celera’s IP for some
amount of time (Panel A of Table 2). Because Celera’s draft genome was disclosed in 2001, I
code Celera genes as having been sequenced in 2001.

1.3      Measuring scientific research and product development outcomes
I collect four outcome variables: three measures of scientific research, and one measure of prod-
uct development. My measures of scientific research are drawn from the Online Mendelian
Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database, which aims to provide a comprehensive set of genotype-
phenotype records. OMIM entries are annotated with citations to published scientific papers.
From these annotations, I collect data on the number of publications related to each gene in each
year. I use publications from 2001 to 2009 as an outcome; on average, genes had 2 publications
over that period, with a median of 0 (Panel B of Table 2).
       OMIM assigns two classifications which I use as proxies for the level of scientific knowledge
about genotype-phenotype links. All genes involved in at least one genotype-phenotype link
classified by OMIM as meeting a high level of scientific certainty are coded as having a “known,
certain phenotype.” The set of genes classified by OMIM as meeting a lower threshold for
scientific certainty (including those meeting the higher threshold) are coded as having a “known,
uncertain phenotype.” I observe the former measure as of 2009, and the latter measure annually.
As of 2009, forty-five percent of genes have a known, uncertain phenotype link, and 8 percent
have a known, certain phenotype link (Panel B of Table 2).
       My measure of product development is drawn from GeneTests.org, a self-reported, voluntary
listing of US and international laboratories offering genetic testing. Although not comprehen-
sive, GeneTests.org is the most frequently referenced genetic testing directory (Uhlmann and
Guttmacher, 2008). I construct an indicator for whether each gene is used in any genetic test
as of 2009. As of 2009, 6 percent of genes were used in a genetic test (Panel B of Table 2).7

1.4      Data construction: An example
A brief example may help to clarify my data construction. The mRNA NM 032753.3 first
appeared in RefSeq in 2001, and was never held with Celera’s IP. This is the only known mRNA
for the RAX2 gene. I define RAX2 as sequenced in 2001, and never held by Celera.
   5
     The mean for this variable is left-censored, because 1999 is the first year coded in the RefSeq database.
   6
     The mean number of known mRNAs per gene is 1.67, and the median is 1. Thus, alternative definitions -
such as the share of known mRNAs that were Celera mRNAs, or an indicator for whether any mRNA on the gene
was a Celera mRNA - are identical for the majority of genes.
   7
     These tests can be developed quite quickly; Cho et al. (2003) note it may only take weeks or months to go
from a research finding that a particular genetic variant is associated with a disease to a clinically validated test.


                                                          4
       OMIM references RAX2 in two genotype-phenotypes, first appearing in 2006. Both reference
a 2004 publication in Human Molecular Genetics, and are classified by OMIM as known, certain
phenotypes. First, RAX2 is linked to age-related macular degeneration, a medical condition
arising in older adults that destroys the type of central vision needed for common tasks such
as driving, facial recognition, and reading. Second, RAX2 is linked to cone-rod dystrophy, an
eye disease tending to cause vision loss. I define RAX2 as having one publication in 2004; in a
known, uncertain phenotype link as of 2006; and in a known, certain phenotype link as of 2009.8
       GeneTests.org lists several testing facilities offering a genetic test for RAX2’s link to age-
related macular degeneration (including some academic medical centers as well as the for-profit
firm Quest Diagnostics). There are no listings for genetic tests for RAX2’s link to cone-rod
dystrophy. I define RAX2 as being used in a diagnostic test as of 2009.

1.5       Linking scientific research and product development
The prior empirical literature investigating how IP affects subsequent innovation has been con-
strained to examine only publication-related outcome variables, whereas in this paper I am able
to trace how IP affected the availability of commercial products. A priori, this distinction is
important: if academic and public researchers face higher incentives to disclose the results of
their research than do private researchers, and if IP induces an increase in the share of re-
search done by private researchers, then observed differences in publications could in part be
explained by differences in disclosure.9 However, my product development outcome - diagnostic
test availability - should be invariant with respect to disclosure preferences of researchers.
       Panel A of Figure 2 presents one set of descriptive statistics illustrating that, in my data,
scientific research and product development are strongly related. The dashed line (“no test as
of 2009 ”) plots the empirical cumulative distribution function of the number of publications
between 1970-2000 for genes that do not have a diagnostic test available as of 2009.10 The solid
line (“test as of 2009 ”) plots the empirical cumulative distribution function of the number of
publications between 1970-2000 for genes that do have a diagnostic test available as of 2009.
Virtually all genes not used in diagnostic tests had 10 or fewer publications, whereas about 70
percent of genes used in diagnostic tests had more than 10 publications.
       Panel B of Figure 2 presents an alternative set of descriptive statistics illustrating a similar
point. The dashed line plots the distribution of genes, ordered by the number of publications
between 1970-2000; consistent with the summary statistics presented in Table 2, most genes have
zero publications. The solid line plots the share of genes with a diagnostic test for each number
of publications. The share of genes with a diagnostic test increases roughly monotonically with
the number of publications between 0 and around 30 publications, and then continues to increase
   8
     As detailed above, I only observe the “known, certain phenotype” measure as of 2009.
   9
     Of course, disclosure itself presumably has social value, and to the extent that IP induces reductions in
disclosure this effect is also relevant in measuring the welfare effects of IP. Moon (2011) provides an empirical
study of disclosure in the context of genetic research. Analyzing the discovery of a genotype-phenotype link in an
event study framework, he shows that non-academic research organizations become less likely to publish relative
to universities after the discovery of a phenotype link.
  10
     There are very few pre-1970 publications cited in the OMIM data.


                                                        5
more slowly above that point. These data suggest that the number of publications is strongly
related to the probability that a diagnostic test is available.


2         Empirical context
This section briefly reviews the institutional context relevant for the empirical analysis.11

2.1        Timeline of sequencing efforts
The public sequencing effort - the Human Genome Project - was launched in 1990, and originally
aimed to finish sequencing the entire genome by 2005 (Collins and Galas, 1993). In May 1998,
Celera - a new firm led by scientist Craig Venter - formed with the intention to sequence the
entire human genome within three years (Venter et al., 1998). The public effort subsequently
announced a revised plan to complete its sequencing efforts by 2003 (Collins et al., 1998), and to
release an earlier “draft” sequence of the human genome (Pennisi, 1999).12 Departing from its
previous goal of producing a near-perfect sequence, the aim of this draft sequence was to place
most of the genome in the public domain as soon as possible. The two efforts jointly published
draft genomes in February 2001, the public effort in Nature (Lander et al., 2001) and Celera in
Science (Venter et al., 2001).13 Celera’s sequencing effort stopped with this publication, whereas
the public effort continued and was declared complete in April 2003 (Wade, 2003).

2.2        Intellectual property: The Bermuda rules and Celera’s IP
As of 1996, genes sequenced by the public effort were covered by the “Bermuda rules,” requiring
data to be posted on an open-access website within twenty-four hours of sequencing.14 The
stated goal was “...to encourage research and development and to maximize [the data’s] benefit to
society.”15 Eisenberg (2000) argues the Bermuda rules also aimed to discourage gene patenting.
         Between 2001 and 2003, Celera used a contract law-based form of IP to protect genes that
had been sequenced by Celera but not yet sequenced by the public effort. Celera’s IP had several
key features.16 First, Celera’s data were ‘disclosed’ in 2001 (Venter et al., 2001), in the sense
that any individual could view data on the assembled genome through Celera’s website, or by
obtaining a free data DVD from the company.17 Academic researchers were free to use Celera’s
    11
     For more details, see Cook-Deegan (1994), Shreeve (2005), Sulston and Ferry (2002), and Venter (2007).
    12
     Many observers attribute this scale-up to Celera’s entry (Marshall, 1998).
  13
     Celera and a few “early subscriber” firms had access to intermediate data updates during late 1999 and 2000,
but my understanding is that the vast majority of Celera’s data were first released in the 2001 draft genome.
  14
     In 1996, the heads of the largest labs involved in the public effort agreed at a Bermuda-based meeting to
these rules as a set of guidelines for data sequenced under the public effort. The Bermuda Rules replaced a US
policy that data be made available within six months (Marshall, 2001).
  15
     These rules are described in various policy statements by the US National Human Genome Research Institute
 (NHGRI). Non-adherence was expected to result in black marks on future grant reviews (Marshall, 2001).
  16
     For details, see Celera’s data access agreement (Science Online, 2001), and Celera’s DVD user agreement. I
am very grateful to Mike Meurer, Robert Millman (then-Chief IP Counsel at Celera from 1999-2002), and Ben
Roin for discussions on Celera’s IP, but of course none of them is responsible for any errors in my descriptions.
  17
     Viewing the data or obtaining the DVD required agreeing not to commercialize or redistribute the data.



                                                       6
data for non-commercial research and academic publications. Second, by placing restrictions
on redistribution, Celera was able to sell its data to larger institutions - including pharmaceu-
tical companies, universities, and research institutes. Although the terms of specific deals were
private, Service (2001) reports that pharmaceutical companies were paying between $5 million
and $15 million a year, whereas universities and nonprofit research organizations were paying
between $7,500 and $15,000 for each lab given access to the data. Third, any researcher wanting
to use the data for commercial purposes was required to negotiate a licensing agreement with
Celera. Celera was able to charge these data access and licensing fees even though all available
accounts suggest it was publicly known in 2001 that all of Celera’s genes would be re-sequenced
by the public effort, and thus move into the public domain, by 2003. Shreeve (2005) quotes
Craig Venter as saying: “Amgen, Novartis, and now Pharmacia Upjohn have signed up knowing
damn well the data was going to be in the public domain in two years anyways. They didn’t
want to wait for it.” In addition to this short-term IP, Shreeve (2005) documents that Celera
was actively pursuing gene patent applications for genes in its database; ex post most of these
applications were not granted patents, but given the contemporaneous and subsequent policy
uncertainty surrounding gene patenting it is difficult to know what researchers’ expectations
were at the time.18 Beyond database sales and licensing revenues, Celera’s business model
also included in-house research and profits from genes granted patents (Service, 2001). Celera
eventually grew into a healthcare firm that develops and manufactures gene-based technologies.

2.3    Sequencing strategies: Implications for selection into Celera’s IP
The public sequencing effort was a large consortium that, for the purposes of this paper, can be
conceptualized as two distinct efforts. A ‘targeted’ effort focused on sequencing genes with known
medical value, such as the gene linked to Huntington’s disease. A ‘large-scale’ effort focused on
the same type of large-scale sequencing undertaken by Celera. Large-scale sequencing by both
Celera and the public effort relied on the shotgun sequencing method, in which DNA is randomly
broken up into small segments that are sequenced and re-assembled (Lander et al., 2001). From
an empirical perspective, shotgun sequencing should have introduced some effectively random
variation in whether genes were initially sequenced by Celera or by the public effort.
    The vast majority of genes were sequenced under the large-scale public effort, which started
in mid-1999 (Lander et al., 2001). However, because the targeted public effort focused on
sequencing genes that had high ex ante expected medical value, we expect that Celera genes
- on average - will be negatively selected in the sense of having a lower inherent potential
for follow-on research. This selection is important, because it implies that the simple cross-
tabulation presented in Table 1 could be misleading. This concern motivates the construction of
empirical measures that proxy for the ex ante expected value of each gene in order to empirically
investigate patterns of selection in my data.
  18
     What the US Patent and Trademark Office has allowed to be covered by a “gene patent” has changed
dramatically over time; see, e.g. National Academy of Sciences (2006). There has also been substantial variation
over time in the judicial enforcement of existing gene patents.



                                                       7
    Based on discussions with scientists, one reasonable proxy for the ex ante expected value of
a gene is the number of scientific papers published about the gene before it was sequenced. For
example, a long scientific literature has documented evidence that Huntington’s disease has a
genetic basis. Many of these papers were published prior to the development of gene sequencing
techniques, and the evidence from these papers likely led scientists to target the sequencing
of genes related to Huntington’s disease more than genes related to conditions that were less
well-understood.
    Figure 3 uses data on the number of OMIM publications about a gene from 1970 to 2000 to
investigate selection into Celera’s IP. The solid line (“all genes”) plots the difference in mean
publications on Celera genes and mean publications on non-Celera genes in each year from 1970
to 2000. All observations are less than zero, providing empirical evidence consistent with the
type of selection I described: genes initially sequenced by the public effort had higher ex ante
expected value than genes initially sequenced by Celera. One formal test for such selection is
to use an ordinary-least-squares model to predict the gene-level “celera” indicator as a function
of count variables for publications in each year from 1970-2000. In the full sample, the p-value
from an F -test for joint significance is less than 0.001.
    Unfortunately, I do not observe which genes were sequenced by the targeted public effort, so
I cannot directly exclude those genes from the sample. As an alternative, I limit the comparison
group of non-Celera genes to those sequenced in 2001 (the year Celera’s draft genome was dis-
closed). Because the number of genes sequenced under the targeted public effort was likely small
in 2001 relative to the number of genes sequenced under the large-scale effort, selection should
be reduced in this sample. The dashed line in Figure 3 (“genes sequenced in 2001”) suggests this
sample restriction reduces but does not eliminate observed selection. In this restricted sample,
the p-value from an F -test for joint significance is 0.033. Selection will thus be a concern in my
cross-section estimates; this motivates two additional empirical tests that address selection.
    My second and third empirical tests rely on variation in the timing of when Celera genes
were resequenced by the public effort (either 2002 or 2003). The dotted line in Figure 3 (“Celera
genes”) plots the difference in mean publications on Celera genes resequenced in 2003 and mean
publications on Celera genes resequenced in 2002, in each year from 1970 to 2000. Here, I find
no evidence of selection: predicting a gene-level indicator for being resequenced in 2003 as a
function of these count variables for publications in each year, the p-value from an F -test for
their joint significance is 0.169. This result suggests that, post-2001, the public effort was either
not targeting or not successfully targeting the resequencing of more valuable Celera genes. This
evidence supports the validity of my second and third empirical tests.


3     Empirical results
3.1   Cross-section estimates
The basic comparison underlying my cross-section estimates can be a presented in a simple
cross-tabulation. Table 1 compares subsequent innovation outcomes for Celera genes and for


                                                  8
non-Celera genes sequenced in 2001. These data suggest Celera genes have lower levels of
subsequent scientific research and product development relative to non-Celera genes sequenced
in the same year. For example, about 3 percent of Celera genes were used in a gene-based
diagnostic test in 2009, relative to 5.4 percent of non-Celera genes sequenced in the same year.
       The concern with interpreting these simple differences in means is that they could reflect a
negative effect of Celera’s IP on subsequent research, or could instead reflect selection if Celera’s
genes had lower inherent potential for follow-on research. In order to address this concern,
Table 3 formalizes the basic comparison from Table 1 in a regression framework that allows me
to investigate the robustness of these patterns. For gene g, I estimate the following:

                         (outcome)g = α + β(celera)g + λ0 (covariates)g + εg .

The coefficient on the “celera” variable is the main estimate of interest. I show estimates from
ordinary-least-squares (OLS) models, and report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.19
       Column (1) of Table 3 replicates the cross-tabulation results on the full sample, controlling
for year of disclosure but no other covariates.20 Column (2) of Table 3 includes a set of count
variables for the number of publications on each gene in each year from 1970 to 2000. We saw in
Section 2.3 that Celera genes looked less valuable than non-Celera genes based on these proxies
for ex ante expected value. As expected, including these variables as covariates reduces the
magnitudes of the point estimates. Column (3) limits the sample to genes with non-missing
data on location variables (n = 16, 485), and investigates whether the estimates are sensitive
to conditioning on detailed location variables. This robustness check addresses the possibility
that scientists may have targeted their sequencing efforts based on a gene’s ex ante known
location on the genome. For example, certain chromosomes (such as chromosome 19) were
estimated to be more “gene-rich” than others, and scientists may have targeted the sequencing
of such chromosomes. To test for this possibility, I collect detailed variables on both types of
gene location descriptors used by geneticists (cytogenetic location and molecular location). The
estimates in Column (3) are quite similar in magnitude to the estimates in Column (2).
       For brevity, I focus on interpreting the magnitudes of the point estimates in Column (1).
The estimate in Panel A implies Celera genes had about 0.88 fewer publications from 2001 to
2009, a decline on the order of 40% of the mean number of publications for genes over that time
period. The estimate in Panel B implies a 16 percentage point reduction in the probability of
having a known, uncertain phenotype link, a decline on the order of 35% relative to the sample
mean. The estimate in Panel C implies a 2.7 percentage point reduction in the probability of
having a known, certain phenotype link, a decline on the order of 33% of the sample mean. The
  19
     As a robustness check, in Appendix Table B.1 I present estimates from proportional models that are analogous
to the estimates in Table 3: quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson models for publications, and logit models for the
three binary outcomes.
  20
     There are two ways to control for variation in innovation outcomes across genes as of 2009 that is a function
of the year in which the genes were sequenced: limiting the sample to the set of genes sequenced in 2001, or using
the full sample but including indicator variables to control for year of disclosure. Because all Celera genes were
sequenced in 2001, the “celera” variable only varies in 2001. Hence, re-estimating the specification in Column
(1) on the sub-sample of genes sequenced in 2001 estimates identical coefficients. I use the full sample in these
robustness checks because the additional non-Celera genes are useful for identifying the covariates.


                                                        9
estimate in Panel D implies a 2.3 percentage point reduction in the probability of a gene being
used in any currently available diagnostic test, a decline on the order of 38% of the sample mean.
One way to interpret the magnitudes of these differences in means is the following: if Celera
genes had counterfactually had the same rate of subsequent innovation as non-Celera genes,
there would have been 1,400 additional publications between 2001 and 2009, and 40 additional
diagnostic tests as of 2009.21 The magnitudes of the estimated coefficients decline in magnitude
when I add additional control variables, and the estimates in Columns (2) and (3) are on the
order of 20 to 30 percent of the sample means.
       Of course, despite my attempts to control for selection, the lingering concern is that these
estimates could be driven by non-random selection into Celera’s IP. Sections 3.2 and 3.3 present
results from my second and third empirical tests, which address selection more directly.

3.2      Panel estimates
My second empirical test investigates whether the the removal of Celera’s IP affected within-gene
flow measures of subsequent innovation. For gene-year gy, I estimate the following:

                             (outcome)gy = α + δg + γy + β(celera)gy + εgy .

The “celera” variable is now an indicator for whether gene g had been sequenced only by Celera
as of that year. This “celera” variable varies within genes over time, and a transition from 1 to 0
represents the removal of Celera’s IP from a given gene. Year fixed effects control for year-specific
shocks that are common across genes, such as annual changes in the level of research funding
available from public sector agencies. Gene fixed effects control for time-invariant differences
across genes, such as a gene’s inherent commercial potential. I limit the years in the sample to
2001-2009, focusing on the time period in which all Celera genes had been sequenced, but vary
in their IP status over time.22 I show estimates from OLS models and report heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors clustered at the gene level.
       Table 4 presents estimates from the panel specification. Columns (1) and (2) are analogous
to the cross-section specifications from Table 3: both control for year fixed effects, Column
(1) includes indicator variables for the year of disclosure, and Column (2) adds count variables
for the number of publications in each year from 1970 to 2000. Column (3), my preferred
  21
      I calculated these figures using non-Celera genes sequenced in 2001 as my counterfactual, as in Table 1, as
follows. Between 2001 and 2009, there were 8,118 publications on the cohort of genes sequenced in 2001, with
an average of 2.116 publications for non-Celera genes and an average of 1.239 publications for Celera genes. If
we assume that Celera genes had attained the non-Celera average number of publications, there would instead
have been 9,592 publications. Hence, Celera’s IP led to around 1,400 fewer publications between 2001 and 2009
(9, 592 − 8, 118 ≈ 1, 400). Undertaking a similar calculation for diagnostic tests, the number of genes sequenced in
2001 with a diagnostic test available as of 2009 was 204, and the probability of having a diagnostic test was 0.030
for Celera genes and 0.054 for non-Celera genes. If Celera genes had attained the non-Celera average probability
of being used in a diagnostic test, there would instead have been 245 diagnostic tests as of 2009. Hence, Celera’s
IP led to around 40 fewer diagnostic tests as of 2009 (245 − 204 ≈ 40).
   22
      As noted in Section 2.1, Celera’s sequencing began in 1999, and its draft genome was disclosed in 2001. My
understanding is that the vast majority of Celera’s data were first released in the 2001 draft genome, but I do not
observe the timing of sequencing from 1999-2001. In the absence of such data, I limit my panel specification to
include the years 2001-2009 since prior to 2001 I do not know whether or not Celera genes had yet been sequenced.


                                                        10
specification, retains the year fixed effects but replaces the time-invariant covariates with gene
fixed effects.
    Panel A of Table 4 reports estimates for the gene-year publications outcome. As in the
cross-section specification, adding the publication variables does affect the estimated effect of
Celera’s IP. In addition, replacing the time-invariant covariates with gene fixed effects further
reduces the magnitude of the estimated effect. That said, the magnitudes of the coefficients
in Columns (2) and (3) are broadly similar, which I interpret as suggestive evidence that the
cross-section controls are at least somewhat effective in controlling for gene-specific variation in
the publications outcome. In terms of magnitudes, the coefficient in Column (3) in Panel A of
Table 4 suggests Celera’s IP was associated with 0.11 fewer publications per year, a decline on
the order of 45% of the sample mean.
    Panel B of Table 4 reports analogous estimates for the gene-year indicator for a gene having
any known, uncertain phenotype link as of that year. The coefficient in Column (3) suggests
Celera’s IP was associated with a 8.3 percentage point reduction in the probability that a gene
had a known, uncertain phenotype link, a decline on the order of 22% of the sample mean.
    To explore the timing of the estimated effects, Figure 4 presents graphical versions of the
following event study specification:

                    (outcome)gy = α + δg + γy + Σz βz (celera)g ∗ 1(z) + εgy .

On the x axes are years z relative to a “zero” relative year that marks the last year the gene was
held with Celera’s IP (that is, year 1 marks the first year the gene was in the public domain).
The dotted lines show 95 percent confidence intervals.
    Panel A of Figure 4 presents results for the gene-year level publications outcome. These
estimates suggest that in the first year a gene enters the public domain (t = 1 on the graph),
there is a discrete level shift in the flow of publications related to that gene, which remains
relatively constant through the end of my data. In theory, the panel estimates in Table 4 could
have been driven by short-term shifts in the timing of when research takes place that may or
may not have persistent effects on welfare. In practice, the results show no clear “bunching” of
publications that would be predicted by stories in which researchers strategically wait until IP
is removed to publish scientific papers.
    Panel B of Figure 4 presents results for the gene-year level indicator for a gene having any
known, uncertain phenotype link. This outcome increases in the first year a gene enters the
public domain (t = 1 on the graph), and continues to increase through the end of my data.

3.3    Focusing on Celera genes
Figure 5 presents results from my third empirical test. I limit the sample to include only Celera
genes, and rely solely on variation in how long genes were held with Celera’s IP - that is, whether
the Celera gene was re-sequenced by the public effort in 2002 (N = 1,047; “public in 2002 ”) or in
2003 (N = 635; “public in 2003 ”). The evidence presented in Section 2.3 and Figure 3 suggests
that the year in which Celera genes were re-sequenced by the public effort cannot be predicted

                                                11
with gene-level observables. Hence, this analysis should provide a clean test for investigating
the effect of being held with Celera’s IP for one additional year.
         Figure 5 presents means by year for the two panel outcome variables. As expected, the mean
levels of both outcome variables are quite similar across the “public in 2002 ” and “public in
2003 ” groups in 2001, when both sets of genes were held with Celera’s IP. Panel A shows that
Celera genes re-sequenced in 2002 saw a relative uptick in publications in that year, while Celera
genes re-sequenced in 2003 show a similar uptick in 2003. Flow of scientific effort into these
two cohorts of genes appears to have converged over time: although the difference in means in
2002 is statistically significant at the 10 percent level, mean differences in other years are not
statistically significant.
         Panel B shows that Celera genes re-sequenced in 2002 saw a relative increase in the proba-
bility of having a known, uncertain genotype-phenotype link in 2002. However, rather than the
“public in 2003 ” group catching up with their “public in 2002 ” counterparts one year later, the
“public in 2003 ” group has persistently lower levels of this outcome variable through the end
of my data. The difference in means is statistically significant in 2003 (at the 10 percent level),
2006 (at the 10 percent level), 2007 (at the 5 percent level), and 2008 (at the 5 percent level).
         The results in Figure 5 suggest that although the flow of scientific effort into these two
cohorts of genes (as measured by annual publications) converged over time, the average stock of
scientific knowledge about genes in these two cohorts (as measured by having a known, uncertain
phenotype) did not converge. I test this formally by estimating whether the mean of the “public
in 2002 ” cohort in year t is statistically distinguishable from the mean of the “public in 2003 ”
cohort in year t + 1; in no year can I reject the null that those means are equal. That is, I cannot
reject a model in which an additional year of Celera’s IP induces a permanent loss of one year
of research. These results provide clear evidence that even very temporary forms of intellectual
property - here, lasting only one year - can have persistent effects on subsequent innovation.


4         What kinds of transaction costs were relevant?
Return to the example from the introduction: suppose Pfizer discovers a gene-based diagnostic
test that requires licensing one of Celera’s genes. Would Celera’s IP impede Pfizer’s research?23
The empirical evidence in this paper suggests it would, which implies that some form of transac-
tion costs hindered licensing negotiations over Celera’s IP. In evaluating which potential sources
of transaction costs were most likely relevant, both Celera’s short-term IP and the expectation
that Celera was pursuing patent applications on their genes are relevant.
         In a perfect contracting environment with no transaction costs, Celera and Pfizer would
negotiate a licensing agreement such that cumulative research is not hindered. Consider the
model of Green and Scotchmer (1995). Licensing agreements can occur at two stages: ex ante,
before Pfizer invests in the diagnostic test, or ex post, after Pfizer has invested in the test.
    23
    Beyond the references in the introduction (Scotchmer, 1991; Green and Scotchmer, 1995; Bessen, 2004), see
also the discussions in Merges and Nelson (1990), Heller and Eisenberg (1998), and Shapiro (2000).



                                                     12
The key distinction is whether Pfizer has sunk its research costs at the time of the licensing
negotiation. The Green and Scotchmer (1995) framework delivers a strong prediction that ex
ante licenses are optimal and will always be negotiated. When negotiating ex ante, Pfizer has a
credible threat not to invest unless Celera is willing to share a positive fraction of the diagnostic
test profits. When negotiating ex post, Pfizer has diminished bargaining power and faces a
potential holdup problem.
   Despite this strong theoretical prediction, transaction costs may prevent ex ante licensing
agreements from being successfully negotiated. For example, the Green and Scotchmer (1995)
framework assumes symmetric information, but in practice Celera may not have known Pfizer’s
cost of developing its gene-based diagnostic test. Bessen (2004) explores the implications of this
type of private information in the Green and Scotchmer (1995) framework, showing that private
information may cause negotiations to break down, deterring some socially desirable research.
   Empirically, only a small share of licensing agreements appear to be set ex ante. Anand and
Khanna (2000) document that in SIC28 (chemicals and pharmaceuticals), only 23% of licensing
agreements were set ex ante. Consistent with this data, Celera’s data access agreement (Science
Online, 2001), Celera’s DVD user agreement, and my informal discussions with academic and
commercial researchers all suggested Celera’s licensing agreements were frequently if not always
negotiated ex post rather than ex ante.
   Celera could have avoided transaction costs by conducting in-house research; indeed, Celera
developed and manufactured several gene-based technologies. However, ideas in this market
were likely scarce in the sense of Scotchmer (1991): Celera’s scientists did not know how to
develop the full set of possible subsequent innovations. Taken together, this suggests that a
scarcity of ideas together with asymmetric information about the costs of development may
have generated a first source of transaction costs.
   A second source of potential transaction costs is a version of the classic disclosure problem
(Arrow, 1962), highlighted by Gallini and Wright (1990) and Gans and Stern (2000). To ne-
gotiate a licensing agreement with Celera, Pfizer had to disclose its idea. Because Celera was
developing gene-based technologies, Celera had a credible threat to engage in imitative R&D. Ei-
ther the expectation of Celera’s bargaining position, or the actual impact of Celera’s bargaining
power in licensing negotiations, may have generated a second source of transaction costs.
   A final source of potential transaction costs is uncertainty over the academic research ex-
emption. Formally, Celera placed no restrictions on academic research. However, for at least
two reasons academic researchers may have nonetheless been deterred from using Celera’s data.
First, informal discussions with academic scientists suggested they faced uncertainty over some
of Celera’s contractual terms. For example, one scientist I spoke with expressed uncertainty
over whether the restrictions on redistribution implied she could not share Celera’s data with
her graduate students. Because accessing the data required agreeing to Celera’s terms of use,
perceived litigation risks may have deterred research even by academics who solely wanted to
use the data for non-commercial research. Second, given that the boundary between academic
and commercial research is often not clearly delineated - perhaps particularly for biomedical


                                                 13
research (Cohen and Walsh, 2008) - the ‘exemption’ for academic research may not have been
clear in practice. Celera’s sequencing took place during the biotech boom, when many academics
were doing research with an eye towards commercial applications. Celera’s IP may have dis-
couraged that type of academic research even in the absence of formal restrictions on academic
publications.


5         Concluding remarks
Intellectual property (IP) is a widely-used policy lever for promoting innovation, yet relatively
little is known about how IP on existing technologies affects subsequent innovation. The se-
quencing of the human genome provides a useful empirical context, generating variation in IP
across a relatively large group of ex ante similar technologies. Across a range of empirical speci-
fications, I find evidence that Celera’s IP led to reductions in subsequent scientific research and
product development on the order of 20 to 30 percent.
         A caveat to this interpretation of these results is that if innovation inputs are scarce, my
estimates could reflect the substitution of innovative effort away from Celera genes towards
non-Celera genes (as opposed to a net decrease in total innovation over the set of all genes).24
Looking at a broad set of academic biomedical researchers, surveys by Walsh, Cho and Cohen
(2005) and Walsh, Cohen and Cho (2007) suggest some substitution is relevant: restricted access
to tangible research inputs (including information, data, and software) appears to shift scientists’
research project choices. If substitution is relevant and researchers optimally choose their line
of research in the absence of IP, quantifying the welfare costs of IP on cumulative innovation
requires estimating the cost of distorting research towards sub-optimal projects. If more socially
valuable technologies are more likely to be held with IP, these welfare costs could be substantial.
         While Celera’s gene-level IP did not depend on patent protection, the evidence in this pa-
per is related to the ongoing legal controversy surrounding patents on human genes.25 Echoing
the broader debate on patents, proponents argue that gene patents incentivize investment in
gene-related technologies, while opponents argue that gene patents stifle subsequent product
development and restrict patients’ access to gene-related technologies.26 To the best of my
knowledge, there exists no direct evidence on how gene patents have affected subsequent prod-
uct development. Moreover, the overall welfare consequences of gene patents - and patents
    24
     A priori, the relevance of substitution depends on whether inputs to gene-related research should be considered
relatively fixed or relatively flexible.
  25
     Two recent court cases are relevant. First, Association for Molecular Pathology v. Myriad Genetics (formerly
Association for Molecular Pathology v. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office) is a lawsuit challenging the validity
of gene patents held by the firm Myriad Genetics related to the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. In November 2012,
the US Supreme Court agreed to hear the AMP v. Myriad case, with a decision expected before July 2013.
Second, Mayo Collaborative Services, dba Mayo Medical Laboratories, et al. v. Prometheus Laboratories Inc. was
a lawsuit challenging the patentability of diagnostic tests with implications for the patentability of gene-based
diagnostic tests. The US Supreme Court handed down a unanimous decision in Mayo v. Prometheus in March
2012, upholding the District court decision that declared Prometheus’s diagnostic test not patent eligible, and
reversing the US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.
  26
     Opponents of gene patents have also argued that such patents may be invalid on the grounds that DNA is
not patentable subject matter.



                                                        14
more generally - depend on the trade-off between ex ante incentives for innovation, the ex post
costs of restricting patients’ access to technologies, and any potential effects of IP on subse-
quent innovation. From a policy perspective, the evidence in this paper informs this gene patent
debate by documenting that - at least for some forms of intellectual property - getting the incen-
tives “right” for subsequent innovators is quantitatively important for encouraging subsequent
scientific research and product development.




                                               15
References
Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont, and Jeremy Stein, “Academic freedom, private-sector
 focus, and the process of innovation,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2008, 39 (3), 617–635.

Anand, Bharat and Tarun Khanna, “The structure of licensing contracts,” Journal of Industrial
 Economics, 2000, 48 (1), 103–135.

Arrow, Kenneth, “Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention,” in Richard Nelson,
 ed., The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity, Princeton University Press, 1962.

Bessen, James, “Holdup and licensing of cumulative innovations with private information,” Economics
  Letters, 2004, 82 (3), 321–326.

Cho, Mildred, Samantha Illangasekare, Meredith Weaver, Debra Leonard, and Jon Merz,
 “Effects of patents and licenses on the provision of clinical genetic testing services,” Journal of Molec-
 ular Diagnostics, 2003, 5 (1), 3–8.

Cohen, Wesley and John Walsh, “Real impediments to academic biomedical research,” in Josh
 Lerner and Scott Stern, eds., Innovation Policy and the Economy Volume 8, University of Chicago
 Press, 2008.

Collins, Francis and David Galas, “A new five-year plan for the U.S. Human Genome Project,”
 Science, 1993, 262 (5130), 43–46.

  , Ari Patrinos, Elke Jordan, Aravinda Chakravarti, Raymond Gesteland, LeRoy Walters,
  the members of the DOE, and NIH planning groups, “New goals for the US Human Genome
  Project: 1998-2003,” Science, 1998, 282 (5389), 682–689.

Cook-Deegan, Robert, The Gene Wars: Science, Politics, and the Human Genome, W. W. Norton
 & Company, 1994.

Eisenberg, Rebecca, “Genomics in the public domain: Strategy and policy,” Nature Reviews Genetics,
  2000, 1 (1), 70–74.

Gallini, Nancy and Brian Wright, “Technology transfer under asymmetric information,” RAND
 Journal of Economics, 1990, 21 (1), 147–160.

Gans, Joshua and Scott Stern, “Incumbency and R&D incentives: Licensing the gale of creative
 destruction,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 2000, 9 (4), 485–511.

Green, Jerry and Suzanne Scotchmer, “On the division of profit in sequential innovation,” RAND
 Journal of Economics, 1995, 26 (1), 20–33.

Heller, Michael and Rebecca Eisenberg, “Can patents deter innovation? The anticommons in
 biomedical research,” Science, 1998, 280 (5364), 698–701.

Huang, Kenneth and Fiona Murray, “Does patent strategy shape the long-run supply of public
 knowledge: Evidence from human genetics,” Academy of Management Journal, 2009, 52 (6), 1198–
 1221.

Istrail, Sorin et al., “Whole-genome shotgun assembly and comparison of human genome assemblies,”
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2004, 101 (7), 1916–1921.

Jaffe, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, “Geographic localization of knowl-
  edge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108 (3),
  577–598.

Kremer, Michael, “Patent buyouts: A mechanism for encouraging innovation,” Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 1998, 113 (4), 1137–1167.

                                                    16
   and Heidi Williams, “Incentivizing innovation: Adding to the toolkit,” in Josh Lerner and Scott
  Stern, eds., Innovation Policy and the Economy Volume 10, University of Chicago Press, 2010, pp. 1–
  17.

Lander, Eric et al., “Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome,” Nature, 2001, 409 (6822),
  860–921.

Marshall, Eliot, “NIH to produce a ‘working draft’ of the genome by 2001,” Science, 1998, 281 (5384),
 1774–1775.

  , “Bermuda Rules: Community spirit, with teeth,” Science, 2001, 291 (5507), 1192.

Merges, Robert and Richard Nelson, “On the complex economics of patent scope,” Columbia Law
 Review, 1990, 90 (4), 839–916.

Moon, Seongwuk, “How does the management of research impact the disclosure of knowledge? Evi-
 dence from scientific publications and patenting behavior,” Economics of Innovation and New Tech-
 nology, 2011, 20 (1), 1–32.

Murray, Fiona and Scott Stern, “Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow of scientific
 knowledge? An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis,” Journal of Economic Behavior and
 Organization, 2007, 63 (4), 648–687.

  , Philippe Aghion, Mathias Dewatripont, Julian Kolev, and Scott Stern, “Of mice and
  academics: Examining the effect of openness on innovation,” 2008. unpublished MIT mimeo.

National Academy of Sciences, Reaping the Benefits of Genomic and Proteomic Research: Intellectual
 Property Rights, Innovation, and Public Health, National Academies Press, 2006.

Nelson, Richard, “The simple economics of basic scientific research,” Journal of Political Economy,
 1959, 67 (3), 297–306.

Pennisi, Elizabeth, “Human genome: Academic sequencers challenge Celera in a sprint to the finish,”
  Science, 1999, 283 (5409), 1822–1823.

Scherer, Stewart, A Short Guide to the Human Genome, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 2008.

Science Online, “Accessing the Celera human genome sequence data,” 2001. http://www.sciencemag.
  org/feature/data/announcement/gsp.dtl (last accessed 21 December 2011).

Scotchmer, Suzanne, “Standing on the shoulders of giants: Cumulative research and the patent law,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1991, 5 (1), 29–41.

Service, Robert, “Can data banks tally profits?,” Science, 2001, 291 (5507), 1203.

Shapiro, Carl, “Navigating the patent thicket: Cross licenses, patent pools, and standard setting,” in
  Adam Jaffe, Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern, eds., Innovation Policy and the Economy Volume 1, MIT
  Press, 2000.

Shreeve, James, The Genome War: How Craig Venter Tried to Capture the Code of Life and Save the
  World, Ballantine Books, 2005.

Snyder, Michael and Mark Gerstein, “Defining genes in the genomics era,” Science, 2003, 300
  (5617), 258–260.

Sulston, John and Georgina Ferry, The Common Thread: Science, Politics, Ethics, and the Human
  Genome, Corgi Books, 2002.

Uhlmann, Wendy and Alan Guttmacher, “Key internet genetics resources for the clinician,” Journal
 of the American Medical Association, 2008, 299 (11), 1356–1358.


                                                   17
US National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), US National Institutes of
 Health (NIH), “NHGRI policy regarding intellectual property of human genomic sequence: Pol-
 icy on availability and patenting of human genomic DNA sequence produced by NHGRI pilot projects
 (funded under RFA HG-95-005),” 1996. http://www.genome.gov/10000926 (last accessed 21 Decem-
 ber 2011).

Venter, J. Craig, “Prepared statement of J. Craig Venter, Ph.D. President and Chief Scientific Officer
  Celera Genomics, a PE Corporation Business before the Subcommittee on Energy and Environment,
  U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science,” 2000. http://clinton4.nara.gov/WH/EOP/
  OSTP/html/00626_4.html (last accessed 21 December 2011).

  , A Life Decoded: My Genome, My Life, Viking Adult, 2007.

   et al., “The sequence of the human genome,” Science, 2001, 291 (5507), 1304–1351.

  , Mark Adams, Granger Sutton, Anthony Kerlavage, Hamilton Smith, and Michael
  Hunkapiller, “Shotgun sequencing of the human genome,” Science, 1998, 280 (5369), 1540–1542.

Wade, Nicholas, “Once again, scientists say human genome is complete,” New York Times, 2003, 15
 April.

Walsh, John, Charlene Cho, and Wesley Cohen, “View from the bench: Patents and material
 transfers,” Science, 2005, 309 (5743), 2002–2003.

  , Wesley Cohen, and Charlene Cho, “Where excludability matters: Material versus intellectual
  property in academic biomedical research,” Research Policy, 2007, 36 (8), 1184–1203.




                                                 18
 Table 1: Innovation Outcomes for Celera & non-Celera Genes Sequenced in 2001

                                        (1)         (2)             (3)             (4)
                                       Celera    Non-Celera     difference      p-value of
                                       mean        mean          [(1)-(2)]      difference
      publications in 2001-2009        1.239        2.116            -0.877       [0.000]
 1(known, uncertain phenotype)         0.401        0.563            -0.162       [0.000]
   1(known, certain phenotype)         0.046        0.073            -0.027       [0.000]
  1(used in any diagnostic test)       0.030        0.054            -0.024       [0.000]
                                  N    1,682        2,851
Notes: This table compares subsequent innovation outcomes for Celera genes relative to non-Celera
genes sequenced in the same year. Gene-level observations. Sample in Column (1) includes all Celera genes;
sample in Column (2) includes all non-Celera genes sequenced in 2001. The p-value reported in Column (4) is
from a t-test for a difference in mean outcomes across Column (1) and Column (2). See text and online appendix
for more detailed data and variable descriptions.




                       Table 2: Summary Statistics for Gene-Level Data

                                                                          standard
                                                  mean       median       deviation    minimum     maximum
 Panel A: Sequencing & Celera’s IP
               year sequence disclosed           2002.962      2001           3.551         1999      2009
                       1(Celera gene)             0.060          0            0.238           0         1
          Panel B: Outcome variables
               publications in 2001-2009           2.197         0            9.133          0         231
          1(known, uncertain phenotype)            0.453         0            0.498          0          1
            1(known, certain phenotype)            0.081         0            0.273          0          1
           1(used in any diagnostic test)          0.060         0            0.238          0          1
                                 N = 27,882
Notes: Gene-level observations. Note that the mean year of disclosure is affected by left-censoring since
a disclosure year of 1999 represents a gene sequenced in or before 1999 (1999 is the earliest year any observations
appear in the RefSeq database). See text and the online appendix for more detailed data and variable
descriptions.




                                                        19
Table 3: Cross-Section Estimates: Impact of Celera’s IP on Innovation Outcomes

                                                           (1)           (2)           (3)
        Panel A: publications in 2001-2009
                               mean = 2.197

                                             celera     -0.877         -0.328        -0.264
                                                      (0.177)***     (0.099)***    (0.107)***
 Panel B: 1(known, uncertain phenotype)
                            mean = 0.453

                                             celera     -0.162         -0.158        -0.128
                                                      (0.015)***     (0.015)***    (0.017)***
    Panel C: 1(known, certain phenotype)
                             mean = 0.081

                                             celera     -0.027         -0.017        -0.014
                                                      (0.007)***     (0.006)***    (0.007)**
   Panel D: 1(used in any diagnostic test)
                             mean = 0.060

                                             celera     -0.023         -0.014        -0.013
                                                      (0.006)***     (0.005)***    (0.006)**
      indicator variables for year of disclosure           yes          yes            yes
 number of publications in each year 1970-2000             no           yes            yes
   detailed cytogenetic & molecular covariates             no           no             yes
                                                 N       27,882        27,882        16,485
Notes: Gene-level observations. All estimates are from ordinary-least-squares (OLS) models. Samples in
Columns (1) and (2) include all genes; sample in Column (3) includes all genes with non-missing cytogenetic
and molecular covariates. Robust standard errors shown in parentheses. *: p< 0.10; **: p< 0.05; ***: p< 0.01.
“Celera”: 0/1, =1 for a Celera gene. Indicator variables for year of disclosure: 0/1 indicator variables for the
year sequence for the gene was disclosed. Number of publications in each year 1970-2000 : count variables for
the number of publications on each gene in each year from 1970 to 2000. Detailed cytogenetic & molecular
covariates: 0/1 indicator variables for the chromosome (1-22, X, or Y ) and arm (p or q) on which a gene is
located; continuous variables for region, band, subband, start base pair, and end base pair; and 0/1 indicator
variables for the orientation of the gene on the genome assembly (plus or minus). See text and the online
appendix for more detailed data and variable descriptions.




                                                      20
      Table 4: Panel Estimates: Impact of Celera’s IP on Innovation Outcomes

                                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)
                            Panel A: publications
                                     mean = 0.244

                                                  celera      -0.160          -0.121         -0.109
                                                            (0.017)***      (0.011)***     (0.011)***
 Panel B: 1(known, uncertain phenotype)
                            mean = 0.381

                                                  celera      -0.163          -0.160         -0.083
                                                            (0.009)***      (0.008)***     (0.008)***
                                year fixed effects               yes            yes             yes
       indicator variables for year of disclosure                yes            yes             no
  number of publications in each year 1970-2000                  no             yes             no
                               gene fixed effects                no             no              yes
                                                       N      250,938        250,938         250,938
Notes: Gene-year-level observations. All estimates are from ordinary-least-squares (OLS) models. The
sample includes all gene-years from 2001 to 2009 (27,882 genes for 9 years implies N = 250,938 total gene-year
observations). Robust standard errors, clustered at the gene level, shown in parentheses. *: p< 0.10; **: p< 0.05;
***: p< 0.01. “Celera”: 0/1, =1 for a Celera gene. Indicator variables for year of disclosure: 0/1 indicator
variables for the year sequence for the gene was disclosed. Number of publications in each year 1970-2000 :
count variables for the number of publications on each gene in each year from 1970 to 2000. See text and online
appendix for more detailed data and variable descriptions.




                                                       21
                                 Figure 1: Timeline of Key Events




Notes: This figure summarizes the key events analyzed in this paper. For details, see Collins and Galas (1993),
Venter et al. (1998), Venter (2000), Lander et al. (2001), Venter et al. (2001), and Wade (2003).




                                                      22
                                                              Figure 2: Documenting the Link Between
                                                             Scientific Research & Product Development




                                        1       .8
                       cumulative share of genes
                     .2       .4       .6
                                        0




                                                             0     10        20         30        40       50      60        70                   80
                                                                                  count of publications, 1970−2000

                                                                              test as of 2009              no test as of 2009


                  (a) CDF of number of publications for genes with/without a diagnostic test




                                                                                                                                       20000
                                        1
                     share of genes with a diagnostic test
                                                    .8




                                                                                                                                                      15000
                                                                                                                                       number of genes
                                           .6




                                                                                                                                           10000
                                 .4




                                                                                                                                       5000
                        .2              0




                                                                                                                                       0




                                                             0    10       20     30        40       50     60          70        80
                                                                            count of publications, 1970−2000

                                                                 share of genes with a diagnostic test             number of genes


                             (b) Share of genes with a diagnostic test by number of publications

Notes: These figures provide two sets of descriptive statistics that document the link between scientific research
and product development in my data. In sub-figure (a), the dashed line plots the empirical cumulative distribution
function of the number of publications between 1970-2000 for genes that do not have a diagnostic test available
as of 2009, and the solid line plots the empirical cumulative distribution function of the number of publications
between 1970-2000 for genes that do have a diagnostic test available as of 2009. In sub-figure (b), the dashed
line plots the distribution of genes by the number of publications between 1970-2000, and the solid line plots the
share of genes with a diagnostic test as of 2009 at each number of publications. See text and online appendix for
more detailed data and variable descriptions.




                                                                                             23
                                 Figure 3: Investigating Selection into Celera’s IP
                                        .05
                      difference in publications by year
                              −.15      −.25−.05




                                                           1970   1975       1980       1985        1990       1995        2000

                                                                   all genes: mean(Celera) − mean(non−Celera)
                                                                   genes sequenced in 2001: mean(Celera) − mean(non−Celera)
                                                                   Celera genes: mean(public in 2003) − mean(public in 2002)



Notes: This figure provides three sets of descriptive statistics investigating the selection of genes into Celera’s
intellectual property (IP). The solid line (“all genes”) plots the difference in mean publications on Celera genes
and mean publications on non-Celera genes in each year from 1970 to 2000. The dashed line (“genes sequenced in
2001”) plots the difference in mean publications on Celera genes and mean publications on non-Celera genes that
were sequenced in 2001 in each year from 1970 to 2000. The dotted line (“Celera genes”) plots the difference in
mean publications on Celera genes resequenced in 2003 and mean publications on Celera genes resequenced in 2002
in each year from 1970 to 2000. See text and online appendix for more detailed data and variable descriptions.




                                                                                      24
     Figure 4: Panel Estimates: Impact of Celera’s IP on Innovation Outcomes




                      .3
                      .2
                      .1
                      0
                      −.1




                            −1       0      1         2           3         4         5   6   7
                                             year relative to last year with Celera IP


                                         (a) Outcome variable: Publications
                      .2
                      .15
                      .1
                      .05
                      0




                            −1       0      1         2           3         4         5   6   7
                                             year relative to last year with Celera IP


                                 (b) Outcome variable: 1(known/uncertain phenotype)


Notes: These figures plot coefficients (and 95 percent confidence intervals) from the event study specification
described in Section 3.2. On the x axes are years z relative to a “zero” relative year that marks the last year
the gene was held with Celera’s IP (that is, year 1 marks the first year the gene was in the public domain). As
in the specifications in Table 4, this specification is based on gene-year level observations, the coefficients are
estimates from ordinary-least-squares (OLS) models, the sample includes all gene-years from 2001 to 2009, and
the standard errors are robust and clustered at the gene level. See text and online appendix for more detailed
data and variable descriptions.




                                                             25
       Figure 5: Average Innovation Outcomes for Celera Genes by Year,
                   by Year of Re-sequencing by the Public Effort



                     .25
                     .2
                     .15
                     .1
                     .05
                     0




                           2001     2002    2003      2004      2005   2006    2007        2008   2009

                                                   public in 2002         public in 2003


                                           (a) Outcome variable: Publications
                     .4
                     .3
                     .2
                     .1




                           2001     2002    2003      2004      2005   2006    2007        2008   2009

                                                   public in 2002         public in 2003


                                  (b) Outcome variable: 1(known/uncertain phenotype)

Notes: These figures plot the descriptive statistics described in Section 3.3. Sample includes all Celera genes.
Means are shown separately for Celera genes that were re-sequenced by the public effort in 2002 (N = 1,047) and
for Celera genes that were re-sequenced by the public effort in 2003 (N = 635). See text and online appendix for
more detailed data and variable descriptions.




                                                               26
Appendix A: Data description
This appendix describes in additional detail the data sets used in my analysis.
Public sequencing data
    I track the public sequencing effort at the mRNA-by-year level from 1999 forward using the
online US National Institutes of Health’s (NIH) RefSeq database.1 The RefSeq database is main-
tained by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), a division of the US NIH’s
National Library of Medicine (NLM). As described on its website, the RefSeq (Reference Se-
quence) database “...aims to provide a comprehensive, integrated, non-redundant, well-annotated
set of sequences, including genomic DNA, transcripts, and proteins.”
    Each RefSeq record represents a naturally occurring molecule from one organism, and is
identified by a distinct RefSeq accession-version number (e.g. N M 000646.1) that can be used
to match RefSeq records with other databases. As noted above, RefSeq records are available
for several types of molecules, including genomic DNA, transcripts, and proteins; the relevant
molecule for a given RefSeq record is identifiable through the two prefix letters on the RefSeq
number.2 RefSeq records are available for many different organisms, including eukaryoktes,
bacteria, and viruses; the relevant organism for a given RefSeq record is identifiable through the
taxonomic ID number.3 I focus on the human messenger RNA (mRNA) RefSeq records.
    I use RefSeq release 34, which incorporates data available as of 6 March 2009. The catalog
for RefSeq release 34 gives a list of accession/version numbers included in that database.4 For
each RefSeq accession/version number corresponding to a human mRNA transcript, I query (via
a Python script) the online Sequence Revision History website to determine the date at which
that record first appeared in the RefSeq database.5
    It is important to note that the public sequencing efforts could be tracked in at least two
other ways: using GenBank, another NCBI online database, or using genome assemblies. It is
worth clarifying why I chose to track the public sequencing efforts through the RefSeq database,
and what the advantages and disadvantages of these data are relative to the GenBank or genome
assembly data.
    GenBank is the “original” database to which individual laboratories submitted data under
the Bermuda rules of the public sequencing effort, and in that sense is the most accurate measure
of when a given section of DNA was sequenced by the public effort. Unfortunately, several
characteristics of the GenBank data complicate its usefulness for this analysis. As described on
the US Department of Energy website, GenBank is an “archival” database, containing records
created by individual scientists.6 Because of this, GenBank may contain hundreds of records
documenting the same mRNA transcript. Unfortunately, no identification numbers exist that
can link a GenBank record for a given mRNA transcript either to other GenBank records for the
same mRNA transcript, or to other databases. Moreover, because there is no independent review
  1
     Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/RefSeq/ (last accessed 21 December 2011). See also Pruitt,
Tatusova and Maglott (2007).
   2
     The prefix letters for mRNA records are NM, NR, XM, and XR; see ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/refseq/
release/release-notes/archive/RefSeq-release34.txt (last accessed 21 December 2011).
   3
     The taxonomic ID number for humans is 9606; see http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/
wwwtax.cgi?mode=Undef&name=Homo+sapiens&lvl=0&srchmode=1 (last accessed 21 December 2011).
   4
     Available at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/refseq/release/release-catalog/archive/RefSeq-release34.
catalog.gz (last accessed 21 December 2011).
   5
     Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/sutils/girevhist.cgi (last accessed 21 December
2011). I am very grateful to David Robinson for assistance in writing this script.
   6
     See http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/posters/chromosome/sequence.shtml (last
accessed 21 December 2011).



                                                   1
system for sequence data submitted to GenBank, the data may contain errors. The RefSeq
database was created specifically to overcome these shortcomings of the GenBank database that
complicated its use by researchers in many contexts. Many RefSeq records are derived from
GenBank records, but RefSeq aims to provide non-redundant records that identify molecules
by unique identification numbers, and that undergo a review process to screen for problems
such as sequencing errors. RefSeq also includes some data not submitted to GenBank but
available elsewhere (such as in published papers). The US Department of Energy website cited
above notes, “Since RefSeq records undergo a review process that screens for problems such
as sequencing errors and vector contamination, RefSeq records are good sources of sequence
information.” Although I have no systematic way of comparing dates of accession to GenBank
with dates of accession to RefSeq, based on some hand-checks it appeared that (as expected)
sequences appearing in RefSeq at earlier dates tended to be based on sequences that appeared in
GenBank at earlier dates, with a relatively short lag. In sum, I rely on RefSeq records rather than
GenBank records because RefSeq records identify unique mRNA observations with identification
numbers that can be reliably matched to other databases, because scientists appear to rely on
the RefSeq database as a source of sequencing data, and because based on some hand-checks
dates of accession to RefSeq appear correlated with dates of accession to GenBank.
    The second alternative would be to track the inclusion of mRNAs in NCBI’s genome assem-
blies, which were released approximately annually over my time period of interest. Using the
date an mRNA was first included in an NCBI genome assembly as the measure of the date of
public sequencing could be more appropriate than the RefSeq measure if scientists primarily
relied on the genome assemblies rather than the underlying mRNA transcript-level data. In
practice, for the one assembly that I can easily compare these two measures they appear to be
quite similar. Specifically, comparing the mRNA transcripts included in the NCBI-34 genome
assembly from 2003 with the set of mRNA transcripts included in the RefSeq data as of 2003
suggests a relatively close correspondence: no mRNA transcripts were included in NCBI-34 but
not included in the RefSeq data, and approximately 1,206 mRNA transcripts were included in
RefSeq but not included in the NCBI-34 assembly (relative to 27,348 mRNA transcripts in-
cluded in both datasets).7 Relying on the RefSeq records rather than the genome assembly
data is also preferable because the latter would require me to run analyses to compare various
versions of the human genome assemblies, a task that is feasible but requires a relatively high
level of scientific expertise. In sum, I rely on RefSeq records rather than comparisons of genome
assemblies for computational ease, and because one comparison of the two measures suggested
a close correspondence.

Celera sequencing data
    For the private sector effort, there was essentially only one “version” of data, which I refer
to as the Celera data. Comparing the Celera data with the public sequence data at a given
point in time itself requires a non-trivial scientific analysis. Fortuitously for this work, a 2004
publication (Istrail et al., 2004) performed just such a comparison, and based on this analysis
I am able to construct an mRNA-by-year level variable for whether a given mRNA transcript
was included in the Celera data but had not yet appeared in the public sequencing data.
    Specifically, Istrail et al. (2004) compare the Celera whole genome shotgun assembly (WGSA)
as of December 2001 with the NCBI-34 (Build 34, October 2003) release of the public sector
human genome assembly. Table 6 in Istrail et al. (2004) gives a list of RefSeq numbers for which
   7
     One reason why an mRNA transcript may be included in the RefSeq data but not in the NCBI-34 assembly
is if the transcript was sequenced but it was not clear where the transcript “fit” in terms of its location on the
full human genome assembly.


                                                        2
the RefSeq mapping was longer in WGSA relative to NCBI-34, and Table 7 in Istrail et al.
(2004) gives an analogous list of RefSeq numbers for which the RefSeq mapping was longer in
NCBI-34 relative to WGSA.
    I obtained an archived version of the mRNA transcripts included in NCBI-34 from the NCBI
website (downloaded 27 April 2009), and used a Python script to extract the RefSeq numbers
for each mRNA transcript in these data.8 Three RefSeq IDs in this list were duplicates, and
I drop one of each duplicate set. Matching this list to the RefSeq release 34 data described
above, some records are included in NCBI-34 but not in RefSeq release 34 (largely “suspended”
records), and some records are included in RefSeq release 34 but not in NCBI-34 (as expected,
since RefSeq release 34 is a more recent dataset). I discard records in either NCBI-34 or in
WGSA that are linked to mRNA transcripts listed in RefSeq release 34 as “suspended” records.
    Table 6 of Istrail et al. (2004) lists RefSeq numbers for which the RefSeq mapping was longer
in WGSA relative to NCBI-34, but this measure of length can be a fraction less than one - which
would imply that a given mRNA transcript was partially but not entirely included in the NCBI-
34 data. To be conservative, I define an mRNA transcript as being in the public domain if any
part of the transcript was in the public domain according to the analysis of Istrail et al. (2004).
Substantively, this means that I consider all RefSeq numbers listed in Table 6 of Istrail et al.
(2004) to be in the public domain if any fraction of the transcript was in NCBI-34. Only four
RefSeq numbers listed in Table 6 of Istrail et al. (2004) are listed as having been completely
absent from the NCBI-34 data, and all four of these RefSeq numbers are listed in the RefSeq
release 34 data as “suspended” records. Thus, for the purposes of my analysis there are no
RefSeq numbers that were in the WGSA data but not in NCBI-34.
    I construct an mRNA-by-year level variable for whether a given mRNA transcript was in-
cluded in the Celera data but had not yet appeared in the public sequencing data as of 2001
as follows. Let A represent the RefSeq numbers in NCBI-34 but not in WGSA; let B represent
the RefSeq numbers in both NCBI-34 and in WGSA; and let C represent the RefSeq numbers
in WGSA but not in NCBI-34. Table 7 in Istrail et al. (2004) gives me the set A, and as noted
above by my definition the set C has no elements. Together with the full NCBI-34 dataset
described above, I can thus construct B as (NCBI-34) minus A. Some elements of B were in the
set B as of 2001, whereas other elements of B were sequenced by the public effort sometime after
2001 and before the October 2003 NCBI-34 release. Because I wish to identify those mRNA
transcripts that were only included in the Celera version of the human genome as of December
2001, I want to subtract off those elements of B that were added to the public database after
December 2001. At the mRNA-year level, I thus create a 0/1 Celera variable, equaling one for
observations in the following set:

   B - ( b ∈ B | b first appearing in RefSeq after December 2001) + C

OMIM database: Publications and scientific knowledge outcome variables
   I draw several gene-level outcome variables from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
(MIM, or OMIM), database.9
   A paper version of MIM was initially created in the 1960s by Dr. Victor McKusick as a
catalog of Mendelian traits and disorders. Twelve paper editions were published between 1966
and 1998. The online version, OMIM, was created in 1985 by a collaboration between the
   8
     Available at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/H_sapiens/ARCHIVE/BUILD.34.1/RNA/rna.gbk.gz (last ac-
cessed 21 December 2011).
   9
     Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=omim (last accessed 21 December 2011). See
also McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore, MD).



                                                   3
National Library of Medicine and the William H. Welch Medical Library at Johns Hopkins,
and first became available on the internet in 1987. OMIM is currently authored and edited at
the McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine at the Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine.
    As described on its website, OMIM aims to provide a “comprehensive, authoritative, and
timely compendium of human genes and genetic phenotypes” (a phenotype is an observable char-
acteristic or trait of an organism). OMIM is updated daily, and is intended for use by physicians
and other professionals concerned with genetic disorders, as well as genetics researchers.
    OMIM includes six types of records:

   • Genes of known sequence (indicated with an asterisk * preceding the MIM number);

   • Descriptive entries, usually of phenotypes, that do not represent a unique locus on the
     human genome (indicated with a number symbol # preceding the MIM number);

   • Descriptions of a gene of known sequence and phenotype (indicated with a plus sign +
     preceding the MIM number);

   • Descriptions of a confirmed mendelian phenotype for which the underlying molecular basis
     is not known (indicated with a percent sign % preceding the MIM number);

   • Descriptions of phenotypes with a suspected but unconfirmed mendelian basis, or with
     separateness from a phenotype in another OMIM entry that is unclear (indicated with the
     lack of a symbol preceding the MIM number);

   • Removed records (indicated with a caret symbol ^ preceding the MIM number).

    I create a “known, uncertain phenotype” indicator variable for whether a gene appears in
any of these types of records, as a proxy for the gene being thought to be related to a given
phenotype with some (potentially low) level of scientific certainty. I create a “known, certain
phenotype” indicator variable for a gene appearing in either the second or the third type of
OMIM records listed above, as a proxy for the gene being thought to be related to a given
phenotype with a higher level of scientific certainty. OMIM records cite published scientific
papers relevant for each record, which I collect as an additional outcome variable.
    These OMIM outcome variables are collected in a cross-section (in 2009), but for two of the
outcome variables, I am able to construct gene-by-year measures for use in the panel specification.
First, I use paper publication dates to construct the number of publications by gene by year.
Second, and less straightforward, I construct the first date each “known, uncertain phenotype”
link appears in OMIM. I observe this latter measure with error, but expect this error to be
uncorrelated with the Celera IP treatment variable. Specifically, the measurement error arises
because OMIM includes entries of some phenotypes with unknown genotypes, some of which
transition to become entries of phenotypes with known genotypes over time, and I do not
observe these transition dates but rather observe the initial date any part of the entry appeared
in OMIM. For example, Huntington’s disease was known to be a genetic disease prior to the
sequencing of the HTT gene, and my measurement of this date would likely capture the first
date Huntington’s disease was included in the OMIM database rather than the date when the
sequenced gene allowed the full genotype-phenotype link to be listed in OMIM.
    Each OMIM record includes a distinct MIM number (e.g. +611082), which can be used to
match OMIM records with other databases. One gene can be included in more than one OMIM
record, and one OMIM record can involve more than one gene; I collapse the OMIM data to
the gene level. For the measures of genotype-phenotype links, I take the maximum of indicator


                                                4
variables by gene, and for the publications measure I sum the total number of publications
relevant to that gene from all OMIM entries.
    I use the full-text OMIM version of 19 April 2009 and extract, via a Python script, the
outcome variables described above for each OMIM record in this text file.10

GeneTests.org database: Diagnostic test availability outcome variable
    I draw a gene-level indicator for the availability of any genetic test related to that gene from
the US NIH’s GeneTests.org online database.11
    As described on its website, GeneTests.org includes a laboratory directory that is a self-
reported, voluntary listing of US and international laboratories offering in-house molecular ge-
netic testing, specialized cytogenetic testing, and biochemical testing for inherited disorders.
US-based laboratories listed in GeneTests.org must be certified under the Clinical Laboratory
Improvement Amendment (CLIA) of 1988, which requires laboratories to meet quality control
and proficiency testing standards; there are no such requirements for non-US-based laboratories.
    The GeneTests.org website clarifies several types of information not included in its labo-
ratory directory, including genetic testing on the diagnosis and/or monitoring of solid tumors,
hematologic malignancies, infectious diseases, and forensic testing.
    As described on its website, GeneTests.org aims to provide “current, authoritative infor-
mation on genetic testing and its use in diagnosis, management, and genetic counseling” to
promote “the appropriate use of genetic services in patient care and personal decision making.”
Originally based at the University of Washington in Seattle, GeneTests.org has been funded
by a series of federal grants and is currently hosted at the US National Institutes of Health’s
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).
    I use the GeneTests.org data as of 27 May 2009, which lists OMIM numbers for which there
is any genetic test available in the GeneTests.org directory.12 As with the OMIM data described
above, one gene can be included in more than one OMIM record, and one OMIM record can
involve more than one gene; I collapse the GeneTests.org data to the gene level, taking the
maximum of this indicator variable by gene.

Gene-level covariates: Cytogenetic and molecular location variables
    I draw several gene-level variables describing the location of a particular gene on the human
genome from the US NIH’s Entrez Gene database.13
    Geneticists use two types of variables to describe a gene’s location on the human genome:
cytogenetic location and molecular location.14 Cytogenetic variables take forms such as 19q13.4.
For this example, 19 represents the chromosome on which the gene is located (1-22, X, or Y ).
The letter q represents the arm of the chromosome on which the gene is located; each chromosome
is divided into two arms based on the location of a narrowing called the centromere - a shorter
arm (p) and a longer arm (q). The numbers after the arm letter describe the position of the
  10
     The current full-text OMIM version is available at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/repository/OMIM/ARCHIVE/
omim.txt.Z (last accessed 21 December 2011). I am very grateful to David Robinson for assistance in writing
this script.
  11
     Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/GeneTests/?db=GeneTests (last accessed 21 December
2011). See also University of Washington, Seattle (2009).
  12
     The current GeneTests.org data are available at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/GeneTests/disease_OMIM.
txt (last accessed 21 December 2011).
  13
     Available at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/ (last accessed 21 December 2011). See also Maglott et al.
(2005).
  14
     The data description in this section draws heavily on the discussion in http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/handbook/
howgeneswork/genelocation (last accessed 21 December 2011).


                                                     5
gene on the p or q arm, usually designated by two digits (representing a region and a band)
and sometimes followed by a decimal point and one or more additional digits (representing
sub-bands). These numbers increase with distance from the centromere.
    Molecular location variables are in a sense more precise than cytogenetic location variables
in that they describe a gene’s location in terms of base pairs. For example, according to the
NIH’s National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database, the APOE gene on
chromosome 19 begins with base pair 50,100,901 and ends with base pair 50,104,488. Together,
these variables communicate both the precise position of the gene and the size of the gene
(3,588 base pairs). However, different databases often present slightly different values for these
variables.
    I use two Entrez Gene files from 18 June 2009: the gene2ref seq file and the gene inf o file.15
    From the gene2ref seq file, I extract continuous variables for the start and end base pairs
of the gene on the genomic accession (as well as indicator variables for uncertain start and end
base pair data) and for the orientation of the gene on the genomic accession (plus and minus,
as well as an indicator variable for uncertain orientation data). The gene2ref seq observations
are at the mRNA-level (identified by RefSeq accession/version numbers), but can include more
than one observation for a given mRNA. I collapse this data to the gene level, taking the mean
of each variable over all available observations.
    From the gene inf o file, I extract indicator variables for the chromosome on which the gene
is located (1-22, X, Y , and an indicator for uncertain chromosome data), indicator variables
for the arm of the chromosome on which the gene is located (p, q, and an indicator for uncer-
tain arm data), and continuous variables for the region, band, and subband position of the gene
on the relevant arm (as well as indicator variables for uncertain region, band, or subband data).16

Other gene-level covariates: Disclosure dates
    Using data already described above, I construct an additional set of gene-level covariates
that a priori are likely to affect the amount of research conducted on a given gene: namely,
indicator variables for the year sequence data for the gene was first disclosed.
    Genes sequenced earlier have been “at risk” for research based on the sequenced data for a
longer period of time, which I would expect to affect the total amount of research observed as of
2009. I define the date of sequence data disclosure as the minimum of (1) the first year I observe
the sequence data in the RefSeq database; and (2) 2001, if the sequence data were included in
the Celera data. Note that this minimum is taken over all mRNA transcripts for each gene, so
measures the earliest date at which sequence data for any mRNA transcript on each gene was
disclosed. I chose to use this disclosure date because of a concern that disclosure dates for other
mRNA transcripts on a gene may be endogenous to the Celera IP treatment variable of interest.

RefSeq-to-gene and gene-to-OMIM crosswalks
   I use NCBI-generated crosswalks to match RefSeq accession/version numbers to Entrez Gene
ID numbers and to match Entrez Gene ID numbers to OMIM numbers.17

  15
     The current versions of these two databases are available at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/DATA/
gene2refseq.gz and ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene_info.gz (last accessed 21 December 2011).
  16
     I made eight hand-corrections to the chromosome variable based on redundant information provided in the
map location variable, and one hand-correction to the region variable - changing a zero region value (which only
appeared once in the data) to an uncertain region value.
  17
     Available at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/refseq/release/release-catalog/archive/RefSeq-release34.
catalog.gz and at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/DATA/mim2gene, respectively (last accessed 21 December
2011).


                                                       6
Appendix B: Proportional models for cross-section estimates
This appendix investigates the robustness of the estimates in Table 3 to using proportional
models: quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) Poisson models for publications, and logit models
for the binary outcomes. For the logit models, I report average marginal effects.
    In Panel B, whenever the outcome variable (known, uncertain phenotype) equals zero there
are also zero publications in the years 1970-2000, implying that these covariates cannot be
included in the logit model estimation - hence the missing coefficient estimates in Columns (2)
and (4).18 Because of this, I add an additional column which presents estimates that condition
only on location covariates, and show estimates conditional on the publication covariates only for
the other outcome variables. In addition, for two of the outcomes (known, certain phenotype and
used in any diagnostic test) in Columns (3) and (4) the indicator variable for genes sequenced
in 2008 perfectly predicts the outcome variables, resulting in 2,964 observations being dropped
from the estimation (16,485 - 13,521 = 2,964).19
    For brevity, I focus on interpreting the magnitudes of the point estimates in Column (1),
and on contrasting these magnitudes with those in Column (1) of Table 3. In the QML-Poisson
models, Celera’s IP is associated with about 40 percent fewer publications (calculated as (eβ −
1) · 100) - almost identical to the estimate in Table 3. The estimate in Panel B implies a
7.7 percentage point reduction in the probability of having a known, uncertain phenotype link,
about half the magnitude of the analogous estimate in Table 3 (which was 16 percentage points).
The estimate in Panel C implies a 2.8 percentage point reduction in the probability of having
a known, certain phenotype link, almost identical to the magnitude of the analogous estimate
in Table 3; but note that unlike in Table 3, this estimate is not statistically significant once
the publication covariates are added. Finally, the estimate in Panel D implies a 2.5 percentage
point reduction in the probability of a gene being used in any currently available diagnostic test,
again almost identical to the magnitude of the analogous estimate in Table 3. As in in Table 3,
the magnitude of the estimated coefficients declines as covariates are added, but for all outcome
variables except Panel C (known, certain phenotype), each of the estimates in all columns is
statistically significant at the 5 percent level.




  18
     OMIM does not describe how this variable is coded, but it appears to be strongly related to the existence of
publications: in my data, all observations without a known, uncertain phenotype have no publications as of 2009,
and very few (19; less than 1%) observations with a known, uncertain phenotype have no publications as of 2009.
  19
     In the full sample, this is not the case: for example, three of the genes sequenced in 2008 have a known,
certain phenotype link. However, each of these three genes have missing location covariates, so this issue is only
relevant in the columns where the location covariates are included.


                                                        7
                         Table B.1: Cross-Section Estimates:
         Impact of Celera’s IP on Innovation Outcomes, Proportional Models

                                                            (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
         Panel A: publications in 2001-2009
                                mean = 2.197

                                              celera      -0.535        -0.499         -0.509        -0.504
                                                        (0.117)***    (0.107)***     (0.136)***    (0.120)***
                                                   N      27,882        27,882         16,485        16,485
 Panel B: 1(known, uncertain phenotype)
                            mean = 0.453

                                              celera      -0.077            -          -0.068            -
                                                        (0.007)***                   (0.005)***
                                                   N      27,882                       16,485
    Panel C: 1(known, certain phenotype)
                             mean = 0.081

                                              celera      -0.028         -0.005         -0.023        -0.002
                                                        (0.006)***      (0.004)       (0.004)**      (0.003)
                                                   N      27,882        27,882          13,521       13,521
   Panel D: 1(used in any diagnostic test)
                             mean = 0.060

                                              celera      -0.025        -0.008          -0.022        -0.006
                                                        (0.005)***    (0.004)***      (0.003)**     (0.003)**
                                                   N      27,882        27,882          13,521       13,531
       indicator variables for year of disclosure           yes           yes            yes            yes
  number of publications in each year 1970-2000             no            yes            no             yes
    detailed cytogenetic & molecular covariates             no            no             yes            yes
Notes: Gene-level observations. Estimates in Panel A are from quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson mod-
els. Estimates in Panels B through D report average marginal effects from logit models. Samples in Columns
(1) and (2) include all genes; sample in Columns (3) and (4) include all genes with non-missing cytogenetic and
molecular covariates. Robust standard errors shown in parentheses. *: p< 0.10; **: p< 0.05; ***: p< 0.01.
“Celera”: 0/1, =1 for a Celera gene. Indicator variables for year of disclosure: 0/1 indicator variables for the
year sequence for the gene was disclosed. Number of publications in each year 1970-2000 : count variables for the
number of publications on each gene in each year from 1970 to 2000. Detailed cytogenetic & molecular covariates:
0/1 indicator variables for the chromosome (1-22, X, or Y ) and arm (p or q) on which a gene is located;
continuous variables for region, band, subband, start base pair, and end base pair; and 0/1 indicator variables
for the orientation of the gene on the genome assembly (plus or minus). In Panel B, whenever the outcome
variable equals zero there are also zero publications in the years 1970-2000, implying that these covariates cannot
be included in the logit model estimation - hence the missing coefficient estimates in Columns (2) and (4). For
two of the outcomes (Panels C and D) in Columns (3) and (4) the indicator variable for genes sequenced in
2008 perfectly predicts the outcome variable, resulting in 2,964 observations being dropped from the estimation
(16,485 - 13,521 = 2,964). See text and the online appendix for more detailed data and variable descriptions.




                                                        8
References
Istrail, Sorin et al., “Whole-genome shotgun assembly and comparison of human genome assemblies,”
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2004, 101 (7), 1916–1921.

Maglott, Donna, Jim Ostell, Kim Pruitt, and Tatiana Tatusova, “Entrez Gene: Gene-centered
 information at NCBI,” Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, 33 (Database issue), D54–D58.

McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore,
 MD) and National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine
 (Bethesda, MD), “Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM (TM),” 2009. http://www.ncbi.
 nlm.nih.gov/omim/ (last accessed 21 December 2011).

Pruitt, Kim, Tatiana Tatusova, and Donna Maglott, “NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq): A cu-
  rated non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts, and proteins,” Nucleic Acids Research,
  2007, 35 (Database issue), D61–D65.

University of Washington, Seattle, “GeneTests: Medical Genetics Information Resource (database
 online), Copyright,” 2009. http://www.genetests.org (last accessed 21 December 2011).




                                                  9
