NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MANAGERIAL MISCALIBRATION
Itzhak Ben-David
John R. Graham
Campbell R. Harvey
Working Paper 16215
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16215
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

We appreciate the detailed comments of editor Larry Katz and five anonymous referees. We also thank
Hengjie Ai, Nick Barberis, Jim Bettman, Jack Bao, Audra Boone, George Constantinides, Werner
DeBondt, Hui Chen, Simon Gervais, Michael Gofman, Markus Glaser, Dirk Hackbarth, Daniel Kahneman,
John Lynch, Ulrike Malmendier, Don Moore, Justin Murfin, Terry Odean, Lubos Pastor, John Payne,
Michael Roberts, Aner Sela, Hersh Shefrin, Doug Skinner, Jack Soll, Richard Thaler, Ivo Welch, and
workshop participants at the AFA Annual Meeting, IDC Caesarea Center conference, MIT, NBER
Behavioral Finance conference, the University of Chicago, DePaul University, Tel-Aviv University,
Yale, and the Whitebox Conference for Behavioral Economics at Yale for helpful comments and suggestions.
Ben-David’s research is supported by the Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate. We appreciate
the excellent research assistance of Joy Tianjiao Tong and YeeJin Jang. All errors are our own. Disclosure:
www.duke.edu/~charvey/Disclosure.htm. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Itzhak Ben-David, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Managerial Miscalibration
Itzhak Ben-David, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey
NBER Working Paper No. 16215
July 2010, Revised September 2013
JEL No. G30,G31,G32,G35
ABSTRACT
Using a unique 10-year panel that includes more than 13,300 expected stock market return probability
distributions, we find that executives are severely miscalibrated, producing distributions that are too
narrow: realized market returns are within the executives’ 80% confidence intervals only 36% of the
time. We show that executives reduce the lower bound of the forecast confidence interval during times
of high market uncertainty; however, ex post miscalibration is worst during periods of high uncertainty.
We also find that executives who are miscalibrated about the stock market show similar miscalibration
regarding their own firms’ prospects. Finally, firms with miscalibrated executives seem to follow more
aggressive corporate policies: investing more and using more debt financing.
Itzhak Ben-David
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
John R. Graham
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu

Campbell R. Harvey
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Miscalibration is the systematic underestimation of the range of potential outcomes.
Evidence from psychology lab experiments indicates that subjects are generally miscalibrated.
This happens either because most overestimate their ability to predict the future1 or because they
underestimate the volatility of random events.2 But does this miscalibration apply to senior
financial executives? In designing corporate policies, managers must routinely estimate future
unknowns (e.g., demand, cash flows, and competition). We provide convincing evidence that top
financial executives are severely miscalibrated.
There are theoretical reasons to believe that miscalibration may be prevalent among
senior executives and that it may affect corporate policies. For example, Goel and Thakor (2008)
argue that due to selection, overconfident managers who take a lot of risk either end up at the top
or are fired, whereas other managers gravitate to the middle. Bernardo and Welch (2001) use a
similar evolutionary argument to explain why overconfidence persists among entrepreneurs. In
their model, overconfidence translates to excessive risk taking. Furthermore, recent research has
documented a link between executive behavior and firm policies. Bertrand and Schoar (2003)
show that there is a pronounced manager “fixed effect” in corporate decisions, but they do not
study the behavioral traits and other characteristics of individual executives. Cronqvist, Makhija,
and Yonker (2012) find a relation between CEOs’ personal leverage and their firms’ leverage.
Our article is the first to apply a laboratory approach to measure miscalibration in a
population of thousands of real-world senior financial executives. Based on 10 years of quarterly
surveys, we collect more than 13,300 forecasts of the S&P 500 made by finance professionals. In
contrast to previous studies that mainly rely on student subjects, most of our respondents are the

1

Surveyed subjects typically provide confidence bounds for their predictions that are too narrow (Alpert and Raiffa
1982). Researchers also document that experts in a variety of professional fields overestimate the precision of their
information, e.g., clinical psychologists (Oskamp 1965), and physicians and nurses (Christensen-Szalanski and
Bushyhead 1981, Baumann, Deber, and Thompson 1991).
2
Studies have shown that professionals such as engineers (Kidd 1970) and entrepreneurs (Cooper, Woo, and
Dunkelberg 1988) are miscalibrated with regard to estimating the probabilities of random outcomes. Related to our
study, Von Holstein (1972) documents that investment bankers provide miscalibrated forecasts of stock market
returns; Deaves, Lüders, and Schröder (2010) find that stock market forecasters are miscalibrated on average and
become more overconfident with previous successful forecasts; and Bar-Yosef and Venezia (2006) report that
subjects (students and security analysts) in the laboratory exhibit miscalibration in their predictions of future
accounting numbers. Deaves, Lüders, and Luo (2009) find that laboratory subjects who are miscalibrated also tend
to trade excessively. None of these studies, however, link miscalibration to real actions in the corporate world.
1

chief financial officers (CFOs) of mid-size and large U.S. corporations.3 We measure the extent
to which financial executives are miscalibrated as well as the determinants of the miscalibration.
We also link executives’ miscalibration to their corporate actions. Specifically, we test whether
miscalibration is related to the confidence interval of CFOs’ forecasts of their own-firms’
internal rate of return (IRR), to the intensity of corporate investment spending, and to corporate
debt policy—all activities in which CFOs play a prominent role (Graham, Harvey, and Puri
2010, 2013).
Miscalibration is one form of overconfidence. In the psychology literature,
overconfidence has several manifestations: miscalibration, the above-average effect, and the
illusion of control. Miscalibration is defined as excessive confidence about having accurate
information (Alpert and Raiffa 1982, Lichtenstein, Fischoff, and Phillips 1982, Ronis and Yates
1987, Kyle and Wang 1997, Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam 1998, Odean 1998, 1999,
Gervais and Odean 2001, Shefrin 2001, Moore and Healy 2008). Miscalibrated people
overestimate the precision of their own forecasts or underestimate the variance of risky
processes; in other words, their subjective probability distributions are too narrow. We use the
terms miscalibration and overprecision interchangeably. In contrast, the above-average effect
describes individuals who believe that they are better than their reference group on a particular
attribute (Svenson 1981, Alicke 1985, Taylor and Brown 1988). The illusion of control refers to
the tendency of individuals to overestimate their ability to control events over which they have
limited influence (Langer 1975, Presson and Benassi 1996).
Theoretical models often distinguish between optimistic managers who overestimate the
mean of their firms’ cash flows (Shefrin 2001, Heaton 2002, Hackbarth 2008), which we refer to
as optimism, and miscalibrated managers who underestimate the volatility of their firms’ future
cash flows (e.g., Shefrin 2001, Hackbarth 2008). Our data allow us to disentangle respondents’
biases in the first and second moments of expectations. In other words, we can separate optimism
from overprecision. To our knowledge, this article is the first to directly measure both
miscalibration and optimism and link these constructs to firms and their actions.
3

Our population of executives is different from groups previously studied in the behavioral economics field.
Deaves, Lüder, and Luo (2009) test overconfidence with students. Deaves, Lüders, and Schröder (2010) study
overconfidence among financial market practitioners in Germany. Bar-Yosef and Venezia (2006) explore the
overconfidence of accounting students. Malmendier and Tate (2005, 2008) and Malmendier, Tate, and Yan (2011)
study overconfidence (in the sense of “above average”) indirectly in the population of CEOs by looking at their
personal portfolio holdings.
2

From June 2001 to March 2011, we surveyed U.S. CFOs on a quarterly basis. We asked
them to predict one- and 10-year market-wide stock returns and to provide an 80% confidence
interval for their predictions. According to the confidence bounds that they provided, the CFOs
are severely miscalibrated: the realized one-year S&P 500 returns fall within their 80%
confidence intervals only 36.3% of the time. Even during the least volatile quarters in our
sample, only 59% of realized returns fall within the 80% confidence intervals provided. We also
explore the degree of overprecision by comparing the size of the CFOs’ confidence intervals to
the distribution of historical one-year returns. Though CFOs provide an average confidence
interval of 14.5%, the difference between the 10th and 90th return percentiles from the realized
distribution of the one-year S&P 500 returns is 42.2%. We find that only 3.4% of CFOs provide
confidence intervals wider than 42.2%. Ten-year average return forecasts are also miscalibrated,
albeit to a lesser degree.
We do not require executives to provide symmetric confidence intervals (we ask separate
questions for the upper and lower bounds), which allows us to study the upper and lower ranges
separately. Our findings suggest that respondents translate high market uncertainty into
substantial downside risk.4 Nevertheless, CFOs do not sufficiently adjust their confidence
intervals to account for the high market uncertainty. In other words, we find that ex post
overprecision (i.e., the percentage of CFOs who had an S&P 500 realization outside the 80%
confidence interval) is more severe during episodes of high uncertainty.
CFOs appear somewhat less miscalibrated when making long-term forecasts. Two factors
contribute to the relatively wider long-term confidence intervals. First, we find that during
periods in which there is a greater dispersion of opinions among CFOs about long-term expected
returns, the long-term confidence intervals are wider. This result is consistent with a model of
parameter uncertainty (see Pastor and Stambaugh 2012): long-term forecasts should have wider
confidence intervals to allow for the forecasters’ uncertainty about long-term expected returns.
Second, there is weak evidence that the long-term confidence intervals are linked to forecasts of
greater longer-term volatility.
We also provide evidence that overprecision permeates corporate planning and
forecasting. First, CFOs provide internal rate of return (IRR) distributions for own-firm projects
4

This behavior is consistent with the evidence of Arnold (1986), March and Shapira (1987), and Kahneman and
Lovallo (1993), who argue that managers focus on downside risk.
3

that reflect extremely low anticipated volatility relative to reasonable benchmarks such as the
volatility of a CFO’s own-firm return on invested capital. Second, CFOs who are miscalibrated
with regard to market-wide returns are also miscalibrated about their own firms’ projects.
We also explore the link between overprecision and corporate policies. We provide
suggestive evidence that more miscalibrated managers invest more and tolerate higher leverage.
This aggressive behavior is consistent with our earlier results showing that managers are
miscalibrated regarding their own firms’ prospects.
We also examine corporate investment and debt around the date when the CFO takes
office (for the subset of CFOs who volunteer their identity). We use hand-collected data to track
these critical dates. We perform an event-study analysis around the dates the CFOs join their
firms. Our results show that the investment level increases in the years following the start-date of
miscalibrated CFOs. Although these results are consistent with overprecision impacting
corporate investment, given our data, we are not able to conclude that the relation is causal.
Finally, our results are reinforced by an out-of-sample analysis in a new study by Inoue,
Kato, and Yamasaki (2012). Their study replicates many of our tests on a different sample. Using
50 years of survey data, the authors find that Japanese CEOs are similarly miscalibrated. They
also find that executives link market uncertainty to downside risk.
Our paper is organized as follows. Section II details the methods we use to collect the
miscalibration data and construct the variables; it also presents some summary statistics. In
Section III, we provide evidence on the miscalibration of CFO expectations. Section IV explores
the determinants of miscalibration. Section V studies the association between short-term and
long-term forecasts. Section VI tests the relations between CFO miscalibration and optimism,
and corporate forecasts and corporate investment policy. Some concluding remarks are offered in
the final section.
II. DATA
II.A.

Executive survey
Our study is based on a unique set of stock market predictions made by senior finance

executives, the majority of whom are CFOs. The data were collected in 40 quarterly surveys
conducted by Duke University between June 2001 and March 2011. Each quarter, we poll
4

between 2,000 and 3,000 financial officers with a short survey on important topical issues (see
Graham and Harvey (2011) for a detailed description of the survey). The usual response rate for
the quarterly survey is 5% to 8%; most of the responses arrive within the first two days of the
survey invitation date.5 The survey usually contains eight questions about the U.S. economy,
firm policies, and short-term corporate expectations. Some of the questions are identical for each
survey; others change over time, depending on economic conditions. Historical surveys as well
as aggregated responses can be accessed at http://www.cfosurvey.org.
We base our miscalibration proxies on two survey questions. The first question is:
Over the next year, I expect the annual S&P 500 return will be:
- There is a 1-in-10 chance the actual return will be less than ___%
- I expect the return to be: ___%
- There is a 1-in-10 chance the actual return will be greater than ___%
The second question is similar but relates to annualized stock market return forecasts over the
next 10 years. The initial words change to “Over the next 10 years, I expect the average annual
S&P 500 return will be.”6
In contrast to most studies that use survey data, we are able to examine the characteristics
of a sizable fraction of the respondents. Although the survey does not require CFOs to identify
themselves, about half of the respondents voluntarily provide such information, and about a
quarter of the respondents confirm that they are employed by U.S. public companies.
Overall, our sample includes 13,346 one-year expected returns and 13,058 10-year
expected returns both with 10th and 90th percentile information. For most CFOs, we have
information about their firm’s characteristics (e.g., size, industry, private/public ownership). Of
this sample, 4,287 observations are from self-reported public companies, and of them, we are
able to match 3,335 observations (1,061 unique firms) to data in CRSP and Compustat. For
2,587 observations (757 unique firms), there is a full set of survey responses and accounting and
market data.

5

The bulk of our tests exploit variation within the respondent group, yet the overall response rate of 5% to 8% could
potentially lead to a non-response bias in the inference of some tests (e.g., in Section III). We explore this issue
further in Section II.F. and in Online Appendix A-II.
6
The first question has appeared in its current form since 2001Q2. The current form of the second question dates
from 2002Q1.
5

II.B.

Imputing CFOs’ individual volatility estimates
Our overprecision measure maps each CFO’s 10th and 90th percentile predictions into an

individual probability distribution. Wide distributions reflect high subjective uncertainty about
the estimated variable, whereas narrow distributions reflect subjective confidence. From an
empirical point of view, asking respondents to predict a widely followed variable like the S&P
500 index is better than asking them to predict their own firms’ performance. Private information
would play a greater role in the latter, and responses are difficult to compare across managers
due to differences in the subjective definition of performance.
One way to assess the quality of CFOs’ predictions is to benchmark their estimations
with the distributional properties of the S&P 500. To do so, we convert their confidence intervals
into individual volatility estimates. Starting with the confidence interval information, we use the
Davidson and Cooper (1976) method to recover respondent i’s individual probability
distribution, based on the normal distribution. The imputed individual volatility is calculated as:
.

.

,

(1)

where x(0.90) and x(0.10) represent the 90th and 10th percentile of the respondent’s distribution,
and Z is the number of standard deviations within the confidence interval. For confidence
intervals of 80% in a normal distribution, Z equals 2.65. Keefer and Bodily (1983) show that
given information about the 10th and 90th percentiles, this simple approximation is the preferred
method for estimating the standard deviation of the probability distribution of a random variable.
We test the statistical properties of S&P 500 returns and find that they are reasonably close to
that of a normal distribution.7
This method can be used for short-term volatility estimates, but it needs to be slightly
modified for long-term volatility estimates. CFOs provide the average annual S&P 500 return
and confidence bounds for this average return. We are interested, however, in the annualized
volatility of long-term returns. To transform the imputed volatility of average long-term returns

7

Alternatively, we could use logged gross returns. To evaluate this possibility, we examine the statistical properties
of one-year S&P 500 simple returns over the period 1950 to 2000 (computed at a daily frequency). We find that the
distribution of simple returns better fits the normal distribution than does the logged returns (where gross returns are
one plus simple returns). Z is estimated as 2.64 for simple returns versus 2.60 for logged gross returns. Also, the
distribution of simple returns is more symmetric than that of the logged gross returns (a skewness of -0.078 vs. 0.483).
6

into the annualized volatility of long-term returns, we multiply the volatility of the average longterm returns by the square root of 10—the number of years.
II.C.

Measuring miscalibration
Our measure of overprecision is obtained through two steps. First, we multiply the

individual’s imputed volatility by -1, so that low individual volatility will correspond to higher
miscalibration. Second, because overprecision should be determined at a particular point in time
(because market conditions change over time), we standardize the variable to have a mean of
zero and a standard deviation of one within each survey date. Given that CFOs provide estimates
for short-term (one-year) S&P 500 returns and long-term (10-year) S&P 500 average returns, we
create short- and long-term overprecision variables: Miscalibration ST and Miscalibration LT.
Although we measure “relative” miscalibration, we use the more general term “miscalibration”
because the majority of CFOs provide responses that would be considered miscalibrated by any
reasonable metric (see discussion in Section III).
Overprecision is very persistent.8 Consider an objective measure of volatility such as the
volatility index (VIX, an index of implied volatility on the S&P 500). We identify 1,185 pairs of
sequential responses (at least four quarters apart) for a given CFO, and we benchmark the
imputed individual volatility to VIX.9 We find that if the CFO’s imputed volatility is less than
VIX in the first period, there is a 98.3% chance in the next period that the same CFO’s imputed
volatility will be less than VIX. We also calculate the persistence of our relative overprecision
measure. We find that the correlation between sequential Miscalibration ST (Miscalibration LT)
observations is 0.53 (0.29).
II.D.

Measuring optimism
Our survey data have the advantage of allowing us to measure overprecision while

simultaneously controlling for optimism in expected returns. Similar to our measure of
miscalibration, we measure relative optimism by standardizing each CFO’s forecast of the
8

Jonsson and Allwood (2003) and Glaser, Langer, and Weber (2012) also report that miscalibration persists over
time.
9
VIX is an index that reflects the average of implied volatility across traded options in the S&P 500 futures index,
traded on the Chicago Board of Options Exchange (CBOE). We note that VIX is a risk neutral measure of volatility.
Conversely, realized volatility contains a risk premium. This should not matter much for our analysis since the
imputed volatility is significantly lower than VIX.
7

expected return (subtracting the cross-sectional mean at each point in time and dividing by the
cross-sectional standard deviation). Our optimism measures are also persistent. The correlation
between sequential relative Optimism ST (Optimism LT) observations is 0.40 (0.34).
II.E.

Company and market data
Throughout the analysis, we use several databases with firm-level information. A detailed

description of the variables is provided in Appendix Table A.1. First, we retrieve accounting data
from Compustat for the subset of firms that we can identify as being public; these data include
industry classification (Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)), book leverage, market leverage,
the asset market-to-book ratio, profitability, collateralized assets, net investments scaled by
lagged assets, and indicator variables for repurchases, as well as dividend payments.10 We merge
the survey observations with annual Compustat data, matching by the nearest fiscal end-of-year
date. Second, we use CRSP to compute one-year past returns for firms. Third, we use Yahoo!
Finance for historical S&P 500 dividend-adjusted prices and for volatility index (VIX) data.
We also use Execucomp (1993 to 2010) to identify CFOs’ transitions into and out of their
jobs. Since Execucomp is limited to the S&P 1500 firms, we complement the dataset with CFO
names extracted from 10-K reports since 2000 (the CFO signs the reports). This process requires
a careful hand-matching procedure to account for nicknames and partial names. Then, for each
firm, we identify cases in which CFOs change over time. We manually verify that changes are
not due to variations in CFOs’ names. We then match CFO names to our survey data so that each
survey observation is matched with information about the date when the CFO joined and left the
firm.
II.F.

Summary statistics
We present summary statistics for survey responses and the characteristics of the

respondents’ firms in Table I, Panels A to C. Panel A presents summary statistics for the key

10

To ensure that our results are not driven by outliers and consistent with the practice of many studies that use
similar data, we winsorize our survey data within each survey date at the 1% level. Similarly, we ensure that the
corporate policy results are not driven by outliers by winsorizing variables calculated from Compustat data at 1%.
Our results remain qualitatively the same when we apply a tighter winsorization of 2%.
8

variables used in the analysis. Additional statistics are presented in Online Appendix Tables A-I
through A-III.11
An important issue is the representativeness of the sample. In Table I, Panel B, we
compare the attributes of the portion of our sample for which we have Compustat data to the
attributes of the pooled population of Compustat firms between 2001 and 2010. Note that if our
sample mirrored Compustat, we would expect 20% in each cell. The results show that we have
larger and thereby more economically influential firms. Our sample is fairly representative in
terms of other dimensions.
One might wonder whether the key variables of interest—optimism and miscalibration—
affect the likelihood of a CFO responding to our survey or whether they are somehow related to
the likelihood that we are able to identify a firm and include it in our analysis. For example,
perhaps CFOs are more likely to respond to a survey if they are optimistic or if their firms are
performing particularly well. We do not find evidence that this is a material issue in our sample.
First, Panel B shows that the past five-year sales growth for our sample firms is representative of
historic sales growth for Compustat firms. Second, we compute the means of the miscalibration
and optimism variables in different subsamples (tabulated in Online Appendix Table A-III, Panel
C). Optimism appears to be statistically similar across subsamples (i.e., the full sample, the
public firms sample, and the identified firms sample). Importantly, the economic variation in
miscalibration across the different subsamples suggests that CFOs in larger firms (with sales
greater than $1bn) are less miscalibrated. Third, we conduct an additional selection test,
described in Online Appendix Section AII. This analysis uses firm characteristics to predict the
miscalibration and optimism variables for all Compustat firms. We then test whether there is a
selection into the sample. We find no evidence that miscalibrated or optimistic CFOs are more
likely to respond to the survey. Also, we fail to find an association between entering or exiting
the sample and current or future performance.
In sum, although it is not possible to eliminate all possible concerns about sample
representativeness, we do not find that our sample should affect the generalizability of the
results. Indeed, given large- and mid-cap firms, which we know are less miscalibrated, our
sample is tilted against finding evidence of miscalibration.
11

In Online Appendix Table A-III, Panel B, we present a breakdown by industry and revenues. The results
demonstrate that industry composition is similar in the full and identified samples.
9

III. ARE CFOs MISCALIBRATED?
In this section, we use two methods to assess whether CFO respondents are, on average,
miscalibrated.12
III.A. Ex ante predictions versus ex post realizations
In this test, we exploit the fact that our data are based on a series of 40 surveys. If CFOs
are well calibrated, then in 80% of the cases, S&P 500 realizations should fall within the
confidence intervals they provided.
We judge whether CFOs are miscalibrated by examining whether ex post market
realizations fall within the ex ante confidence intervals. Panel A of Table II shows that only
36.6% of the stock market return realizations are within the 80% confidence bounds estimated by
CFOs (also see Figure I).13 The statistical standard error around the mean of 36.6% is 7.8%, after
accounting for overlapping observations using the Newey-West (1987) procedure; hence, the
difference of the measured mean from the 80% benchmark is statistically significant at the 1%
level.14 Statistics broken down by each quarterly survey are presented in Online Appendix Table
A-II.
This degree of overprecision is consistent with other studies that request subjects in
experiments (mostly students) to estimate 80% confidence bounds (Lichtenstein, Fischoff, and
Phillips 1982, Russo and Schoemaker 1992, Klayman, Soll, Gonzales-Vallejo, and Barlas 1999,
Soll and Klayman 2004). Even during relatively stable stock market periods (e.g., between
6/2003 and 11/2006), the percent of stock market return realizations that fall in the 80%
confidence interval does not exceed 60%. In a recent replication of our study, Inoue, Kato, and
Yamasaki (2012) find that 36.3% of Japanese CEO’s one-year forecasts fall in the 80%
confidence interval in the 2000 to 2011 period.

12

A third method—based on VIX as a proxy for the market’s expectation of future volatility—is provided in Online
Appendix Section AI.
13
CFOs at large firms (>$500m sales) are less miscalibrated than CFOs at small firms (38.0% vs. 34.2%,
respectively).
14
We estimate the standard error using the Newey-West procedure with four lags.
10

III.B. Historical volatility and return distributions
Next, we consider the distribution of historical volatility and compare it to the
distribution of the imputed individual volatility. Figure IIA shows the distribution of historical
volatility computed in a one-year rolling window of monthly returns in the presurvey period of
1950 to 2011. The figure shows that the distribution is centered at 12% and that most of the
distribution lies between 8% and 25%. In addition, we present the distribution of the individual
volatility imputed from the CFOs’ forecasts. The imputed individual volatilities are centered at
4%, and that most of the distribution lies between 1% and 15%. Fifty-eight percent of the
imputed individual volatilities of CFOs are lower than 5.1%—the lowest historical one-year
volatility over the past 60 years. Overprecision is also evident in the long-term annualized
volatility, although to a lesser degree (see Figure IIB).
Another approach is to compare the 10th and 90th return percentiles as reported by CFOs
to the historical unconditional distributions of S&P 500 one-year and 10-year annualized returns.
Again, we examine historical return distributions from 1950 until 2011 (Table II, Panel B). For
the one-year returns, the 10th and 90th percentiles are -13.4% and 28.8%, respectively. Thus, the
confidence interval based on historical returns is 42.2%. In contrast, the average confidence
interval across responses is only 14.5% (Table II, Panel B), and only 3.4% of CFOs provided a
one-year confidence interval wider than 40.3%. A comparable analysis in Inoue, Kato, and
Yamasaki (2012) shows that only 1.0% of CEOs provided a one-year confidence interval wider
than the expected confidence interval based on historical stock market volatility in Japan
(58.8%).
We repeat the same exercise for the annualized 10-year return forecasts in Table II, Panel
B. The 10th and 90th percentiles of the annualized forecasted 10-year S&P 500 returns are 2.2%
and 11.6%, respectively. The size of the confidence interval provided by CFOs is 9.4%. The 80%
confidence range for actual annualized 10-year returns is 12.4% (based on a sample of monthly
S&P 500 returns from 1950 to 2011). We find that only 18.0% of CFOs provide a range that is
wider than the historical 12.4%. Although CFOs are miscalibrated in their long-term forecasts,
they are less miscalibrated than in their short-term forecasts. In Section V, we discuss the
relation between one-year and 10-year forecasts.

11

III.C. Do CFOs provide narrow confidence intervals because of innumeracy?
Our evidence shows that CFOs’ confidence intervals are too narrow. Narrow confidence
intervals could result from respondents’ weakness in generating estimates rather than an innate
behavioral bias. Indeed, many studies find that survey respondents have trouble with estimation
tasks (e.g., Tversky and Kahneman 1971, 1973, 1983).
To explore the possibility that our results could reflect an innumeracy problem among
CFOs rather than miscalibration, we perform an innumeracy experiment in our 2011Q1 survey,
in which CFOs are requested to provide an estimate to a math question. The usual innumeracy
questions asked in experimental settings of students are fairly simple, and we worried that asking
too simple a question could be interpreted as insulting to a CFO and might even lead the CFO to
abandon the survey. We therefore chose a question that deals with discounting and that has been
previously studied, but that would also be moderately challenging to CFOs. Our goal was to
obtain a cross-sectional measure of relative innumeracy. We asked the following question:
You are presented with a hypothetical investment that will double your
money each year (all reinvested). You start with $1. How many years would
you need to accumulate $1 million? No calculators please.
Of the respondents, 54% provide guesses that are between 19 and 21 years (the correct answer is
20). A large estimation error would suggest that the respondent might have poor estimation skills
and perhaps even have hyperbolic discounting (Laibson 1997), which could mean that they
would also provide too small confidence intervals for the S&P 500 forecast question. However,
we find that there is no significant relation between the estimation error in the innumeracy
question and overprecision (see Online Appendix Table A-V).
III.D. Miscalibration and CFO characteristics
We test the relation between miscalibration and CFO characteristics collected in various
surveys. In 2003Q4 and 2004Q1, we gathered information about CFO education and age; in
2008Q1 we asked CFOs about their age; and in all surveys we asked CFOs about their optimism
regarding their firms’ financial prospects.15 The results are presented in Table III. Our analysis
shows that long-term miscalibration increases with the level of education and with age, and that
15

This question reads: “Rate your optimism about the financial prospects for your own company on a scale from 0–
100, with 0 being the least optimistic and 100 being the most optimistic.”
12

both short- and long-term miscalibration are positively correlated with managers’ optimism
about their firms’ financials.

IV. UNDERSTANDING CFO FORECASTS AND MISCALIBRATION
In this section, we identify the variables that explain the level of overprecision. Our goal
is to better understand the mechanism through which executives use available information when
forming their predictions.
IV.A. Can CFOs predict future returns?
Although CFOs might be miscalibrated in terms of having imputed individual volatilities
that are much lower than reasonable benchmarks, their return forecasts could still be accurate.
However, in Panel A of Table IV, the evidence is inconsistent with forecasts having any
predictive power. The table shows no significant relation between S&P 500 future one-year
realizations and CFOs’ forecasts. We also test whether S&P 500 forecasts can predict CFOs’
own-firm returns (results available upon request). We find no relation between the forecasts and
executives’ own-firm future returns.
IV.B. Variation of miscalibration over time
Next, we examine the relation between the CFO return forecasts and both past returns
and contemporaneous expected volatility (measured by VIX). The motivation for studying these
variables comes from experimental and empirical results that show that forecasters develop
estimates by extrapolating past events (e.g., Kahneman and Tversky 1974, Alba, Hutchison, and
Lynch 1991, De Bondt 1993, Vissing-Jorgensen 2004, Soll and Klayman 2004).16 Another
motivation is that CFOs’ confidence intervals are likely to be correlated with expected market
volatility, approximated by VIX.
16

Other research points to past performance affecting predictions about own-firm future performance. Kahneman
and Tversky (1972) propose that the “representativeness” of past events leads people to forecast similar patterns in
the future. In models by Einhorn and Hogarth (1978) and Van den Steen (2004), decision makers “learn” about their
decision-making ability by observing the outcomes of past decisions, while ignoring exogenous determinants of
these outcomes. Following favorable outcomes, decision makers become more confident about their judgment
through a self-attribution mechanism, even if the outcome was independent of their prior decisions. In applying this
idea to trading behavior, Gervais and Odean (2001) argue that traders become overconfident after observing a series
of past successes that they then attribute to their own abilities. As an extension of this reasoning, Hilary and Menzly
(2006) find that security analysts exhibit greater aggressiveness following success in predicting earnings.
13

The results in Table IV, Panel B, show that the one-year return forecasts are not affected
by past returns. However, confidence bounds widen in periods of increased volatility and the
lower bound is particularly sensitive to contemporaneous volatility. A one standard deviation
change in contemporaneous volatility (a change of 9.4% in VIX) is associated with a 2.2
percentage-point wider confidence interval (a 15% increase in the average confidence interval).
This pattern is depicted in Figure III. The chart presents survey averages of the upper bound,
expected return, and lower bound, in addition to the contemporaneous VIX (inverted). The chart
demonstrates that the average lower bound of CFOs’ S&P 500 estimations co-moves with the
inverted VIX. In contrast, the average upper bound does not move as much with VIX. The
disparity between the upper and lower bounds causes confidence intervals to widen during times
of stress. Note, however, that Table II, Panel A, shows that widening the confidence interval
during times of high market stress does not improve calibration: in quarters with an abovemedian VIX, only 24.1% of the time do one-year-ahead S&P 500 realizations fall within the
80% confidence interval that CFOs provide.
V. SHORT-TERM VERSUS LONG-TERM FORECASTS
In Section III.B., we noted that the confidence interval for long-term forecasts is
materially wider than that of short-term forecasts. It is interesting to understand the factors that
affect short-term versus long-term forecasts, as executives are often required to plan for different
time horizons. In this section, we test two possible explanations for the difference in confidence
intervals between short- and long-term predictions.
V.A.

The confidence interval and dispersion of opinions among respondents
The first potential explanation for the difference in confidence intervals suggests that

confidence intervals are wider for multi-period predictions because forecasters allow for larger
mistakes over long horizons (errors due to unknown model parameters accumulate over the
forecast horizon). Thus, in a multi-period setting, wider confidence intervals are needed (see
Pastor and Stambaugh 2012).
We test this explanation by regressing the difference between the long-term and shortterm imputed volatilities (at the survey level) on the difference in the long-term and short-term
dispersion of opinions. Dispersion of opinions is defined as the cross-sectional standard
14

deviation of the expected return estimates by CFOs at each point in time. High dispersion could
reflect low quality signals that CFOs are receiving and using to make their forecasts.
The results are presented in Table V, Panel A. The panel shows that a higher dispersion
of opinions is correlated with higher average imputed volatility. The evidence shows that a
higher relative dispersion of beliefs (long-term minus short-term) is associated with higher longterm relative imputed volatility. We also show that the level of long-term dispersion is important.
V.B.

Term structure of volatility
Another potential and non–mutually exclusive explanation for why long-term predictions

appear to have wider confidence intervals is that CFOs might believe volatility will increase in
the future. To provide evidence for this conjecture, we asked CFOs in the March 2011 survey to
estimate the two-year-ahead volatility:
In 2010, the volatility of S&P 500 returns was 12.6%. What do you think the
volatility of S&P 500 returns will be in 2012?
We regress the difference between the long-term and the short-term imputed volatilities
on respondents’ forecasts of two-year-ahead volatility. In contrast to Panel A, this test exploits
cross-sectional variation in forecasts and is limited to a single survey. As a result, we cannot
include time-varying controls like past returns. The coefficients of expected volatility in Table V,
Panel B, are positive albeit statistically insignificant (p = 0.12).17 The positive sign potentially
indicates that CFOs with higher relative long-term imputed volatility anticipate higher volatility
two years ahead.

VI. MISCALIBRATION AND CORPORATE ACTIONS
We now consider corporate actions. First, we examine the relation between
miscalibration in S&P 500 return forecasts and miscalibration concerning own-firm project
returns. Second, we examine the effects of executive overprecision on corporate investment.
Third, we extend the analysis and test the relation between CFO miscalibration and financing
policy.
17

In these regressions, we cluster errors by one-digit SIC industry classification, which is self-reported by
executives. To account for the potential bias created due to the small number of clusters, we use bootstrapped
standard errors based on Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2009).
15

VI.A. Miscalibration regarding own-firm projects
Our first test examines whether S&P 500 miscalibration is related to firm-level planning.
Specifically, we query executives about their firms’ expected internal rates of return (IRRs) (i.e.,
the expected return on the firm’s own investment projects) and IRR confidence intervals. We
determine the correlation between CFOs’ overprecision in S&P 500 forecasts and the
overprecision when forecasting the returns on their own firms’ projects.
To implement this test, we asked CFOs in the 2007Q2 survey to provide mean estimates
and 10th and 90th percentiles for the return distributions of their own firms’ investments in the
future:
For the investments that your company makes this year, what do you expect the
internal rate of return (IRR) to be?
- There is a 1-in-10 chance that the actual IRR will be less than ___%
- I expect the IRR to be ___%
- There is a 1-in-10 chance that the actual IRR will be greater than ___%
In addition, we surveyed respondents about the degree to which they personally affect
investment decisions in their firms on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 7 (a lot).
We compute the imputed individual volatility of own-firm IRR and assess whether CFOs
are overprecise. Although we cannot observe the true distribution of the IRR outcomes of
individual firms, it is possible to compare the imputed individual volatilities of own-firm IRR to
public firms’ market and accounting returns. We find that the average annualized imputed
volatility of own-firm IRR is surprisingly small, only 5.3% (5th percentile: 1.1%, 95th
percentile: 11.3%). These estimates seem to grossly underestimate volatility relative to several
benchmarks: (1) the average of the historical (1950–2011) S&P 500 volatility of 13.9% (Table II,
Panel B); (2) the 47.4% volatility of individual company stock returns in 2001–2007 (before the
time of the survey question); and (3) the volatility of the ROIC (return on invested capital) of
Compustat firms in 2001–2007, which was 36.5%.
Given this result, that most CFOs appear to be overprecise when judging their own-firm
projects, we calculate an own-firm miscalibration variable (Own-firm IRR Miscalibration)
according to the procedure used in Section II.C. As with the S&P 500-based miscalibration
variables, Own-firm IRR Miscalibration reflects the standardized perceived volatility of own-

16

firm investment returns (multiplied by -1): a high value of Own-firm IRR Miscalibration reflects
high miscalibration.
Next, we test whether own-firm overprecision is correlated with S&P 500 overprecision.
In Table VI, columns (1) and (2), we find that firm-based overprecision is significantly
correlated with both the short-term and long-term miscalibration variables (lending some
credibility to our relating these latter miscalibration variables to corporate actions below).
Although the power of the regression is low due to the small sample and to our conservative
clustering approach (standard errors are bootstrapped based on Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller
(2009)), the magnitude of the coefficients is large: a one standard deviation shift in short-term
(long-term) market miscalibration is associated with a shift of 41.7% (27.5%) of one standard
deviation of own-firm IRR miscalibration. The correlation is even stronger for the subset of
CFOs who are more involved in their companies’ investment decisions (columns (3) and (4)).
VI.B. Miscalibration and corporate investment
We now study the corporate policies of companies run by miscalibrated executives. Do
companies invest more when their executives are miscalibrated and optimistic? We regress
investment intensity (the dependent variable), computed as the annual net investments scaled by
lagged total assets, on overprecision, optimism, and firm controls.
The results are presented in Table VII, columns (1) and (2). We find a positive relation
between corporate investment and long-term overprecision as well as long-term optimism; for
short-term optimism and overprecision, we observe a positive but insignificant relation. Since
miscalibration and optimism are standardized, we can assess the economic magnitude directly
from the regression coefficients. A one standard deviation shift in long-term overprecision is
associated with a shift of 0.6 of a percentage point (t = 2.7) in corporate investment (relative to a
mean of 8.7 percentage points and a median of 5.4 percentage points).
This evidence resonates with Kahneman and Lovallo (1993), who theorize that
executives are often optimistic and overconfident about their managerial skills and their ability to
mitigate risk. Also, Heaton (2002) shows that optimistic managers invest more because they
perceive negative net present value (NPV) projects to be good projects.

17

VI.C. Miscalibration and corporate debt
CFOs play an important role in decision making about the financing of the firm.
Hackbarth (2008) argues that a miscalibrated manager chooses a higher level of debt because she
overestimates her firm’s ability to meet its liabilities. We test Hackbarth’s prediction in Table
VII, columns (3) and (4). We regress firm leverage (total interest-bearing liabilities scaled by
total book asset value) on short-term and long-term miscalibration variables in addition to firm
variable controls and industry and survey date fixed effects. The results show that both short- and
long-term miscalibration variables are positively associated with debt leverage (t = 3.6 and t =
1.3, respectively). A one standard deviation shift in short-term miscalibration is associated with a
moderate increase of 1.3% in leverage, relative to a sample mean of 22.5%; the effect of longterm miscalibration is about half of that of short-term miscalibration.18
Although our tests cannot identify the direction of causality and the economic magnitude
of the results is modest, the findings are consistent with Hackbarth’s (2008) hypothesis that
overprecise managers tend to have higher leverage.
VI.D. Change in corporate policies when CFOs take office
Given the correlation between overprecision and corporate investment and debt policies,
we search for hints about the direction of causality: high miscalibration might induce high
investment and leverage, or, perhaps, high investment and debt induce selection and cause
executives to be overprecise. Related to this, one wonders whether miscalibrated CFOs are
selected (or self-select) to work in firms with high corporate investment and debt.
To shed some light on the direction of causality, we exploit within-firm variation through
time. In particular, we examine how corporate investment behaves in the years surrounding a
CFO’s hiring. We extract the dates when CFOs join firms from Execucomp data and by handcollecting data from 10-K filings (Section II.E. provides further details on the process). A CFO is
considered to take office in a firm when she/he first signs the financial reports. In addition, we
match corporate investment and characteristics from Compustat for the year of taking office. The
dependent variable in our regressions is the difference between the average corporate investment
in the two years following the CFO taking office and the average corporate investment in the two
years prior to the event.
18

The results are similar, although slightly weaker, when we use market leverage instead of book leverage.
18

The regression results in Table VIII, column (1) indicate no significant relation between
our short-term measure of miscalibration and corporate investment. However, corporate
investment increases for firms in the long-term miscalibration of hired CFOs (column (2)). A one
standard deviation increase in CFO long-term overprecision is associated with a 0.7 percentagepoint (t = 2.0) (column (2)) higher investment intensity (relative to the average investment
intensity of 8.7 percentage points).
To summarize, we find a weak correlation between investment and debt policies and
miscalibration around the year when a new CFO takes office. Although we cannot rule out
reverse causality, our findings are consistent with CFO miscalibration leading to a change in
corporate policies.

VII. CONCLUSION
Over the past 10 years, we collected more than 13,300 S&P 500 forecasts, including 80%
confidence intervals, from CFOs. We study the abilities of CFOs to estimate probabilities over
time and in the cross-section and examine how these abilities affect the corporate policies at the
CFOs’ firms.
We use several methods to show that CFOs are, on average, severely miscalibrated: their
confidence intervals are far too narrow. For example, the 80% confidence interval for their oneyear forecasts contains only 36.6% of the realized returns. We find that confidence intervals are
wider in periods of high market-wide uncertainty, but during these periods, CFOs are even more
miscalibrated. We also show that the size of the confidence intervals is related to the dispersion
of forecasts across CFOs.
We find evidence that CFO overprecision appears to be related to corporate decision
making. We show that the overprecision measure, based on predicting the S&P 500 returns, is
significantly correlated with overprecision in own-firm investment return predictions. Moreover,
we find modest evidence that firms with miscalibrated or optimistic executives invest more and
have more debt, on average.
Knowing that executives are miscalibrated has important implications for investors,
regulators, and other corporate stakeholders who rely on corporate data and forecasts. We look
19

forward to future research that examines how such data should be best used and also that
determines how miscalibrated employees should be compensated and motivated.

20

REFERENCES
Alba, Joseph A., J. Wesley Hutchison, and John G. Lynch, 1991, Memory and decision making, in
Handbook of Consumer Research (Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ), eds.: Thomas S. Robertson
and Harold H. Kassarjian.
Alicke, Mark D., 1985, Global self-evaluation as determined by the desirability and controllability of trait
adjectives, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 49, 1621-1630.
Alpert, Murray, and Howard Raiffa, 1982, A progress report on the training of probability assessors, in
Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge), eds.:
Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, 1-49.
Arnold, Jasper H., 1986, Assessing capital risk: You can’t be too conservative, Harvard Business Review
64, 113-121.
Bar-Yosef, Sasson, and Itzhak Venezia, 2006, An experimental study of overconfidence in accounting
numbers predictions, Working Paper, Hebrew University.
Baumann, Andrea O., Raisa B. Deber, and Gail G. Thompson, 1991, Overconfidence among physicians
and nurses: The micro-certainty, macro-uncertainty phenomenon, Social Science & Medicine 32, 167174.
Bernardo, Antonio E., and Ivo Welch, 2001, On the evolution of overconfidence and entrepreneurs,
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 10(3), 301-330.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The effect of managers on firm
policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169-1208.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas Miller, 2009, Bootstrap-based improvements for
inference with clustered errors, Review of Economics and Statistic 90, 414-427.
Christensen-Szalanski, Jay J., and James B. Bushyhead, 1981, Physicians’ use of probabilistic
information in a real clinical setting, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 7, 928-935.
Cooper, Arnold C., Carolyn W. Woo, and William C. Dunkelberg, 1988, Entrepreneurs’ perceived
chances for success, Journal of Business Venturing 3, 97-108.
Cronqvist, Henrik, Anil K. Makhija, and Scott Yonker, 2012, Behavioral consistency in corporate
finance: CEO personal and corporate leverage, Journal of Financial Economics 103(1), 20-40.
Daniel, Kent D., David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology and
security market under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839-1885.
Davidson, L. B., and D. O. Cooper, 1976, A simple way of developing a probability distribution of
present value, Journal of Petroleum Technology, September, 1069-1078.
De Bondt, Werner P. M., 1993, Betting on trends: Intuitive forecasts of financial risk and return,
International Journal of Forecasting 9(3), 355-371.
Deaves, Richard, Erik Lüders, and Guo Ying Luo, 2009, An experimental test of the impact of
overconfidence and gender on trading activity, Review of Finance 13(3), 555-575.
Deaves, Richard, Erik Lüders, and Michael Schröder, 2010, The dynamics of overconfidence: Evidence
from stock market forecasters, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 75(3), 402-412.
Einhorn, Hillel J., and Robyn Hogarth, 1978, Confidence in judgment: Persistence in the illusion of
validity, Psychological Review 85, 395-416.
21

Gervais, Simon, and Terrance Odean, 2001, Learning to be overconfident, Review of Financial Studies
14, 1-27.
Glaser, Markus, Thomas Langer, and Martin Weber, 2012, True Overconfidence in Interval Estimates:
Evidence Based on a New Measure of Miscalibration, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
forthcoming.
Goel, Anand M., and Anjan V. Thakor, 2008, Overconfidence, CEO selection, and corporate governance,
Journal of Finance 63(6), 2737-2784.
Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2011, The Duke/CFO Business Outlook survey,
http:www.cfosurvey.org.
Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Manju Puri, 2010, Capital allocation and delegation of
decision-making authority within firms, Working Paper, Fuqua School of Business, Duke University.
Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Manju Puri, 2013, Managerial attitudes and corporate actions,
Journal of Financial Economics 109(1), 103-121.
Hackbarth, Dirk, 2008, Managerial traits and capital structure decisions, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 43(4), 843-882.
Heaton, J.B., 2002, Managerial optimism and corporate finance, Financial Management 31, 33-45.
Hilary, Gilles, and Lior Menzly, 2006, Does past success lead analysts to become overconfident?
Management Science 52, 489-500.
Inoue, Kotaro, Hideaki Kato, and Takashi Yamasaki, 2012, Managerial overconfidence: Evidence from
Japanese CFOs, Working paper, Tokyo Institute of Technology.
Jonsson, Anna-Carin, and Carl Martin Allwood, 2003, Stability and variability in the realism of
confidence judgments over time, content domain, and gender, Personality and Individual Differences
34, 559-574.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Dan Lovallo, 1993, Timid choices and bold forecasts: A cognitive perspective on
risk taking, Management Science 39, 17-31.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1972, Subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness,
Cognitive Psychology 3(3), 430-454.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1974, Judgments under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases,
Science 185, 1124-1131.
Keefer, Donald L., and Samuel E. Bodily, 1983, Three-point approximations for continuous random
variables, Management Science 29, 595-609.
Kidd, John B., 1970, The utilization of subjective probabilities in production planning, Acta Psychologica
34, 338-347.
Klayman, Joshua, Jack B. Soll, Claudia Gonzales-Vallejo, and Sema Barlas, 1999, Overconfidence: It
depends on how, what, and whom you ask, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
79, 216-247.
Kyle, Albert S., and Albert Wang, 1997, Speculation duopoly with agreement to disagree: Can
overconfidence survive the market test? Journal of Finance 52(5), 2073-2090.
Laibson, David I., 1997, Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting, Quarterly Journal of Economics
112(2), 443-477.
Langer, Ellen, 1975, The illusion of control, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32, 311-328.

22

Lichtenstein, Sarah, Baruch Fischoff, and Lawrence Phillips, 1982, Calibration of probabilities: The state
of the art to 1980, in Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge), eds.: Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, 306-334.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2005, CEO overconfidence and corporate investment, Journal of
Finance 60, 2661-2700.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2008, Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence and the
market’s reaction, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 20-43.
Malmendier, Ulrike, Geoffrey Tate, and Jonathan Yan, 2011, Overconfidence and early-life experiences:
The effect of managerial traits on corporate financial policies, Journal of Finance 66(5), 1687-1733.
March, James G., and Zur Shapira, 1987, Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking, Management
Science 33, 1404-1418.
Moore, Don A., and Paul J. Healy, 2008, The trouble with overconfidence, Psychological Review 115(2),
502-517.
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semidefinite, heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent covariance-matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Odean, Terrence, 1998, Volume, volatility, price, and profit when all traders are above average, Journal
of Finance 53(6), 1887-1934.
Odean, Terrence, 1999, Do investors trade too much? American Economic Review 89, 1279-1298.
Oskamp, Stuart, 1965, Overconfidence in case study judgments, Journal of Consulting Psychology 29,
261-265.
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2012, Are stocks really less volatile in the long run? Journal of
Finance 67(2), 431-478.
Presson, Paul K., and Victor A. Benassi, 1996, Locus of control orientation and depressive
symptomatology: A meta-analysis, Journal of Social Behavior and Personality 11, 201-212.
Ronis, David L., and J. Frank Yates, 1987, Components of probability judgment accuracy: Individual
consistency and effects of subject matter and assessment method, Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes 40(2), 193-218.
Russo, J. Edward, and Paul J. H. Schoemaker, 1992, Managing overconfidence, Sloan Management
Review 33, 7-17.
Shefrin, Hersh, 2001, Behavioral corporate finance, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 14, 113-124.
Soll, Jack B., and Joshua Klayman, 2004, Overconfidence in interval estimates, Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 30, 299-314.
Svenson, Ola, 1981, Are we all less risky and more skillful than our fellow drivers? Acta Psychologica
47, 143-148.
Taylor, Shelley E., and Jonathon D. Brown, 1988, Illusion and well-being: A social psychological
perspective on mental health, Psychological Bulletin 103(2), 193-210.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1971, Belief in the low of small numbers, Psychological Bulletin
76(2), 105-110.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1973, Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and
probability, Cognitive Psychology 5, 207-232.

23

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1983, Extension versus intuitive reasoning: The conjunction
fallacy in probability judgment, Psychological Review 90(4), 293-315.
Van den Steen, Eric, 2004, Rational overoptimism (and other biases), American Economic Review 94,
1141-1151.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2004, Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does “irrationality” disappear with
wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 18, 139-208.
Von Holstein, C. Staël, 1972, Probabilistic forecasting: An experiment related to the stock market,
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 8, 139-158.

24

APPENDIX TABLE A.1
VARIABLE DEFINITIONS
Variables from CFO Survey
One-year (10-year annualized)
return estimate: lower bound (%)

Survey response for the level of S&P 500 return for which there is a 1-in-10
chance of its being lower. Applies to short-term (1-year) and long-term (10year) returns.

One-year (10-year annualized)
return estimate: expected value
(%)

Survey response for the (average) expected return of the S&P 500. Applies to
short-term (1-year) and long-term (10-year) returns.

One-year (10-year annualized)
return estimate: upper bound (%)

Survey response for the level of S&P 500 return for which there is a 1-in-10
chance of its being higher. Applies to short-term (1-year) and long-term (10year) returns.

One-year (10-year annualized)
return estimate: imputed
individual volatility (%)

. Applies to short-term (one-year) and long-term (10year) forecasts. For 10-year forecasts, we multiply by sqrt(10).

Confidence interval (%)

Upper bound minus lower bound.

Miscalibration ST (LT)

Miscalibration (or overprecision) is the negative imputed individual volatility,
standardized within each survey date. We calculate the mean of the imputed
individual volatility within each survey date and subtract it from the imputed
individual volatility. Then, we multiply the result by -1 and divide by the
standard deviation of the imputed individual volatilities within the survey date.
We apply the same procedure to short-term (1-year) and long-term (10-year)
forecasts.

Dispersion volatility (%)

Standard deviation of mean forecasts (expected returns) within the survey date.
Applies to short-term (1-year) and long-term (10-year) forecasts.

Optimism ST (LT)

Standardized expected returns: we subtract the mean within each survey date
from the expected return estimate and divide by the standard deviation within
the survey date. Applies to short-term (1-year) and long-term (10-year)
forecasts.

Forecast error (%)

One year realized S&P 500 return minus the expected S&P 500 return for the
same period.

IRR estimate: lower bound (%)

Survey response for the level of internal rate of return (IRR) for which there is a
1-in-10 chance of its being lower. Question was asked in the 2007Q2 survey.

IRR estimate: expected value
(%)

Survey response for the (average) expected internal rate of return (IRR).
Question was asked in the 2007Q2 survey.

IRR estimate: upper bound (%)

Survey response for the level of internal rate of return (IRR) for which there is a
1-in-10 chance of its being higher. Question was asked in the 2007Q2 survey.

Own-firm IRR miscalibration

The negative imputed individual volatility about own-firm IRR, standardized
within the survey date. We calculate the mean of the imputed individual IRR
volatility within each survey date, and subtract it from the imputed individual
volatility observations. Then, we multiply it by -1 and divide by the standard
deviation of the imputed individual volatilities within the survey date.

Involved in investments

Response to the question: To what degree do you personally affect the
investment decisions of your firm? (1) Not at all, to (7) A lot. Question was
asked in the 2007Q2 survey.
Volatility estimates made by survey participants (2011Q1) for volatility in 2012.

2012 volatility estimate (%)

.

25

Math estimation error

Optimistic about own firm

The absolute value of the log difference between the right answer to the math
problem and the answer respondents provided. Question was asked in the
2011Q1 survey.
Response to the question: “Rate your optimism about the financial prospects for
your own company on a scale from 0-100, with 0 being the least optimistic and
100 being the most optimistic.”

Variables from Compustat
Market leverage (%)

Total debt / market assets = sum(item DLTT, item DLC) / sum(CRSP item
SHROUT * CRSP abs(PRC), item AT, – item CEQ).

Book leverage (%)

Total debt / total assets = sum(item DLTT, item DLC) / sum(item AT).

log(Sales)

Logged annual sales in millions of USD (log(item SALE)).

Asset market-to-book (M/B)

Total assets at market values / total assets = sum(CRSP item SHROUT *
abs(CRSP item PRC), total assets (item AT), – book value of equity(item CEQ))
/ total assets at book values (item AT).

Profitability (%)

Operating profit (item OIBDP) / lag(total assets at book values (item AT)).

Five-year sales growth
(annualized)

(item SALE / lag5(item SALE))1/5 – 1.

Return on invested capital
(ROIC)

Earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) * (1 – %tax) / lag(invested capital) =
item EBIT * (1 – 0.35) / lag(item ICAPT).

Repurchases

1 if repurchased common and preferred stock is greater than 1% of equity, and
zero otherwise. I(item PRSTKC / CRSP item SHROUT * CRSP item abs(PRC))
> 0.01.

Dividends

1 if firm declared dividends in previous year, and 0 otherwise. I(item DV > 0).

Investment intensity (%)

Net investments / lag(total assets at book values) = (capital expenditures (item
CAPX) + change in investments (item IVCH) + acquisitions (item AQC) – sales
of property, plant and equipment (item SPPE) – sale of investments (item SIV))
/ lag(total assets at book values (item AT)).

Variable from CRSP
Past 12-month firm returns (%)

Stock-level cumulative returns over the 12 months preceding the survey date.

Variables from Yahoo!
12-month S&P 500 returns (%)

S&P 500 total returns, accumulated over 12 months.

12-month S&P 500 volatility (%)

S&P 500 volatility, computed over 12 months using daily data.

VIX (%)

An index for the implied volatility on 30-day options. The index is constructed
by the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) from a wide range of S&P
500 (S&P 100 until August 2003) index options (both calls and puts). The index
reflects the anticipated volatility in the next 30 days. VIX represents a risk
neutral volatility. Realized volatility, in contrast, may contain a risk premium.
See http://www.cboe.com/micro/vix/vixwhite.pdf for further details.

26

TABLE I
SUMMARY STATISTICS
PANEL A: SAMPLE SUMMARY STATISTICS
Obs
One-year S&P 500 return forecasts (all surveys 2001Q2-2011Q1)
Imputed individual volatility (%)
13,346
Confidence interval (%)
13,346
Optimism about own firm
11,457
10-year S&P 500 return forecasts (all surveys 2002Q1-2011Q1)
Imputed individual volatility (%)
Confidence interval (%)

13,058
13,058

Mean

Std Dev 5th pctl Median 95th pctl

5.52
14.64
65.60

4.41
11.70
19.68

1.1
3.0
30.0

3.8
10.0
70.0

15.1
40.0
90.0

11.44
9.59

9.25
7.75

3.6
3.0

9.5
8.0

25.1
21.0

PANEL B: DISTRIBUTION RELATIVE TO THE COMPUSTAT UNIVERSE
Variable
Sales

Q1 (smallest)
3.5%

Q2
5.9%

Compustat quintiles
Q3
9.3%

Q4
20.1%

Q5 (largest)
61.2%

Controlling for year, sales quintile, and 2-digit SIC:
Asset market-to-book
14.3%

23.6%

23.7%

21.9%

16.5%

Profitability
Five-year sales growth
Market leverage
Investment intensity
Return on invested capital (ROIC)

22.6%
25.6%
20.5%
21.0%
23.2%

23.1%
22.9%
21.7%
23.2%
21.9%

20.9%
19.7%
20.2%
22.5%
20.8%

17.1%
12.7%
17.3%
17.7%
19.6%

16.3%
19.2%
20.2%
15.6%
14.5%

Panel A presents summary statistics for the select variables used in the study, based on the sample of CFO
responses, aggregated CFO responses at the survey level, and Compustat variables for survey firms that could be
identified as Compustat firms. (Online Appendix Tables A-I and A-III provide additional summary statistics.) Panel
B compares the distribution of key attributes of the sample firms to those from the Compustat universe from 2001 to
2010. The columns represent Compustat quintiles, and the numbers report the percentage of sample observations
that fall within each quintile. Sales are reported in raw form. For other variables, we split the universe of Compustat
firms into sales quintiles, by year, and by 2-digit SIC industry classification, and we report the distribution of survey
firms along these thresholds. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table A.1. *, **, *** denote two-tailed
significant difference from zero at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

27

TABLE II
AGGREGATE FORECASTS AND CONFIDENCE INTERVALS

PANEL A: AGGREGATE FORECASTS AND S&P 500 REALIZATIONS
S&P 500 realizations
th

Avg. forecast error (%) % below 10
(realized - forecasted) percentile
All quarters
-3.1%
30.5%
6/2003-11/2006 (low volatility period)
2.8%
5.3%
Quarters with above-median VIX
-5.2%
40.8%
Quarters with below-median VIX
-0.8%
19.1%

th

th

% between 10
% above 90
th
and 90 percentiles percentile
36.3%
33.2%
59.1%
35.5%
23.0%
36.2%
51.0%
29.9%

PANEL B: AGGREGATE FORECASTS

# surveys
Average # respondents
Average lower bound (10th percentile)
Average expected (realized) returns
Average upper bound (90th percentile)
80% confidence interval
Average imputed individual volatility
Average dispersion volatility

One-year return
CFO Forecasts S&P 500 (1950-2011)
40
334
-2.7%
-13.4%
5.8%
8.4%
11.8%
28.8%
14.5%
42.2%
5.5%
13.9%
4.7%

10-year annualized return
CFO Forecasts S&P 500 (1950-2011)
37
353
2.2%
0.1%
7.5%
7.2%
11.6%
12.5%
9.4%
12.4%
11.2%
14.3%
3.6%

Panel A compares survey S&P 500 forecasts to S&P 500 realized returns. Panel B shows summary statistics of the
CFO forecasts over 2001–2011 and S&P 500 realized returns and volatility over 1950–2011. Variable definitions
are provided in Appendix Table A.1.

28

TABLE III
MISCALIBRATION AND PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS

PANEL A: SUMMARY STATISTICS
Survey variables
CFO has MBA
CFO has PhD
Age 40-49
Age 50-59
Age 60+
Optimism about own firm

Obs
401
401
775
775
775
11,457

Mean
0.57
0.05
0.43
0.39
0.08
65.60

Std Dev 5th pctl Median 95th pctl
0.50
0.0
1.0
1.0
0.23
0.0
0.0
1.0
0.50
0.0
0.0
1.0
0.49
0.0
0.0
1.0
0.27
0.0
0.0
1.0
19.68
30.0
70.0
90.0

PANEL B: MISCALIBRATION AND CFO CHARACTERISTICS
Dependent variable →
CFO has MBA
CFO has PhD
Age 40-49
Age 50-59
Age 60+
Optimism about own firm

Miscalibration ST
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.004
[0.860]
0.207
[0.185]
-0.127
[0.475]
0.131
[0.595]
0.055
[0.650]
0.004***
[<0.001]

Miscalibration LT
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.134
[0.390]
0.533**
[0.090]
0.046
[0.475]
0.217**
[0.050]
0.282***
[<0.001]
0.001**
[<0.001]

Industry FE
Survey FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations

399

781

11,343

401

775

11,457

-0.018

0.008

0.018

0.003

0.005

0.003

Adj R

2

The table explores whether miscalibration is determined by personal characteristics. Panel A provides summary
statistics. Panel B presents the regressions. All regressions are OLS. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix
Table A.1. All regressions include one-digit SIC industry fixed effects and intercepts that are not presented.
Standard errors are clustered by one-digit SIC and bootstrapped following Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2009). pvalues are presented in square brackets. *, **, *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

29

TABLE IV
DETERMINANTS OF FORECASTS AND INDIVIDUAL CONFIDENCE INTERVALS

PANEL A: FUTURE S&P 500 RETURNS AND AVERAGE FORECASTS
Dependent variable → 12-month future S&P 500 return (%)
(1)
(2)
One-year average lower bound (%)
-8.236*
(4.110)
One-year average expected returns (%)
0.698
16.065
(3.574)
(11.342)
One-year average upper bound (%)
-5.278
(7.006)
Intercept
Observations
2

Adj. R

-1.040
(24.179)
40

-50.514
(43.402)
40

-0.023

0.123

PANEL B: AVERAGE FORECASTS AND PAST S&P 500 RETURNS AND VIX
Dependent variable →

Current VIX (%)
12-month past S&P 500 return (%)
Intercept

Observations
Adj. R2

One-year forecasts (%): Average of…
Lower Expected Upper Confidence
bound
return
bound
interval
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.225*** -0.075*** 0.009
0.234***
(0.043)
(0.025)
(0.026)
(0.043)
-0.005
0.002
-0.003
0.002
(0.029)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.024)
2.234*** 7.418*** 11.479*** 9.246***
(0.687)
(0.616)
(0.789)
(0.824)

10-year forecasts (%): Average of…
Lower Expected Upper Confidence
bound
return
bound
interval
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.058** -0.014
0.005
0.063***
(0.024)
(0.011)
(0.009)
(0.023)
-0.023
-0.011 -0.011**
0.012
(0.016)
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.014)
3.461*** 7.696*** 11.322*** 7.862***
(0.332)
(0.204)
(0.243)
(0.388)

40

40

40

40

37

37

37

37

0.629

0.210

-0.048

0.588

0.073

0.015

0.162

0.157

The sample comprises averages of CFO estimates aggregated at the survey level in addition to market data. Panel A
presents regressions of future S&P 500 returns on the average lower bound, the average expected return, and the
average upper bound. Panel B shows regressions of average forecasts on current VIX and past S&P 500 returns.
Observation units in Panels A and B are the means of survey responses within a given quarter (measured in
percentage points). The regressions in Panels A and B are weighted by the square root of the number of observations
of each survey date, and standard errors in the OLS regressions (in parentheses) are adjusted for autocorrelation
using the Newey and West (1987) procedure with four lags. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table
A.1. *, **, *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

30

TABLE V
DETERMINANTS OF LONG-TERM INDIVIDUAL VOLATILITY
PANEL A: AVERAGE FORECASTS AND DISPERSION VOLATILITY
Dependent variable →

10-year dispersion volatility - One-year dispersion volatility (%)
10-year dispersion volatility (%)
Intercept

Avg. imputed 10-year volatility - Avg. imputed one-year volatility (%)
Survey average responses
(1)
(2)
0.325***
0.365***
(0.063)
(0.073)
0.415***
(0.135)
6.199***
5.073***
(0.259)
(0.385)

Industry FE
Observations
2

Adj. R

No
37

No
37

0.139

0.273

PANEL B: TERM STRUCTURE OF VOLATILITY
Dependent variable → Imputed 10-year volatility - Imputed one-year volatility (%)
(1)
(2)
Two-year volatility estimate (%)
0.361
0.368
[0.125]
[0.120]
Intercept

3.472***
[<0.001]

3.390***
[<0.001]

Industry FE

No

Yes

Observations

375

375

0.023

0.025

Adj. R

2

Panel A shows results from a sample of aggregated data at the survey level. The panel presents regressions of the
difference in average long-term and short-term imputed volatilities on the difference in survey-level dispersion of
opinions of short-term and long-term forecasts. OLS errors in Panel A are adjusted for autocorrelation using the
Newey and West (1987) procedure with 7 lags. Panel B uses individual forecasts from the 2011Q1 survey. The
panel presents results from a regression of the difference in long-term and short-term imputed volatility on the twoyear expected volatility. The regressions include one-digit SIC industry fixed effects. In Panel B, OLS errors are
clustered by one-digit SIC industry and bootstrapped following Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2009). p-values are
presented in square brackets. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table A.1. *, **, *** denote two-tailed
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

31

TABLE VI
OWN-FIRM IRR MISCALIBRATION AND S&P 500 MISCALIBRATION

Dependent variable →
Sample →
Miscalibration ST
Optimism ST

Own-firm IRR Miscalibration
All respondents
Involved in investments
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.418***
0.445***
[0.000]
[0.000]
0.009
0.041
[0.846]
[0.528]

Miscalibration LT

0.293***
[0.000]
-0.043
[0.454]

Optimism LT

0.382***
[0.000]
-0.002
[0.822]

Industry FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

331

331

214

214

0.184

0.093

0.195

0.108

2

Adj. R

The sample contains individual CFO’s forecasts from the 2007Q2 survey. In columns (1) and (2), the sample
includes all respondents. In columns (3) and (4), the sample is restricted to respondents who reported that they are
involved in investments (“involved in investments” question = [5, 6, 7]). The regressions include one-digit SIC
industry fixed effects. OLS errors are clustered by one-digit SIC industry and bootstrapped following Cameron,
Gelbach, and Miller (2009). p-values are presented in square brackets. Variable definitions are provided in
Appendix Table A.1. *, **, *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

32

TABLE VII
MISCALIBRATION, OPTIMISM, AND CORPORATE POLICIES
Dependent variable →
Miscalibration ST
Optimism ST
Miscalibration LT
Optimism LT

Investment intensity (%)
(1)
(2)
0.235
(0.257)
0.336
(0.384)
0.600**
(0.242)
0.837*
(0.418)

Leverage (%)
(3)
(4)
1.324***
(0.358)
-0.027
(0.454)
0.538
(0.450)
0.227
(0.632)

Firm characteristics
Industry FE
Survey Date FE

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations

2,547

2,511

2,601

2,565

0.114

0.116

0.316

0.310

Adj R

2

The sample includes all observations that could be identified and merged with Compustat. The dependent variables
are investment intensity (net investment / total assets) and book leverage (total debt / total assets), expressed in
percentage points. Firm characteristics include log(sales), asset market-to-book, profitability, a repurchase indicator,
a dividend indicator, and 12-month past firm returns. Columns (1) and (2) also include market leverage as a control.
Summary statistics are in Online Appendix Table A-III, Panel A. Industry fixed effects are based on the two-digit
SIC level classification. OLS standard errors are clustered at the two-digit SIC level. Variable definitions are
provided in Appendix Table A.1. *, **, *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

33

TABLE VIII
CHANGE IN CORPORATE POLICIES WHEN NEW CFOS TAKE OFFICE
Dependent variable →

Miscalibration ST
Optimism ST
Miscalibration LT
Optimism LT

Change in investment intensity
Avg(t-2, t-1) → Avg(t+1, t+2) (%)
(1)
(2)
-0.026
(0.348)
0.340
(0.334)
0.724*
(0.369)
0.318
(0.547)

Change in leverage
Avg(t-2, t-1) → Avg(t+1, t+2) (%)
(3)
(4)
0.169
(0.495)
-0.065
(0.411)
0.154
(0.412)
0.300
(0.525)

Firm characteristics
Industry FE
Year of taking office FE

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations

939

929

1,052

1,045

0.341

0.342

0.356

0.363

Adj R

2

The sample includes one observation per survey response for which we could identify an event in which the CFO
took office. The dependent variable is the change between the average investment intensity (or book leverage, in
columns (3) and (4)) in the two years preceding the CFO taking office (t-2, t-1) and the average investment intensity
(or book leverage) in the two years following the CFO taking office (t+1, t+2). The dependent variable is expressed
in percentage points. All regressions are OLS and include controls for firm characteristics measured at the year of
being hired (log(sales), asset market-to-book, profitability, repurchases, dividends, 12-month past firm return,
industry fixed effects (two-digit SIC level), year fixed effects that correspond with the date of the investment and
corporate characteristics, and year fixed effects that correspond with the year when the CFO took office. Columns
(1) and (2) also include market leverage as a control. Summary statistics are in Online Appendix, Table A-III, Panel
A. Standard errors are clustered at the two-digit SIC level. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table A.1.
*, **, *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

34

FIGURE I
TIME-SERIES OF CFO MISCALIBRATION
The figure presents the percentage of CFOs whose S&P 500 realized returns fall within the 80%
confidence interval, by survey quarter. The horizontal dashed line represents the 80% line; if executives
are well calibrated, the percentage of respondents for whom the actual return is within the 80%
confidence bounds should be 80%. The horizontal line represents the sample average across surveys.

35

FIGURE IIA
ONE-YEAR IMPUTED INDIVIDUAL S&P 500 VOLATILITY VERSUS HISTORICAL DISTRIBUTION
The kernel density of the one-year S&P 500 return volatility for the period of 1950–2000 (or 2001–2011),
and the kernel density of the imputed one-year S&P 500 individual volatility derived from CFOs’
predictions.

FIGURE IIB
10-YEAR IMPUTED INDIVIDUAL S&P 500 VOLATILITY VERSUS HISTORICAL DISTRIBUTION
The kernel density of the 10-year S&P 500 annualized return volatility for the period of 1950 to 2000 and
the kernel density of the imputed 10-year S&P 500 annualized individual volatility derived from CFOs’
predictions.
36

10%
-10%

0%
10%

30%

-10%

50%

Implied Volatility (VIX) (reversed scale)

-30%

-20%
Jun 2001
Sep 2001
Dec 2001
Mar 2002
Jun 2002
Sep 2002
Dec 2002
Mar 2003
Jun 2003
Sep 2003
Dec 2003
Mar 2004
Jun 2004
Sep 2004
Dec 2004
Mar 2005
Jun 2005
Sep 2005
Dec 2005
Mar 2006
Jun 2006
Sep 2006
Dec 2006
Mar 2007
Jun 2007
Sep 2007
Dec 2007
Mar 2008
Jun 2008
Sep 2008
Dec 2008
Mar 2009
Jun 2009
Sep 2009
Dec 2009
Mar 2010
Jun 2010
Sep 2010
Dec 2010
Mar 2011

CFOs' Average 1-Year S&P 500 Forecasts

-50%

20%

Avg lower bound

Avg expected returns

Avg upper bound

VIX

FIGURE III
AVERAGE S&P 500 FORECASTS AND MARKET IMPLIED VOLATILITY, BY SURVEY
The chart shows the average lower bound, the average expected returns, and the average upper bound for
one-year S&P 500 return predictions, per survey date (left-hand scale). In addition, the chart includes the
S&P 500 option implied volatility (VIX index) on the survey date (reversed right-hand scale).

37

