NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HARD TIMES
John Y. Campbell
Stefano Giglio
Christopher Polk
Working Paper 16222
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16222

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

We are grateful to Tuomo Vuolteenaho for conversations that helped to motivate and shape this paper.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by John Y. Campbell, Stefano Giglio, and Christopher Polk. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Hard Times
John Y. Campbell, Stefano Giglio, and Christopher Polk
NBER Working Paper No. 16222
July 2010
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that the stock market downturns of 2000-2002 and 2007-09 have very different proximate
causes. The early 2000's saw a large increase in the discount rates applied to corporate profits by rational
investors, while the late 2000's saw a decrease in rational expectations of future profits. In each case
the downturn reversed the trends of the previous boom. We reach these conclusions using a vector
autoregressive model of aggregate stock returns and valuations, estimated imposing the cross-sectional
restrictions of the intertemporal capital asset pricing model (ICAPM). As stock returns are very noisy,
exploiting an economic model such as the ICAPM to extract information about future corporate profits
from realized returns can potentially be very useful. We confirm that the ICAPM restrictions improve
the out-of-sample forecasting performance of VAR models for stock returns, and that our conclusions
are consistent with a simple graphical data analysis. Our findings imply that the 2007-09 downturn
was particularly serious for rational long-term investors, who did not expect a strong recovery of stock
prices as they did earlier in the decade.

John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
Stefano Giglio
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
sgiglio@fas.harvard.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16222

Christopher Polk
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton St.
London WC2A 2AE
UK
c.polk@lse.ac.uk

1

Introduction

During the past 15 years the US stock market has experienced two long booms, in
each case followed by a sharp downturn. From the end of March 1994 through the
end of March 2000, the S&P 500 index rose 221% in current dollars and 177% after
adjustment for in‡ation. In the following two years (from March 2000 to September
2002), it declined 39% (42% in real terms). Similarly, from September 2002 to
September 2007 the S&P 500 rose 75% (51%) and from September 2007 to March
2009 declined 44% (45%).
How should we interpret these dramatic ‡uctuations? Adopting the perspective of
a rational investor or stock market analyst, should we think of the stock market booms
as re‡ecting good news about future corporate pro…ts, discounted at a constant rate
as in traditional “random walk”models of stock prices? Or were stock prices driven
up by declines in the discount rates that rational investors applied to corporate cash
‡ows? And when the booms ended, did prices fall because rational investors became
pessimistic about pro…ts, or because they discounted future pro…ts more heavily?2
Answers to these questions are important both because they tell us about the proximate causes of stock market ‡uctuations, and because they reveal future prospects
for the stock market. If the hard times recently experienced by stock market investors are due to lower expected corporate pro…ts, then they are permanent in the
sense that there is no reason to expect stock prices to rebound to previous levels. On
the other hand, if hard times are driven by an increase in discount rates, or equivalently expected future returns, then it is rational to expect stock prices to recover
over time, and in this sense the hard times are temporary.
In this paper we argue that the downturns of 2000–02 and 2007–09 have very
di¤erent proximate causes. In 2000–02, stock prices fell primarily because discount
rates increased, while in 2007–09 cash ‡ow prospects worsened, with discount rates
playing little role until late 2008. Similarly, the preceding booms were driven primarily by discount rates in the 1990’s and by a mix of cash ‡ows and discount rates
in the mid-2000’s.
2

An increase in the discount rates applied by rational investors can occur for several reasons:
an increase in aggregate risk; an increase in the risk aversion of rational investors; or a transfer
of aggregate risk from irrational to rational investors, as in models with noise traders who have
‡uctuating sentiment and sell stocks to rational investors when they become pessimistic.

1

We reach this conclusion using a structured econometric approach with three
main ingredients: …rst, a vector autoregressive (VAR) model of aggregate stock returns, valuation ratios, and other relevant …nancial variables; second, the approximate
accounting identity of Campbell and Shiller (1988); and third, the cross-sectional restrictions of the intertemporal capital asset pricing model (ICAPM) of Merton (1973)
and Campbell (1993), as implemented empirically by Campbell (1996), Campbell and
Vuolteenaho (2004), and Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2010). Relative to these
earlier papers, our contribution here is to estimate the aggregate VAR imposing the
cross-sectional restrictions of the ICAPM, thereby reducing uncertainty about the
components of stock market ‡uctuations under the assumption that the ICAPM is
correct.
We impose these restrictions because forecasting the equity premium with a pure
time-series-based approach is a di¢ cult task. Consequently, exploiting the economic
logic of a cross-sectional asset-pricing model can help sharpen forecasts if the model
imposed does a reasonably good job describing patterns in average returns. We join
others in arguing that imposing such economically reasonable guidelines can be useful
in forecasting subsequent excess market returns.3 In support of this argument, we
document that our theoretically restricted …ve-variable VAR model generates smaller
average out-of-sample forecast errors than its unrestricted counterpart.
Of course, the VAR methodology used in the above tests relies on speci…c assumptions about the data-generating process. Though the assumptions we make are
reasonable, we also show that our …ndings about the proximate causes of the 2000–
2002 and 2007–09 downturns, and their link to the cross section of equity returns, are
consistent with much simpler although less elegant data analysis.
Beyond simply forecasting the equity premium, our results provide insight into
the process by which the market prices the cross-section of equities. The model
we impose argues that value stocks (relative to growth stocks) do better on average
but worse during those stock market downturns that are permanent, in the sense
that those downturns re‡ect hard times today due to expectations of lower corporate
pro…ts in the future. Our empirical success con…rms that this economic model was
3

Campbell and Shiller (1988a, 1988b) and Fama and French (1989) argue that high stock prices
should imply a low equity premium. Merton (1980) argues that the equity premium should usually
be positive because of risk aversion. Polk, Thompson, and Vuolteenaho (2006) argue that the
cross-sectional pricing of risk should be consistent with the time-series pricing of risk, and assume
the CAPM to make that comparison. Campbell and Thompson (2008) argue that imposing the
restrictions of steady-state valuation models improves forecasting ability.

2

a useful description of the recent US stock market experience.
Other work has used implications from the cross section to derive new equity
premium predictors. For example, Polk, Thompson, and Vuolteenaho (2006) point
out that if the CAPM is true, a high equity premium implies low prices for stocks with
high betas. Relative valuations of high-beta stocks can therefore be used to predict
the market return. Though their CAPM-based equity premium predictor does well
in the pre-1963 subsample, it performs poorly in the post-1963 subsample, perhaps
not surprising given the poor performance of the CAPM in that period. Unlike Polk,
Thompson, and Vuolteenaho (2006), not only do we use an asset-pricing model (the
ICAPM) that has had better empirical success in the post-1963 sample, we estimate a
time series model that is fully restricted to be consistent with cross-sectional pricing.
Additionally, our results suggest that tests of the Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004) implementation of the ICAPM that jointly estimate both the VAR coe¢ cients and the pricing parameters together will be favorable to that model. Not
only will the model’s pricing performance improve but the integrity of the resulting
news terms may not be dramatically sacri…ced. Though a joint estimation approach
will twist the VAR coe¢ cients away from the OLS estimates used by Campbell and
Vuolteenaho, in order to better …t the more precisely measured cross-sectional pricing
implications, the resulting equity premium forecasts should still perform well out of
sample.
Our …nal contribution is to expand the set of variables included in the Campbell
and Vuolteenaho VAR. We speci…cally add the default yield spread, as shocks to
this variable should contain information about future corporate pro…ts. Consistent
with this intuition, our restricted VAR chooses to include the default spread as an
important component of aggregate cash-‡ow news. Interestingly, though the key
variable of Campbell and Vuolteenaho, the small-stock value spread, continues to
be an important component of market news, its role does not seem as critical in
our structured econometric approach. This helps to address concerns about the
sensitivity of the results in Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) and Campbell, Polk,
and Vuolteenaho (2010) to the inclusion of the small-stock value spread.
A recent precursor to our paper is Ranish (2009). This paper also argues that
cash-‡ow news was relatively important in the downturn of 2007-09, but it does so
using high-frequency data and does not seek to use the restrictions of asset pricing
models to improve the precision of the return decomposition.

3

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains our methodology for identifying the components of stock returns. Section 3 discusses the data,
and Section 4 presents our VAR estimates with and without ICAPM restrictions.
Section 5 contrasts the two boom-bust cycles of the late 1990’s and early 2000’s and
the mid to late 2000’s. Section 6 concludes.

2
2.1

Identifying the Components of Stock Returns
Cash-‡ow and discount-rate shocks

Campbell and Shiller (1988) provide a convenient framework for analyzing cash-‡ow
and discount-rate shocks. They develop a loglinear approximate present-value relation that allows for time-varying discount rates. Linearity is achieved by approximating the de…nition of log return on a dividend-paying asset, rt+1 log(Pt+1 + Dt+1 )
log(Pt ), around the mean log dividend-price ratio, (dt pt ), using a …rst-order Taylor
expansion. Above, P denotes price, D dividend, and lower-case letters log transforms. The resulting approximation is rt+1
k + pt+1 + (1
)dt+1 pt ;where
and k are parameters of linearization de…ned by
1 1 + exp(dt pt ) and
k
log( ) (1
) log(1=
1). When the dividend-price ratio is constant, then
= P=(P + D), the ratio of the ex-dividend to the cum-dividend stock price. The
approximation here replaces the log sum of price and dividend with a weighted average of log price and log dividend, where the weights are determined by the average
relative magnitudes of these two variables.
Solving forward iteratively, imposing the “no-in…nite-bubbles”terminal condition
that limj!1 j (dt+j pt+j ) = 0, taking expectations, and subtracting the current
dividend, one gets
pt

dt =

k
1

+ Et

1
X

j

[ dt+1+j

rt+1+j ] ;

(1)

j=0

where d denotes log dividend growth. This equation says that the log price-dividend
ratio is high when dividends are expected to grow rapidly, or when stock returns are
expected to be low. The equation should be thought of as an accounting identity
rather than a behavioral model; it has been obtained merely by approximating an
identity, solving forward subject to a terminal condition, and taking expectations.
4

Intuitively, if the stock price is high today, then from the de…nition of the return
and the terminal condition that the dividend-price ratio is non-explosive, there must
either be high dividends or low stock returns in the future. Investors must then expect
some combination of high dividends and low stock returns if their expectations are
to be consistent with the observed price.
Campbell (1991) extends the loglinear present-value approach to obtain a decomposition of returns. Substituting (1) into the approximate return equation gives
rt+1

Et rt+1 = (Et+1

Et )

1
X

j

j=0

= NCF;t+1

dt+1+j

(Et+1

Et )

1
X

j

rt+1+j

(2)

j=1

NDR;t+1 ;

where NCF denotes news about future cash ‡ows (i.e., dividends or consumption), and
NDR denotes news about future discount rates (i.e., expected returns). This equation
says that unexpected stock returns must be associated with changes in expectations
of future cash ‡ows or discount rates. An increase in expected future cash ‡ows is
associated with a capital gain today, while an increase in discount rates is associated
with a capital loss today. The reason is that with a given dividend stream, higher
future returns can only be generated by future price appreciation from a lower current
price.
If the decomposition is applied to the returns on the investor’s portfolio, these
return components can be interpreted as permanent and transitory shocks to the
investor’s wealth. Returns generated by cash-‡ow news are never reversed subsequently, whereas returns generated by discount-rate news are o¤set by lower returns
in the future. From this perspective it should not be surprising that conservative
long-term investors are more averse to cash-‡ow risk than to discount-rate risk.

2.2

VAR methodology

An important issue is how to measure the shocks to cash ‡ows and to discount rates.
One approach, introduced by Campbell (1991), is to estimate the cash-‡ow-news and
discount-rate-news series using a vector autoregressive (VAR)
This VAR
P model.
j
methodology …rst estimates the terms Et rt+1 and (Et+1 Et ) 1
r
t+1+j and then
j=1
uses realization of rt+1 and equation (2) to back out the cash-‡ow news. Because of
the approximate identity linking returns, dividends, and stock prices, this approach
5

yields results that are almost identical to those that are obtained by forecasting cash
‡ows explicitly using the same information set, provided that the information set
includes the dividend yield and su¢ cient lags of the forecasting variables. Replacing
the dividend yield with an alternative smooth valuation ratio, such as the smoothed
earnings-price ratio or book-price ratio, also generates similar results whether returns
or cash ‡ows are forecast. Thus the choice of variables to enter the VAR is the
important decision in implementing this methodology.4
When extracting the news terms in our empirical tests, we assume that the data
are generated by a …rst-order VAR model
zt+1 = a + zt + ut+1 ,

(3)

where zt+1 is a m-by-1 state vector with rt+1 as its …rst element, a and are m-by-1
vector and m-by-m matrix of constant parameters, and ut+1 an i.i.d. m-by-1 vector
of shocks. Of course, this formulation also allows for higher-order VAR models via a
simple rede…nition of the state vector to include lagged values.
Provided that the process in equation (3) generates the data, t + 1 cash-‡ow and
discount-rate news are linear functions of the t + 1 shock vector:
NDR;t+1 = e10 ut+1 ;
NCF;t+1 = (e10 + e10 ) ut+1 :

(4)

Above, e1 is a vector with …rst element equal to unity and the remaining elements
equal to zeros. The VAR shocks are mapped to news by , de…ned as
(I
) 1 : e10 captures the long-run signi…cance of each individual VAR shock to
discount-rate expectations. The greater the absolute value of a variable’s coe¢ cient in the return prediction equation (the top row of ), the greater the weight the
variable receives in the discount-rate-news formula. More persistent variables should
also receive more weight, which is captured by the term (I
) 1.
4

Chen and Zhao (2009) discuss the sensitivity of VAR decomposition results to alternative speci…cations. Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2010), Cochrane (2008), and Engsted, Pedersen, and
Tanggaard (2010) clarify the conditions under which VAR results are robust to the decision whether
to forecast returns or cash ‡ows.

6

2.3

Imposing the ICAPM

Campbell (1993) derives an approximate discrete-time version of Merton’s (1973)
intertemporal CAPM. The model’s central pricing statement is based on the …rstorder condition for an investor who holds a portfolio p of tradable assets that contains
all of her wealth. Campbell assumes that this portfolio is observable in order to derive
testable asset-pricing implications from the …rst-order condition.
Campbell considers an in…nitely lived investor who has the recursive preferences
proposed by Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991), with time discount factor , relative risk
aversion ; and elasticity of intertemporal substitution . Campbell assumes that
all asset returns are conditionally lognormal, and that the investor’s portfolio returns
and its two components are homoskedastic. The assumption of lognormality can be
relaxed if one is willing to use Taylor approximations to the true Euler equations, and
the model can be extended to allow changing variances, something we plan to do in
future research.
Campbell derives an approximate solution in which risk premia depend only on the
coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion and the discount coe¢ cient , and not directly
on the elasticity of intertemporal substitution . The approximation is accurate if
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is close to one, and it holds exactly in
the limit of continuous time (Schroder and Skiadas 1999) if the elasticity equals one.
In the = 1 case, = and the optimal consumption-wealth ratio is conveniently
constant and equal to 1
.
Under these assumptions, the optimality of portfolio strategy p requires that the
risk premium on any asset i satis…es
Et [ri;t+1 ]

rf;t+1 +

2
i;t

2

=

Covt (ri;t+1 ; rp;t+1
+(1

Et rp;t+1 )

(5)

)Covt (ri;t+1 ; Np;DR;t+1 );

where p is P
the optimal portfolio that the agent chooses to hold and Np;DR;t+1
j
(Et+1 Et ) 1
rp;t+1+j is discount-rate or expected-return news on this portfolio.
j=1

The left hand side of (5) is the expected excess log return on asset i over the riskless
interest rate, plus one-half the variance of the excess return to adjust for Jensen’s
Inequality. This is the appropriate measure of the risk premium in a lognormal
model. The right hand side of (5) is a weighted average of two covariances: the
7

covariance of return i with the return on portfolio p, which gets a weight of , and
the covariance of return i with negative of news about future expected returns on
portfolio p, which gets a weight of (1
). These two covariances represent the
myopic and intertemporal hedging components of asset demand, respectively. When
= 1, it is well known that portfolio choice is myopic and the …rst-order condition
collapses to the familiar one used to derive the pricing implications of the CAPM.
Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) rewrite equation (5) to relate the risk premium
to betas with cash-‡ow news and discount-rate news.
Using rp;t+1 Et rp;t+1 =
Np;CF;t+1 Np;DR;t+1 to replace the portfolio covariance with news covariances, and
then multiplying and dividing by the conditional variance of portfolio p’s return, 2p;t ,
we have
Et [ri;t+1 ]
Here the cash-‡ow beta

rf;t+1 +
i;CF

i;DR

i;DR

2

=

2
p;t i;CFp ;t

+

2
p;t i;DRp ;t :

(6)

is de…ned as

i;CF

and the discount-rate beta

2
i;t

Cov (ri;t ; NCF;t )
;
e
e
Var rM;t
Et 1 rM;t

(7)

Cov (ri;t ; NDR;t )
:
e
e
Var rM;t
Et 1 rM;t

(8)

as

Note that the discount-rate beta is de…ned as the covariance of an asset’s return with
good news about the stock market in form of lower-than-expected discount rates, and
that each beta divides by the total variance of unexpected market returns, not the
variance of cash-‡ow news or discount-rate news separately. This implies that the
cash-‡ow beta and the discount-rate beta add up to the total market beta,
i;M

=

i;CF

+

i;DR :

(9)

Equation (6) delivers the prediction that “bad beta” with cash-‡ow news should
have a risk price times greater than the risk price of “good beta”with discount-rate
news, which should equal the variance of the return on portfolio p.
In our empirical work, we assume that portfolio p is fully invested in a valueweighted equity index. This assumption implies that the risk price of discount-rate
news should equal the variance of the value-weighted index. The only free parameter
in equation (6) is then the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion, .
8

3

Data and Econometrics

Our estimation method involves specifying a set of state variables for the VAR, plus
a set of test assets on which we impose the ICAPM conditions. We …rst describe the
data, then our econometric approach for imposing the restrictions of the asset pricing
model.

3.1

VAR data

Our full VAR speci…cation includes …ve variables, four of which are the same as in
Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004). Because of data availability issues, we replace the
term yield series used in that paper with a new series, as described below. To those
four variables, we add a default yield spread series. The data are all quarterly, from
1929:2 to 2008:4.
e
, the
The …rst variable in the VAR is the excess log return on the market, rM
di¤erence between the log return on the Center for Research in Securities Prices
(CRSP) value-weighted stock index and the log risk-free rate. The risk-free data are
constructed by CRSP from Treasury bills with approximately three month maturity.

The second variable is the price-earning ratio (P E) from Shiller (2000), constructed as the price of the S&P 500 index divided by a ten-year trailing moving
average of aggregate earnings of companies in the S&P 500 index. Following Graham
and Dodd (1934), Campbell and Shiller (1988b, 1998) advocate averaging earnings
over several years to avoid temporary spikes in the price-earnings ratio caused by
cyclical declines in earnings. We avoid any interpolation of earnings in order to ensure that all components of the time-t price-earnings ratio are contemporaneously
observable by time t. The ratio is log transformed. We have explored using the
price-to-dividend ratio, P D, in place of P E; our results remain qualitatively similar
for our full speci…cation.5
Third, the term yield spread (T Y ) is obtained from Global Financial Data. In
5

Our construction of the dividend-to-price ratio measures dividends as the average dividend over
the last year. Similar to P E, smoothing dividends over a longer period helps remove transitory
variation in dividends. In that case, the di¤erence between results with P E and results with a
smoothed dividend-to-price ratio becomes even smaller.

9

Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004), T Y was computed as the yield di¤erence between
ten-year constant-maturity taxable bonds and short-term taxable notes. Since the
series used to construct it were discontinued in 2002, we compute the T Y series as
the di¤erence between the log yield on the 10-Year US Constant Maturity Bond
(IGUSA10D) and the log yield on the 3-Month US Treasury Bill (ITUSA3D).
Fourth, the small-stock value spread (V S) is constructed from the data on the
six “elementary” equity portfolios made available by Professor Kenneth French on
his web site. These elementary portfolios, which are constructed at the end of each
June, are the intersections of two portfolios formed on size (market equity, ME) and
three portfolios formed on the ratio of book equity to market equity (BE/ME). The
size breakpoint for year t is the median NYSE market equity at the end of June of
year t. BE/ME for June of year t is the book equity for the last …scal year end in
t 1 divided by ME for December of t 1. The BE/ME breakpoints are the 30th
and 70th NYSE percentiles.
At the end of June of year t, we construct the small-stock value spread as the
di¤erence between the log(BE=M E) of the small high-book-to-market portfolio and
the log(BE=M E) of the small low-book-to-market portfolio, where BE and ME are
measured at the end of December of year t 1. For months from July to May, the
small-stock value spread is constructed by adding the cumulative log return (from
the previous June) on the small low-book-to-market portfolio to, and subtracting the
cumulative log return on the small high-book-to-market portfolio from, the end-ofJune small-stock value spread. The construction of this series follows Campbell and
Vuolteenaho (2004) closely.
The …fth and last variable in our VAR is the default spread (DEF ), de…ned as
the di¤erence between the log yield on Moody’s BAA and AAA bonds. The series
is obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. We add the default spread
to the Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) VAR speci…cation partially because that
variable is known to track time-series variation in expected excess returns on the
market portfolio (Fama and French, 1989), but mostly because shocks to the default
spread should to some degree re‡ect news about aggregate default probabilities. Of
course, news about aggregate default probabilities should in turn re‡ect news about
the market’s future cash ‡ows.
Table 1 reports descriptive statistics on these variables. The lower panel of the
table shows some quite strong correlations among the VAR explanatory variables,
for example a positive correlation of 0.654 between the value spread and the default
10

spread and a negative correlation of -0.591 between the log price-earnings ratio and
the default spread. These correlations complicate the interpretation of individual
VAR coe¢ cients when all the variables are included in the VAR.

3.2

Test asset data

Our main set of test assets is the six elementary ME and BE/ME sorted portfolios,
described in the previous section. We impose the ICAPM conditions on the returns
of these six assets and on the return of the market portfolio, the CRSP value-weighted
stock index.
All the test portfolios are highly correlated with the market return. When we
estimate the model, we impose the ICAPM equations on the di¤erence between the
return of each test asset and the return of the market; in this way, we remove part of
the correlation between the errors of the moment conditions, which is computationally
convenient. The condition on the market return is instead imposed in excess of the
risk-free rate.

3.3

Estimation methodology

This section details the estimation technique used to solve for the restricted model,
using Hansen, Heaton, and Yaron’s (1996) continuously updated Generalized Method
of Moments (GMM).
We use the notation K for the dimension of the VAR and I for the number of test
assets. The restricted model gives us R = K(K + 1) + I + 1 orthogonality conditions.
K(K + 1) of these estimate the intercepts and dynamic coe¢ cients of the VAR, and
I + 1 orthogonality conditions are imposed by the ICAPM on the test assets and
the market portfolio. There is one free parameter in the ICAPM, the coe¢ cient of
relative risk aversion, so there are I overidentifying restrictions.
The VAR restrictions impose, for each equation k, that the error at t + 1 is
uncorrelated with each of the state variables measured at time t. They also impose
a zero unconditional mean on the innovation vector.
The ICAPM conditions are derived as follows. Starting from equation (5), we
11

assume lognormality, substitute in the market portfolio for portfolio p and use the
VAR conditions to get
Et (Ri;t+1 Rf;t+1 ) = Covt (ri;t+1 ; e10 (zt+1 a

)Covt (ri;t+1 ; e10 (zt+1 a zt )):
(10)
We can condition down using the fact that Et [ut+1 ] = 0, so that we obtain
E(Ri;t+1

Rf;t+1 ) = E(ri;t+1 e10 (zt+1

M
Rt+1

i
(rt+1

M
rt+1
)e10 (

zt ))

(1

)

(I

(1

)E(ri;t+1 e10 (zt+1

zt )):
(11)
We use this orthogonality condition for the market portfolio, but rewrite the I orthogonality conditions for the test assets in excess of the market return, rather than
the riskfree rate:
i
E[Rt+1

a

zt ))+(1

) 1 )(zt+1

a

a

zt )] = 0: (12)

This is useful for the numerical estimation because it removes a large amount of the
correlation between the errors of the moment conditions.
When K = 5, we have a large number of parameters to estimate. We therefore
have to restrict our continuously updated GMM estimation procedure in several ways
in order to achieve convergence to acceptable parameter values for every subsample,
a property that we need for out-of-sample analysis. First, we place an upper bound
on the risk aversion coe¢ cient . This results in an estimate that in the full sample
and some subsamples actually hits the bound, while in others it converges below it.
In analysis not shown, we …nd that the results are robust to various speci…cations for
this upper bound. We also impose a lower bound on of one, which is never binding.
Second, we impose stationarity on the estimated VAR by requiring that the absolute value of the maximum eigenvalue of the transition matrix is less than or
equal to a value < 1. We explore the cases = 0:98 and = 0:99 and report the
former in the online Appendix. Again, results appear to be robust to this choice.
In order to de…ne convergence of the estimator, we use a tolerance level of 1e-5 on
the objective function value (whose order of magnitude is around 1e-2), 1e-4 on the
values of the parameters, 1e-3 on , and 1e-4 on the maximum eigenvalue constraint
and on the response to discount rate news shocks.
Finally, since in some cases the search function seems to converge to local minima,
we start the estimation from several di¤erent points, where the VAR parameters are
the ones of the unrestricted OLS estimate, while varies from 1 to the upper bound.
This method seems to converge well to the global minimum.
12

4

Alternative VAR Estimates

In Tables 2 through 4, we estimate three alternative VAR systems. For comparison
with previous work, we begin in Table 2 with a simple two-variable VAR without
restrictions, including only the market return and log price-earnings ratio as state
variables. Then in Tables 3 and 4 we include all …ve state variables, …rst without
restrictions and then imposing the restrictions of the ICAPM described in the previous
section.

4.1

A two-variable VAR system

Table 2 reports results that are familiar from previous research using this methodology. The top panel shows that the market return is predicted negatively by the
log price-smoothed earnings ratio (with a partial regression coe¢ cient of -0.047 and a
t-statistic of -2.94), which itself follows a persistent AR(1) process. This implies that
discount rate news is quite volatile and explains most of the variance of the market
return.
One way to see the extent to which discount-rate news is an important component
of the market return is to calculate the coe¢ cients mapping state variable shocks into
news terms, as we do in the middle panel of Table 2. If we orthogonalize the state
variable shocks, using a Cholesky decomposition with the market return ordered
…rst, the “structural”market return shock gets credit for the movement in the priceearnings ratio that normally accompanies a market return shock, while the structural
shock to the price-earnings ratio is interpreted as an increase in the price-earnings
ratio without any change in the market return, that is, a negative shock to earnings
with no change in price. The …rst shock has a discount-rate e¤ect that is over four
times larger than its cash-‡ow e¤ect. The second shock carries both bad cash-‡ow
news and o¤setting good discount-rate news to keep the stock price constant.
Another way to see the importance of discount-rate news is to calculate the volatilities of discount-rate and cash-‡ow news. We do this in the bottom panel of Table
2. Discount-rate news is about twice as volatile as cash-‡ow news, consistent with
results reported by Campbell (1991) and others. There is only a weak correlation
(0.145) between the two news terms.

13

We have explored what happens when we impose the restrictions of the ICAPM
on this two-variable VAR system. The predictability of the market return from
the price-earnings ratio diminishes (the partial regression coe¢ cient is nearly four
times smaller in absolute magnitude), and therefore the volatility of discount-rate
news diminishes. The estimated system implies that cash-‡ow and discount-rate
news have similar volatilities and a large positive correlation; that is, almost all stock
market ‡uctuations are attributed to a roughly equal mix of the two types of shocks,
as if the market overreacts to cash-‡ow news. The estimate of risk aversion is a
modest 2.3, and the overidentifying restrictions of this model are strongly rejected.
These unpromising results are driven by the fact that in our full sample, the value
spread is negatively correlated with the price-earnings ratio as shown in Table 1.
During the Great Depression, the value spread was wide and the price-earnings ratio
was low, while the postwar period has been characterized by a lower value spread and
a higher average price-earnings ratio. Given this fact, a model that only includes
the price-earnings ratio as a predictor variable implies that value stocks have high
discount-rate betas (since on average they do well when the price-earnings ratio rises,
and this predicts low future stock returns). Since the discount-rate beta has a low
price of risk in the ICAPM, the implied value premium is actually lower than it
would be in the simple CAPM; equivalently, the model implies that value stocks have
a negative CAPM alpha. To mitigate this e¤ect, the restricted model reduces the
predictability of stock returns (but does not eliminate it altogether), and estimates
a relatively low coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion, thus a relatively small di¤erence
between the risk prices for cash-‡ow and discount-rate betas. The poor …t of the
model to the cross-section of stock returns implies that the ICAPM restrictions can
be statistically rejected.

4.2

Five-variable VAR systems

In Table 3 we include all …ve state variables in an unrestricted VAR. Consistent
with previous research, the term spread predicts the market return positively while
the value spread predicts it negatively; however, the predictive coe¢ cients on these
variables are not precisely estimated. The default spread has an imprecisely estimated
negative coe¢ cient, probably a symptom of multicollinearity among the explanatory
variables as the default spread and the value spread have a correlation of 0.65 in
Table 1. Discount-rate news is considerably more volatile than cash-‡ow discount-

14

rate news, just as in the unrestricted two-variable model of Table 2. The volatility of
aggregate cash-‡ow news is 0.045 while the volatility of discount-rate news is 0.102,
more than twice as large. The correlation between these two components of the
market shock is a relatively small -0.117.
While the unrestricted …ve-variable VAR has similar properties to the unrestricted
two-variable VAR, the same is not true when we impose the ICAPM restrictions on the
system. Table 4 reports a restricted …ve-variable VAR. The restrictions strengthen
the predictive power of the term spread and the default spread for the market return,
and weaken the predictive power of the value spread. The partial regression coe¢ cient
on T Y is 0.013 with an associated t-statistic of 2.17. DEF forecasts the log excess
market return in the presence of the other …ve variables with a coe¢ cient of -0.050
(t-statistic of -1.92). The two news terms are now each estimated to be more volatile
than the market return itself, and strongly negatively correlated, implying that booms
and busts are typically due to cash-‡ow news overwhelming discount-rate news or vice
versa, but not typically due to an equal mix of both types of shocks. The coe¢ cient
of risk aversion is estimated to be around 5, and the overidentifying restrictions of
the ICAPM are not rejected.
Shocks to the default spread play a much more signi…cant role in the determination
of cash-‡ow news in the restricted VAR relative to the unrestricted estimates. For the
reduced-form mapping, the coe¢ cient on the default spread is now -1.047, compared
to the unrestricted estimate of -0.080. For the structural mapping, the coe¢ cient on
the default spread is -0.23 instead of -0.017. Essentially what we are …nding is that
the restricted VAR wants value stocks (relative to growth stocks) to be more sensitive
to shocks to the default spread. This …nding seems reasonable, given the result in
Fama and French (1993) that both small stocks and value stocks covary more with a
default risk factor than large stocks and growth stocks do. Of course, unlike Fama
and French, we restrict the price of risk for exposure to this factor to be consistent
with the ICAPM.
Interestingly, though the key variable of Campbell and Vuolteenaho, the smallstock value spread, continues to be an important component of market news, its role
does not seem as critical in our structured econometric approach. This helps to
address concerns about the sensitivity of the results in Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004) and Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2010) to the inclusion of the smallstock value spread. Moreover, in results not shown, dropping VS from the restricted
…ve-variable VAR has little e¤ect on the qualitative conclusions drawn from the VAR.
15

In particular, we continue to fail to reject the null hypothesis of the J-test of overidentifying restrictions as the associated p value for that test is 0.078. Also the resulting
discount-rate and cash-‡ow news terms appear very similar to those produced without
the exclusion.
The online Appendix to this paper examines the robustness of these estimates to
two other variations in the methodology. The …rst variation is that we impose a
slightly tighter bound on the maximum eigenvalue of the transition matrix . The
restricted VAR estimates that result when imposing this tighter bound result in a risk
aversion estimate that is approximately 40% larger, with volatilities of the two news
terms that are approximately 35% smaller. Still, the model is not rejected by the test
of overidentifying restrictions and the state variables enter both the reduced-form and
structural mapping functions in much the same fashion. The second methodological
variation allows the cash-‡ow and discount-rate beta estimates of the test assets to
di¤er across the pre-1963 and the post-1963 subperiods. The resulting transition
matrix estimate does di¤er somewhat from the estimate in Table 4. For example,
in the return forecasting regression of the VAR, the coe¢ cient on the lagged excess
market return is now negative instead of positive. However, in neither case was
the resulting estimate statistically signi…cant from zero. Moreover, the news terms
appear to behave similarly to those from Table 4. Again, these two news series are
more volatile than the market return itself, and strongly negatively correlated.

5
5.1

Understanding Recent US Financial History
The VAR approach

What account do these alternative VAR models give of US …nancial history? In Figure
1, we report exponentially smoothed news series over the full sample period from
1929:2 through 2008:4. The smoothing parameter is 0.08 per quarter, corresponding
to a half-life of two years. Our three models are organized vertically, in each case
with cash-‡ow news on the left and the negative of discount-rate news on the right.
Increases in each news series imply an increase in stock prices driven by cash-‡ow
or discount-rate changes. For each model, the two smoothed news series add to
the smoothed unexpected excess return on the stock market, which varies somewhat
across models since di¤erent models imply di¤erent expected returns.
16

The three models give a fairly similar explanation of the large movements in the
stock market over this eighty-year period. The Great Depression was a prolonged
period of negative cash-‡ow news that lasted until World War II, together with a
sharp increase in discount rates— equivalently, a decline in investor sentiment— in the
very early 1930’s. This was followed by a pro…t boom in the late 1940’s through to
the early 1960’s, but discount rates remained high in this period (sentiment remained
depressed), dampening the e¤ect on stock prices. Pro…ts were weak in the 1980’s
and early 1990’s, and stronger if somewhat erratic during the last two decades of the
sample. Declining discount rates (improving sentiment) drove stock prices up from
the late 1970’s through the year 2000.
In Figure 2, we look more closely at the period since 1995. All three models show
that declining discount rates (improving sentiment) drove the stock market up during
the late 1990’s, and then reversed in the early 2000’s. All three models also show
a pro…t boom in the mid-2000’s followed by a collapse in 2007-08. The restricted
model shows a particularly strong hump shape in cash-‡ow news over this period.
There is less consistency across models about cash-‡ow news in the 1990’s (estimated to be modestly positive in the two-variable model but not in the …ve-variable
models) and discount-rate news in the 2000’s. Our unrestricted models imply that
investor sentiment had a modest positive e¤ect on stock prices from 2003 through
2008, but collapsed in late 2008. The restricted model, by contrast, implies that positive investor sentiment supported stock prices after 2005 even in the face of strongly
negative cash-‡ow news, and continued to do so through the end of our sample period.
Summarizing these results, our VAR models tell us that the two boom-bust cycles
of the 1990’s and the 2000’s were quite di¤erent in their proximate causes. The
technology boom and bust that occurred in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s was
primarily driven by discount-rate news. The credit boom and bust of the mid to late
2000’s saw an extended pro…t boom followed by negative cash-‡ow news at the end
of our sample period. Discount rates remained low, contributing to high stock prices
during the boom, and did not drive stock prices down until late 2008 at the earliest.

17

5.2

Out-of-sample return forecasts

Another way to understand the di¤erences between the technology boom-bust and
the credit boom-bust is to use our three VAR models to generate out-of-sample return
forecasts during the period 1993–2008. We estimate each model on an expanding
sample and, in Figure 3, plot the resulting out-of-sample forecasts. The striking
pattern in the …gure is that return forecasts were much lower during the boom of the
late 1990’s than they were during the boom of the mid-2000’s, and they increased
much more rapidly during the downturn following the year 2000 than they did in
2007-08. These di¤erences are noticeable in all the models, but are stronger in the
…ve-variable models than in the two-variable model, and strongest in the …ve-variable
model with theoretical restrictions imposed. The implication is that the stock market
downturn of the early 2000’s was mitigated, for long-term investors, by an increase
in expected future stock returns. This was much less the case in 2007-08.
This exercise also allows us to judge the success of our models at predicting excess
stock returns in this period. The mean squared error of in-sample forecasts is 0.0083
over this period for the unrestricted two-variable and …ve-variable models, and 0.0079
for the restricted …ve-variable model. Out of sample, the mean squared errors are
0.0092 for the unrestricted two-variable model, 0.0096 for the unrestricted …ve-variable
model, and 0.0092 for the restricted …ve-variable model. While the evaluation period
is short and unusual, and we do not propose to pick models based on these numbers,
the results do suggest that theoretical restrictions can improve the out-of-sample
performance of VAR forecasting models for stock returns.

5.3

Recent booms and busts in event time

The di¤erences between the technology and credit booms and busts can be appreciated without using VAR methodology. Figure 4 plots several key aggregate inputs
to our analysis. To aid comparison of the technology and credit episodes, we plot
variables in event time, where the event is the stock market peak: 2000Q1 for the
technology boom, and 2007Q3 for the credit boom.
One can see from Figure 4 that though, by construction, returns increased leading
up to the peak and then decreased, there are clear di¤erences in the source of that
variation across these two key episodes in recent market history. For the tech boom,

18

the P E ratio moved dramatically during the time leading up to the peak, while during
the credit boom, the market’s P E was essentially ‡at. Since Campbell and Shiller
(1988b) and others document that discount-rate news dominates cash-‡ow news in
moving the ratios of prices to accounting measures of stock market value, movements
in P E should be thought of as re‡ecting good news about market discount rates. In
contrast, the market’s smoothed earnings (E) moved dramatically during the years
of the credit boom, while during the tech boom there was a much smaller increase in
E. In fact, any increase in E prior to the tech peak occurred entirely within a year
of the market top. Of course, movements in this variable are naturally associated
with market cash-‡ow news.
Post event, the plots show that P E moved dramatically downward for both the
tech and credit busts. However, during the credit bust this movement in P E is
associated with a strong downward movement in E, while during the tech bust, aggregate earnings actually increased after the market peak. Similar conclusions can
be drawn from examining the price-to-dividend ratio, P D, and that ratio’s cash-‡ow
component, dividends over the last year (D). Movements in P D are very similar
to movements in P E. Prices scaled by dividends rise and then fall around the tech
boom. However D is essentially ‡at during the six years surrounding this episode.
In stark contrast, D rises sharply throughout the three years preceding the credit
boom and then begins to taper o¤ in the months subsequent to the peak. The slowdown in the growth of D corresponds with a rapid decline in the P D ratio. These
movements in simple aggregates are consistent with our claim that the tech boom
and bust was primarily a discount-rate event while the credit boom and bust was
primarily a cash-‡ow event.
Figure 4 also con…rms the usefulness of examining the cross-section of asset returns
for information about market aggregates. In particular, the movement in the value
spread shows a striking di¤erence across the two periods. During the tech boom,
V S increases leading up to the market peak and then after the peak starts to decline,
though this decline does take over a year to begin. In stark contrast, the V S decreases
in the time leading up to the credit peak and then begins to rise sharply after the
market begins to decline in late 2007. This response is exactly what one would expect
if cross-sectional pricing followed the ICAPM of Merton (1973), Campbell (1996),
Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004), and Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2010).
Speci…cally, the price gap between expensive and cheap stocks should narrow during
times when shocks to market cash-‡ow news are positive or when shocks to market
discount-rate news are negative. Conversely, this price gap should widen during times
19

when shocks to market cash-‡ow news are negative or when shocks to market discountrate news are positive. We …nd it comforting that this straightforward prediction of
the ICAPM can be seen clearly in the data, indicating that our conclusions do not
hinge on the details of a VAR speci…cation.

6

Conclusion

Over the last three decades, …nancial economists have dramatically changed their
interpretation of stock market movements. A wave of research has challenged the
traditional paradigm in which the equity premium is constant, excess stock returns
are unforecastable, and stock price ‡uctuations solely re‡ect news about corporate
pro…ts. Although there is still an active debate about the extent of predictability in
stock returns (see for example Campbell and Thompson 2008, Cochrane 2008, and
Goyal and Welch 2008), many …nancial economists have adopted a new paradigm
in which a signi…cant fraction of the variation in market returns re‡ects information
about future expected returns.
The new paradigm implies that market returns are a very noisy proxy for corporate fundamentals. They often re‡ect temporary valuation movements instead of
shifts in aggregate pro…tability, so it is di¢ cult to learn about changes in corporate
fundamentals simply from raw realized returns. We turn to asset pricing theory to
provide a better understanding of the fundamentals hidden in stock market returns
than can be achieved by purely statistical methods. In particular, we use the theoretical restrictions of the ICAPM to jointly estimate both a time-series model for
the aggregate market return and a cross-sectional model of average stock returns.
Out-of-sample tests con…rm the usefulness of our theory-driven approach.
Our analysis implies that bad news about future corporate pro…ts was much more
important in the stock market downturn of 2007–2009 than in the previous downturn of 2000-2002. The earlier downturn was driven primarily by a large increase
in expected future stock returns. Although the 2007–2009 proportional decline in
stock prices was only slightly greater than the 2000–2002 decline, it had more serious
implications for long-term investors, because there was little increase in expected future returns to reassure investors that stock prices were likely to recover over time.
In this sense, times were particularly hard at the bottom of the recent downturn in
March 2009.
20

References
Campbell, John Y., 1991, “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns”, Economic
Journal 101:157–179.
Campbell, John Y., 1993, “Intertemporal Asset Pricing Without Consumption Data”,
American Economic Review 83:487–512.
Campbell, John Y., 1996, “Understanding Risk and Return”, Journal of Political
Economy 104:298–345.
Campbell, John Y., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2010, “Growth or
Glamour? Fundamentals and Systematic Risk in Stock Returns” Review of
Financial Studies 23:305–344.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988a, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and
Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors”, Review of Financial
Studies 1:195–228.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988b, “Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected Dividends”, Journal of Finance 43:661–676.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1998, “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run
Stock Market Outlook”, Journal of Portfolio Management 24(2):11–26.
Campbell, John Y. and Sam Thompson, 2008, “Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out
of Sample: Can Anything Beat the Historical Average?”, Review of Financial
Studies 21:1509–1531.
Campbell, John Y. and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2004, “Bad Beta, Good Beta”, American Economic Review 94:1249–1275.
Chen, Long and Xinlei Zhao, 2009, “Return Decomposition”, Review of Financial
Studies 22:5213–5249.
Cochrane, John H., 2008, “The Dog That Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return
Predictability”, Review of Financial Studies 21:1533-1575.
Davis, James L., Eugene F. Fama, and Kenneth R. French, “Characteristics, Covariances, and Average Returns: 1929 to 1997”, Journal of Finance 55:389–406.

21

Engsted, Tom, Thomas Q. Pedersen, and Carsten Tanggaard, 2010, “Pitfalls in VAR
Based Return Decompositions: A Clari…cation”, unpublished paper, University
of Aarhus.
Epstein, Lawrence and Stanley Zin, 1989, “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework”, Econometrica 57:937–69.
Epstein, Lawrence and Stanley Zin, 1991, “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Investigation”, Journal of Political Economy 99:263–86.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1989, “Business Conditions and Expected
Returns on Stocks and Bonds”, Journal of Financial Economics 25:23-50.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in the
Returns on Stocks and Bonds,”Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Goyal, Amit and Ivo Welch, 2008, “A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Performance of Equity Premium Prediction”, Review of Financial Studies 21:1455–
1508.
Graham, Benjamin and David L. Dodd, 1934, Security Analysis, …rst edition, McGraw Hill, New York.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John Heaton, and Amir Yaron, 1996, “Finite-Sample Properties
of Some Alternative GMM Estimators”, Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics 14:262–280.
Merton, Robert C., 1973, “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model”, Econometrica 41:867–87.
Polk, Christopher, Sam Thompson, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2006, “Cross-Sectional
Forecasts of the Equity Premium”, Journal of Financial Economics 81:101–141.
Ranish, Ben, 2009, “Was This Stock Market Crash Di¤erent?”, unpublished paper,
Harvard University.
Schroder, Mark and Costis Skiadas, 1999, “Optimal Consumption and Portfolio
Selection With Stochastic Di¤erential Utility”, Journal of Economic Theory
89:68–126.

22

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
The table reports the descriptive statistics of the VAR state variables over the full
e
sample period 1929:2-2008:4, 319 quarterly data points. rM
is the excess log return
on the CRSP value-weight index. P E is the log ratio of the S&P 500’s price to
the S&P 500’s ten-year moving average of earnings. T Y is the term yield spread in
percentage points, measured as the yield di¤erence between the log yield on the tenyear US constant maturity bond and the log yield on the three-month US treasury.
V S is the small-stock value-spread, the di¤erence in the log book-to-market ratios
of small value and small growth stocks. The small-value and small-growth portfolios
are two of the six elementary portfolios constructed by Davis et al. (2000). DEF is
the default yield spread in percentage points between the log yield on Moody’s BAA
and AAA bonds.
Variable Mean Median
Std.
e
0.027 0.108
rM 0.012
P E 2.910
2.895 0.382
TY
1.419
1.369 1.029
V S 1.640
1.509 0.366
DEF 1.071
0.829 0.686
e
Correlations
rM
PE
TY
e
0.075 0.035
rM 1.000
P E 0.075
1.000 -0.244
TY
0.035
-0.244 1.000
V S -0.036
-0.334 0.338
DEF -0.167
-0.591 0.408

23

Min
Max
-0.437 0.641
1.495 3.891
-1.650 3.748
1.183 2.685
0.324 5.167
V S DEF
-0.036 -0.167
-0.334 -0.591
0.338 0.408
1.000 0.654
0.654 1.000

Table 2: Unrestricted VAR Parameter Estimates, Two Variables
The table shows the OLS parameter estimates for a …rst-order VAR model including
e
a constant, the log excess market return (rM
) and the price-earnings ratio (P E). In
the upper panel, each set of two rows corresponds to a di¤erent dependent variable.
The …rst two columns report coe¢ cients on the two explanatory variables, and the
remaining column shows the R2 . Standard errors are in parentheses. The middle
panel of the table shows the coe¢ cients mapping state variable shocks into news
e
terms for both a reduced-form VAR and a structural VAR where rM
is ordered …rst
and P E second. The bottom panel of the table reports the correlation matrix of the
shocks with shock standard deviations on the diagonal. The sample period for the
dependent variables is 1929:2-2008:4, providing 319 quarterly data points.

VAR estimate
e
rM
PE
Error to NCF
Error to NDR
Structural Error to NCF
Structural Error to NDR
News terms corr/std
NCF
NDR

24

e
PE
R2
rM
-0.029 -0.047 0.029
(0.056) (0.016)
0.049
0.963 0.932
(0.053) (0.015)
0.932 -0.866
0.068
0.866
0.020 -0.035
0.087
0.035

NCF
0.040
0.145

NDR
0.145
0.093

Table 3: Unrestricted VAR Parameter Estimates, Five Variables
The table shows the OLS parameter estimates for a …rst-order VAR model including
e
a constant, the log excess market return (rM
), the price-earnings ratio (P E), the term
yield spread (T Y ), the small-stock value spread (V S), and the default yield spread
(DEF ). In the upper panel, each set of two rows corresponds to a di¤erent dependent
variable. The …rst …ve columns report coe¢ cients on the …ve explanatory variables,
and the remaining column shows the R2 . Standard errors are in parentheses. The
middle panel of the table shows the coe¢ cients mapping state variable shocks into
news terms for both a reduced-form VAR and a structural VAR where the state
variables are ordered as in the columns. The bottom panel of the table reports the
correlation matrix of the shocks with shock standard deviations on the diagonal. The
sample period for the dependent variables is 1929:2-2008:4, providing 319 quarterly
data points.
e
rM
-0.036
(0.057)
PE
0.049
(0.054)
TY
0.043
(0.302)
VS
0.068
(0.046)
DEF
-0.003
(0.002)
Error to NCF
0.929
Error to NDR
0.071
Structural Error to NCF
0.014
Structural Error to NDR r
0.092

VAR estimate
e
rM

News terms corr/std
NCF
NDR

NCF
0.045
-0.117

PE
-0.057
(0.020)
0.962
(0.018)
0.039
(0.104)
0.009
(0.016)
0.000
(0.001)
-1.056
1.056
-0.034
0.034
NDR
-0.117
0.102

25

TY
0.006
(0.006)
0.004
(0.006)
0.772
(0.034)
-0.004
(0.005)
0.000
(0.000)
0.002
-0.002
0.001
-0.001

VS
-0.032
(0.022)
-0.027
(0.021)
0.046
(0.117)
0.950
(0.018)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.158
0.158
-0.020
0.020

DEF
-0.004
(0.015)
0.004
(0.014)
0.179
(0.077)
0.024
(0.012)
0.865
(0.040)
-0.080
0.080
-0.017
0.017

R2
0.041
0.932
0.698
0.946
0.820

Table 4: Restricted VAR Parameter Estimates, Five Variables
The table shows the restricted, continuously-updated GMM parameter estimates for
e
a …rst-order VAR model including a constant, the log excess market return (rM
),
the price-earnings ratio (P E), the term yield spread (T Y ), the small-stock value
spread (V S), and the default yield spread (DEF ) where the resulting news terms
are restricted to price the cross-section of average returns as given by the six ME
and BE/ME sorted portfolios from Professor Kenneth French’s website. Each set of
two rows corresponds to a di¤erent dependent variable. The …rst …ve columns report
coe¢ cients on the two explanatory variables, and the remaining column shows the
R2 , computed as 1-MSE/(Variance of the dependent variable). Standard errors are
in parentheses. The second panel of the table shows the coe¢ cients mapping state
variable shocks into news terms for both a reduced-form VAR and a structural VAR
where the state variables are ordered as in the columns. The third panel reports
the estimated value for the risk aversion parameter gamma, the p-value for the J-test
of overidentifying restrictions, and the correlation matrix of the shocks with shock
standard deviations on the diagonal. The sample period for the dependent variables
is 1929:2-2008:4, providing 319 quarterly data points.

Error to NCF
Error to NDR
Structural Error to NCF
Structural Error to NDR

e
rM
0.099
(0.084)
0.190
(0.088)
-0.191
(0.300)
-0.018
(0.066)
-0.802
(0.375)
1.624
-0.624
0.176
-0.065

PE
-0.057
(0.017)
0.964
(0.015)
0.032
(0.096)
0.015
(0.018)
-0.004
(0.033)
-1.899
1.899
0.027
-0.027

News terms corr/std
NCF
NDR

NCF
0.321
-0.943

NDR
-0.943
0.277

VAR estimate
e
rM
PE
TY
VS
DEF

26

TY
0.013
(0.006)
0.011
(0.006)
0.777
(0.049)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.017
(0.016)
0.086
-0.086
0.042
-0.042

VS
-0.003
(0.024)
0.000
(0.023)
0.023
(0.113)
0.940
(0.017)
0.029
(0.054)
-0.459
0.459
-0.131
0.131

DEF
R2
-0.050 -0.037
(0.026)
-0.032 0.927
(0.025)
0.171 0.702
(0.088)
0.038 0.945
(0.013)
0.991 0.802
(0.092)
-1.047
1.047
-0.230
0.230

Gamma

4.980

J-stat p-value

0.092

Figure Descriptions
Figure 1: This …gure plots the cash-‡ow news and the negative of discountrate news, smoothed with a trailing exponentially-weighted moving average. Each
row of graphs plots news terms extracted from the corresponding VARs estimated in
Tables 2 through 4 respectively. The decay parameter is set to 0.08 per quarter, and
the smoothed news series are generated as MAt (N)=0.08Nt +(1-0.08)MAt 1 (N). The
sample period is 1929:2-2008:4.
Figure 2: This …gure plots the cash-‡ow news and the negative of discountrate news, smoothed with a trailing exponentially-weighted moving average. Each
row of graphs plots news terms extracted from the corresponding VARs estimated in
Tables 2 through 4 respectively. The decay parameter is set to 0.08 per quarter, and
the smoothed news series are generated as MAt (N)=0.08Nt +(1-0.08)MAt 1 (N). The
sample period is 1995:1-2008:4.
Figure 3: This …gure plots the 1993-2008 out-of-sample equity premium forecasting performance of the VARs estimated as in Tables 2 through 4. The VAR coe¢ cients
are either estimated using OLS (as in Tables 2 and 3) or estimated jointly in conjunction via continuously-updated GMM with cross-sectional asset pricing restrictions on
the returns of the six elementary ME and BE/ME-sorted portfolios (as in Table 4).
The models are estimated on a expanding window basis and then used to predict
quarterly excess log returns on the CRSP value-weight index. For comparision, we
also plot the (rescaled) equity premium realization over this time period.
Figure 4: This …gure plots the evolution in event time for the key aggregate
variables in our analysis for both the tech boom of 1997-2002 and the credit boom
of 2005-2008. The event for each period is the market peak (tech: 2000Q1, credit:
2007Q3). The variables we plot include the excess return on the market, the small
stock value spread (VS), the default yield spread (DEF), the smoothed price-earnings
ratio (PE), the market’s smoothed earnings (E), the smoothed price-to-dividend ratio
(P/D), and the market’s smoothed dividends (E).

27

Unrestricted, 2 vars

Unrestricted, 5 vars

Restricted, 5 vars

Figure 1

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1930

ï0.05

0

0.05

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

CL

1930

ï0.05

0

0.05

ï0.03
1930

1970

ï0.03
1930

1960

ï0.02

ï0.02

1950

ï0.01

0

ï0.01

1940

CL

0.01

0.01

0

0.02

0.02

ï0.03
1930

1970

ï0.03
1930

1960

ï0.02

ï0.02

1950

ï0.01

0

ï0.01

1940

CL

0.01

0.01

0

0.02

0.02

Smoothed Ncf

1940

1940

1940

1950

1950

1950

1960

1960

1960

1970

1970

1970

Smoothed ïNdr

1980

1980

1980

1990

1990

1990

2000

2000

2000

CL

CL

CL

Unrestricted, 2 vars

Smoothed Ncf
0.06

0.02

0.04

0.01

0.02

0

0

ï0.01

ï0.02

ï0.02

ï0.04

Unrestricted, 5 vars

ï0.03
1995

2000

2005

ï0.06
1995

0.03

0.06

0.02

0.04

0.01

0.02

0

0

ï0.01

ï0.02

ï0.02

ï0.04

ï0.03
1995

Restricted, 5 vars

Smoothed ïNdr

0.03

2000

2005

ï0.06
1995

0.05

0.05

0

0

ï0.05

ï0.05

1995

2000

2005

1995

Figure 2

2000

2005

2000

2005

2000

2005

Figure 3

ï0.08

ï0.06

ï0.04

ï0.02

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

1995

2000

Quarterly return forecast out of sample, 1993ï2008

2005

Realized Returns (rescaled)
Outïofïsample unrestricted VAR (2 variables)
Outïofïsample unrestricted VAR (5 variables)
Outïofïsample restricted VAR (5 variables)

Excess Returns

0

0.02

0.04

ï3

3.6

3.8

4

4.2

4.4

ï3

3

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

ï3

1.45

1.5

1.55

1.6

ï3

ï0.02

VS

P/E

P/D

ï2

ï2

ï2

ï2

0

0

0

1

1

1

ï1
0
1
Years before/after peak

ï1

ï1

ï1

2

2

2

2

10
ï3

15

20

25

30

ï3

40

60

80

ï3

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

ï3

1

1.5

2

ï2

ï2

ï2

ï2

Tech episode (1997ï2002): peak 2000q1
Credit episode (2005ï2008): peak 2007q3

3

3

3

3

TS
DEF
E
D

Figure 4
0

0

0

1

1

1

ï1
0
1
Years before/after peak

ï1

ï1

ï1

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

3

