NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FISCAL AND MIGRATION COMPETITION
Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka
Working Paper 16224
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16224

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Fiscal and Migration Competition
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 16224
July 2010, Revised November 2010
JEL No. F2,H87
ABSTRACT
It is often argued that tax competition may lead to a "race to the bottom". Such a race may hold indeed
in the case of the pure case of factor mobility (such as capital mobility). However, in this paper we
emphasize the unique feature of labor migration, that may nullify the "race to the bottom" hypothesis.
Labor migration is governed by net-of-tax factor rewards and the benefits that the welfare state provides.
Tax rates are determined in a political economy set up which takes into account the effect of taxes
and migration on factor rewards and the fiscal burden imposed by migration on the decisive voter.
The paper models the host country stylistically as a member of the core of an economic union (i.e.,
a core EU welfare state member state), with tax financed benefits which is able to control the volume
and the skill-composition of migration. The source country is modeled as an accession country to an
economic union (i.e., through the EU enlargement treaty), with its own welfare (tax-benefit) policy.
We let these two countries engage in fiscal competition. Using numerical simulations we examine
how the migration policies are affected by whether the skilled or the unskilled are in power. We also
analyze differences for tax policies between free and controlled migration, and the role of productivity
gap.
Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
ar256@cornell.edu
Efraim Sadka
Tel Aviv University
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978, ISRAEL
sadka@post.tau.ac.il

We address the issue of wether tax competition lead to a "race to the bottom". In a basic tax-competition model competition may lead to such
a downward race because of three mutually reinforcing factors. First,
in order to attract mobile factors or prevent their ‡ight, tax rates on
them are reduced. Second, the ‡ight of mobile factors from the relatively high tax to the relatively low tax countries shrinks the tax base
in the relatively high tax country. Third, the ‡ight of the mobile factors
from the relatively high tax country is presumed to reduce the remuneration of the immobile factors, and, consequently, their contribution to
the tax revenue 1 . In contrast, in our model the mobile factor is labor
of various skills. These factors consider not only their economic returns
when making their migration decision, but rather also the social bene…ts o¤ered by the countries. Importantly, also, the decisive voter who
determine the tax rates is concerned about the e¤ect of migration on
factor rewards and …scal burden. The paper analyzes …scal competition
with and without migration in a two-country, political-economy, model
with labor of di¤erent skills. The paper assigns an active …scal role for
both the host and the source countries in shaping policies concerning
the generosity of the welfare state. It models a migration host country
stylistically as a member of the core EU welfare state, with tax …nanced
bene…ts, and political - economy based immigration policies. The source
country is modelled as an accession EU country (in the EU enlargement
to 27 states), with its own welfare state (tax-bene…t) policy 2 . The two
countries are identical except that the total factor productivity in the
host country is assumed to be higher than that of the source country.
The productivity gap is indeed the driving force behind migration. We
let the host and the source country engage in …scal competition. Using
numerical simulations we examine how the migration and tax policies
are shaped. That is, how they are di¤erent according to whether the
skilled, or the unskilled, are in power. We also analyze hoe tax policies
di¤er between the regime of free migration and the regime of controlled
migration.
The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 reports some
background empirical evidence. Section 3 presents the analytical framework. Simulation results are reported in section 4. Section 5 analyzes
free vs. controlled migration. Section 6 concludes.
1

For a general-equilibrium …scal-competion model of Europe, with capital mobility, see Mendoza and Tesar (2005). The paper demonstrates the limitation of the
race-to-the-bottom result when factor rewards are variable.
2
Recall that a grace period between 2004 and 2014 exists where an EU-15 member
state can regulate the immigration ‡ows from the accession countries. Thus, in the
interim period national policies are allowed for inter-EU migration.

2

2

Evidence on the Fiscal Burden of Migration

It is worthwhile to review some evidence on the …scal aspects of migration
and on native born attitudes toward immigration, before we develop the
tax competition model.
In 1997 the U.S. National Research Council sponsored a study on the
overall …scal impact of immigration into the U.S.; see Edmonston and
Smith (1997). The study looks comprehensibly at all layers of government (federal, state, and local), all programs (bene…ts), and all types of
taxes. For each cohort, de…ned by age of arrival to the U.S., the bene…ts
(cash or in kind) received by migrants over their own lifetimes and the
lifetimes of their …rst-generation descendents were projected. These bene…ts include Medicare, Medicaid, Supplementary Security Income (SSI),
Aid for Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), food stamps, Old
Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI), etc. Similarly, taxes
paid directly by migrants and the incidence on migrants of other taxes
(such as corporate taxes) were also projected for the lifetimes of the
migrants and their …rst-generation descendents. Accordingly, the net
…scal burden was projected and discounted to the present. In this way,
the net …scal burden for each age cohort of migrants was calculated in
present value terms. Within each age cohort, these calculations were disaggregated according to three educational levels: Less than high school
education, high school education, and more than high school education.
Indeed the …ndings suggest that migrants with less than high school
education are typically a net …scal burden that can reach as high as
approximately US-$100,000 in present value, when the migrants’age on
arrival is between 20–30 years. See also the related analysis of Auerbach
and Oreopoulos(1999).
Following the recent enlargement of the European Union to 27 countries, only three members of the EU-15 (the UK, Sweden and Ireland)
allowed free access for residents of the accession countries to their national labor markets, in the year of the …rst enlargement, 2004. The
other members of the EU-15 took advantage of the clause that allows
for restricted labor markets for a transitional period of up to seven years.
Focusing on the UK and the A8 countries3 , Dustmann at al (2009) bring
evidence of no welfare migration. The average age of the A8 migrants
during the period 20044 -2008 is 25.8 years, considerably lower than the
native U.K. average age (38.7 years). The A8 migrants are also better
educated than the native-born. For instance, the percentage of those
3

The A8 countries are the …rst eight accession countries (Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovenia and Poland.)
4
More accurately, the said period extends from the second quarter of 2004 through
the …rst quarter of 2009.

3

that left full-time education at the age of 21 years or later is 35.5 among
the A8 migrants, compared to only 17.1 among the U.K. natives. Another indication that the migration is not predominantly driven by welfare motives is the higher employment rate of the A8 migrants (83.1%)
relative to the U.K. natives (78.9%). Furthermore, for the same period, the contribution of the A8 migrants to government revenues far exceeded the government expenditures attributed to them. A recent study
by Barbone et al (2009), based on the 2006 European Union Survey
of Income and Living conditions, …nds that migrants from the accession countries constitute only 1-2 percent of the total population in the
pre-enlargement EU countries (excluding Germany and Luxemburg); by
comparison, about 6 percent of the population in the latter EU countries
were born outside the enlarged EU. The small share of migrants from the
accession countries is, of course, not surprising in view of the restrictions
imposed on migration from the accession countries to the EU-15 before
the enlargement and during the transition period after the enlargement.
The study shows also that there is, as expected, a positive correlation
between the net current taxes (that is, taxes paid less bene…ts received)
of migrants from all source countries and their education level5 .
Hanmeueller and Hiscox (2010), using survey data in the US, …nd
two critical economic concerns that appear to generate anti-immigrant
sentiments among voters: concerns about labor-market competition, and
concerns about the …scal burden on public services. Not unexpectedly,
employing opinion surveys, Hanson et al (2007) bring evidence that in
the United States native residents of states which provide generous bene…ts to migrants also prefer to reduce the number of migrants. Furthermore, the opposition is stronger among higher income groups. Similarly, Hanson et al (2009), again employing opinion surveys, …nd for
the United States that native-born residents of states with a high share
of unskilled migrants, among the migrants population, prefer to restrict
in migration; whereas native-born residents of states with a high share
of skilled migrants among the migrant population are less likely to favor restricting migration6 . Indeed, developed economies do attempt to
sort out immigrants by skills (see, for instance, Bhagwati and Gordon
(2009)). Australia and Canada employ a point system based on selected immigrants’characteristics. The U.S. employs explicit preference
for professional, technical and kindred immigrants under the so-called
third-preference quota. Jasso and Rosenzweig (2009) …nd that both the
Australian and American selection mechanisms are e¤ective in sorting
out the skilled migrants, and produce essentially similar outcomes de5
6

See also Boeri, Hanson, and McCormick (2002)
See also Mayda (2006)

4

spite of their di¤erent legal characteristics.

3

The Analytical Framework

We now develop a two-country model based on political-economy determination of migration policies and the generosity of the welfare state7 .

3.1

The Host-Country Economy

Assume a Cobb-Douglas production function, with two labor inputs,
skilled and unskilled8 :
 =  1¬
  0 

1

(1)

where,  is GDP,  denotes a Hicks-neutral productivity parameter, and
 denotes the input of labor of skill level , where  =   for skilled
and unskilled, respectively.
The competitive wages of skilled and unskilled labor are, respectively
 =  
 = (1 ¬ )   

(2)

Note that the abundancy of skilled labor raises the wage of the unskilled, and the abundancy of unskilled labor raises the wage of the
skilled.
Aggregate labor supply, for skilled and unskilled workers, respectively, is given by:
 = ( + ) 
 = (1 ¬  + (1 ¬ ) )  

(3)

There is a continuum of workers, where the number of native-born is
normalized to 1;  denotes the share of native born skilled in the total
native-born labor supply; denotes the share of skilled migrants in the
total number of migrants; denotes the total number of migrants; and
 is the labor supply of an individual with skill level  2 f g
Total population (native born and migrants) is as follows
 =1+ :
7

(4)

See Cohen and Razin (2008) and Cohen, Razin and Sadka (2009) who analyze
the interactions between redistribution policies and migration policies using a similar
analytical framework.
8
The parsimonious model is developed with the cross-section data is mind. The
migration variable is the stock of migrants; not ‡ows (as relevant for dynamic analysis).

5

We specify a simple welfare-state system which levies a proportional
labor income tax at the rate , with the revenues redistributed equally
to all residents (native born and migrants alike) as a demogrant,  per
capita. The demogrant captures not only a cash transfer but also outlays
on public services such as education, health, and other provisions, that
bene…t all workers, regardless of their contribution to the …nances of the
system.
The government budget constraint is therefore
  = 

(5)

Note that we assume that migrants are fully entitled to the welfare
state system. That is, the pay the tax rate and receive the bene…t b.
The utility function for skill-type  2 f g is
 =   ¬

 1+
  + ln()
1+ 

(6)

where  denotes consumption of an individual with skill level , and
  0, in the labor supply elasticity. Note that we interpet b not just
as a pure cash transfer, but rather as some public service that renders a
utility of ln(b)9 .
The budget constraint of an individual with skill level  is
 = (1 ¬ )   

(7)

Individual utility-maximization yields the following the labor supply
equation
 = ((1 ¬ )  ) 
(8)
The indirect utility function of an individual of skill level  2 f g
is given by
1
((1 ¬ )  )1+ 
(9)
1+
It is then straightforward to calculate the equilibrium wages for the
skilled and unskilled workers, which are given, respectively, by
 = ln() +

9

¬  1¬
 = 
¬
 =  (1 ¬ ) 

1
1+

¬

1
1+

(10)

Note that this interpretation of b is also called for in order to ensure that everyone, including the rich, opts for some positive level of b and is willing to support
some taxation

6

1¬+(1¬ )
where
(1 ¬ )1¬ and
+
In order to ensure that the skilled wage always exceeds the unskilled
wage,    , we assume that



3.2

(1 ¬  + (1 ¬ ) )
 1
(1 ¬ )( + )

(11)

The Source-Country Economy

To simplify, we assume that the economies of the source country and
the host country are identical, except for a higher productivity factor
in the host country (e.g., all the other technology and preference parameters are identical). Also, each resident of the source country has an
individual-speci…c cost of migration. This cost (denoted by  and measured in utility terms) varies across individuals as in section 2.3.1 due
to individual characteristics such as age, family size, forms of portable
pensions, etc. For each skill group (their total size normalized to one) 
is distributed uniformly over the interval [0  ]. Throughout an asterisk
( ) denotes the source country variables.
The description of the source country economy is similar to that of
the host country economy. Production is as in equation (1), except for
a di¤erent total productivity factor:
 =   (1¬ ) 

(12)

where   . The competitive wage rates are given by equation (2)
with asterisks attached to the variables. The aggregate labor supplies
in the source country are di¤erent than in the host because the former
is "sending" what the latter is "receiving":
 = ( ¬

)

(13)

 = (1 ¬  ¬ (1 ¬ ) )
Note that we assume the same pre-migration skill composition in the
two countries.
Total population in the source country is
 =1¬ :

(14)

The utility function of source country residents is given by equation
(2), with asterisks attached to the variables.
The competitive equilibrium wage rates are given by:
7

 (  ;    ) =  (

(1¬ )

1

) 1+

(¬ )
 (  ;    ) =  ((1 ¬ )
)
1¬
where
( ) (1 ¬ )
1 ¬  ¬ (1 ¬ )

and
 ¬

(15)
1
1+

Similar to the condition in equation (10), we also assume that
(1 ¬  ¬ (1 ¬ ) )
 1
(1 ¬ )( ¬ )

(16)

so that    .
The indirect utility function is given by
1
((1 ¬ )  )1+ 
1+
The government budget constraint is given by
 = ln( ) +

 =

(1 ¬

) ( ) (1 ¬ ) (1¬ ) 

(1+ )

1¬

( ¬

(17)

) (1 ¬  ¬ (1 ¬ ) )1¬

(18)
Note that we assumed that the countries are identical except for the
productivity parameter. This is why we wrote A* (instead of A) in
equation (18), but we used the same symbols for all other parameters.
Note also that the tax rate is a policy country-speci…c variable, so that
we employ di¤erent symbols, and , for the host and source country,
respectively.

3.3

Migrant Supply

Each resident in the source country, skilled or unskilled, decides whether
to migrate to the host country or stay in her source country, depending
on where her utility is higher (taking into account migration costs).
Consider …rst a skilled resident with migration cost of  . If she stays in
her source country, her utility level is  (   ). If she migrates to the
host country she enjoys a utility level of  (   ) ¬  . Thus, there will
be a cuto¤ level of the cost, denoted by b such that all skilled persons
with  below b
 will migrate and all others stay behind. The cuto¤ level
of the cost is given by:
 (   ) =  (   ) ¬ b
 
8

(19)



Given the uniform distribution of b
 over the interval [0  ] the number of skilled migrants ( ) is then given by
 = b
 

(20)

Similarly, for the unskilled too there will be a cuto¤ level of the
migration cost, denoted by b
  which is given by
 (   ) =  (   ) ¬ b
 

(21)

 = (1 ¬ )b
  

(22)

The number or unskilled migrants ( ), is then given by

Hence, the total number of migrants ( ), is given by
=  +  = (b
 + (1 ¬ )b
 ) 

(23)

and the share of the skilled migrants in the total migration is given
by
=  ( +  )

3.4

(24)

Fiscal and Migration Competition

Each one of the two countries independently determines its tax-bene…t
policy ((  ) and (   )) by majority voting. That is, the policy is determined by maximization of the (indirect) utility function of the skilled
or the unskilled, depending on which of the two groups forms a majority. In doing so, voters in each country take the tax-bene…t policy of the
other country as given (Nash-equilibrium).
Note that we assume that the host country is more productive than
the source country, that is,    . This productivity advantage is the
driver of migration ‡ows from the source country to the host country in
our stylized model.
The indirect utility functions in equilibrium of the skilled and the
unskilled in the host country, respectively, can be computed as:

 = (1¬ )

1+

1+
( )1+ " (1¬ )(1¬
1+

(1 ¬ ) + (1 ¬ )
+

)

1¬

+ln()
(25)

 = (1 ¬ )1+

1+
( ) " (1 ¬ )1+(1¬
1+

9

)

+
(1 ¬ ) + (1 ¬ )

+ ln()
(26)

The per-capita bene…t (public service) in equilibrium is given by:

 = ( ; )

(1 ¬ )
( ) " (1¬ )(1¬
1+

)

1+ (+

) [(1¬)+ (1¬ )]1¬

(27)
Similarly, the source-country indirect utility functions in equilibrium
and the per-capita bene…t are:
1¬

 ( ;  ) = (1¬ )1+

 1+
( )1+ " (1¬ )(1¬
1+

)

 ( ;  ) = (1¬ )1+

 1+
( ) " (1¬ )1+(1¬
1+

)

 = ( ;  )

(1 ¬
1¬

)

( ) " (1¬ )(1¬

)



1+

(1 ¬ ) ¬ (1 ¬ )
¬
(28)

¬
+ln(( ;  ))
(1 ¬ ) ¬ (1 ¬ )
(29)

(¬

) [(1¬)¬ (1¬ )]1¬
(30)

The migration (incentive compatible) equations are:
 ( ;  ) =  ( ; ) ¬ ^

(31)

 = ^
 

(32)

 ( ;  ) =  ( ; ) ¬ ^

(33)

 = (1 ¬ )^
 

(34)

Finally, the de…nitions of

and

are:

=  + 

(35)


 + 

(36)

=

Equations (31)-(34) determine the volume and skill composition of
migration when the later is free. Alternatively, the host country adopt
an active migration policy by which it directly controls  and  .
10

+ln( ( ;  ))

However, as migration can not be "forced" by the host country to come,
these levels of  and  can not exceed their free-migration level. Thus,
equation (32) and (34) should be replaced by inequalities


^
 

(32’)

(1 ¬ )^
  

(34’)

and


respectively. In the remainder of this paper we assume that in the
migration-controlled regime the inequalities are npt binding and simply
drop equations (31)-(34) for this regime.
We now turn to the analysis of the …scal-competition problem, with
and without free migration.

3.5

Nash Equilibrium of the Policy Game

Consider …rst the case of conrolled migration. To …x ideas we consider
the case where the skilled are in the majority in both the source and the
host countries. Each country chooses its policy variables assuming that
the other country’s variables are given (Nash-equilibrium).
Formally, the Nash-equilibrium is as follows:
(I) The host country solves the given following optimization problem:
Maxf ; ;b; ; ;  g 
subject to equations (25), (27), (35) and (36)
(II) The source country solves the following optimization problem:
Maxf ;  g 
subject to equations (26) and (30)
Note that this formulation assumes that the host-country regulates
directly immigration, but the source country does not. Note that it is
technically impossible for the two countries to a¤ect independently the
same migration policy. More importantly, we chose the host country as
the one that controls migration, because it is more common for voters
to engage in setting immigration policies than emigration policies.
A Nash-equilibrium is the solution to (I) and (II) above.
We …rst compare in the next section these equilibrium policies, (with
controlled migration) with the policies that will ensue in the absence of
migration; that is, when is set exogenously at zero. We carry this
comparison via numerical simulations.
Another regime that we study is where migration is free. In this case,
the host country’s optimization problem (I) changes to:
11

(I’) The host country solves the given following optimization problem:
Maxf ; g 
subject to equations (25) and (27)
The optimization problem of the source country (II) does not change.
The equilibrium is given by (I’), (II), and in addition, the free migration
equations (31) - (36) determine the migration variables  ;     ^ 
and ^ . We study this free-migration regeme and compare it to the
controlled migration regime in section 5.

4

The identity of the Decisive Voter and Fiscal and
Migration Competition: Controlled Migration

Consider …rst the case where the skilled are the majority (in both countries). As the productivity gap rises, the skilled majority in the host
country opts to raise the volume of migration, and to decrease the share
of skilled migrants. This is because the rise in the productivity gap
strengthens the positive e¤ect on the marginal productivity of all complementary inputs (unskilled labor) and generates also strong negative
e¤ects on the marginal productivity of all competing inputs (skilled labor). Things are di¤erent in the case where the unskilled are the majority (in both countries). As the productivity gap rises, the unskilled
majority in the host country opts for a larger share of skilled among the
migrants, and also a larger volume of migration.
Figures 1 and 2 describe the e¤ect of a rise in the productivity gap
and of migration on the tax rates and per-capita bene…ts, respectively,
in the two countries for the case in which the skilled are in the majority
(in both countries). Note that the host-country has a lower tax rate with
a larger per-capita bene…t, compared to the source-country, thanks to
its productivity advantage. In other words, the productivity advantage
implies that the host country can provide more generous bene…ts than
the source country with a smaller tax rate.

12

Figure 1: The e¤ect of the productivity gap and migration on the source- and
host-country taxes; The skilled are the majority

13

Figure 2: The e¤ect of the productivity gap and migration on the source- and
host-country per-capita bene…t; The skilled are the majority
Consider now the e¤ect of an increase in the host-source productivity,
holding the source-country productivity …xed, thereby raising the productivity gap. Tax rates in both the host and the source country fall.
From Figure 2 we can see that the host-country bene…ts rise whereas the
source-country bene…ts fall.
Comparing the migration with the no migration case, Figure 1 shows
that migration raises the host-country tax rate, whereas it lowers the
source-country tax rate. This is an unexpected result in view of the
literature (see e.g. Chari and Kehoe (1990)). As far as the generosity of
the welfare state is concerned, comparing again the migration and the no
migration cases, Figure 2 shows that migration raises the host-country
bene…ts but lowers the source-country bene…ts, as expected in view of
the behavior of the tax rates.

14

Figure 3: The e¤ect of the productivity gap and migration on the source- and
host-country taxes; The unskilled are the majority.

15

Figure 4: The e¤ect of the productivity gap and migration on the source- and
host-country taxes; The unskilled are the majority.
Figures 3 and 4 describe the e¤ect of the productivity gap and migration on the tax rates and per-capita bene…ts, respectively, in the two
countries for the case in which the unskilled are in the majority (in both
the host and the source country).
Note that as in the case where the skilled are in the majority, the hostcountry has a lower tax rate and higher per-capita bene…t, compared to
the source-country, thanks to e¤ect of productivity on political-economy
based tax rate.
Consider now the e¤ect of an increase in the productivity gap described in Figures 3 and 4. As the host-country productivity advantage
rises, the tax rate in the host country falls as in the case where the
skilled where the majority. But now the tax rate in the source-country
rises rather then falls. From Figure 4 we can see that as the host-country
productivity advantage rises, the host-country bene…ts fall. As the tax
rate in the source country rises, so do the bene…ts.
Comparing the migration with the no-migration cases, Figure 3 shows
16

that migration lowers the host-country tax rate, as is indeed expected in
view of the literature on factors mobility. However, in contrast to this
literature, the tax rate in the source country is higher under migration
than without migration. As far as the generosity of the welfare state is
concerned, Figure 4 shows that the bene…ts behave in circumstance to
the tax rates. As expected, the host country tax rate falls if migration
is allowed because the native-born are reluctant to set high taxes, as
the proceeds of these taxes serve to …nance also bene…ts to immigrants
("…scal leakage"), as in Razin and Sadka (2002a) and (2002b).

5

Free vs. Controlled Migration

In the previous sections migration is assumed to be controlled by the
host country. In this section we analyze the case of free migration. We
compare the di¤erence between the tax policies of the host and source
country for the controlled and free migration regimes.
Figure 5 compares the host-country tax rates, under free and controlled migration, for the case where the skilled-young is the largest
voting group. Similarly, Figure 6 compares the source-country tax rates,
under the controlled and free migration regimes, for the case where the
largest group is the skilled-young. If the skilled-young is the largest
group, the regime switch from free to controlled migration raises the
tax rate in the host country, while it lowers the tax rate in the source
country.
Similarly, Figures 7 and 8 compare the two migration regimes for the
case where the unskilled-young is the largest voting group. In this case
the regime switch from free to controlled migration lowers the tax rate
in the host country and raises the tax rate in the source country.
Therefore, the ability to control migration a¤ects the tax rates in the
host and source countries di¤erently. The tax e¤ect crucially depends
on which skill group is decisive.

17

Figure 5: comparing the host-country tax rates under free and under controlled
migration; Largest groups are the Skilled-Young

18

Figure 6: comparing the source-country tax rates under free and under controlled
migration; Largest groups are the Skilled-Young

19

Figure 7: comparing the host-country tax rates under free and under controlled
migration; Largest groups are the Unskilled-Young

20

Figure 8: comparing the source-country tax rates under free and under controlled
migration; Largest groups are the Unskilled-Young

6

Conclusion

It is often argued that tax competition may lead to a "race to the bottom". This result may indeed hold in the case of factor mobility (such
as capital). However, in this paper we emphasize the unique feature of
labor migration, that may nullify the"race to the bottom" hypothesis.
Labor migration is governed not only by net-of-tax factor rewards, but
rather importantly also by the bene…ts that the welfare state provides.
Taking this consideration into account, countries are less reluctant to
impose taxes that …nance bene…ts to their residents in the presence of
migration. Employing simulation methods we can indeed demonstrate
that migration need not lower taxes in the source country, and may even
give rise to higher taxes.

21

7

References.

References
[1] Auerbach, A. and P. Oreopoulos (1999), "Analyzing the Economic
Impact of U.S. Immigration," American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings, 89(2), 176-180.
[2] Barbone, Luca, Bontch-Osmolovsky, Misha and Salman Zaidi
(2009), "The Foreign-Born Population in the European Union and
its Contribution to National Tax and Bene…t Systems" Policy Research Working Paper, the World Bank (April).
[3] Bhagwati, Jagdish and Gordon Hanson (2009), editors, Skilled Immigration Today: Prospects, Problems and Policies, Oxford University Press.
[4] Boeri, Tito, Gordon Howard Hanson and Barry McCormick (2002a,
2002b), Immigration Policy and the Welfare System: A Report for
the Fondazione Rodolfo Debenedetti, Oxford University Press.
[5] Boeri, T., G. Hanson and B. McCormick (eds., 2002), Immigration
policy and the welfare system, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[6] Chari, V. V. and P. J. Kehoe (1990), "International Coordination
and Fiscal Policy in Limiting Economies", Journal of Political Economy, 98, 617-636.
[7] Cohen, Alon, and Assaf Razin (2008), "The Skill Composition of
Immigrants and the Generosity of the Welfare State: Free versus
Policy-controlled Migration," NBER Working Paper No. 144459,
October.
[8] Cohen, Alon, Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2009), "The Skill
Composition of Migration and the Generosity of the Welfare State,"
NBER Working Paper No. 14738, February.
[9] Dustmann, C., Frattini, T. & Halls, C. (2009), "Assessing the Fiscal
Costs and Bene…ts of A8 Migration to the UK", CReAM Discussion
Paper No. 18/09
[10] Hainmueller, Jens, and Michael J. Hiscox (2010), "Attitudes toward Highly Skilled and Low-skilled Immigration: Evidence from a
Survey Experiment" American Political Science Review, 104, no 1,
February, 61-84
[11] Hanson, Gordon H. (2008), "The Economic Consequence of the International Migration of Labor," NBER Working Paper No. 14490,
November.
[12] Hanson, Gordon, Scheve, Kenneth, and Matthew J. Slaughter
(2009) "Individual Preferences over High-Skilled Immigration in the
United States," in Bhagwati, Jagdish and Gordon Hanson, editors,
Skilled Immigration Today: Prospects, Problems and Policies, Ox22

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

ford University Press.
Hanson, Gordon, Scheve Kenneth and Matthew J. Slaughter (2007),
"Public Finance and Individual Preferences over Globalization
Strategies" Economics and Politics, 19(1), March, 1-33
Jasso, Guillermina and Mark R. Rosenzweig (2009) "Selection Criteria and the Skill Composition of Immigrants: A Comparative
Analysis of Australian and U.S. Employment Immigration," in
Bhagwati, Jagdish and Gordon Hanson, editors, Skilled Immigration Today: Prospects, Problems and Policies, Oxford University
Press.
Mayda, Anna Maria (2006), "Who Is Against Immigration? A
Cross-Country Investigation of Individual Attitudes toward Immigrants", Review of Economics and Statistics.
Mendoza, Enrique, G., and Linda L. Tesar (2005), "Why hasn’t
tax competition triggered a race to the bottom? Some quantitative
lessons from the EU", Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 163-204.
Razin, Assaf, Sadka, Efraim and Phillip Swagel (2002a),"The aging
population and the size of the welfare state,". Journal of Political
Economy 110, 900— 918.
Razin, Assaf, Sadka, Efraim, and Phillip Swagel, (2002b). Tax burden and migration: a political economy theory and evidence," Journal of Public Economics 85,167— 190.
Smith, James P. and Barry Edmouston, editors, (1997), The New
Americans: Economic, Demographic and Fiscal E¤ects of Immigration, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C

23

