                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 AGGREGATE OUTPUT WITH OPERATING
                 RATES AND INVENTORIES AS BUFFERS
                  BETWEEN VARIABLE FINAL DEMAND
                     AND QUASI-FIXED FACTORS



                        John F. Helliwell
                            Alan Chung




                      Working Paper No. 1623




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                             June 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper # 1623
                                                             June 1985

               Aggregate Output With Operating Rates and Inventories as Buffers
                  Between Variable Final Demand and Quasi—Fixed Factors

                                           ABSTRACT



        Empirical evidence has long shown that output varies more in the short—run than do
all factor inputs, including employment and hours worked. There is also evidence that all
factors, including capital, start adjusting within a few months, suggesting that production models
should treat all measured factor inputs as quasi— fixed.

       In such a context, long—run equilibrium involves the choice of average factor
proportions, including an average operating rate, that minimize total costs of producing the
desired level of output In response to unexpected or temporary changes in demand or cost
conditions, optimal temporary equilibrium involves some changes in factor demands coupled
with the joint use of pricing and production decisions to make best use of the buffering
capacity provided by inventories and operating rates.

        Applying this framework to aggregate annual data, this paper concentrates on the
econometrics of the production or operating rate decision, since the operating rate is the key
adjusting variable in the short—run. The operating rate decision also reveals most clearly the
important consequences of quasi— fixity, and shows how our model contrasts with more
conventional treatments. Other models of temporary equilibrium of production usually assume
either the strict applicability of the underlying production function (requiring the assumption of
either completely flexible product prices or at least one fully variable factor if quantity
rationing is not to take place) or that current output is determined by aggregate demand
without reference to the production function constraint.

        The assumed long—run production structure is two—level CES, with the inner function's
vintage bundle of capital and energy combining with efficiency units of labour in the outer
function. Long—run average cost minimization assumptions are used to derive the parameters of
the production function, assuming constant returns to scale and constant growth of' labour
efficiency. These assumptions about the functional form and properties of the long—run
production function are tested against various alternatives in the context of the derived
temporary equilibrium output decision.

John F. Helliwell and Alan Chung
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Y2
                                                                                                  1




                Aggregate Output With Operating Rates and inventories as Buffers

                    Between Variable Final Demand and Quasi—Fixed Factors.


                               John F. Helliwell and Alan Chung.



1. Empirical and Theoretical Background.


       The theoretical and econometric literature on the short—run or temporary determination
of aggregate output has long been in an unsettled state. Although Keynes and the classics
both argued that labour could be treated as a variable factor that could be immediately (and
costlessly) adjusted to keep firms on their production functions, the evidence has persistently
failed to support that assumption. The evidence takes the form of the finding of short—run
increasing returns to employment and average hours; and of the almost universal result that
all factors (including hours) adjust in the short—run by less than the amount required to be
consistent with an underlying production function1. Okun's Law2 reports the empirical regularity
of an "approximate 3—to—i link between output and the unemployment rate" (Okun 1970, p.
137). This finding of apparent short—run increasing returns to labour in the United States has
been duplicated in many countries, although in countries such as Japan where employment is
much more unaffected by short—term changes in output, the Okun's Law ratio reaches such
high levels (28 to 1 in Hamada and Kurosaka 1984) as to demand the treatment of labour
as a quasi— fixed factor. Many macroeconometric models implicitly accept the quasi— fixity of

labour by deriving desired employment and/or desired hours from a production function and
by finding significantly less than immediate response of actual employment towards the target
value. Since such models typically determine output from the demand side, without explicit
reference to the production function, attention is diverted away from the fact that the partial
adjustment of the most variable factor implies that all factors are quasi— fixed.

  Fair (1969) provides an extensive summary of the previous literature. See also Solow (1973).
2The original 1962 paper is reprinted as an appendix to Okun (1970).
2




       Over   the past fifteen years there have been many studies of production based on the
translog and other flexible functional forms. The substitution and other parameters are usually
estimated from cost share equations based on the assumption of full and immediate
adjustment. These production models are usually represented by their dual cost functions, and
their primal forms often remain unspecified, so that their maintained hypothesis of constant
factor utilization remains untested. Where this assumption has been indirectly tested, in the
context of the factor share equations, it has been heavily rejected (e.g. Mohr 1980).

       More recent work involves what Bemdt, Morrison and Watkins (1981) have described
as "third generation" production models wherein flexible functional forms for production are
combined with assumed costs of adjustment for one or more quasi— fixed factors to give a
dynamic model of factor demands. The adjustment costs for the quasi— fixed factors imply
overshooting for at least one of the variable factors. Morrison and Bemdt (1981) test for, and
find, significant quasi— fixity of capital and non—production workers, following Oi's (1962)
suggestion that quasi— fixity of labour is likely to be more prevalent for supervisory and staff
employees than for production workers. Our hypothesis is that all types of labour are
quasi— fixed, and that it is therefore necessary to take explicit account of the choice of a
utilization or operating rate. Berndt and Morrison (1981) suggest that capacity output should
be defined, following the notion introduced earlier by Klein and Preston (1967), as that level
of output where the shbrt—run and long—run cost functions are tangent. We agree with their
suggestion, but note that where all factors are quasi— fixed there is considerable ambiguity

(noted earlier by Stigler 1939) in defining the notional short—mn cost function, especially
where, as argued in this paper; the costs of abnormal utilization rates do not generally show
up in current measured costs. This suggests defining normal capacity in terms of the
underlying production function at average utilization rates. The temporary equilibrium level of
output will then differ from normal output in a manner determined by the utilization or
operating rate decision.
                                                                                                       3



         As long as there are at least some important quasi—fixed factors, it will in general
 not be optimal to meet all unexpected changes in final demand by changes in output Several
 authors have emphasized that where changes in production are costly and demand is variable
 it will be optimal to use changes in inventories and in prices, along with changes in
 production, to meet unforseen or temporary changes in final demand.3. Other authors have
 shown in more detail why there are many prices that are set by producers and not changed
unless there arise fundamental or sustained changes in expected demand or cost conditions4.

More recent work has emphasized the joint optimality for buyers and sellers in customer
markets" (Okun 1981, chap. 4) to maintain relations characterized by relatively stable prices
and sustained patterns of supply5. Okun argues that the advantages of continuity in customer
markets for goods and services are similar to those that bind firms and workers in career
labour markets. As Kuh (1965) and others have pointed out in the context of the labour
market, the importance of continuity in both labour and product markets means that currently
measured prices and quantities will not appear to satisify the conditions for short—term
optimality. That does not mean that the strategies followed are not optimal, only that the
books are balanced over a longer time span than the normal periods used for econometric
estimation.


        Another important strand of literature has emphasized that firms facing uncertain
demand and cost conditions will tradeoff flexibility against static efficiency, because technologies

that can produce at least cost under known demand and cost conditions are less easily
adaptable to unexpected changes in those conditions. The optimal tradeoff between flexibility
and static efficiency is that which minimizes the present value of current and expected future
costs6. Quasi— fixity of factor inputs and flexibility of plant design are likely to be mutually

3Blinder (1981, 1982) and Hay (1970) both emphasize the interdependence of output, inventory,
and pricing decisions
  The early evidence goes back to the 1930s Oxford studies in the price mechanism, e.g.
Hall and Hitch (1939).
  Gordon (1981) provides a survey of recent theories and evidence of gradual price
adjustment
6
  Insightful early analysis of this trade—off may be found in Stigler (1939) and Hart (1940).
4


re—enforcing, since flexibility will have a high payoff where quasi—fixity is great, and the

benefits of quasi— fixity (whether showing up as smaller total adjustment costs, lower average
transactions costs in markets with high continuity, or lower initial costs for no—rush
construction) are less costly to obtain if ex ante plant design facilitates flexible ex post
changes in operating rates, factor mix, and output characteristics.

       What are the implications of this theory and evidence for the specification and
estimation of aggregate production models? In our view, any model designed to embody
explicit production constraints and yet be consistent with the possibly widespread importance of
costly and time— consuming factor adjustments, customer markets for goods, and career or
long—term (implicit) contracts for labour is likely to need the following features:
1. Explicit minimization of measured short—nm costs should be expected to apply on average,
        and not on a period—to-period basis;
2. Similarly, a production structure based on measured factor inputs should be expected to
        hold on average, and not during each production period;
3. If quasi— fixity of factors is empirically important, then firms will equip themselves to
        operate over a range of feasible utilization rates, and will choose their factor
        quantities, plant designs, and normal operating rates so as to minimize average costs
        over the expected pattern of operating rates;
4. The long—term commitments - implied by the quasi—fixity of factor inputs implies that factor

        demand decisions be based on expected future demand and cost conditions;
5. Given the expected joint role of inventories, operating rates, and price changes in meeting
        unexpected or temporary changes in final demand, all three decisions should be

        specified and estimated consistently, with their key interdependencies made explicit;
6. The treatment of the production decision as an operating rate decision dictates the choice
        of a production structure that can equally well be represented by its direct form as


6(cont'd) The trade—off is clearly stated in terms of modem production theory by Fuss and
McFadden (1978).
                                                                                                                             5




          by   its dual cost function.



2. Model Specification


         For simplicity of exposition, we shall develop the model in terms of a two—level CES
production function7, using efficiency units of labour (assuming Harrod— neutral technical

progress) and an inner CES bundle of capital— plus— energy to produce q, the aggregate gross

output of the energy— using sector. Consistent long— term planning for output and factor inputs
must therefore be constrained by the CES relationship between expected profitable future

output (q*) and target inputs of the capital—energy bundle (ke) and labour (flN'. where fl
is the index of employee efficiency and Nne the desired level of employment).


               =
                   [M(flN)(T_1)/T+ vkT1)/T]T/(T1)                                                             (1)

For any given value of desired future output, the first—order conditions for cost minimization
can be used to define the desired factor inputs, shown in (2) and (3):

         k'= [1 + (    v/u)    (flPke/Wne)
                                                     F 1] r/ (1 -
                                                                                  q                   (2)



         Nne        (1/rI)[q*(T_1)/T -                  vk(T1)/T/u](T1)                                             (3)

where   1'ke is the price   index        for the capital— energy          bundle           and Wne   is the average annual

wage    in the   non—energy sector. Given cost minimization, the factor price frontier (Samuelson

1953— 54)   or minimum attainable cost index is defined by:

         en =       [uT(W
                                     1
                                         —
                                             F
                                                 +
                                                              —
                                                                  F] 1   /(   1
                                                                                  —   r)                (4)
                             c/ri)                     1'ke




  The bundling of capital and energy in a separable subfunction is supported by the results
of Berndt and Wood (1979) for the United States and Arms (1983) for the other major
OECD countries. The use of a two— level CES function as a way of combining flexibility of
parameters with reasonable simplicity of functional form was suggested by Sato (1967).
  Since employment is the direct measure of labour input, H includes the effect of trend
changes in average weekly hours.
6



        Under circumstances of uncertainty and quasi— fixity, it may not be expected that actual
output will equal desired output, or that desired factor ratios will equal optimal ones, except
on average.    The main focus of this paper is on the output decision, for given quantities of
the quasi— fixed factors. We first define a measure of the quantity of output that would be
forthcoming if the actual factor inputs were combined according to the underlying production
function:




        =       [M    Nne)(T1)/T+       pkev(T1)/T]T/(T1)                        (5)



where   key is the vintage bundle of capital and   energy based on the separable CES inner

function. If q and current relative factor prices had been accurately foreseen, then, in the
absence of unforseen or temporary fluctuations in demand, actual and optimal factor inputs
would be equal, actual output would equal q; actual costs would follow the factor price
frontier, and inventory stocks would be at their optimal levels.

        Why do changes in cost or demand conditions provide an incentive to produce at
some level other than q5? This question is probably best answered by treating factor
utilization, or the operating rate, as a factor of production, and then deriving an exact or an
approximate equation for its optimal level. We have already seen that only unexpected or
temporary changes in demand or cost conditions can provide an incentive to vary the
operating rate, since in the absence of such variations the actual and desired quantities of
measured factor inputs will be equal, and the operating rate will be constant at the value
that minimizes average costs'°. When demand or cost conditions fluctuate, firms have, in


91f nominal wage rates are expected to rise at the general rate of inflation plus the rate of
increase in the labour efficiency index, as would be required for equilibrium growth, then
current prices may be used instead of future prices in equations (2) and (3) in the absence
of specific information about future movements in the prices of energy and capital goods
relative to the general rate of inflation.
10
   The optimal normal operating rate is naturally a function of the degree of uncertainty; in
conditions of lower uncertainty firms would not need to invest so heavily in flexibility, and
they would thereby lower average costs, in part by investing in smaller buffer stocks of
inventories and excess capacity.
                                                                                                   7



 addition to whatever changes they choose to make in their quasi— fixed factors, three
 interdependent instruments available to them: variations in the operating rate, variations in
 inventory stocks, and changes in prices. Given the demand and cost conditions, decisions about
 the values for two of these instruments implies the value for the third. The short—term
 decision problem for the representative firm can be characterized as minimizing the notional
 short—term disequilibrium cost function based on the divergences between actual and normal
 values for the operating rate, inventory stocks, and price increases:
        Cd = (I q/q,    - 1J.   I
                                    kin/kinv _1I,   PqYCkenI)
                                                                         (6)
subject to the demand function for non—inventory sales,"

        s=s0p                        (7)
and the inventory stock identity:
            =
                k_i   +q—            s     + mne                (8)

where mne is the level of non— energy imports. For reasons already discussed, it is not
possible to obtain direct evidence about the functional form of the cost function (6), since the
consequences of abnormal factor utilization, non—optimal inventories, and excessively variable
prices will not generally show up in the current period's costs or revenues, but will appear
gradually. Fortunately, to obtain an operational model for estimation, all that need be assumed
is that there is a symmetrically rising marginal cost of proportionate differences from normal
utilization rates, from desired inventories, and price changes not directly linked to changes in
the factor price frontier'2. Optimal short—term response to, e.g., changes in demand conditions

requires mutually dependent responses of operating rates, inventories, and prices in order to
equalize the marginal costs of using the alternative responses. The optimal temporary


"For the open economy, with imports as an additional source of supply, there is an
additional decision variable. In the MACE model (Helliwell et al, 1984), which provides the
first macroeconomic application of the production structure described in this paper, this is
dealt with by introducing a third level in the nested CES supply structure. In the top level,
there is a long—term CES relationship between non—energy imports and the gross output, q,
of the domestic energy—using sector in meeting final demands (including exports). This is
addressed explicitly later on.
12
   In later sectiona we shall test this assumption indirectly by examining the skewness of the
disinbutions of the ratios of actual to normal operating rates and inventory levels.
8



equilibrium choice of the three variables can be represented by equations for prices and for
either production or inventory change, with the other being determined by the identity linking

production and sales. Equations (9) and (10) are log—linear form for the price and production
equations, and (11) shows a comparable inventory equation in conventional linear adjustment
form. Either (10) or (11) could be used, with the equation (8) used to define the other.

Price adjustment equation

          Pq"Pq.. 1 = ken"ken—       (k nvinv 2(q/q)3 + u                          (9)

Operating rate equation

          q/q5 = cq (s/s) 5(k nv'kinv_ i6 +       v                 (10)

where cq is the ratio of current unit costs to the output price and s iS normal or expected
sales.

Inventory adjustment equation (alternative to (10))

                                                      1               (11)
          kinv_kinvi= 7[s—s] + [ck
Where the short—term cost variable Cq modifies the normal target stock of inventories to
 reflect the implications for inventory accumulation of profit—induced changes in the relationship

 between production and sales.

           For the open economy, the short—term supply structure may be more complicated, as
    imports may provide a short—term buffer as well as a long—term source of supply. If
    non— energy imports are substitutable with domestic normal output q in a long— run CES
    relationship, then normal or permanent imports will be given by

           mnep = y(PmneIPq)                   (12)


           Actual imports may differ from normal imports by lags in the response to relative
    prices as well as by a potential buffering role played by inventories if there are discrepencies
    between actual and normal operating rates or inventories. If the production and import
    buffering responses are symmetric, then we would have the following import equation:
                                                      12
                                                           +w              (13)
           mne/mnep=cq '°(s/s) 11(k
                                                                                                   9



 where mnep is as defined in equation (12). Since mnep is unmeasured, equation (12) must be

 substituted into equation (13) to obtain equation (14) for estimation:
           mne =
             Cq l0(s/s)P "(k             1'                 +w                (14)

A finding of significant coefficients for p,0. P,, or p,2 would imply a short—term bufering
role for imports, and would require that equation (14) and equation (10) be both taken into
account to deduce the buffering role played by inventory changes.

           In this paper we shall concentrate on the direct estimation of the operating rate
equation (10), with some attention to the matching equations for prices and imports, using the
inventory stock identity to derive the implications for inventory determination.

           Before proceeding to a discussion of estimation and results, there remain some
specification issues, one relating to the cost variable cq and the others to the appropriate
definition of normal sales and the desired stock of inventories. The cost variable is actual
unit costs relative to the output price, and can be related to the factor price frontier as
follows:

           Cq = TC/qpq                                            (15)

Where TC is actual total costs, using the depreciation rate plus an interest—sensitive rental
price of capital" to measure the return to capital, and q is the level of output that would
be forthcoming if the existing quantities of employed factors were used at normal operating
rates in the long—term two—level CES production structure, with vintage effects ignored. The
first of the three terms of the compound expression measures actual total costs per unit of
normal non— vintage output divided by the cost index with cost— minimizing factor proportions.

This will always be more than 1.0, as actual factor proportions cannot be better than optimal.
Variations in this term show the extent to which the current factor mix is out of line with

'3All of the evidence we have assessed shows that the derived cost—minimizing factor
proportions treat the real supply price of capital as a constant, while the cost of capital most
relevant to the operating rate and inventory decisions is based on a weighted average of the
cost of debt financing and the (constant) long—nm cost of equity capital. The precise
definition is given in Helliwell, MacGregor and Padmore (1984).
10




current factor prices. The second term is the factor price frontier divided by the output price;
variations represent changes in quasi—rents in the output market. On average this term will be
less than 1.0, as average revenues over the long haul must be sufficient to cover average
costs based on actual rather than currently optimal factor proportions. The third term converts
costs per normal unit of output to costs per actual unit, and reemphasizes how unlikely it
would be to find actual unit costs rising with increases in the utilization rate: for given levels
of the quasi— fixed factors, costs per unit are bound to fall with increases in q/q5 unless the
factor input prices, assumed so far to be predetermined, rise as much as proportionately with
q/%. We shall later test whether the elasticity of the operating rate is, as hypothesized here,
equally responsive to the different sources of variation in unit costs relative to the output
price. It is possible, for example, that high costs due to, for example, excessively high energy
consumption built into existing capital goods, would reduce the temporary equilibrium rate of
output differently from changes in profitability caused by, e.g., a worsening in the terms of
trade leading to a drop in the market price relative to the factor price frontier.

       The definitions of normal sales, s, and of desired inventories, k nv' need to be
settled prior to estimation. It has been traditional for inventory models to equate desired
production with expected sales, and to base expected sales on some extrapolation of past sales.
However, it is possible to exploit the links between the production, inventory, and factor
demand decisions more fully to develop what may be a stronger hypothesis. Changes in sales
will induce buffering changes in operating rates or inventories only to the extent that they
were not foreseen as being sure enough and permanent enough to justify matching changes in
the quantities of quasi— fixed factors. It therefore seems more than natural to use normal
output (or normal output plus normal imports in the case of an open economy) to measure
the relevant expected sales concept.

       For example, if a change in sales is expected, but is thought to be too temporary to
justify matching changes in the stocks of quasi— fixed factors, then the difference between sales
                                                                                                  11



 and (some function of) planned capacity q, will be the appropriate measure of the gap to
 be filled by buffering movements of operating rates, inventories, or imports. If normal imports
 have been roughly constant in relation to normal output, then normal sales can be
 multiplied by the average ratio of s to q5. If there have been important price—induced
 long— term fluctuations in import intensity, then normal sales might be more appropriately
 defined by adding permanent imports to normal output:

         S=q+m                       (16)


        Desired inventories could be defined either in relation to normal output or normal
 sales; since normal output is in any event the main determinant of permanent imports, the
 simplest definition of long— term desired inventories is q mulitiplied by the trend value of
 the ratio of inventories to
                               q,.
        In the short—term production equation specified in this section, the aggregate demand
influences are captured by the separate roles of s and of the output price as part of         As
                                                                                         Cq
emphasized in earlier models with quasi—fixed but endogenous output and prices (e.g. Hay

(1970) and Rotemberg (1982)), exogenous shifts in demand conditions are appropriately
measured as variations in s0 rather than in s. Any change in s0 will show up partly through

changes in s and partly through changes in Pq The use of s rather than s0 in the quantity
adjustment equations raises no special problems of estimation or interpretation as long as s is
appropriately treated as an endogenous variable for estimation purposes, and if the total effects
of demand shocks are evaluated using the complete model with endogenous prices and sales.

3. Parameter Estimates and Tests Against Alternative Models


       If there are economically important variations in operating rates, and hence if the
production function based on measured capital, energy, and labor inputs holds on an average

basis, there are implications for the appropriate estimation methods for the parameters of the
underlying production structure. Two methods are appropriate, and we have used them both.
12




The first method is a separable two—stage process, whereby sample averages and trends, along
with assumed equality, on average, between actual and cost— minimizing factor proportions, are

used to reduce to a minimum the number of parameters requiring direct estimation. As
described in the Appendix an iterative maximum liklihood procedure is used, in the context
of the equation for the derived demand for energy, to find the retrofitting coefficient
(reflecting the extent to which energy use is adjustable ex post) and the long—term elasticity
of substitution in the energy—capital bundle. An iterative procedure is also used to define
consistently the elasticity of substitution in the outer CES function and the rate of
Harrod— neutral technical progress. Given the parameters of the long term technology, equation

(5) is then used to define normal output and equation (10) is subsequently estimated to
determine the parameters of the operating rate decision, and hence the joint role of operating
rates and inventory changes as buffers between variable demand and the quasi—fixed factors

represented by

        The second feasible estimation strategy is to use direct estimation of the production

equation to jointly determine the longer term technology and the temporary equilibrium
production response. This extended strategy can be used as a check on the results obtained
 from the first estimation strategy, and is necessary if one wishes to increase the complexity of
 the longer— term structure to such a point that there are too many parameters to be reliably
 estimated from average optimality and derived factor demand equations. We have used this
 extended strategy to test alternative models of the pace and nature of technical progress, and
 especially to test various hypotheses about whether there has or has not been a post—1973

 slowdown in the rate of technical progress'4.

        In this paper, we shall emphasize the temporary equilibrium determination of the
 output decision, for given parameters of the underlying production structure, obtained in the


 14 Results of the tests for the Canadian case, which tend to support the hypothesis that there
 has been no post—1973 slackening in the underlying rate of technical progress, are reported in
 Helliwell, MacGregor and Padmore (1984).
                                                                                                13



manner described in the Appendix. The results for the matching price and import equations
are reported in Helliwell, MacGregor, and Padmore (1984). Our example application uses
annual Canadian data for a 29—year estimation period running from 1954 through 1982.
Two—stage least squares is used for estimation, and all of the right hand variables are treated
as jointly endogenous variables. The eligible instrumental variables for the first stage
regressions are taken from a causally ordered list of exogenous and pre— determined variables
from the macroeconomic model in which the supply structure is embedded. The results for
the ojerating rate equation are as follows:


       ln q =       in    ci —     .25340   in                   (17)
                                                 Cq

                                             (11.20)


               + .55404 ln s/s + .093749 In k.
                         (18.84)                 (2.93)



       where s/sr = [s/q5 /<S/%v>

       where <s/q> the sample average of the ratio of sales to normal output, is equal
       to 1.3396,


       and where k                 <kj_1/%>qy
       where <k_ r'q> the sample average of the ratio of inventories to normal output,
       is equal to 0.23365.

2SLS 1954—1982 ; s.e.e. = 0.00583; R2 = .9998; DW = 1.21

F—test for constraints on ln                and intercept =   0.38

Coefficient of skewness=—0.1474 with standard deviation of 0.4335

Coefficient of kurtosis=—0.7800 with standard deviation of 0.8452
14




       The parameter estimates show substantial buffering roles for both inventories and
operating rates, as implied by the sales coefficient being significantly above zero (which would
have indicated no buffering role for operating rates) and 1.0 (which would indicate no
buffering role for inventories if imports and production played symmetric buffer roles). In fact,
estimation of equation (14) for imports shows significant relative price effects ('F 1.3 after
three years) but no significant buffering role. Thus production would play a buffering role for
unexpected or temporary sales changes unless the sales coefficient in equation (17) were over
1.33, since 1.33 is the average ratio of sales to normal output There is also a substantial
effect from the short—term profitability variable, as shown by the significant negative
coefficient on cq.

       The functional form of equation (17) asumes that there are symmetric costs of
upward and downward divergences of the operating rate away from its normal value. If this
assumption is seriously false, then one would expect to find substantial non—normality of the
distribution of residuals in equation (17). The coefficients of skewness and kurtosis are shown
below the equation, to provide evidence on this score. Both indicate some non— normality of
an expected sort: the negative skewness suggests that costs may rise faster with large positive
than with large negative divergences from normal utilization rates, and the platykurtic
distribution reflects less than expected frequencies in the tails of the distribution, as one
would expect to find if the cost function were flat over a region near the average operating
rate, and then more sharply rising with larger divergences. In total, the evidence of
non—normality is slight enough (the chi—square of 2.88 is significant only at 10%) that the
assumed form for the cost function for divergences of actual from normal output is not likely
to be seriously inappropriate.

       How confident can we be of these results, and to what extent can they be taken to
support our view that there are economically important, and empirically explicable, variations in
the operating rates for quasi— fixed factors? A first and obvious question to ask is whether the
                                                                                                   15



model is internally consistent with its own assumptions about the definitions of normal sales,
desired inventories, and the treatment of the short—term output decision as an operating

decision. These assumptions jointly imply a number of restrictions on the value of the
coefficient on q, which appears in the definitions of s and of             as well as in the
denominator of the operating rate. Given the definitions of    s and        the assumptions
jointly imply that q must have a coefficient of 1.0 in the equation for q. This constraint
was imposed during estimation, and is tested by the F—statistic reported below the equation.
The restrictions implied by the model are accepted so easily that the standard error of the
estimate actually fails when they are imposed, since the saving on the degrees of freedom
more than offsets the small reduction in explained variance.

        Another easy test of the model is to compare its explanation of output to that of the
underlying production function. If the latter were always binding, then it would explain output
with only random residuals, and with a standard error not significantly larger than that of the
main model. This hypothesis is nested within our model, and can be tested by constraining
equal to 0.0 all of the coefficients other than that on q. This raises the standard error of
estimate from .0058 to .025, and the F—statistic of 126.1 on the restrictions implies rejection,
at a very high level of significance, of the hypothesis that there are no economically
important changes in the utilization rates for capital and employment

        Another alternative approach is to adjust labour and capital inputs by separate
utilization rates, and then to assume that there are no remaining variations in factor
utilization. If this procedure gives more accurate output predictions than equation (17), it could
then be implemented by deriving and fitting separate equations for each of the measured
utilization rates. But first it will be necessary to see whether the available measures of factor
utilization can be combined with the underlying production function to give better explanations
of output than does equation (17). If they cannot, then there is no reason to develop models
or equations for the separate utilization variables.
16



        Average hours worked are the usual measure of labour utilization, and that is the one
we have tested15. For capital utilization, there are no generally available direct measures so
indirect measures must be used'6. We shall make use of the capacity utilization series
published by the Bank of Canada'7. We have constructed three alternative models of ouput
determination based on these utilization series. Table 1 uses the non—nested hypothesis test
suggested by Atkinson (1970) to compare these models with the results of equation (17), as
re— estimated over the shorter sample period for which the utilization series is available. The
first alternative uses average hours to adjust the labour input and the l3ank of Canada
capacity utilization series to adjust the capital— plus— energy bundle kev The second alternative

adjusts both Nne and key by the utilization rate series, while the third leaves employment
unadjusted and adjusts the capital—energy bundle by means of the utilization rate'8. In all
cases the adjustments are done by multiplying the utilization rate, relative to its trend value,
by the relevant factor input'9.

' The labour input is thus in terms of the product of employment and average hours.
Several studies have provided evidence that where employment and hours are entered
separately in a production function the short—run returns to the latter are higher than to the
former. e.g. Feldstein (1967). Some have argued that hours are a truly variable factor, with
pecuniary diseconomies (due to the overtime and shift premia) requiring a high marginal
product, e.g. Lucas (1970) and Craine (1973), while others (including us) would argue that
hours are also quasi—fixed (Lazear 1981), and only appear to have a very high marginal
product because they are collinear with unmeasured changes in the rate of utilization of all
quasi— fixed factors.
16 Klein and Preston (1967) suggested a trend trend—through—peaks method that many
researchers have used since. More recently, Berndt and Fuss (1982) have suggested using
capital asset valuation to adjust for variations in capital utilization. Depending on the extent to
which current earnings are capitalized into current share prices, the latter procedure may also
capture the effects of any changes in labour utilization, as the rents to all quasi—fixed factors
tend to appear as cyclical variations in profits.
' As described in Schaefer (1980), the potential capital/output ratio is defined by the trend
through troughs of the actual capital/output ratio, and not by any direct evidence from firms.
It is subject to substantial historical revisions as new troughs are observed, and is unable to
disentangle the effects of changes in relative prices from those of longer—run changes in
technical progress.
18 This third alternative is the one applied to determine production in the Bank of Canada's
SAM model of the Canadian economy.
' It is necessary to remove the trends from the utilization measures, since the rate of
technical progress in q is defined so as to ensure that      and q have the same average
growth rate over the entire sample period. If the downward trend in the average work week,
and the likely upward trend in average machine hours (Foss 1981) were included as separate
factors, the former would raise the rate of growth of the labour efficiency index, while the
latter would reduce it
                                                                                                    17



        The results in Table 1 show that none of the three alternative models contain
information that improves the basic model of equation (17), as shown by the insignificant
coefficients on the auxiliary variable when H0 is equation (17). By contrast, when each of the
three alternatives is in turn made H0, the additional information in equation (17) is so great
as to reject H0, as shown by the high t—statistics on the auxiliary variables. Of the
alternatives to equation (17), the best is that obtained by adjusting key by the Bank of
Canada's capacity utilization series, but even in this case the standard error is three times as
large as that from equation (17) fitted over the same sample period. These results therefore
support our view that the observed operating rate contains much systematic information beyond
that provided by conventional measures of utilization of employed factors.

       Table 2 shows the results of some tests of different definitions of the cost variable
cq. The first experiment redefines Cq to include only the first two terms of equation (15),
with their coefficients constrained to be equal. Unit costs are therefore defined per unit of
normal output q, rather than per unit of actual output. This has the effect of raising all of
the coefficients, and also of raising the standard error of estimate from .0058 to .0078. To
the extent that the simultaneous equation estimation methods used do not adequately protect
against spurious correlation, this increase in standard error may not represent as decisive a
preference for the definition of cq adopted in equation (17). The F—statistic on the constraints
is higher than in equation (17), but not significantly so. The increase in the F—statistic may
be reflecting a difference in the impacts of disequilibrium costs and of changes in quasi—rents
in the output market. To show the extent to which this is so, we re— estimated the equation,
still with only the first two terms of         but with their coefficients freely estimated. This
                                         cq.
raises slightly the coefficient on the ratio of actual costs (per unit of normal output) relative
to fully adjusted minimum costs sen' and reduces the coefficient on the terms of trade term
to insignificance. The standard error of estimate is slightly reduced, but remains substantially
higher than that of equation (17). To summarize this evidence, it suggests that the
disequilibrium costs term has been the most important component of
18




Cq over the 29—year sample period, without rejecting the maintained hypothesis that Cq is
appropriately defined in equation (17).

       Finally, Table 3 shows results from some tests of alternative definitions of normal
sales. Alternatives to the main model are provided by four different ARIMA models based on
previous values of actual sales. Atkinson tests of the resulting output equations show that in
each case the ARIMA models are rejected by equation (17), and in no case do the
alternative models for normal sales add anything to equation (17).

4. Summary and Implications

       The tests so far completed with our model of temporary production equilibrium tend
to support fairly strongly the main elements of the model: quasi— fixity of measured factor
inputs combined with variable factor utilization influenced strongly by unexpected or temporary
sales changes, abnormal profitability, and gaps between actual and target stocks of inventories.
If the model is acceptable, it provides a potentially important bridge between
supply— determined and demand— determined macroeconomic systems, and a means of consistently

and coherently integrating supply and demand influences at the aggregate level.

       At any level of aggregation, a supply model that combines explicit cost— minimizing
factor substitution with short—term departures from normal utilization rates has the potential
for providing an enriched and possibly more accurate picture of macroeconomic dynamics. It
can also provide a framework for treating short—run disturbances consistently with longer—term

substitution and technical progress in the analysis of aggregate productivity movements20.
Imbedded in a macroeconomic framework, the short—term supply structure outlined in this

paper, properly supported by the associated equations for imports, prices and factor demands,
would provide the necessary supply constraints in an integrated manner. It also provides a


20The supply model is used to analyze the Canadian productivity experience in Helliwell
(1984) and Helliwell, MacGregor and Padmore (1984), and is applied to comparable data for
the seven major OECD countries by Helliwell, Sturm and Salou (1984).
                                                                                                 19



framework for using those supply constraints to condition and channel the influence of changes
in cost and demand conditions. We think that the results reported in this paper help to
confirm the importance and determinants of the buffering roles for operating rates and
inventories, and hence to show how important it is to have a supply framework that treats
factors as being quasi— fixed and final demand as uncertain.

                                             REFERENCES


Artus, P. (1983) "Capital, Energy, and Labour Substitution: The Supply Block in OECD
               Medium-Term Models" Paris: OEC1) Working Papers, No. 2.
Atkinson, A.C. (1970) "A Method for Discriminating Between Models" Journal of the Royal
                                 C
                         .,U1LJ .,eries   fl1.,   .)L.. JL...T L..JJ.


Baily, M.N. (1974) "Wages and Employment Under Uncertain Demand" Review of Economic
               Studies 4: 37—50.

Berndt, ER. and M.A. Fuss (1982) "Productivity Measurement Using Capital Asset Valuation
              to Adjust for Variations in Utilization" NBER Working Paper No. 895.
              Cambridge:National Bureau of Economic Research.

Berndt, E.R. and C.J. Morrison (1981) "Capacity Utilization Measures: Underlying Economic
               Theory and an Alternative Measure" American Economic Review 71: 48—57.

Berndt, ER., CL Morrison, and G.C. Watkins (1981) "Dynamic Models of Energy Demand:
              An Assessment and Comparison" in ER. Bemdt and B.C. Fields, eds., Modeling
              and Measuring Natural Resource Substitution Cambridge Mass.: MIT Press.
Berndt, E.R. and D.O. Wood (1979) "Engineering and Econometric Interpretations of
              Energy—Capital Complementarity" American Economic Review 69: 342— 354.

Blinder, A.S. (1981) "Inventories and the Structure of Macro Models" American Economic
              Review 71: 11—16.

Blinder, A.S. (1982) "Inventories and Sticky Prices: More on the Microfoundations of
              Macroeconomics" American Economic Review 72: 334—348.

Brechling, F. and P. O'Brian (1967) "Short—mn employment functions in manufacturing
               industries: An international comparison" Review of Economics and Statistics 49:
              277—287.

Craine, R. (1973) "On the Service Flow from Labour" Review of Economic Studies 40: 39—46.
Davidson, R., and J.G. MacKinnon (1981) "Several Tests for Model Specification in the
              Presence of Alternative Hypotheses" Econometrica 49:781—794.

Davidson, R., and J.G. MacKinnon (1982) "Some Non—Nested Hypothesis Tests and the
               Relations Among Them" Review of Economic Studies 49:551—566.
20



Fair, R.C. (1969) The Short—Run Demand for Workers and Hours Amsterdam:
                   North— Holland.

Feldstein, M.S. (1967) "Specification of the Labour Input in the Aggregate Production
                   Function" Review of Economic Studies 34: 375— 386.

Foss, M.F. (1981) "Long—run changes in the workweek of fixed capital" American
                   Economic Review 71: 58—63.

Fuss, M. and D. McFadden (1978) "Flexibility versus efficiency in ex ante plant design".
              In M. Fuss and D. McFadden, eds. Production Economics: A Dual
                   Approach to Theory and Applications Amsterdam: North—Holland, pp.
                   311— 364.

Gordon, R.J. (1981) "Output Fluctuations and Gradual Price Adjustment" Journal of
                   Economic Literature 19: 493— 530.

Hall, R.L. and C.J. Hitch (1939) "Price Theory and Business Behaviour" Oxford
               Economic Papers No. 2, May 1939, 12—45.
Hamada, K. and Y. Kurosaka (1984) "The Relationship Between Production and
             Unemployment in Japan" European Economic Review 25: 71—94.

Hart., A.G. (1940) Anticipations, Uncertainty, and Dynamic Planning Chicago: Univerity of
               Chicago Press (second edition, New York: Kelley, 1951).
Hay, G.A. (1970) "Production, Price and Inventory Theory" American Economic Review
                   60:   531—545.


Helliwell, J.F.    (1984)   "Stagflation and Productivity Decline in Canada,    1974-82"   Canadian
                   Journal- of Economics 17: 191—216.

Helliwell, J.F., P. Sturm and G. Salou (1984) "International Comparison of the Sources
                of Productivity Slowdown 1973—1982" NBER Working Paper No. 1465.
                   Cambridge: National      Bureau of Economic     Research.

Helliwell, J.F., R.N. McRae, P. Boothe, M. Margolick, T. Padmore, A. Plourde and R.
                Plummer (1984) "Energy and the National Economy: An Overview of the
                MACE Model" in AD. Scott, ed., Progress in Natural Resource
                Economics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Helliwell, J.F., M.E. MacGregor and T. Padmore (1984) "Canadian Economic Growth and
                Productivity 1955—1990" U.B.C. Department of Economics Discussion Paper
                   84—30.

Klein,    L.R.   and   R.S. Preston (1967) "Some New Results in         the Measurement of Capacity
                   Utilization" American Economic Review 57:         34— 58.


Kuh, E. (1965) "Cyclical and secular labor productivity in United States manufacturing"
                   Review      of Economics and Statistics 47:    1—12.


Lazear,    EP. (1981) "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions"
                   American      Economic   Review 71: 606—620.
                                                                                             21




Lucas, R.E. (1970) "Capacity, Overtime, and Empirical Production Functions" American
                Economic Review 60: 23—27

Mohr, M.F. (1980) "The Long—Term Structure of Production, Factor Demand and Factor
             Productivity in U.S. Manufacturing Industries". In J.W. Kendrick and B.N.
             Vaccara, eds. New Developments in Productivity Measurement and Analysis
             Chicago: University of Chicago Press (NBER Studies in Income and
             Wealth, vol. 44) pp. 137—238.

Morrison, C.J. and E.R. Bemdt (1981) "Short—run labour productivity in a dynamic
               model" Journal of Econometrics 16: 39—65.

Oi, W.Y. (1962) "Labour as a quasi—fixed factor" Journal of Political Economy 70:
                538—55 (December 1962).

Okun, A.M. (1970) The Political Economy of Prosperity New York: Norton.
Okun, A.M. (1981) Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis Washington:
                Brookings.

Rotemberg, J.J. (1982) "Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output" Review of
                Economic Studies 49: 517— 531.

Samuelson, P.A. (1953—54) "Prices of Factors and Goods in General Equilibrium" Review
             of Economic Studies 21: 1—20.

Sato, K. (1967) "A two—level CES production function" Review of Economic Studies 34:
                201—218.

Schaefer, G. (1980) "Measuring Capacity Utilization: a Technical Note." Bank of Canada
                Review May 1980:3—13.

Solow, R.M. (1973) "Some evidence on the short—run productivity puzzle". In J. Bhagwati
              and R.S. Eckaus, eds., Development and Planning: Essays in Honour of
              Paul Rosenstein—Rodan 316—325 (London: Allen and Unwin) Chap. 17.

Stigler, G. (1939) "Production and Distribution in the Short Run" Journal of Political
                Economy 47: 305—327.

                                          APPENDIX

       This appendix derives the parameters of the two—level CES production function
and describes the estimation procedure. The inner function is discussed first, followed by
the outer function.
I. The Inner CES Function:

         The vintage inner function which bundles energy and capital has the following
form:

key      (1_&1_2)kel + mnewk*                           (1)
where:
22



klk=
and   wherenew
             i =ne       +       k
                                  ne—i
                                          is re—investment with energy use malleable in the

current year.
         Each year, as the relative prices of energy and capital change, the optimum
energy to capital ratio implied by the basic CES factor bundle, discussed below, can be
calculated. A fraction      of the capital energy bundle is assumed to be retrofitted to
this energy intensity. New capital installed in the current year is also assumed to use
energy at the optimum rate. This provides new which is the amount of capital stock
installed or retrofitted. Equation (i), the vintage capital energy bundle, enters the outer
CES production function.
          In equation (1) the business fixed capital stock (exiuding energy) (k e' energy
expenditure (e), business   fixed investment (excluding energy investment) (inej the energy
price ()      and the scrapping rate (& 2) are observed variables. The user cost of capital
    is:
                      = (<2>O1Pr)Pa

where a is the observed implicit price of absorption and r (the long term supply
price of capital) is defined as a constant, with a value such that on average total factor
earnings exhaust total output over the sample period.
          The basic CES inner bndi and the derivation of the optimum ratio of capital
to the capital—energy bundle k Ike in equation (1) will now be discussed. The optimal
factor to bundle ratio is based on the following CES bundle which is denoted by ke:
k     =
          ((3k1)/a           +   7e1)/U)'1)                                       (2)

          To   derive the optimum factor ratio, the partial         derivatives of       (2) with respect to
capital and     energy are first calculated and set equal to the prices k and                      This gives
the optimal ratio:
                =                                                                  (3)
(e*/ke)
where a is the elasticity of substitution between capital and energy. Next the sample
average of (3) is taken and the equation is solved for the ratio (7/(3). This is done by
assuming that the actual and the cost—minimizing (based on current relative prices)
energy/capital    ratios have the same      mean values      over the sample       period:

(y/(3) =                                                              (4)
                (<e/tfle>/<pk/pe>a)1
where <x> denotes the sample average of x.
          The optimum factor to bundle ratio is obtained             by     substituting

e=kne[ (7/j3)                I       from (3) into   (2),   and   by solving for k* 1k:

                                                                                             (5)

       The parameter (3 is solved from (5) by taking sample averages of both sides. It
is assumed that the ratio of the optimal capital stock to the bund1e of capital and
                                                                                               23



 energy
                                                      **
          services is equal to one, on average i.e., <k Ike> = 1. The expression for i3 is
 therefore:
    = <1 1+(7/13)°(p/pk          )1U]1>(1)/U                                  (6)

 Estimation of a and &


      The elasticity of substitution between capital and energy a and the retrofitting
parameter (a   are determined by estimating the energy demand function:
in (e) =      in   (e)                                                            (7)

where e is the vintage energy requirement needed to operate the capital stock
                                                                                  kne
subject to the prevaiiing relative energy prices Pe''Pk e is defined by the recursive
equation:

e=    (1_61_ô2)eVl+{(7pk)/(3p)}aj                              (8)

To obtain a starting value, e is set equal to e at the beginning of the sample period,
on the assumption that no large and surprising changes in energy prices occurred over
the preceding few years (the kick—off values start in 1952). The parameter pair (a,&')
which maximizes the likelihood function of the above energy demand regression is chosen
as the preferred parameter combination (so a double grid search is required).

II. The Outer CES function.
          The outer function which defines normal output   q is:
     =
          [U(HNne)(T_1)/T+ vkev(T1)/T]T/(T_1)                               (9)

The following will first discuss the procedure used to derive expressions for v and H.
The final values of these parameters depend on the value of r, the elasticity of
                                                                                        ,
substitution between labour and the capital/energy bundle, which is determined iteratively.
The iteration method used to calculate r will be examined last.
       Equation (9) can be rewritten by setting q=q and by isolating the following
expression for II:
fl = [(q(T1)/T - vkV(T1)/r)/(UN                    (r1)/rj(r1)/r                        (10)
Equation (10) is used to obtain an expression fo the parameter v. First the optimum
factor ratio is derived in the same way as the inner function i.e., the relative prices are
obtained and solved for the factor ratio. Assuming the factor ratio is optimal provides
the following ratio:

fIN/k* =           (PkeH/mne)T(/1')T                                 (11)

where the price of the capital—energy bundle is:

                   ke    (130p1_a+ 7a1—o)1/(1—a)
ke is obtained by the cost—minimization problem using the inner CES function (2).
24



        Equation (10) is substituted into equation (11). The parameter u drops out and
can be determined empirically when H is normalized, as shown below. The parameter v
is isolated in the substituted equation and sample averages are taken to provide the
following expression:
               v=                      r- 1) /r >/[<(N/k) 1 /T>         +
                    <(p/Wfl)(q/Nfl)(
                                             r 1) /T>]               (12)
                       <(Pkene)(kev/Nne)
Note that we cannot get as simple an interpretation as before because of the exponent
on the starred variables. Instead we are normalizing so that the sample average of the
ratio of the factors raised to the hr power is equal to the average for optimum
proportions.
       The value of H, the labour productivity index for Harrod—neutral technical
progress, is derived by the following procedure. Output attributable to labour is is
defined by rewriting equation (10):
11(r—1)/r = (q(Tl)/T             —
                                     pkev(T1)/T)/Nne(T1)/T                  (13)


The technical progress index is modelled to grow at a constant rate. It is estimated by
ordinary least squares by regressing the log of the value provided by equation (13) on
an nnu9l me index. Given the final value of r, the fitted values of log
     T
(2fl    / T) can be estimated for each year. The value of u is calculated by setting
H = 1.0 in 1971. The technical progress factor for 1971 is therfore1           The labour
                                                                T
efficiency index is defined simply as the exponent of log (H        / ) since the
parameter    remains a constant throughout the sample period. The labour efficiency
index is calculated to grow at an annual rate of 1.7%.
        Finally an estimate of r is needed to derive final values of the above
parameters. The iterative procedure uses the expression for the optimum factor ratio,
equation (11). The log of this equation provides the following form that can be
estimated:

ln (flN*e/k:)=rlfl(LL/v) + r lfl(PkeH/Wne)                           (14)
r is the coefficient of the inverse price ratio. An arbitrary value of r is used to
define ,v, and H. Equation (14) is then estimated by ordinary least squares and the
estimated coefficient provides a new value of r, which is used to redefine the other
parameters in the next round. The process is repeated until the value of r in equation
(14) converges. This value is used to obtain the final values of j, v, H and normal
output '1sv.
        The following are the estimated values of the parameters for the nested
production function:
3 =.74175; 'y =.15943; j =.0813723 ; v =.655263; a =.8700; r =.53.
        The version of the model used in this paper assumes a constant annual growth
rate for II. Estimated following the procedures described above, it has the value 1.0 in
1971, and has an annual growth rate of 1.70%. In Helliwell, MacGregor and Padmore
(1984), the assumption of constant underlying technical progress is tested against, and
found to be superior to, a number of alternative models involving some form of
slowdown in the rate of technical progress.
                                                                                             25



            which is defined in. the text as the level of output forthcoming if the
existing quantities of employed factors were used at normal operating rates with viniage
effects ignored, is obtained by using ke (2) instead of key (1) in the outer function (9).
All parameters are kept at the estimated values given above.
                                       Table 1


             Atkinson Tests of Alternative Models of Output Determination

2SLS 1957—1982                                Atkinson test

H0:Eq. (17); H1:Case 1                                .449



H0:Case 1; H:Eq. (17)                               18.270*


H0:Eq. (17); H1:Case 2                               0.065


H0Case 2;   H1:Lq. (17)                             43•747*


H0:Eq. (17); H1:Case 3                               0.104


H0:Case 3; H1:Eq. (17)                              12.886*



Model                                      s.e.e.              R2

Equation (17)                            .005498              .9998
Case 1                                   .023716              .9955
Case 2                                   .052447              .9779
Case 3                                   .017286              .9976




Note: H0 denotes the maintained null hypothesis and it is tested against the
alternative hypothesis H1. The Atkinson test first requires the residuals
from regressing the estimated maintained hypothesis against the estimated
alternative hypothesis. These residuals are included as an independent
variable in the regression of the maintained hypothesis. The above table
reports the t—statistic for the variable. If it is significant it indicates
that H1 adds significant explanatory power to H0 and it implies the
rejection of the null hypothesis against H1. The 3-test proposed by
Davidson and MacKinnon (1981,1982) gives the same accept-or—reject advice
for each of our comparisons. The 3—test results are therefore not included
in the table.
        *
        in the above table denotes rejection of the null hypothesis H0
against the alternative hypothesis H1 at the 99% confidence level.
                                        Table 2




                   A Comparison of the Operating Rate Equation
                 Under Alternate Definitions of the Cost Variable,
                                                                     Cq•


Equation                 Equation (17)             Model 1                 Model 2


in q


in q                           1.0                   1.0                     1.0


in                           — .25340                 —
      Cg
                             (11.20)


in (TC/q5)/c                    —                  —.32562                 —.40270
                                                    (7.93)                  (8.13)


                                —
in CkIPq     -
                                                  —0.32562                 -.014008
                                                    (7.93)                  (0.10)


in    s/sn                    .55404                .73766                  .65568
                             (18.84)               (14.20)                 (11.24)

      *
in   k. 1k.
      mv ].flV               .093749                .11127                  .14668
                              (2.93)                (2.47)                  (3.42)



s.e.e.                        .00583                .00778                  .00694
R 2                           .9998                 .9996                   .9997
D—W                            1.21                  1.24                   1.31
F—test on                      0.38                  1.86                    .038
constraints on q
                sv
and intercept
2SLS 1954—82
                                      Table 3



               Atkinson Tests of Alternative Models of Normal Sales


2SLS 1956—1982                                Atkinson test

H0:Eq.(17);H1:CaSe 1                                    .4l2
H0:Case l;H1:Eq.(17)                                12.304
H0:Eq.(17);H1:CaSe 2                                    .798k
H0:Case 2;H1:Eq.(17)                                12.365
H0:Eq.(17);H1:CaSe 3                                    .489k
H0:Case 3;H1:Eq.(17)                                12.469
H0:Eg.(17);H1:Case 4                                    .306k
H0:Case 4;H1:Eq.(17)                                12.350

Model                                      s.e.e.                   R2

Equation (17)                             .005333                  .9998
Case 1                                    .015890                  .9982
Case 2                                    .016079                  .9982
Case 3                                    .016168                  .9982
Case 4                                    .016047                  .9982


        *
            in the above table denotes rejection of the null hypothesis          H0
against     the alternative hypothesis H1 at the 99% confidence level.
        The following models, which all   employ either a first or second order
auto-regressive moving average process, were used            to   provide estimates of
normal sales. These values were tested in the operating rate equation
against the base model, equation (17). The models are:
Case 1          nt1t—1 pei+e
Case 2

Case 3          s.=I31s1+ pe 1+Oe 2 C1
Case    '                                 8C2       t
               data sample used is 1947—55, since sales data are available
        The first
since 1947. The forecasting models are reestimated each year, so that the
parameters depend only on information available at that time. The procedure
is used to obtain estimates of normal sales for each year from 1956 to
1982.
