NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOREIGN WARS, DOMESTIC MARKETS:
ENGLAND, 1793-1815
David S. Jacks
Working Paper 16236
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16236

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010

Liam Brunt and Edmund Cannon generously allowed for the provision of the commodity price data
and are warmly thanked. The author also wishes to thank Greg Clark, Larry Neal, and Solomos Solomou
for the provision of other data; Doug Allen, Clyde Reed, the editor and three anonymous referees for
comments; and Dan Bogart for helpful discussions and for providing much of the impetus for the paper.
Finally, the author gratefully acknowledge the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
of Canada for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by David S. Jacks. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Foreign Wars, Domestic Markets: England, 1793-1815
David S. Jacks
NBER Working Paper No. 16236
July 2010
JEL No. F40,N73
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the means by which warfare influences domestic commodity markets. It is argued
that England during the French Wars provides an ideal testing ground. Four categories of explanatory
variables are taken as likely sources of documented changes in English commodity price dis-integration
during this period: weather, trade, policy, and wartime events. Empirically, increases in price dispersion
are related to all of the above categories. However, the primary means identified by which warfare
influenced domestic commodity market integration was through international trade linkages and the
arrival of news regarding wartime events.
David S. Jacks
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6
CANADA
and NBER
dsjacks@gmail.com

I. Introduction
An emerging consensus in the economic history literature has identified the period
encompassing the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars as one of the key turning points in
the process of global market integration. Federico and Persson (2007), Jacks (2005, 2006), and
Studer (2009) all very clearly indict the so-called French Wars in disrupting the slow, but gradual
process of intra- and inter-continental market integration that had unfolded over the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. The effects of this commodity market disintegration are most clearly
seen in the work of O’Rourke (2006, 2007). The shared findings of his papers are that the
relative price effects of the French Wars were larger than generally appreciated, global in scale,
and brought large changes to consumer welfare in their wake. However, what is less clear from
all of these studies is the effects of the French Wars on the operation of domestic commodity
markets.
In particular, this paper addresses the questions of how and why England suffered from
such a decline in domestic market integration. Locating the sources of this decline is far from
trivial. The attendant destruction of commercial and transport infrastructure which typically
takes place in times of war were notably absent in the English case, due to the accidents of
geography and history. In fact, apart from one half-hearted excursion by a mixed lot of French
soldiers and convicts which was apocryphally repulsed by unarmed Welsh women (Stuart Jones,
1950), no battles actually took place on British soil. As a consequence, English commodity
markets during the French wars make for an analytically simpler—yet still complex—case study
of the effects of foreign wars on domestic economies. Certainly, there exists a burgeoning
literature on war and the macroeconomy (cf. Glick and Taylor, 2010; O’Rourke, 2006, 2007).
However, this paper takes a decidedly different approach by focusing on domestic—rather than
international—developments in times of war.
At the same time, a sizeable literature has put forward favored explanations for market
disintegration in this period. Thus, Tooke (1838), Hecksher (1922), Crouzet (1958), and many
others have all weighed in on this matter. Yet the specific mechanisms involved remain vague.
A likely contender in this regard is the effect of the French Wars on the English coastal trade: the
losses to the mercantile fleet due to French harassment were significant and certainly affected the
functioning of this crucial link in domestic commerce. Another contender is the uneven spread
of commercial banking from its center in London: differing degrees of financial intermediation

1

might imply differences in the provision of commercial credit in times of expansionary
government policy or shocks emanating from the international economy. One of this paper’s
contributions is in sorting out these far from mutually exclusive explanations in a coherent
empirical framework. The means for assessing the effects of the French Wars are the prices of
four basic agricultural commodities—wheat, barley, oats, and beans—at weekly intervals for the
forty counties of England collected by Brunt and Cannon (2004, 2005). Standard measures of
the size of price dispersion across counties are used first to document the dis-integration of the
English market occasioned by the wars and then to probe the likely channels through which the
wars affected commodity prices. The paper offers four such categories: weather, trade, policy,
and wartime events. The main conclusions of the paper are that all of the above likely
contributed to commodity price dispersion but that the primary means identified by which
warfare influenced domestic commodity market integration was through international trade and
wartime events.
The results of the paper also impinge on key issues relating to welfare and economic
growth. First, market integration most immediately impacts the efficacy of markets. Here, the
efficacy of markets—as opposed to their efficiency—relates to the level of real resources which
must be dedicated to the distribution of goods from primary producers to final consumers.
Considering the considerable number of transactions required to wrangle goods up and down the
supply chain, any improvement in the efficacy of markets can have profound influences on
economic welfare (Ejrnæs and Persson, 2006). In this respect, the French Wars have long been
implicated in the decline—or at best, stagnation—of standards of living during the early
industrial revolution period (cf. Ashton, 1949; Lindert and Williamson, 1983; Nicholas and
Steckel, 1991). This paper provides further evidence on the disruptive nature of the wars and
suggests that the process of market disintegration differentially affected English regions, giving
weight to the view that the French Wars were the primary culprit in depressing real wages during
this period.
Furthermore, the results of this study inform the inquiry into the sources of economic
growth in general and the industrial revolution in particular. The role of domestic commodity
markets in shaping the course of economic history has long been recognized. In one of the first
contributions to the literature, Hicks (1969) proposed a market-led growth model, explicitly
suggesting a role for domestic integration in helping to drive the growth process. Granger and

2

Elliott (1967) likewise viewed the decline of regional markets and the corresponding rise of a
truly English market as one of the preconditions of the industrial revolution. In more recent
work, Kelly (1997) sought to give teeth to the theory of Smithian growth by demonstrating that
in a model of geographic specialization with threshold effects in transportation, sustained
domestic market integration could actually give rise to an abrupt acceleration in the growth rate
of an economy. And while his paper focuses on Sung dynasty China as a case study, he does
note that the same processes could have been at work in eighteenth century Britain with the rise
of integrated canal and turnpike networks. Thus, to the extent to which the French Wars
disrupted English markets, one might expect that changes in domestic integration vitally affected
the pace of industrialization and growth.
The paper proceeds as follows. After reviewing developments in the transport and
diplomatic arenas in sections II and III, the paper considers the views of previous researchers on
the disintegration of English commodity markets in section IV. Section V discusses the data in
greater detail while section VI documents the wars’ contribution to the process of market disintegration and then seeks to relate changes in the behavior of prices to the underlying processes
of weather, trade, policy, and wartime events. Finally, section VII concludes and offers some
possible implications of the heightened price dispersion brought on by the French Wars for
English economic history, specifically in the context of the role of commodity markets in
conditioning English growth prospects for the nineteenth century.
II. Internal Developments: The Primacy of Transport
For a number of years, Adam Smith's prognosis in 1776 that “the prices of bread and
butchers’ meat are generally the same, or very roughly the same throughout the greater part of
the United Kingdom” (1976, p. 177) was taken at face value.1 Lacking much of the data and
certainly the necessary statistical techniques, the economic historian’s view of English market
integration in the eighteenth century was for a long time dominated by the early work of Gras
(1915) and Rogers (1887, 1902). The former was quick to point to institutional features in
explaining the evolution of the English market. For Gras, the integration of grain markets
relied on the interplay between municipal corn regulations and the various Corn Laws with the
Nor was Smith alone among his contemporaries. The slightly less esteemed John Arbuthnot
noted three years before that in English markets it was only necessary to “let corn flow like
water…it will find its level” (1773, p. 88).
1

3

eighteenth century marking a somewhat dramatic turning point as the grip of local
proscriptions—both legal and moral—was lessened. Although not very explicit on the matter,
Rogers took a slightly different tack. Instead, he emphasized the role of well-developed
transport linkages in driving the process of integration. At the very least, a cumulative picture
can be drawn from these two, namely that the gradual integration of various regional markets
into an approximate national market had certainly taken place by the mid-eighteenth century.
In one of the earliest, truly quantitative works on the subject, Granger and Elliot (1967)
find that the emergence of a national market in wheat could be dated from the late seventeenth/
early eighteenth centuries. Admittedly, their data was sparse, but recent and more data-intensive
work on the late eighteenth century (Shiue and Keller, 2007) as well as the early nineteenth
century (Jacks, 2005, 2006) suggests that the domestic commodity market in England was
among the most efficient in the world at this time. Central to this English precociousness was the
development of internal transport linkages. This proceeded along many lines in eighteenth
century England, giving rise to the idea of a transport revolution. Generally, the literature
identifies three separate fronts along which this revolution proceeded—canals and rivers, the
coastal trade, and turnpikes. In what follows, a brief summary of developments in each sector
will be provided with the hope of identifying patterns which will be salient to the question of the
domestic effects of the French wars.
Of the three, it is canals which have probably captured the popular imagination most
fully. Accordingly, a rich literature has developed in British economic history concerning the
role of canal and river navigation from the earliest of times (cf. Hadfield, 1950-1985; Willan
1936). And as a consequence, the general outlines of canal and river development during the
eighteenth century are readily discerned. Drawing from its rich natural endowment of rivers,
England was able to make impressive gains in navigable waterways from the mid-seventeenth
century when a spate of acts was passed by Parliament. Duckham (1983) offers a succinct
summary for our period: from 1660-1750, 40 rivers were subject to Improvement Acts while
Parliament passed 29 acts for inland navigation in the 1760s, 23 such acts in the 1770s,
culminating with the Canal Mania of 1790-1794 and its 80 associated inland navigation acts.
Partly due to the maturation of canal networks, the general atmosphere of austerity, and the fact
that so many investors had their fingers burned in the speculative boom surrounding the Canal
Mania, the French Wars saw very few developments in canal or river navigation.

4

The coastal trade of England and Wales was for long the linchpin in the system of
domestic commerce. In 1700, London alone accounted for 69% of all inland trade, with the
majority of this figure being provided by coastal shipping, especially in coal and grains (Dyos
and Aldcroft, 1969). Taking a look at the available figures on shipping capacity, Aldcroft and
Freeman (1983) report that the tonnage of ships engaged in the coastal trade increased from
154,640 in 1760 to 332,962 by 1790. In contrast to the experience with inland navigation, the
French Wars period seems to be associated with a tremendous increase in coastal tonnage, in that
it reached 833,416 by 1824. This view is also corroborated by the figures for the average-perannum coastwise shipment of grain which rose from 166,716 tons in the period 1780/86 to
446,318 tons in 1819/27. At the same time, the authors notes that “the activity of enemy vessels
and privateers seriously harassed the shipping of the East and South coast ports” (p. 147; cf.
Tooke, 1838, p. 115) during the French Wars. Thus, it remains an open question whether
additions to the size of the coastal fleet were able to counteract the wartime disruptions.
Finally, turning to the rise of turnpikes, we can refer to Arthur Young who noted in 1768
that “all the sensible people attributed the dearness of their county to the turnpike roads; and
reason speaks the truth of their opinions…make but a turnpike road though their county and all
the cheapness vanishes at once” (1768, p. 260). Certainly then, the perception of turnpikes as
enhancing market integration—albeit at the cost of diminishing local purchasing power—was
widely held. Much of this probably stemmed from the rapidity with which the turnpike trust
emerged as a dominant means of overland carriage. A strong surge in the early 1700s which
established—or more precisely, affirmed—London as the hub of domestic traffic was followed
by a boom period dating from 1750 which, over the next 20 years, witnessed the formation of
over 500 trusts operating more than 15,000 miles (Albert, 1983). 1770 marked a fairly dramatic
break in trend as only 4,000 additional miles of road were added in the next fifty years, most of
these consisting of feeders to the existing major arteries. This pattern of establishment, boom,
and maturation in the physical turnpike network also seems to be matched in its internal
dynamics. In a recent series of papers, Bogart traces the impact of turnpike trust formation on
parish-level transportation investment (2005a) and the consequent reduction in freight charges as
well as passenger travel times (2005b). On all accounts, it appears that the big gains in
investment, freights, and travel times were made prior to 1770 with slow, but steady
improvements through the French Wars.

5

To sum up, the early integration of English commodity markets was almost certainly
dependent upon developments in the transport sector. And the changes witnessed in canals and
rivers, the coastal trade, and turnpikes necessarily altered the landscape of English commerce.
However, for our purposes, it is important to bear in mind that the two overland transport sectors
were transformed well before the outbreak of the French Wars. Additionally, the effects of the
French Wars almost certainly swamped any further developments in the transport sector. A hint
of this might be seen in the figures provided by Mathias (1983) who reports that the total
investment in canals between 1750 and 1815 was some twenty million GBP while the total debt
issue attributable to the French Wars was some five hundred million GBP and total direct
military costs were in excess of one billion GBP. The marginal effects might have been very
different, but surely the magnitudes involved are telling. This state of affairs will allow for some
latitude in the estimation to follow, in that no explicit controls for developments in canals, rivers,
and turnpikes—beyond county fixed effects—will be thought necessary. And in the case of the
coastal trade, the areas affected are conveniently defined by the geography of England. Before
proceeding to the empirics, however, a consideration of the main diplomatic developments of the
period is in order.
III. External Developments: The Primacy of War
The state of Anglo-French relations throughout the eighteenth century was contentious at
best. In the century before 1793, the two parties openly engaged in warfare for 45 years. What
is more, the theatre of conflict was remarkably wide, extending from the traditional epicenter
provided by the Rhineland and Low Countries to more exotic and far-flung locales such as
Cochin, Montevideo, and Pittsburgh. But for all this, the period was marked by a noticeable—if
somewhat slight—uptake in the level of international trade, both in absolute terms and relative to
GDP (O’Rourke and Williamson, 2002, 2004).
These developments, in part, explain why the French Wars can be considered the nadir of
Anglo-French commercial relations. The French declaration of war against the English in
February 1793 witnessed not only the introduction of a revolutionary anti-British rhetoric, but
also a precipitous decline in Anglo-French trade volumes. Mokyr and Savin (1976) estimate the
annual average of Anglo-French bilateral trade in 1793/99 to be one-tenth of the value in
1788/92. Although precise figures are harder to come by for the later wartime period of 1800/15,

6

it seems pretty certain that further declines in commercial activity between the two belligerents
occurred (Cuenca Esteban, 2001). This decline in trade volumes was, of course, generated by
enormous increases in trade costs. Tooke (1838) long ago made this point explicit. Comparing
costs between the Baltic and London in 1809/12 and 1837, he found that freight and insurance
for one quarter of wheat was 600 d. in the former period and 54 d. in the latter. Likewise,
Danson (1894) reports that marine insurance premiums in 1816 were less than one-third their
level in 1810. One of the most obvious sources for these large premiums was the loss of
mercantile shipping as even the British with their readily apparent naval superiority lost 11,000
ships—or equivalently, 2-3% of its shipping stock annually—to privateering over the course of
the French Wars (Mokyr and Savin, 1976).
Coupled with the heightened risks of seizure and sinking, there was also a tremendous
increase in protective and prohibitive trade measures. This pattern was firmly established at the
very outbreak of the war as the Jacobin-dominated French National Convention repudiated the
unpopular Vergennes—or Eden—Treaty of 1786 and raised formidable tariff barriers. This was
followed by a proclamation in October of 1793 which allowed for the seizure of all British goods
in the realm (Haight, 1941). The French declaration of war and imposition of trade barriers was
answered on the other side of the Channel with the first in an almost continuous series of naval
blockades of the French coast.
These acts of commercial aggression were, of course, not limited to the two main
belligerents. On the one hand, French and, especially, British treatment of self-declared neutral
bottoms and crews precipitated major diplomatic crises such as the formation of the League of
Armed Neutrality in 1800 which saw the Baltic powers—Denmark, Prussia, Russia, and
Sweden—effectively close the Sound at a time of extreme dearth in the U.K. and major
commercial crises such as the U.S. Non-Importation Act of 1806/12, the U.S. Embargo Act of
1807/09, and the U.S. Non-Intercourse Act of 1809/10. The former crisis was only resolved with
the destruction of the Danish fleet and consequent shelling of Copenhagen in 1801 (Ruppenthal,
1943). And while the latter probably did more harm to the United States than to either of the
belligerents (cf. Frankel, 1982; Heaton, 1941; and O’Rourke, 2006), it was a decisive factor in
the American decision to wage the ill-timed—by British standards—War of 1812.
On the other hand, the most prominent development of the French Wars was the steady
annexation of continental Europe into a greater French polity. In this way, direct political

7

control was established in the Low Countries by 1795; in central Italy, Hannover, and the left
bank of the Rhine by 1801; in the Piedmont/Liguria by 1804; and in Dalmatia by 1805. Indirect
control through the establishment of puppet or vassal governments was in effect by 1804 in the
Kingdom of Italy; by 1806 in the Confederation of the Rhine and the Kingdom of Naples; and by
1808 in the Grand Duchy of Warsaw and Spain. Thus, after the successive defeats of Austria in
1805, Prussia in 1806, and Russia in 1807, Napoleon was in the position to fully extend the range
of his Berlin Decree of 1806 which banned the import of British goods and prohibited the
landing of British (including colonial) bottoms in French ports. This, of course, marked the
beginning of the Continental System.
Economic historians have long debated Napoleon’s exact intentions in declaring his
reverse blockade of the United Kingdom. Rose’s claim that his “economic ideas were those of
the crudest section of the old Mercantilist School” (1902, p. 74) seems to capture much of the
spirit of early thought on the subject, implying that the goal was simply to bleed Britain of its
bullion. Likewise, Cunningham (1910) documents the precipitous decline in the reserves of the
Bank of England from the beginning of the Continental System to the time of Waterloo. In one
of the most authoritative studies on the topic, Heckscher (1922) suggested that the Continental
System was intended to not only strangle British exports and generate a balance-of-payments
crisis, but also provide a valuable source of revenue as the war grinded on. More recently, Neal
has argued that the Continental System was designed to “disrupt the traditional British
techniques for financing wars on the European continent” (1990, p. 201).
Of course, these interpretations are not mutually exclusive. Indeed, all are consistent
with one of the most controversial incidents during the French Wars, the exportation in 1810 of
continental grains following a seriously deficient harvest in Britain. The amounts imported from
the continent were far from trivial with 225,710 quarters of grain coming from France and
1,080,731 quarters coming from allies or vassal states of France (Marshall, 1833). Various
commentators (Galpin, 1925; Olson, 1963; and Young, 1812) have calculated these imports to
represent about 15% of total British consumption, give or take a few percentage points.
Furthermore, one cannot claim ignorance or indifference on Napoleon’s part as he himself noted
in 1808 that “the corn question is for sovereigns the most important and delicate of all” (quoted
in Olson, 1963, p. 61). Most likely, the decision to grant the licenses simply recognized the
immense arbitrage profits available for the taking by the revenue-starved French government: an

8

export license for wheat cost 830 francs per ton (Heckscher, 1964) at a time when wheat sold on
average for some 250 francs per ton in the Pas-de-Calais (Labrousse et al., 1970). At the same
time, the decision may have also been motivated by a desire to raise French prices and, thus,
quell agrarian unrest, particularly in the volatile western regions (Melvin, 1970).
What all of the preceding hopefully illustrates is that we cannot be as sanguine as
William Pitt who declared in 1800 that “it is clear from a deduction of facts that war of itself has
no evident and necessary connection with the dearness of provisions” (quoted in Rose, 1902, p.
66). In the following, a brief synopsis of the thoughts of economic historians on the topic will be
given in an effort to direct the empirical analysis of wartime commodity prices.
IV. Previous Explanations for the Behavior of Commodity Prices
Fortunately, there are a few leads provided by the economic history of Georgian England.
In one of the earliest contributions to the literature, Tooke (1838) suggested that of the myriad of
publications professing to have explained the behavior of English commodity prices during the
French Wars none had availed themselves to consider the effects of weather on agriculture
during the period. His volumes seem to be a catalog of catastrophes, underlining his main point
that “a greater proportion of unfavourable seasons [took place] in the interval between 1792 and
1819, than in an equal interval anterior or subsequent to that period” (p. 85). However, Tooke
himself was careful to stress the additional—and potentially interactive—effects of the war on
currency and trade flows. Some researchers, although acknowledging wartime disruptions, have
continued to maintain the primacy of the climate in explaining the heightened dispersion of
prices during the period (cf. Chambers and Mingay, 1966; Lamb, 1977; Libby, 1977; Mathias,
1983; O’Brien, 1989). At the same time, the connection between weather and prices has been
questioned on two fronts. First, and more generally, some researchers have cast doubt on the
possibility of isolating the effects of weather on prices, citing the large number of variables
involved in price formation (Brunner, 2002; Pfister, 1975; de Vries, 1981). Second, and more
pointedly, at least one economic historian has claimed that Tooke overestimated the effects of
weather, suggesting that “it is even possible that he may have assumed bad harvests in certain
years from the fact that corn prices were high” (Schumpeter, 1938, p. 26).
In light of the discussion in section III, a second obvious explanation for the behavior of
commodity prices is the various trade restrictions imposed by the English, French, and other

9

parties. And nowhere were these restrictions more acutely felt than in the trade in foodstuffs.
Moving from the position of a net-exporter to a net-importer of grains sometime in the 1760s,
both English and foreign commentators considered “food…as the weakest link in Britain’s chain
of defense” (Olson, 1963, p. 6). Heckscher was even more explicit in noting that “the question
of the dependence of Great Britain on imports from the European mainland has generally been
regarded as identical with the question of its provision with food…[and]…the importance of
Great Britain’s imports of foodstuffs…can practically be regarded as identical with her imports
of wheat” (1922, p. 336). This over-reliance on foreign sources of grain was made manifest in
the years 1795, 1800, and 1812 when adverse trade conditions combined with inclement weather
to produce widespread bread riots, threats to the person of the King pressing for peace, and the
highest grain prices ever recorded in England (Fay, 1921; Stern 1964; Thompson, 1971; author’s
calculations). Certain authors (Danson, 1894; Galpin, 1925; Sears, 1919) have emphasized the
degree to which shortages of foreign supply and a certain fetish of self-sufficiency gave rise to
feverish speculation and, hence, commodity price volatility.2 On the other hand, even as astute
an observer as Arthur Young felt “that imports could have only a psychological effect, being too
small to lower the home price of wheat” (Stern, 1964, p. 180). A final element to be considered
with respect to trade issues is the Continental System itself. More specifically, if it truly was
successful in inducing balance-of-payments difficulties for England, it would undoubtedly have
had a profound influence on the course of the exchange rate and, in turn, domestic prices of
imported goods such as grains.3
Another of the predominant themes in the economic history of the French Wars is the
effects of government military expenditures and borrowing. The levels of expenditures and
borrowing were certainly unprecedented with net annual additions to the war debt averaging
between 5.75 and 6.75% of national income (Williamson, 1985). The result of this borrowing
was that the face value of accumulated debt in 1820 stood in excess of £850 million (Clapham,
1920) with a corresponding market value of £700 million, or roughly two-times GNP (Clark,
2001). While most of the literature has focused on the possible effects of crowding-out and its
2

On this point, the recent work of O’Grada (2005, 2007) emphasizes the potential role of
speculation in alternately exacerbating or ameliorating commodity price volatility in a host of
settings, depending on the maturity of domestic markets and accompanying institutions.
3
In addition, the nominal exchange rate, being at least partially determined by English money
supply, may also reflect changes in monetary policy. See below.
10

implications for British industrialization (cf. Heim and Mirowski, 1987; Temin and Voth, 2005;
Williamson, 1984; and Wright, 1999), there remain a few avenues which have remained
unexplored.
First, research into commodity markets has long emphasized the interaction of arbitrage
across space and across time, with the interest rate helping to determine the level of storage and,
thus, the range of commodity prices between periods of production (Samuelson, 1957). The
basic idea is that storage behavior is governed by the costs of withholding goods from the market
until a future date. Apart from the physical deterioration of goods over time and the actual costs
of storing commodities, the other key variable will be the prevailing rate of interest which
represents the opportunity cost of not selling in the present, assuming that the proceeds of such a
sale can and will be invested in alternative assets. A number of economic historians have
successfully exploited the behavior of commodity prices to estimate prevailing interest rates (cf.
Brunt and Cannon, 2004; McCloskey and Nash, 1984; van Zanden, 2004). Potentially, this
procedure can be reversed, namely by using data on interest rates to help explain the behavior of
commodity prices. The implication is that if the French Wars led to higher interest rates and the
Samuelson model approximately holds, then the range of intra-annual commodity prices and,
thus, commodity price dispersion must have increased.
Second, the suspension of convertibility in 1797 has often been seen as an attempt to
monetize the debt with disastrous consequences for the dispersion of prices (Acworth, 1925;
Crouzet, 1958; Silberling, 1919).4 Monetized government expenditures are likely to register on
prices on two levels—a general inflationary effect and commodity-specific effects tied to civil or
military requisitions of foodstuffs and other raw materials, both of which are likely to vary
geographically depending on the composition of output and the degree of financial
intermediation at the local level. Both Schumpeter (1938) and Silberling (1923, 1924a, 1924b)
explicitly note the positive correlation between the level of expenditure and general—as well as
commodity-specific—price movements, respectively emphasizing the roles of the proportion of
borrowing-to-expenditure and advances by the Bank of England. This also suggests another
means by which warfare cum monetary expansion provides a link between changes in nominal
exchange rates and domestic commodity prices of internationally traded goods.

4

For a more nuanced view, see Bordo and White (1991).
11

Finally, more than a few researchers have suggested a role for wartime events in
determining the movement of specie prices or equivalently in this era, the nominal exchange rate
(cf. Crouzet, 1990; Mokyr and Savin, 1976; Neal, 1990; Silberling, 1919). While some historical
studies have been conducted on the effects of wartime news on exchange rates, particularly
during the U.S. Civil War (Guinnane et al., 1996; McCandless, 1996; Weidenmier, 2002), no
equivalent work has appeared on the effects of “news from the front” on commodity prices. The
intuition, in this case, is that the arrival—or accumulation—of news which reflects unfavorably
on the prospects of victory may initiate new rounds of speculation in commodity markets and
potentially raise the dispersion of prices. Thus, the potential explanations for the behavior of
commodity prices that will be considered below fall into four broad categories: weather, trade,
policy, and wartime events. In the following section, a brief motivation for and discussion of the
dependent and independent variables used will be provided.
V. Data
In order to explain the behavior of commodity prices, the first task is to define
appropriate measures which capture changes in the dispersion of prices. The commodity price
data employed is that underlying the recent work of Brunt and Cannon (2004) and described in
detail in Brunt and Cannon (2005). The Corn Laws of 1672 stipulated that every market town in
England and Wales submit weekly returns on the total revenues and quantities sold of corn and
related commodities. Using the London Gazette as their primary source, Brunt and Cannon have
reconstructed the weekly Corn Returns and, hence, prices for barley, beans, oats, and wheat for
the 52 counties of England and Wales plus London in the period from 1771 to 1820. In what
follows, only the data for the 40 English counties will be used as continuous series are not
available for the Welsh counties and London—the goal being to maintain as strict comparability
over time as possible.
Taking a cue from the international macro literature (Engel and Rogers, 1996), the basic
building block for the analysis will simply be the logged relative price in two counties,
ln  Pt i / Pt j  . Whereas Engel and Rogers difference this ratio between time t and t-2 and

calculate its standard deviation, we will take a more intuitive approach. Recently, Broda and
Weinstein (2008) have pointed out that this standard deviation term captures “Approximate
Relative PPP” in that it only measures changes in the percentage deviation of prices in two

12

locations. This property is generated by the fact that Engel and Rogers used city-specific CPIs
which are only available in index form and not comparable in levels. Broda and Weinstein
further suggest that in the case where exact price levels are available a more intuitive measure of
price dispersion is simply ln  Pt i / Pt j  , the absolute value of log of the price of good i in
location j relative to location k, itself averaged over an appropriate period of time. In what
follows, we utilize this average price dispersion measure as our dependent variable.
With the relative price data in hand, the average of the price ratio for two counties was
calculated for the four commodities, for every calendar year between 1771 and 1815 (t = 45), and
for all available unique pair-wise combinations of counties (n = 40*39/2 = 780). Apart from its
intuitive appeal as a measure of commodity price dispersion, this measure should also serve as a
good proxy for the level of trade costs separating locations. Thus, as market dis-integration
occurs, prices should diverge in the two counties, and one would expect successively higher
values of this variable.
Figures 1 through 4 chart the evolution of the preferred measure of commodity price
dispersion for barley, beans, oats, and wheat, averaging across all unique county-pairs in the
period from 1771 to 1815. The results are quite suggestive in that all the series exhibit a marked
upward swing dating from 1793, the beginning of hostilities. The wheat series, in particular, are
interesting for the fact that the French Wars came on the backdrop of a downward trend in price
dispersion throughout the 1770s and 1780s and for the fact that its successive peaks in 1795,
1800, 1805, and 1812 coincide precisely with the dates identified in the historical literature as the
years of greatest dearth in England. If any further doubt remains that the French Wars
contributed to the relative dis-integration of the English market, Table 1 addresses this issue
head-on. There, a simple t-test of the equality of the means in the two periods, 1771-1792 and
1793-1815, confirms that the French Wars were associated with heightened price dispersion
across all commodities, save beans.5 On an unconditional basis, the average increase in price
dispersion potentially attributable to the French Wars stands on the order of 5%. Of course, what
remains to be determined is the exact propagation mechanisms. First, control variables

5

An alternative approach would be to calculate a t-test for the equality of means for every county pair in the sample.
This exercise was conducted for the case of wheat; the resulting average value was 7.11, further confirming that the
French Wars period was associated with higher intranational price dispersion.
13

employed in the empirics are introduced. Then, the four likely suspects—namely, weather,
trade, policy, and wartime events—and their associated measures will be considered in turn.
Control Variables
The control variables employed below are measures of the great-circle distance
separating counties, their average population densities, as well as a limited set of their
geographical features, namely their adjacency to one another and whether or not they are situated
on the coast. The distance variable is calculated as the logged Euclidian distance between county
seats and like the other geographic controls is time-invariant. County area and population
figures are taken from Mitchell (1988), and the density figure is calculated as the logged average
of the ratio of population-to-area in counties i and j and varies across county-pairs and time.
Weather
The weather variables considered here are the annual means and standard deviations of
monthly rainfall and temperature taken from the Climatic Research Unit (1992) and Manley
(1974). These variables have previously been determined to generate the best fit in semiparametric estimations of the harvest-weather relationship by Khatri et al. (1998). The intuition
is that the state of the harvest will be a strong determinant of the prevailing dispersion of crop
prices. As both deficient or excessive rainfall and temperature will have adverse effects on
harvests and hence prices, a squared mean term will also be included. Of course, these variables
and their interpretation must be treated with some caution as all of the series have been generated
for one localized area, South-East England, and are, thus, county-pair invariant. While
agronomists and historians have long insisted on the importance of micro-climates in agriculture,
it is likely that the series can at least capture inter-annual variations in English weather, citing
their usual pattern of high correlation over relatively short distances (Bryson and Padoch, 1981).
Trade
English trade figures for wheat, barley, oats, and beans are taken from Marshall (1833).
The import figures reported there are comparable to those of Mitchell and Deane (1962) and
Schumpeter (1960). This source is also attractive in that it allows for the calculation of net

14

imports—that is, imports less exports—for all commodities except beans.6 Another trade-related
variable to be considered is the exchange rate for the GBP. Lacking a truly appropriate reference
currency, the decision was made to use the GBP-USD exchange rate in light of both the relative
isolation of the United States from the events of the French Wars and its burgeoning importance
in the English overseas grain trade. Annual means and standard deviations were computed from
the monthly U.S. series given in Schneider et al. (1991). Both the trade and exchange rate data
variables are county-pair invariant.
Policy
In assessing the effects of changes in interest rates induced by government expenditures,
monthly price data on 3% Consols underlying Neal (1990) are used to construct annual means
and standard deviations. The choice of the price of Consols is straightforward: these were the
primary vehicle for financing the war effort; and since they were zero-coupon bonds, their price
should accurately capture changes in the market rate of interest. The second class of variables
are those relating to monetary and fiscal disbursements. The particular variables of interest are
the means and standard deviations of Silberling’s quarterly series on Bank of England total
advances (1923) and the values of Schumpeter’s annual series on the level and composition of
the English national debt (1938), specifically the ratios of unfunded-to-total debt and revenue-toexpenses. In both cases, the variables under this category are county-pair invariant.
Wartime Events
Here, it is proposed that there are at least three variables which might have altered market
perceptions of the progress of the war and fed into the behavior of prices via speculation in
commodity markets. These are the levels of British and allied casualties in battle; the average
duration of battles; and the average rate of strategic loss in battle of the British and their allies.
All of these were calculated annually using Smith (1998). In order to ease the data entry
requirements, only incidents with 1000+ casualties on either side were coded. In total, over 350
incidents attained this threshold. Once again, the variables under this category are county-pair
invariant.

6

These were apparently exported only very rarely, in any case.
15

Summary Statistics and Correlations
Table 2 presents summary statistics for all dependent and independent variables used
below while Table 3 reproduces the correlation matrix for all independent variables.
VI. Empirics
Initial Exercises
The basic specification in this section is of the following form:
1.) Dispersionti , j  Dispersionti, 1j  1 ln(Disti , j )   2 ln(Densityi , j ,t )   3 Adjacencyi , j

  4 Coasti , j   o,i   o, j   i , j ,t ,
where Dispersion is defined as before as the average of logged relative prices in two counties in
a given calendar year and is assumed to follow an autoregressive process. The estimates are
corrected for potential heteroskedasticity and any remaining auto-correlation, suggesting that
OLS will be consistent. Additionally, standard errors are clustered on years to account for the
fact that many of our independent variables are county-pair invariant and, thus, their standard
errors may be downwardly biased if left uncorrected. The Dist term is the Euclidean distance
separating the county seats of i and j; the expectation is that dispersion should be increasing in
this variable. Density is the logged average population density of counties i and j. In this case, it
might be reasonable to expect either positive or negative effects. If we take a cue from the
literature on the gravity model of trade, it is generally found that trade flows between nations are
increasing in the density of populations as this proxies for the thickness of markets. In this light,
Dispersion would be negatively correlated with Density, that is, trade flows work to ameliorate
commodity price dispersion. At the same time, Density could capture diseconomies of scale in
marketing or congestion costs in transportation, resulting in a positive correlation with
Dispersion. Finally, the specification above includes a number of indicator variables: Adjacency
for whether counties i and j lay next to each other to capture potential changes in administrative
boundaries or transportation modes associated with crossing county borders; Coast for whether
counties i and j both lay on the coast to capture the possibility of coastal shipping linking the
two; and fixed effects for each county.
Benchmark estimates for wheat in the period from 1793 to 1815 can be found in Panel A
of Table 4. The coefficients conform to the priors given above: commodity price dispersion is
strongly persistent from year to year, increasing in distance, and decreasing in adjacency. To
16

give some sense of the magnitudes involved, a one standard deviation increase in logged distance
(=0.635) is predicted to increase the price dispersion measure by 0.198 standard deviations
(=0.028). Equivalently, adjacency is predicted to lower dispersion by 0.082 standard deviations
and coastal counties are predicted to have dispersion which is 0.108 standard deviations higher.
This last result on the Coast variable may seem paradoxical as we would generally associate
maritime transport with lower trade costs and, hence, commodity price dispersion. However, as
can be seen in the Appendix, this result is contingent upon the state of warfare. Finally, this
specification captures an appreciable amount of the variation of the dependent variable, in that
the R2 is a healthy 0.330.7
Panels B, C, and D of Table 4 consider the other commodities available from the London
Gazette, namely barley, beans, and oats. In general, the results are encouraging. In all four
commodity classes, commodity price dispersion is positively serially correlated, increasing in
distance, and smaller in the presence of a shared county border. In the case of oats, however,
there are no identifiable effects for coastal locations. This apparently reflects the fact that this
commodity with its low unit-value was not traded as extensively as wheat with the consequence
that most flows of oats were highly localized (Gras, 1915; Rogers, 1902). In what follows, the
focus will be concentrated on the results for wheat. This choice reflects a desire to keep the
exposition cleaner and the notion that the market for wheat best approximates general conditions
in the national market for commodities. Additionally, the interested reader can also consult the
paper’s Appendix which reports the results of exercises which pool across various periods and
regions.
Final Estimates
Table 5 reports the OLS estimates with the full set of independent variables and county
fixed effects. Generally, the results look reasonable. All the control variables—save the Density
variable—retain roughly the same coefficients as in Panel A of Table 4. The percentage of the
variation in average price dispersion explained by the independent variables is also high with an
7

In a specification without county fixed effects, the R2 drops to 0.299, suggesting that our
control variables—and not the county fixed effects—are doing most of the heavy lifting here.
Most of the explanatory power, however, is still in the cross-section as all the control variables
save one are time-invariant. It is only the density variable which has any time-varying
component, but this is relatively muted as it follows a smooth upward trend and is not punctuated
by the spikes seen in Figure 4.
17

R-squared value of 0.870. In terms of the two weather variables, rainfall and temperature, there
is evidence of a non-linear relationship, as the average and squared-average terms are both
significant. Both suggest that increases in average monthly rainfalls and temperatures—when
evaluated at their means—were associated with better harvests, and, thus, lower price
dispersion.8 Additionally, the standard deviation of rainfall is found to be positively associated
with commodity price dispersion.
Turning to the results on the trade variables, here, we find commodity price dispersion to
be decreasing in net imports, but with a rather strong and positive coefficient on the squared
term.9 In theory, net imports could be positively or negatively associated with commodity price
dispersion: positively if unsettled market conditions—that is, higher price dispersion—induced a
flow of imports into England; and negatively as the flow of imports could stabilize price
dispersion by augmenting domestic commodity stocks.10 Additionally, the table shows that
commodity price dispersion was decreasing in the level of the GBP exchange rate. This can be
thought of in two ways, either as the greater purchasing power of the GBP or the lack of balanceof-payment difficulties facilitating international transactions for grain. In any case, the most
important evidence comes from the standard deviation of the exchange rate. Any reasonable
prior would suggest that commodity price dispersion would be increasing in exchange rate
volatility, a result confirmed in the data.
On the fiscal and monetary policy variables, we find that the average Consol price is
negatively associated with commodity price dispersion. This makes intuitive sense as the Consol
is a zero-coupon bond, and its price should be negatively correlated with the market interest rate.
8

This result is masked by the positive coefficient on average monthly rainfall. However, given
the coefficient values, the inflection point is actually 67.4—that is, commodity price dispersion is
predicted to fall at all levels of rainfall greater than 67.4 centimeters. This can be compared to
the mean and minimum values of 78.56 and 63.70, respectively.
9
An increase in imports at its mean value of 0.545 would imply that price dispersion was
virtually unchanged. The regression coefficients imply that the effect of imports is upwardly
convex with a minimum at 0.462. That is, increases in imports from levels below the mean serve
to decrease price dispersion while increases of imports from levels above the mean are associated
with higher price dispersion.
10
Of course, as the discussion above suggests, there is a strong potential for endogeneity
between price dispersion and the flow of imports and, thus, biased estimates in such a
specification. Unfortunately, instrumenting imports with declarations of French naval blockades
and British shipping losses returned grossly imprecise estimates. The author thanks the editor
for highlighting this point.
18

Thus, Table 5 provides evidence that commodity price dispersion is positively related with the
level of the nominal interest rate. The results also suggest that dispersion is decreasing in the
level of Bank of England (BOE) advances and increasing in this variable’s standard deviation.
Interpreting the second result is straightforward as the volatility of money stocks is often taken as
a proxy for uncertainty over future rates of inflation (Devereux and Yetman, 2005). Interpreting
the first result seems more problematic, especially if we expect BOE advances to reflect the
general rate of inflation. In this case, it is important to remember that we are already
conditioning on two other variables—the ratios of unfunded-to-total debt and of revenue-toexpenses which are likely to capture any monetization of debt on the part of the British
government and which perform as expected with commodity price dispersion increasing in the
former and decreasing in the latter. It is argued that in this case the level of BOE advances
captures the ease of obtaining commercial credit and, thus, the facilitation of both domestic and
international trade flows (Acworth, 1925). The last independent variables to consider are those
relating to wartime events. All three variables—the annual allied causalities, the average
duration of battles and the rate of strategic loss in battle—contribute significantly to the
explanatory power of the regression in column A and enter into the estimates with the expected
signs.
Assessment of Wartime Forces
The final exercise in this section will be to provide a rough assessment of the relative
magnitude of the wartime forces in effect under the general headings of weather, trade, policy,
and wartime events. However, we are immediately confronted with the fact that the set of
independent variables is not only large but also may suffer from relatively high degrees of
correlation within groups as seen in Table 3. An obvious way forward is to employ factor
analysis to reduce the dimensionality of our independent variables. Factor analysis has a longstanding tradition in the psychometrics literature dating from at least the work of Spearman
(1904) and is becoming increasingly common-place in finance and macroeconomics. The
intuition is much like that of OLS regression: in a multi-dimensional space, factor analysis seeks
to identify successive hyper-planes (or factors) which capture increasing amounts of the shared
variation in the underlying variables. Once the most relevant factors are identified, it then

19

becomes possible to extract a single index thought to be representative of the variation in the
underlying data.
Table 6 reports the results of factor analysis on our four categories of independent
variables: weather, trade, policy, and wartime events. The shared outcome is that a very high
degree of the variation within these headings can be accounted for by a relatively small number
of factors in each case. Log-likelihood ratio tests also confirm the significance of the factors
under each heading. With these results in hand, it is then possible to collapse the independent
variables under each heading into a single factor score (or composite variable). These four factor
scores simply replace the long list of variables in the estimating equation for Table 5. Table 7
largely reproduces the results found there with respect to the control variables, albeit at a cost of
a slightly smaller R-squared and slightly larger root mean-squared-error. Unfortunately, the
relatively high correlation between the weather and trade indices on the one hand and the
government policy and wartime events indices on the other seems to confound precise estimation
for the weather and policy indices.
Regardless of the indices’ statistical significance, we can rank the indices in terms of
their quantitative significance. In the case of a one standard deviation increase in the weather
index (=0.998), commodity price dispersion is predicted to change by 0.069 standard deviations.
Likewise, trade, government policy, and wartime events are predicted to change commodity
price dispersion by 0.157, 0.062, and 0.132 standard deviations, respectively. Given these
figures along with those on statistical significance, the results suggest that the prime movers of
commodity price dispersion in the time of the French Wars were international trade and wartime
events.
VII. Conclusion
The purpose of this paper has been in determining the means by which warfare influences
the process of domestic commodity market dis-integration. It was argued that England during
the French Wars was an appropriate choice, given the prominent role of commodity markets in
English economic history, the rich set of data available, and the accidents of geography and
history which made for a clean analytic case study—that is, the English experience allows one to
abstract away from the physical destruction generally associated with wars. Following the lead
of earlier economic historians, four categories were suggested as likely sources of changes in the

20

degree of commodity market integration, namely weather, trade, policy, and wartime events.
The means of assessing the various explanatory variables were empirical exercises relating
commodity price dispersion to likely proxies for the four categories. Overall, it is suggested that
the primary vehicle for warfare to influence domestic commodity market integration was through
international trade linkages and the arrival of news regarding wartime events.
Apart from highlighting this empirical finding, we might do well to consider the broader
implications of this study. For one, it might inform the terms of an emerging debate on the
relation between well-functioning markets and economic growth. A recent literature has
emerged concerning the relative performance of markets and the determinants of economic
growth in the time of the Industrial Revolution, echoing in part the market-led growth model
proposed by Hicks (1969). The most prominent of these studies is the work of Shiue and Keller
(2007) which finds a statistical dead-heat between Western Europe and China in terms of
commodity market integration prior to 1780, but a real English lead among all the contenders.
Their conclusion seems to be a negative one, in the sense that the simultaneous occurrence of
sustained economic growth and an upswing in commodity market integration in Western Europe,
circa 1830, suggests to them that the latter is not a necessary condition for the former. In this
view, there seems to be little room for markets in explaining the nature or timing of the European
ascent to economic primacy in the nineteenth century. However, if the smooth functioning of
markets matters at all, then the fallout of the French Wars on the English domestic economy
could have profound implications for our understanding of the nature and timing of economic
growth.
What will be suggested in closing is a defense of well-functioning markets in
conditioning future growth prospects. Of course, this notion is not a new one to readers of
economic history. North and a series of co-authors has long argued that the particular
constellation of English institutions —inclusive of its markets—was the key to its burgeoning
economic success in the eighteenth century (North and Thomas, 1973; North and Weingast,
1989). Likewise, Acemoglu et al. (2005) have recently reminded us that the interactive effects
between markets, institutions, and growth can take a very long time to unfold. At the same time,
relatively little has been made of the role of domestic—as opposed to international—markets in
determining English output growth. Given the predominance of domestic trade at the time and
the disruptions of domestic markets attendant upon the French Wars, the degree to which the

21

domestic market got prices right could have been crucial to England’s growth prospects at the
time. In a sense, this work follows up on the sentiments of Adam Smith who felt that the causes
of English prosperity seem to be the “equal and impartial administration of justice” along with
“the liberty of exporting…to almost any foreign country and what perhaps is of still greater
importance, the unbounded liberty of transporting [goods] from any part of our own country to
any other…” (1976, p. 610). Of course, more fully explicating the causal links between growth,
institutions, and markets—both domestic and international—in the English case remains a task
for future work.

22

References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J.A. Robinson (2005), “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade,
Institutional Change, and Economic Growth.” American Economic Review 95(3), 546579.
Acworth, A.W. (1925), Financial Reconstruction in England 1815-1822. London: King & Son.
Albert, W. (1983), “The Turnpike Trusts.” In D.H. Aldcroft and M.J. Freeman (Ed.s),
Transportation in the Industrial Revolution. Manchester: Manchester University Press,
31-63.
Aldcroft, D.H. and M.J. Freeman (1983), “Coastal Shipping.” In D.H. Aldcroft and M.J.
Freeman (Ed.s), Transportation in the Industrial Revolution. Manchester: Manchester
University Press, 142-176.
Arbuthnot, J. (1773), An Inquiry into the Connection between the Present Price of Provisions
and the Size of Farms. London: Cadell and Sons.
Ashton, T.S. (1949), “The Standard of Life of the Workers in England 1790-1830.” Journal of
Economic History 9, 19-38.
Bogart, D. (2005a), “Did Turnpike Trusts Increase Transportation Investment in Eighteenth
Century England?” Journal of Economic History, 65(2), 439-468.
Bogart, D. (2005b), “Turnpike Trusts and the Transportation Revolution in Eighteenth Century
England.” Explorations in Economic History, 42(4), 479-508.
Bordo, M.D. and E.N. White (1991), “A Tale of Two Currencies: British and French Finance
during the Napoleonic Wars.” Journal of Economic History 51(2), 303-316.
Broda, C. and D.E. Weinstein (2008), “Understanding International Price Differences using
Barcode Data.” NBER Working Paper 14017.
Brunner, A.D. (2002), “El Niño and World Primary Commodity Prices.” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 84(1), 176-183.
Brunt, L. and E. Cannon (2004), “Do Banks Generate Financial Market Integration?”
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration.
Brunt, L. and E. Cannon (2005), “Asset Prices in the Industrial Revolution: Evidence from the
Grain Market.” Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration.
Bryson, R.A. and C. Padoch (1981), “On the Climates of History.” In R. Rotberg and T. Rabb
(Ed.s), Climate and History. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 3-18.
Buchinsky, M. and B. Polak (1993), “The Emergence of a National Capital Market in England,
1710-1880.” Journal of Economic History 53(1), 1-24.
Chambers, J.D. and G.E. Mingay (1966), The Agricultural Revolution 1750-1880. New York:
Schocken Books.
Clapham, J.H. (1920), “Europe after the Great Wars, 1816 and 1920.” Economic Journal
30(120), 423-435.
Clark, G. (2001), “Debt, Deficits, and Crowding Out.” European Review of Economic History,
5(3), 403-436.
Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia (1992), World Climate Disc – Global
Climatic Change Data. Cambridge: Chadwyck-Healey, Ltd.
Crafts, N.F.R. (1985), British Economic Growth during the Industrial Revolution. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Crouzet, F. (1958), L’Economie Britannique et le Blocus Continental. Paris: P.U.F.
Crouzet, F. (1990), Britain Ascendant. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cuenca Esteban, J. (2001), “The British Balance of Payments, 1772-1820: India Transfers and

23

War Finance.” Economic History Review 54(1), 58-86.
Cunningham, A. (1910), British Credit in the Last Napoleonic War. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Danson, J.T. (1894), Our Next War in its Commercial Aspects. London: Blades, East and
Blades.
Deane, P. and W.A. Cole (1967), British Economic Growth, 1688-1959. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Defoe, D. (1991), A Tour through the Whole Island of Great Britain. New Haven: Princeton
University Press.
Devereaux, M. and J. Yetman (2005), “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Pass-Through.”
University of British Columbia.
Duckham, B.F. (1983), “Canals and River Navigation.” In D.H. Aldcroft and M.J. Freeman
(Ed.s), Transportation in the Industrial Revolution. Manchester: Manchester University
Press, 100-141.
Dyos, H.J. and D.H. Aldcroft (1969), British Transport. Leicester: Leicester University Press.
Eagly, R.V. and V.K. Smith (1976), “Domestic and International Integration of the London
Money Market, 1731-1789.” Journal of Economic History 36(1), 198-212.
Engle, C. and J.H. Rogers (1996), “How Wide is the Border?” American Economic Review
86(4), 1112-1125.
Ejrnæs, M. and K.G. Persson (2006), “The Gains from Improved Market Efficiency: Trade
Before and After the Transatlantic Telegraph.” University of Copenhagen Discussion
Paper 06-19.
Fay, C.R. (1921), “Corn Prices and the Corn Laws.” Economic Journal 31(121), 17-27.
Federico, G. and K.G. Persson (2007), “Market Integration and Convergence in the World Wheat
Market, 1800-2000.” In T.J. Hatton, K.H. O’Rourke, and A.M. Taylor (Ed.s), The New
Comparative Economic History. Cambridge: MIT Press, 87-114.
Frankel, J.A. (1982), “The 1807-1809 Embargo Against Great Britain.” Journal of Economic
History 42(2), 291-308.
Galpin, W.F. (1925), The Grain Supply of England during the Napoleonic Period. New York:
MacMillan.
Glick, R. and A. M. Taylor (2010), “Collateral Damage: Trade Disruption and the Economic
Impact of War.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92(1), 102-127.
Granger C.W.J. and C.M. Elliott (1967), “A Fresh Look at Wheat Prices and Markets in the
Eighteenth Century.” Economic History Review 20(2), 257-265.
Gras, N.S.B. (1915), The Evolution of the English Corn Market from the Twelfth to the
Eighteenth Century. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Guinnane, T., H.S. Rosen, and K.L. Willard (1996), “Turning Points in the Civil War.” American
Economic Review, 86(4), 1001-1018.
Hadfield, C. (1950-1985), The Canals of the British Isles, volumes I-XIV. Newton Abbot: David
and Charles.
Haight, F.A. (1941), A History of French Commercial Policies. New York: Macmillan.
Heaton, H. (1941), “Non-Importation, 1806-1812.” Journal of Economic History 1(2), 178-198.
Heckscher, E.F (1922), The Continental System. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Heim, C.E. and P. Mirowski (1987), “Interest Rates and Crowding-Out during Britain’s
Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Economic History 47(1), 117-139.
Hicks, J.R. (1969), A Theory of Economic History. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

24

Imlah, A.H. (1958), Economic Elements in the Pax Britannica. New York: Russell & Russell.
Jacks, D.S. (2005), “Intra- and International Commodity Market Integration in the Atlantic
Economy, 1800-1913.” Explorations in Economic History, 42(3), 381-413.
Jacks, D.S. (2006), “What Drove 19th Century Commodity Market Integration?” Explorations in
Economic History 43(3), 383-412.
Kelly, M. (1997), “The Dynamics of Smithian Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(3),
939-964.
Khatri, Y., S. Solomou, and W. Wu (1998), “Weather and Fluctuations in Agricultural Output,
1867-1913.” Research in Economic History 18, 83-102.
Labrousse, E., R. Romano, and F.-G. Dreyfus (1970), Le Prix du Froment en France au Temps
de la Monnaie Stable (1726-1913). Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N.
Lamb, H.H. (1977), Climate: Present, Past and Future, volume II. London: Meuthen.
Libby, L.M. (1977), “Correlation of Historic Climate with Historic Prices and Wages.” Indian
Journal of Meterology, Hydrology and Geophysics, 28(2), 247-250.
Lindert, P.H. and J.G. Williamson (1983), “English Workers’ Living Standards during the
Industrial Revolution.” Economics History Review, 36(1), 1-25.
Manley, G. (1974), “Central England Temperatures: Monthly Means, 1659 to 1973.” Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 100(3), 389-405.
Marshall, J. (1833), A Digest of All the Accounts. London: J. Haddon.
Mathias, P. (1983), The First Industrial Nation. London: Methuen.
McCandless, G.T. (1996), “Money, Expectations, and the U.S. Civil War.” American Economic
Review, 86(3), 661-671.
McCloskey, D.N. and J. Nash (1984), “Corn at Interest.” American Economic Review, 74(1),
174-187.
Melvin, E. (1970), Napoleon’s Navigation System. New York: AMS Press.
Mitchell, B.R. and P. Deane (1962), Abstract of British Historical Statistics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, B.R. (1988), British Historical Statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mokyr, J. and N.E. Savin (1976), “Stagflation in Historical Perspective.” Research in Economic
History, 1, 198-259.
Neal, L. (1990), The Rise of Financial Capitalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nicholas, S. and R.H. Steckel (1991), “Heights and Living Standards during the Early Years of
Industrialization, 1770-1815.” Journal of Economic History, 51(4), 937-957.
North, D.C. and R.P. Thomas (1973), The Rise of the Western World. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
North, D.C. and B. Weingast (1989), “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of
Institutions Governing Public Choice in the Seventeenth Century England.” Journal of
Economic History 51(1), 23-46.
O’Brien, P.K. (1989), “The Impact of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, 1793-1815, on
the Long-Run Growth of the British Economy.” Review, 12(3), 335-395.
O’Connel, P.G.J. and S. J.Wei (1996), “The Bigger They Are, the Harder They Fall: Retail Price
Differences across U.S. Cities.” Journal of International Economics 56(1), 21-53.
O’Grada, C. (2005), “Markets and Famine in Pre-Industrial Europe.” Journal of Interdisciplinary
History 36(2), 143-166.
O’Grada, C. (2007), “Making Famine History.” Journal of Economic Literature 45(1), 5-38.
Olson, M. (1963), The Economics of the Wartime Shortage. Durham: Duke University Press.

25

O’Rourke, K.H. and J.G. Williamson (2002), “After Columbus: Explaining Europe’s Overseas
Trade Boom, 1500-1800.” Journal of Economic History 62(2), 417-456.
O’Rourke, K.H. and J.G. Williamson (2004), “Once More: When Did Globalisation Begin?”
European Review of Economic History 8(1), 109-117.
O’Rourke, K.H. (2006), “The Worldwide Economic Impact of the French Revolutionary and
Napoleonic Wars.” Journal of Global History 1(1), 123-149.
O’Rourke, K. H. (2007), “War and Welfare: Britain, France and the United States 1807-14,”
Oxford Economic Papers Supplementary Issue 59: i8-i30.
Pfister, C. (1975), Agrarkonjunktur und Witterungsverlauf im westlichen Schweizer Mittelland
1755-1797. Bern: Lang Druck AG Liebefeld.
Rogers, J.E.T. (1887), A History of Agriculture and Prices in England, volume VI. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Rogers, J.E.T. (1902), A History of Agriculture and Prices in England, volume VII. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Rose, J.H. (1902), “Our Food Supply in the Napoleonic War.” Monthly Review, 63-76.
Ruppenthal, R. (1943), “Denmark and the Continental System.” Journal of Modern History
15(1), 7-23.
Samuelson, P.A. (1957), “Intertemporal Price Equilibrium.” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 79,
181-219.
Schneider, J., O. Schwarzer, and F. Zellfelder (1991), Währungen der Welt I, Teilband I.
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Schumpeter, E.B. (1938), “English Prices and Public Finance, 1660-1822.” Review of Economic
Statistics 20(1), 21-37.
Schumpeter, E.B. (1960), English Overseas Trade Statistics 1697-1808. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Sears, L.M. (1919), “British Industry and the American Embargo.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 34(1), 88-113.
Shiue, C.H. and W. Keller (2007), “Markets in China and Europe on the Eve of the Industrial
Revolution.” American Economic Review, 97(4), 1189-1216.
Silberling, N.J. (1919), “British Financial Experience 1790-1830.” Review of Economic
Statistics, 1(4), 282-97.
Silberling, N.J. (1923), “British Prices and Business Cycles, 1779-1850.” Review of Economic
Statistics, 5(2), 223-247.
Silberling, N.J. (1924a), “Financial and Monetary Policy of Great Britain during the Napoleonic
Wars.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 38(2), 214-233.
Silberling, N.J. (1924b), “Financial and Monetary Policy of Great Britain during the Napoleonic
Wars.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 38(3), 397-439.
Smith, A. (1976), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Smith, D. (1998), The Greenhill Napoleonic Wars Data Book. London: Greenhill Books.
Spearman, C. (1904), “General Intelligence Objectively Determined and Measured.” American
Journal of Psychology 15(1), 201-293.
Stern, W.M. (1964), “The Bread Crisis in Britain, 1795-96.” Economica, 31(122), 168-187.
Stuart Jones, E.H. (1950), The Last Invasion of Britain. Cardiff: University of Wales Press.
Studer, R. (2009), “Does Trade Explain Europe’s Rise? Geography, Market Size and Economic
Development.” London School of Economics, Department of Economic History Working

26

Paper 129/09.
Temin, P. and H.J. Voth (2005), “Credit Rationing and Crowding Out during the Industrial
Revolution.” Explorations in Economic History 42(3), 325-348.
Thompson, E.P. (1971), “The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eighteenth Century.”
Past and Present 50(1), 76-136.
Tooke, T. (1838), A History of Prices and of the State of Circulation from 1793 to 1837,
volume I. London: Longman, Orme, Brown, Green and Longmans.
Vries, Jan de (1981), “Measuring the Impact of Climate on History.” In R. Rotberg and T. Rabb
(Ed.s), Climate and History. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 19-50.
Weidenmier, M.D. (2002), “Turning Points in the Civil War: Views from the Grayback Market.”
Southern Economic Journal 68(4), 875-890.
Wigley, T.M.L. and T.C. Atkinson (1977), “Dry Years in South-East England since 1698.”
Nature 265(5593), 431-434.
Willan, T.S. (1936), River Navigation in England, 1600-1750. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Williamson, J.G. (1984), “Why Was British Growth So Slow during the Industrial Revolution?”
Journal of Economic History 44(3), 687-712.
Williamson, J.G. (1985), Did British Capitalism Breed Inequality? Boston: Allen & Unwin.
Wright, J.F. (1999), “British Government Borrowing in Wartime, 1750-1815.” Economic History
Review 52(2), 355-361.
Young, A. (1768), A Six Weeks Tour through the Southern Counties of England and Wales.
London: W. Nicoll.
Young, A. (1812), An Enquiry into the Progressive Value of Money in England as Marked by the
Price of Agricultural Products. London: B. McMillan.
Zanden, J.L. van (2004), “On the Efficiency of Markets for Agricultural Products: Rice Prices
and Capital Markets in Java, 1823-1853.” Journal of Economic History 64(4), 10281056.

27

Appendix
Having considered the cross-commodity properties of the control estimation, here we will
take a look at the temporal stability of the estimates to ensure that these are not simply generated
by wartime conditions. Panel A of Table A1 reports the results for the non-wartime period from
1771 to 1792 while Panel B repeats the results for the period from 1793 to 1815 for ease of
comparison. Naturally, the English saw their fair share of warfare during the period from 1771
to 1792, including—but not limited to—the American Revolutionary, Anglo-Mysore, and
Anglo-Maratha Wars. The argument here is that these conflicts were on the whole periphery—as
their names would imply—and minimally disrupted the traditional financial and trade flows of
the English. All the coefficients are estimated to be of the same sign and, generally, of the same
magnitude before as opposed to during the French Wars.
However, there is one exception. The coefficient on Coast is strongly insignificant
before the wars, suggesting that coastal counties were no better off on average in times of peace.
However, the coefficient on Coast is positive and strongly significant during the wars. This can
be explained by two observations. First, although we condition on distance, this is a linear
measure while most coastal routes would have been decidedly non-linear—here, a good example
might be Lancashire and Lincoln which has a measured distance of 117 kilometers, but which
would be separated by some 1500 kilometers of coast. In other words, the Coast variable may be
too coarse to capture any advantages enjoyed by a very small subset of coastal counties,
explaining its insignificance in the pre-war years. At the same time, the harassment of coastal
shipping during the French Wars is likely to have driven freight and insurance costs up enough
for this subset to register in the data, explaining its significance in the war years.
This result can be seen a little more clearly if we control for geographical variation in the
Coast variable by constructing separate indicators for the east, west, and south coasts of England.
The results from including these indicators in the regressions for during the war are presented in
Panel C of Table A1. For the wartime estimation, we still pick up the positive Coast effect, but it
is clearly limited to the southern coast of England—precisely the area which contemporaries and
historians have identified as being the most susceptible to French raiding parties (Aldcroft and
Freeman, 1983; Mokyr and Savin, 1976). On the other hand, the littoral counties of the North
Seas in particular were largely protected, as their conditional mean is predicted to be 0.014 (or
over 15%) lower than that of the full sample (0.094).
Finally, there is the potential that the estimation strategy is not fully controlling for crosssectional correlation in the error terms. The intuition here is that by using price data for all
county-pairs the standard errors on the regression coefficients may be biased downward as the
relative prices in certain county-pairs may not be independent of those in a second county-pair.
For example, we include price information on the county-pairs of Lancashire-Lincolnshire,
Lancashire-Yorkshire, and Lincolnshire-Yorkshire when it may be econometrically sufficient to
consider only the first two pairs, as the third pair might provide no more independent
information. A potential corrective is to estimate equation 1.) above but only on a subset of
county-pairs. What is needed in this case is an appropriate reference point. This is not a difficult
task, as Defoe writing in the 1720s noted that “this whole Kingdom, as well the people, as the
land, and even the sea, in every part of it, are employed to furnish something…to supply the city
of London with provisions” (1991, p. 12) and that, above all, London corn was “provided in all
counties of England” (Ibid., p. 397). Accordingly, in Panel A of Table A2, the estimation results
are reported for only those county-pairs which include Middlesex. Middlesex was chosen as the
numéraire as price data for London is only available for the period from 1771 to 1793. However,

28

given that the correlation between the two series for that period is 0.94, the substitution of
Middlesex seems justified. In general, these match the general patterns and magnitudes of Panel
B, the full-sample results. The only deviation is the insignificance on the Coast variable in Panel
A. However, in this specification, this is not strictly speaking the same variable as in Panel B, in
that Middlesex is not a coastal county—that is, Coast is no longer bilaterally defined, but rather
enters as a one when the other county in the pair is on the coast. In sum, the results suggest that
cross-sectional correlation is not unduly biasing the baseline estimates.

29

Table A1: Initial Estimates across Periods
Dependent variable: average price dispersion
Panel A:
Wheat, 1771-1792, with county fixed effects
Std. Err.
p-value
Coefficient
Lagged value
0.409570
0.052831
0.00
Distance
0.012350
0.002454
0.00
Density
-0.019447
0.030499
0.53
Adjacency
-0.005130 0.001189
0.00
Coast
0.000711
0.001854
0.71

Panel B:
Wheat, 1793-1815, with county fixed effects
Coefficient
Std. Err.
p-value
Lagged value
0.402456
0.068298
0.00
Distance
0.015580
0.003084
0.00
Density
-0.018939
0.028654
0.52
Adjacency
-0.004134 0.001222
0.00
Coast
0.005440
0.002191
0.02

Panel C:
Wheat, 1793-1815, with county fixed effects
Coefficient
Std. Err.
p-value
Lagged value
0.390818
0.068870
0.00
Distance
0.013831
0.002957
0.00
Density
-0.019391
0.028671
0.51
Adjacency
-0.004986 0.001255
0.00
Coast
0.009906
0.002628
0.00
East coast
-0.024299 0.007492
0.01
West coast
-0.009474 0.004711
0.06
South coast
-0.003005
0.003705
0.43

N
R-squared
Root MSE

N
R-squared
Root MSE

N
R-squared
Root MSE

16380
0.326
0.041

14820
0.330
0.041

14820
0.335
0.041

NB: Fixed effects suppressed; OLS estimation with heteroskedasticity and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors clustered on years.

30

Table A2: Initial Estimates across Regions
Dependent variable: average price dispersion
Panel A:
Wheat, 1793-1815, with county fixed effects
County-pairs including Middlesex county only
Std. Err.
p-value
Coefficient
Lagged value
0.113108
0.068304
0.01
Distance
0.006838
0.002454
0.01
Density
-0.031784
0.024481
0.21
Adjacency
-0.009723 0.005064
0.07
Coast
-0.001219
0.010399
0.91

Panel B:
Wheat, 1793-1815, with county fixed effects
All county-pairs
Coefficient
Std. Err.
p-value
Lagged value
0.402456
0.068298
0.00
Distance
0.015580
0.003084
0.00
Density
-0.018939
0.028654
0.52
Adjacency
-0.004134 0.001222
0.00
Coast
0.005440
0.002191
0.02

N
R-squared
Root MSE

N
R-squared
Root MSE

741
0.411
0.031

14820
0.330
0.041

NB: Fixed effects suppressed; OLS estimation with heteroskedasticity and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors clustered on years.

31

0.16

Figure 1: Average Price Dispersion for Barley,
1771-1815

0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
1770 1775 1780 1785 1790 1795 1800 1805 1810 1815

0.16

Figure 2: Average Price Dispersion for Beans,
1771-1815

0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
1770 1775 1780 1785 1790 1795 1800 1805 1810 1815

32

0.16

Figure 3: Average Price Dispersion for Oats,
1771-1815

0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
1770 1775 1780 1785 1790 1795 1800 1805 1810 1815

0.12

Figure 4: Average Price Dispersion for Wheat,
1771-1815

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
1770 1775 1780 1785 1790 1795 1800 1805 1810 1815

33

Table 1: Average Price Dispersion and the French Wars
1771-1792

Mean
Variance
Observations

Barley
0.1232
0.0044
17160

Beans
0.1548
0.0085
14528

Oats
0.1299
0.0059
17159

Wheat
0.0915
0.0026
17160

1793-1815

Mean
Variance
Observations

0.1324
0.0055
15600

0.1557
0.0091
11808

0.1425
0.0070
15539

0.0943
0.0025
15600

11.84

0.74

14.12

4.85

Value of t-test for
equality of means:

34

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Average price dispersion (wheat only)
Distance
Density
Adjacency
Coast
Average monthly rainfall (centimeters)
Average rainfall, squared
Rainfall, standard deviation
Average monthly temperature (degrees Fahrenheit)
Average temperature, squared
Temperature, standard deviation
Net imports, millions of quarters
Net imports, squared
Average annual exchange rate
Exchange rate, standard deviation
Average monthly Consol price
Average quarterly BOE advances
BOE advances, standard deviation
Ratio of unfunded-to-total debt
Ratio of revenue-to-expenses
Annual allied casualties (1000s)
Average duration of battles
Rate of strategic loss in battle

Observations
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820
14820

Mean
0.094
5.108
-1.785
0.119
0.244
78.56
6227.59
36.92
48.13
2317.59
5.231
0.545
0.473
100.86
2.088
61.97
25.32
1.306
4.939
0.681
50.64
12.20
0.521

Standard Deviation
0.050
0.635
0.640
0.324
0.429
7.49
1170.73
8.07
1.05
100.84
0.482
0.419
0.649
6.58
1.102
4.94
10.49
0.787
1.470
0.149
45.82
11.78
0.197

Minimum Maximum
0.012
0.378
1.282
6.372
-2.804
1.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
63.70
91.12
4057.69
8302.85
18.50
47.67
45.95
49.80
2111.40
2480.24
4.500
6.320
0.004
1.455
0.000
2.117
84.58
109.49
0.838
5.008
50.69
68.45
10.50
42.93
0.310
3.180
1.721
7.355
0.350
0.880
3.40
153.17
1.00
36.50
0.000
0.860

35

Table 3: Correlation Matrix

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)

Distance
Density
Adjacency
Coast
Average monthly rainfall (centimeters)
Average rainfall, squared
Rainfall, standard deviation
Average monthly temperature (degrees Fahrenheit)
Average temperature, squared
Temperature, standard deviation
Net imports, millions of quarters
Net imports, squared
Average annual exchange rate
Exchange rate, standard deviation
Average monthly Consol price
Average quarterly BOE advances
BOE advances, standard deviation
Ratio of unfunded-to-total debt
Ratio of revenue-to-expenses
Annual allied casualties (1000s)
Average duration of battles
Rate of strategic loss in battle

(1)
1.00
-0.12
-0.58
0.28
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(2)

(3)

1.00
0.03
-0.15
0.00
0.00
-0.05
-0.05
-0.05
-0.04
-0.01
-0.01
-0.04
0.06
0.02
0.12
0.06
0.08
0.09
0.04
0.03
0.00

1.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(4)

1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22)
|r|=(.66, 1.00)
|r|=(.33, .66)
|r|=(0, .33)

1.00
1.00
0.44
-0.06
-0.05
-0.19
-0.14
-0.10
-0.07
0.16
-0.01
-0.05
-0.30
0.26
0.16
0.06
0.16
0.24

1.00
0.43
-0.07
-0.06
-0.21
-0.14
-0.10
-0.08
0.18
-0.02
-0.06
-0.29
0.24
0.15
0.06
0.16
0.24

1.00
0.11
0.11
0.08
0.07
0.10
-0.16
-0.33
-0.03
-0.34
-0.52
0.03
-0.27
0.18
0.19
0.16

1.00
1.00
-0.10
0.02
0.04
0.23
-0.05
-0.13
-0.39
-0.28
-0.32
-0.18
-0.32
-0.23
0.09

1.00
-0.11
0.02
0.04
0.23
-0.05
-0.13
-0.39
-0.28
-0.32
-0.17
-0.32
-0.24
0.09

1.00
-0.02
-0.02
0.23
-0.08
0.11
-0.25
-0.24
0.12
-0.28
-0.27
0.30
0.11

1.00
0.92
0.03
-0.09
0.06
-0.03
0.02
-0.06
-0.10
0.02
-0.04
-0.05

1.00
0.03
-0.06
0.11
0.00
0.02
-0.01
-0.05
-0.01
-0.02
-0.06

1.00
-0.32
0.13
-0.41
0.15
-0.27
0.14
-0.54
-0.41
-0.07

1.00
0.10
0.46
0.05
0.34
0.07
0.29
0.24
0.35

1.00
0.20
0.21
0.51
0.38
0.08
0.25
-0.07

1.00
0.50
0.67
0.60
0.39
0.28
0.01

1.00
0.10
0.41
-0.24
-0.13
-0.26

1.00
0.52
0.45
0.51
0.12

1.00
0.07 1.00
-0.06 0.23 1.00
-0.13 0.25 0.26 1.00

36

Table 4: Initial Estimates across Commodities
Dependent variable: average price dispersion
Panel A:
Wheat, 1793-1815, with county fixed effects
Std. Err.
p-value
Coefficient
Lagged value
0.402456
0.068298
0.00
Distance
0.015580
0.003084
0.00
Density
-0.018939
0.028654
0.52
Adjacency
-0.004134 0.001222
0.00
Coast
0.005440
0.002191
0.02

Panel B:
Barley, 1793-1815, with county fixed effects
Coefficient
Std. Err.
p-value
Lagged value
0.343950
0.069875
0.00
Distance
0.024820
0.003904
0.00
Density
-0.063345
0.046431
0.19
Adjacency
-0.004265 0.001613
0.02
Coast
0.009424
0.003688
0.02

N
R-squared
Root MSE

N
R-squared
Root MSE

14820
0.330
0.041

14820
0.334
0.060

Panel C:
Beans, 1793-1815, with county fixed effects
Std. Err.
p-value
Coefficient
Lagged value
0.410292
0.066774
0.00
Distance
0.028128
0.005646
0.00
Density
-0.064685
0.055146
0.26
Adjacency
-0.005087 0.002166
0.03
Coast
0.009288
0.004589
0.06

Panel D:
Oats, 1793-1815, with county fixed effects
Coefficient
Std. Err.
Lagged value
0.463338
0.067399
Distance
0.005874
0.002485
Density
0.003935
0.039005
Adjacency
-0.017064 0.003316
Coast
0.000886
0.004142

N
R-squared
Root MSE

N
R-squared
Root MSE

11180
0.385
0.076

p-value
0.00
0.03
0.92
0.00
0.83

14760
0.433
0.063

NB: Fixed effects suppressed; OLS estimation with heteroskedasticity and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors clustered on years.

37

Table 5: Final Estimates
Dependent variable: average price dispersion

Lagged value
Distance
Density
Adjacency
Coast
Average monthly rainfall (centimeters)
Average rainfall, squared
Rainfall, standard deviation
Average monthly temperature (degrees Fahrenheit)
Average temperature, squared
Temperature, standard deviation
Net imports, millions of quarters
Net imports, squared
Average annual exchange rate
Exchange rate, standard deviation
Average monthly Consol price
Average quarterly BOE advances
BOE advances, standard deviation
Ratio of unfunded-to-total debt
Ratio of revenue-to-expenses
Annual allied casualties (1000s)
Average duration of battles
Rate of strategic loss in battle
N
R-squared
Root MSE

Country fixed effects
Coefficient
Std. Err.
p-value
0.409311
0.061051
0.00
0.015672
0.002988
0.00
0.021943
0.007723
0.01
-0.003639
0.001135
0.01
0.005545
0.002214
0.02
0.006334
0.002298
0.01
-0.000047
0.000016
0.01
0.000914
0.000011
0.00
-0.072360
0.015121
0.00
0.004581
0.000792
0.00
-0.001167
0.001238
0.36
-0.055145
0.009407
0.00
0.059694
0.006950
0.00
-0.000771
0.000207
0.00
0.013939
0.001038
0.00
-0.001793
0.000168
0.00
-0.005586
0.000778
0.00
0.018301
0.001653
0.00
0.009485
0.000281
0.00
-0.060845
0.004014
0.00
0.000080
0.000016
0.00
0.000150
0.000064
0.03
0.049244
0.001022
0.00
14820
0.870
0.039

NB: Fixed effects suppressed; OLS estimation with heteroskedasticity and auto-correlation
consistent standard errors clustered on years.

38

Table 6: Factor Analysis
Method: principal factors
Weather; N=14820; retained factors=4

Factor1
Factor2
Factor3
Factor4
Factor5
Factor6

Eigenvalue
2.36
2.04
0.15
0.06
0.00
0.00

Percentage of variation
explained by factor
0.51
0.44
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.00

Cumulative variation
explained by factors
0.51
0.96
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00

Likelihood ratio test of independence vs. saturation: chi2(15) = 0.00002; Prob>chi2 = 0.0000
Trade; N=14820; retained factors=2

Factor1
Factor2
Factor3
Factor4

Eigenvalue
1.98
0.37
-0.01
-0.15

Percentage of variation
explained by factor
0.91
0.17
0.00
-0.07

Cumulative variation
explained by factors
0.91
1.07
1.07
1.00

Likelihood ratio test of independence vs. saturation: chi2(15) = 0.00045; Prob>chi2 = 0.0000
Policy; N=14820; retained factors=3

Factor1
Factor2
Factor3
Factor4
Factor5

Eigenvalue
2.61
0.65
0.16
-0.02
-0.18

Percentage of variation
explained by factor
0.81
0.20
0.05
-0.01
-0.06

Cumulative variation
explained by factors
0.81
1.02
1.06
1.06
1.00

Likelihood ratio test of independence vs. saturation: chi2(15) = 0.00042; Prob>chi2 = 0.0000
Wartime events; N=14820; retained factors=1

Factor1
Factor2
Factor3

Eigenvalue
0.17
-0.04
-0.09

Percentage of variation
explained by factor
4.64
-1.09
-2.54

Cumulative variation
explained by factors
4.64
3.54
1.00

Likelihood ratio test of independence vs. saturation: chi2(3) = 280.85; Prob>chi2 = 0.0000

39

Table 7: Final Estimates with Principal Factors as Regressors
Dependent variable: average price dispersion

Lagged value
Distance
Density
Adjacency
Coast
Weather
Trade
Policy
Wartime events
N
R-squared
Root MSE

OLS
(county fixed effects)
Std. Err.
p-value
Coefficient
0.405402
0.063570
0.00
0.015832
0.002993
0.00
0.033933
0.008054
0.00
-0.003536
0.001147
0.01
0.005621
0.002197
0.02
0.003477
0.002766
0.23
0.008035
0.002301
0.00
-0.003273
0.003416
0.35
-0.017303
0.006691
0.02
14820
0.861
0.040

NB: Fixed effects suppressed; OLS estimation with heteroskedasticity and auto-correlation
consistent standard errors clustered on years.

40

