                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DECOMPOSING THE GREAT TRADE COLLAPSE:
             PRODUCTS, PRICES, AND QUANTITIES IN THE 2008-2009 CRISIS

                                            Mona Haddad
                                            Ann Harrison
                                          Catherine Hausman

                                         Working Paper 16253
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16253


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2010




We thank Hiau Looi Kee, Brent Neiman, Daria Taglioni, and Hans Timmer for valuable comments.
We thank Caroline Freund and Matias David Horenstein for the use of the Tradewatch Data. This
paper is part of a World Bank research project on exports and growth supported in part by the governments
of Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom through the Multidonor Trust Fund for Trade and Development.
This article reflects the views of the authors and not necessarily those of the World Bank or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Mona Haddad, Ann Harrison, and Catherine Hausman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Decomposing the Great Trade Collapse: Products, Prices, and Quantities in the 2008-2009
Crisis
Mona Haddad, Ann Harrison, and Catherine Hausman
NBER Working Paper No. 16253
August 2010
JEL No. F1

                                               ABSTRACT

We identify a new set of stylized facts on the 2008-2009 trade collapse that we hope can be used to
shed light on the importance of demand and supply-side factors in explaining the fall in trade. In particular,
we decompose the fall in international trade into product entry and exit, price changes, and quantity
changes for imports by Brazil, the European Union, Indonesia, and the United States. When we aggregate
across all products, most of the countries analyzed experienced a decline in new products, a rise in
product exit, and falls in quantity for product lines that continued to be traded. The evidence suggests
that the intensive rather than extensive margin mattered the most, consistent with studies of other countries
and previous recessionary periods. On average, quantities declined and prices fell. However, these
average effects mask enormous differences across different products. Price declines were driven primarily
by commodities. Within manufacturing, while most quantity changes were negative, in most cases
price changes moved in the opposite direction. Consequently, within manufacturing, there is some
evidence consistent with the hypothesis that supply side frictions played a role. For the United States,
price increases were most significant in sectors which are typically credit constrained.


Mona Haddad                                           Catherine Hausman
World Bank                                            Department of Agricultural
1818 H Street, N.W.                                    and Resource Econonmics
Washington, D.C. 20433                                University of California, Berkeley
mhaddad@worldbank.org                                 210 Giannini Hall
                                                      Berkeley, California 94720
Ann Harrison                                          calmirall@berkeley.edu
Department of Agricultural
 and Resource Econonmics
University of California, Berkeley
210 Giannini Hall,
Berkeley, California 94720
and The World Bank
and also NBER
aharrison2@worldbank.org
1. Introduction



        As has been widely documented, the world-wide economic crisis of 2008 and 2009 was

accompanied by a severe fall in international trade. Baldwin (2009) characterizes the collapse as

“sudden, severe, and synchronized… the sharpest in recorded history and deepest since WWII.”

A number of hypotheses exist to describe what caused the collapse and why it became so

widespread and deep (for summaries, see Baldwin 2009 and CEA 2010). In addition to the fall in

aggregate demand, a number of supply-side factors may have played a role. Anecdotal evidence

abounds that trade finance was restricted, which could have resulted in a decline in trade from

the supply side. Others have noted that with the globalization of supply-chains, a fall in

manufactures could lead to an outsized fall in total trade, particularly if supply chains are

disrupted. Finally, protectionism rose, although not to the extent that was initially feared.

        The speed and durability of the recovery could depend on which margin, extensive or

intensive,2 has been the most affected by the crisis, and by how fast it responds to fiscal stimulus.

For VOXEU, Peter Schott wrote in November 2009 that “If the current ‘shock’ to US trade is

similar to those that have occurred before, most of the decline in exports and imports we’ve seen

is due to less intense trade rather than firm and firm-product exit. To the extent that this is true,

trade will bounce back relatively quickly once conditions improve. It is of course possible that

the severe shortage of credit available to firms over the past year has led to a higher-than usual

share of harder-to-reverse firm exit, potentially dampening the speed of recovery”.

        As indicated by Schott, if there are significant fixed costs associated with exporting or

importing new products, then identifying whether most of the changes in trade were on the

2
 The intensive margin refers to changes in the value of exports due to changes in the quantities and/or prices of
already exported goods. The extensive margin refers to changes in the value of exports due to changes in the number
of goods exported and/or changes in the number of destinations to which a country exports old or new goods.

                                                                                                                 2
intensive margin is useful in predicting the speed of the recovery. There has also been

substantial interest in identifying the role of demand shocks versus supply shocks in explaining

the largest collapse in world trade since the 1930s. Supporters of the demand shock hypothesis

argue that the collapse in trade has been the result of a synchronized postponement of purchases,

especially of durable consumer and investment products. By contrast, supporters of the supply

shock hypothesis suggest that the collapse in trade has been a consequence of the sudden

financial arrest, which froze global credit markets and spilled over on the specialized financial

instruments that finance international trade.

       In this paper, we identify a new set of stylized facts on the 2008-2009 trade collapse that

we hope can be used to shed light on the importance of demand and supply-side factors in

explaining the fall in trade. In particular, we decompose the fall in international trade into

product entry and exit, price changes, and quantity changes for imports by Brazil, the European

Union, Indonesia, and the United States. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to decompose

the trade collapse at the product level into changes in prices and quantities, as well as entry and

exit. Our approach is inspired by earlier work analyzing the 1997 Asian crisis by Bernard,

Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2009). However, we go one step further: we decompose the

observed changes in trade at the intensive margin into price and quantity changes.

       Our ability to identify what happened to traded prices and quantities between 2008 and

2009 allows us to suggest a new way of identifying the importance of demand versus supply

factors in contributing to the observed fall in trade. We would expect that if the decline in trade

was mostly driven by a negative demand shock, then both prices and quantities would be

negatively affected. However, if supply side shocks were important, with a reduction in trade

credit leading to a reduction in supply of traded goods independently of the negative demand



                                                                                                      3
shock, then we would have expected less downward pressure, and possibly upward pressure, on

prices.

          When we aggregate across all products, most of the countries analyzed experienced a fall

in new products, an increase in product exit, and falls in quantity for product lines that continued

to be traded. Whereas the overall price effect is negative in the US, EU and Indonesia, it is

positive in Brazil. These effects are similar for high-income and middle-income partner

countries, but trade with low-income partner countries was much less affected. Trade with upper-

middle income exporters appears to have suffered the most. Overall, the most value was lost

through a reduction in value of products that continued to be traded, although potential value was

also lost as more products exited and fewer products entered. This evidence that the intensive

rather than extensive margins mattered the most matches previous evidence on the 1997 Asian

crisis (Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott 2009). Across all products, both prices and

quantities fell significantly in the US and EU, which is consistent with a story where the demand

shock played a dominant role. Aggregating across all product categories, the evidence is

consistent with the conclusions reached by Eaton et al (2010) and Levchenko et al (2010), who

argue that the collapse in trade was caused primarily by a synchronized demand-side shock.

          However, these average effects mask significant differences across product types.

Disaggregating the data into manufactures and non-manufactures, we show that the price

declines are driven primarily by commodities. Within manufacturing, while most quantity

changes were negative, in most cases price changes moved in the opposite direction. This is

particularly true for products imported by developing-country trading partners. Consequently,

within manufacturing, there is some evidence consistent with the possibility that supply side

frictions did play a role.



                                                                                                   4
       Considerable differences emerge across product types and exporter income levels. Some

have argued that South-South trade was less disrupted during the crisis. While this appears to be

the case if one examines aggregate trade patterns across all goods, there is a large decline in

manufacturing trade with Sub-Saharan Africa. We indeed find a small positive quantity effect

for total exports from low-income countries to Brazil and Indonesia, but there is an almost

equally large negative net entry effect. Furthermore, the quantity effect for manufactures alone is

negative. We also find evidence consistent with the view that credit constraints could account

for the price increases which occurred in the manufacturing sector. For the United States, for

example, price increases were most significant in sectors which are typically credit constrained.

       In Section II, we describe the conceptual approach. Results are presented in Section III,

and Section IV concludes. We focus on the decomposition of changes in trade into entry, exit,

price and quantity changes. Our ability to separate price and quantity changes allows us to

identify the upward trajectory of prices for manufacturing, which could be consistent with a role

for credit constraints in explaining some—but obviously not the majority—of the collapse in

world trade.



2. Conceptual Approach



       Our approach is inspired by earlier work analyzing the 1997 Asian crisis by Bernard,

Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2009). However, we go one step further: we decompose the

observed changes in trade at the intensive margin into price and quantity changes. For each

importing country, we can tabulate the total number of products that entered or exited or

continued in the market for imports from a given partner country. Most products fall into the



                                                                                                    5
“continuing” category, for which we can assign further divisions. For each continuing product,

we can decompose the change in value from one year to the next into price and quantity margins.

If the data are missing for one of the years, we do not assign a status.

        Together, these classifications allow us to analyze whether the fall in trade values

worldwide was a result of changing extensive margins (fewer products entering, more products

exiting) or intensive margins (falling quantities, falling prices, or some combination thereof).

        Specifically, our main decomposition is as follows. At time , we can write total value as

the sum of the value    of each product , which is the product of price    and quantity : (1)




Then the change in total value from period t-1 to period t can be written as follows:          (2)




This can be decomposed into products that are traded in both t and t-1 (denoted c for continuing),

only in t (denoted n for entry), or only in t-1 (denoted x for exit):                          (3)




Where           0 and        0:                                                                (4)




To separate the price and quantity effects, we add and subtract ∑             for the continuing

products:                                                                                      (5)




                                                                                                     6
Rearranging we get:                                                                             (6)


                                 ∆           ∆


Note that had we added and subtracted ∑                 we would instead obtain:                (7)


                                     ∆           ∆


Or that we could use the average of these two:                                                  (8)


                                  ∆           ∆
                            2                          2

Thus any of the last three equations gives us that the total change in value is the sum of the

quantity effect, the price effect, the new product effect, and the exiting product effect, i.e., the

sum of the intensive and extensive margins. Then the percentage change can be found as

follows:                                                                                        (9)

                    ∑            ∆       ∑    ∆              ∑              ∑


And if we want to know whether these effects are driven by the number of products or the

average value of each product, we can write:                                                    (10)

               ∑             ∆           ∑    ∆                  ∑                   ∑


Thus the total change in value is the sum of the average quantity effect, the average price effect,

the average new product effect, and the average exiting product effect, each weighted by the

number of products.




                                                                                                       7
3. Results



        We analyze imports from all partner countries for the United States, Brazil, Indonesia,

and each member of the European Union. We observe, for all traded products, value and

quantity, from which we calculate unit-values. The data are disaggregated at the 6-digit product

level by both importing and exporting countries. Observations are available by month from

January 2007 to November 2009. The data are available in US dollars for the US, Brazil, and

Indonesia and in Euros for the EU. The choice of currency used in this analysis is important, as

both real and nominal exchange rates fluctuated sharply during the crisis. In particular, the dollar

appreciated substantially against the currencies of most major trading partners, with the

exceptions of Japan and China. The currencies of Brazil, Korea, Mexico, Hungary, Poland, and

Ukraine depreciated more than 50 percent against the dollar, although they saw some recovery

after the beginning of 2009 (CEA 2010). Figures 1a and 1b show real and nominal exchange

rates of the euro, Brazilian real, and Indonesian rupiah against the US dollar. 3

        As our analysis focuses on imports, we deflate using the importer countries’ Consumer

Price Indices (which are available monthly, unlike GDP deflators or trade-weighted deflators). In

the future, we hope to use a combination of importer country and exporter country CPIs. Final

results are normalized to US dollars (at September of 2009 exchange rates). Note that real

exchange rates fluctuated even within the European Union, so we use country-specific CPIs there

as well (except in figures 1a and 1b, which uses a EU27-wide CPI). Nominal exchange rates and



3
 For illustrative purposes, consider the real exchange rates in March 2008 and March 2009, when the
euro rose against the dollar approximately 18%, the real approximately 27%, and the rupiah
approximately 16% (all in real terms). Suppose that the US saw a drop in trade during that period from
100 real dollars to 70 real dollars, or 30%. This same drop would be just 18% in real euros, 11% in real
reais, and 19% in real rupiahs; one’s choice of currency matters during the crisis.

                                                                                                           8
CPI data are taken from Eurostat for the EU countries and from Global Financial Data for Brazil

and Indonesia. CPI data for the US is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

       Very rarely, observations on value are missing. More commonly, data on quantity are

missing. Both, of course, affect our ability to calculate unit-values. The US, EU, and Brazil all

report a main quantity variable and a supplemental quantity variable. We use the main quantity

variable where possible, and the supplemental quantity variable where the main measure is not

reported.

       To maximize data reliability, only trade as reported by the importer country is used.

European Union import data are collected by Eurostat and was obtained through Tradewatch.

United States data are from the US International Trade Commission (USITC) and was also

obtained through Tradewatch. Brazilian data was obtained from the Ministry of Development,

Industry, and International Trade (MDIC), and Indonesian data from BPS-Statistics Indonesia

(BPS). For all four datasets, monthly data was aggregated into quarters. 8-digit and 10-digit tariff

line data are aggregated into 6-digit Harmonized System product codes. All four datasets report

trade with both other nations and some territories (e.g. Taiwan, Guam, etc.). Generally we report

results with these territories included in the data as separate units of observation. An exception is

the section on partner income, where we only include nations and a few large territories (e.g.

Taiwan). Territories represent a very small fraction of world trade, and accordingly should not

influence the results.

       To analyze product entry and exit, we tabulate whether products were traded for a

bilateral country-pair in a given period. For instance, we assign one “point” in the first quarter of

2007 to the United States for its imports from Germany of product # 520829 (Woven fabrics of

cotton, containing 85 percent or more by weight of cotton, weighing not more than 200 g/m2:



                                                                                                    9
Other fabrics). We again assign one “point” in the first quarter of 2008, as product # 520829 was

again imported by the United States from Germany.

       Before turning to the decomposition, we examine the changes in the extensive and

intensive margins. This is presented in Figures 2 and 3. Figure 2 shows the fall in bilaterally

traded products at the beginning of the global economic crisis. There is a drop in the total

number of bilaterally-traded products for Brazil, Indonesia, and the US, all beginning in October

2008; however there is no fall for the European Union. The percentage fall in the total number of

products is greatest for Brazil and Indonesia, reaching about 10 percent from peak to trough for

both countries. By contrast, there is no decline in the percentage of products traded for the EU

and the decline for the United States is half of that for Brazil and Indonesia, around 5 percent.

       Figure 3 shows the values for the US, Brazil, Indonesia, and the average across the

European Union. Each shows a sharp drop in total value of imports beginning in October 2008,

with recovery beginning in early 2009. None was back to pre-crisis levels by the end of the

period shown (September 2009). It is also important to note the much greater volatility

experienced by the developing countries. The total value of imports fell by nearly half for Brazil

and Indonesia, before beginning to recover. At the end of the sample period, however, the total

loss in trade was about the same for both groups of countries, around one third to one fourth of

aggregate trade. Since the sample ends in September 2009, the trends do not capture the

continued slow recovery since that period.

       Our decomposition is carried out in six-month periods; annual data are too aggregated as

it cuts across pre-crisis and crisis months. To eliminate problems with seasonal exports, we count

whether products are “entering” or “continuing” according to their status from the first half of

year t to the first half of year t+1. For instance, product # 520829 is considered “continuing” in



                                                                                                    10
2008 since it was traded in the first six months of 2007. A product that was not traded in

January-June of 2007 but was in January-June of 2008 is counted as “entering.” Similarly, a

product that is traded in January-June 2007 but not January-June 2008 is counted as “exiting.”

All of these classifications are assigned at the country level; if a product were imported one year

only from Germany and the next year only from Italy, it would be counted as exiting from

Germany and entering Italy.

         Table 1 and figure 4 show the results for the decomposition. To simplify the table, we

aggregate the United States and the EU into one group, and Brazil and Indonesia into a separate

group.4 In this table we use the decomposition as it appears in equation (10).5 That is, in

calculating the quantity effect, we use the average of prices in the two periods (and similarly the

average of quantities for the price effect). We eliminate observations on price and quantity where

using this average, rather than one period’s price or the other’s, would make a substantial

difference. These observations are not dropped; rather they are absorbed by the category

“continuing products, price and quantity unobserved.” This category also includes products

which simply did not have a price and quantity recorded.

         The EU and US together lost over 1 trillion dollars in imports from the first half of 2008

to the first half of 2009, or 25.2 percent. Both table 1 and figure 4 make clear that the effects

along the intensive margin dramatically outweighed the effects along the extensive margin, both

in the US-EU markets and in the Brazil-Indonesia markets. The reduction in quantity was largest,

and it accounted for over 63% of the total value change in the US and EU. The decline in prices

4
  Results for the individual countries are available upon request. In addition, we perform the analysis both for the
European Union as a whole and for individual countries. Finally, we consider both European Union trade with all
partners, and EU trade exclusively with extra-EU partners. The results shown in Table 1 are qualitatively similar for
the EU as a whole versus Germany, and for all partners versus extra-EU partners only. These are available upon
request.
5
  Note that, as we report the number of products and the average value of each product, the results can easily be
converted to match equations (8) or (9). In subsequent tables, we present results following equation (9), which can
again be converted to match equation (8).

                                                                                                                   11
accounted for approximately 22% in the US and EU. Net entry, the sum of the new product (-

6.5%) and exiting product (8.9%) contributions, contributed to only 2.4% of the total value

change.

           Brazil and Indonesia together lost over 25 billion dollars in imports from the first half of

2008 to the first half of 2009, or 18.9%. The effects along the intensive margins again

dominated, with the quantity effect again largest. Indeed, the fall in quantity contributed to

almost all of the total value change. The price effect was actually positive, partially outweighing

the value lost from the quantity effect. Negative net entry accounted for 5.3% of the total value

change, over twice as high as the net entry effect in the US and EU. These higher entry and exit

rates are consistent with the higher volatility in trade changes documented in Table 1. The results

for the intensive and extensive margins match evidence by Bricongne et al (2009), who find that

for French firms, changes in the intensive margin outweighed changes in the extensive margin.6



3.1 Aggregate Results



           The main decomposition can also be used in an OLS (ordinary least squares) linear

regression. We extend Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2009) to allow a decomposition of

the intensive margin into price and quantity effects. From equation (8), we show that the change

in value is the sum of the change along four margins: price, quantity, entry, and exit. This is also

true for each individual trading partner. We can then regress each margin of trade on the total

change in trade, where the unit of observation is a trading partner. Since equation (8) is an


6
    We also analyze entry and exit compared to entry and exit in previous time periods. We find that product entry
declined during the crisis, and product exiting rose. This was generally true across countries. Available upon
request.

                                                                                                                     12
identity, and OLS has mean-zero residuals, the coefficients from the four equations will sum to

unity. Each coefficient then represents the average contribution (across trading partners) of the

given margin to the total change in value from the first half of 2008 to the first half of 2009.

       Table 2 shows the results for this regression decomposition. As we indicated in the

introduction, the stylized facts are very different for all goods (which include commodities) and

manufactures only. Consequently, in the first four columns of Table 2 we report the results for

all goods, while in the last four columns we report the results for manufacturing only. Note that

the total value change is negative for all columns except Brazilian imports of manufactures

(which rose 4%). Hence in all other columns, a fall in prices or quantities is represented by a

positive percentage of the value change, whereas in the manufactures-Brazil column, the fall in

quantities is represented by a negative percentage of the total value change. Across all goods, the

evidence is qualitatively similar to Table 1, but with some differences (arising from the fact that

the regression averages across trading partners). For the United States, the results in column 1

suggest that price declines accounted for 36 percent of the reduction in trade across all trading

partners, while a decline in quantity accounted for 57 percent. The contribution of entry and exit

accounted for less than 1 percent of the observed changes. In both the EU and Indonesia, the

quantity declines dominated the price effect, while for Brazil the opposite is true. For all

countries, the intensive margin again is substantially larger than the extensive margin. Exit again

outweighs entry, leading to negative net entry in all regions.

       Across all goods, the evidence is consistent with both quantity and price declines.

Without disaggregating the sample, the evidence is consistent with a pure demand shock story: a

fall in demand generated both declines in prices and quantities. However, if we restrict the

sample to manufacturing, as we do in the last four columns, a different story emerges. We see



                                                                                                    13
that for manufactures, the fall in quantity continues to account for the major share of the

observed trade collapse in the US, EU, and Indonesia. In Brazil, the value of manufactured

imports increased in this time period despite a large negative quantity effect. All four regions

saw positive price effects. For the US, EU, and Indonesia, these were small and did little to offset

the fall in quantity. However, for Brazil the price increase was large enough to offset the

contribution of declining quantities to the fall in trade. All in all, the evidence is consistent with

a more important role played by supply side disruptions, possibly caused by a contraction in

trade credit in manufacturing, particularly in Brazil.

       Additionally, the regression technique easily allows us to identify outliers. For instance,

OPEC countries experienced larger price effects for their exports to the US than did other

countries, as the graph below shows. Figure 5a shows the fitted values of the price (grey) and

quantity (black) effects, as well as actual data points for individual countries. Actual dollar

amounts in terms of declines in billions of dollars following the crisis are shown on the

horizontal axis. Figure 5b shows the same data, with a close-up excluding the largest countries.

The y-axis displays the total change in the value, and the x-axis the price and quantity effects.

       Oil-exporting countries, including Saudia Arabia and Venezuela (visible in Figure 5a)

and Iraq, Algeria, Angola, and Russia (visible in Figure 5b) show price effects that are larger

(more negative) than the average. Their quantity effects are, correspondingly, smaller than the

average. Other large trading partners, such as Japan and Germany (visible in Figure 5a) and the

UK, Malaysia, Italy, France, Korea, and Taiwan (in 5b) show larger quantity effects than the

average across countries.

       Alternatively, we can decompose the total trade value (and change in total trade value) by

trading partner, product, and average value, following Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott



                                                                                                    14
(2009). The total trade imports by country    at time is the product of the number of partner

countries (   , the number of traded products , the density of trade     , and the average value of

trade   :               . The density of trade is defined as the ratio of the number of traded

country/product pairs to the number of “potential” country/product pairs:           ⁄        where

  is the number of country/product pairs with positive value. The average value         is conditional

on the country/product pair being traded.

        Results for this alternative decomposition (in table 3) show that, while the extensive

margin experienced negative changes, the intensive margin mattered more. No country saw an

increase in the number of trading partners from 2008 to 2009, and Brazil in fact lost almost 10

trading partners. All four regions also saw a fall in the number of products traded, although this

was a very small percentage of the total loss. The largest changes were in average value, which

fell by 10% to 28% across the various regions.



3.2 Heterogeneity and Mechanisms



        The decompositions given above aggregate across trading partners, product types, and

shipment methods, and as such they mask considerable heterogeneity. We expect to see, given

the hypothesized mechanisms for the transmission of the trade collapse, differences across these

dimensions. While the financial crisis originated in high income countries, its effects on trade

were rapidly transmitted to low-income countries. It has been hypothesized that the effects of

constrained trade finance could vary by exporter income (Malouche 2009, Berman and Martin

2010) and by geographic region (Berman and Martin 2010). High-income countries with well-

developed markets were most affected in the financial crisis; on the other hand, low-income


                                                                                                   15
exporters with less developed financial markets may be more reliant on trade finance originating

in their trading partners.

           Countries with different levels of income export different baskets of goods, which

embody different levels of quality and variety. To analyze how the response in trade volumes

changes with the income level of the exporting country, we decompose the fall in trade in

different groups. In doing so, we classify trading partners in four categories: high, upper middle,

lower middle, and low income, according to the World Bank’s country classification.7 Table 4

and figure 6 present the main decomposition along these income definitions.

           Overall, upper middle income exporters were most affected by the crisis, with falls of

31% to the EU and US and 30% to Brazil and Indonesia. In terms of total volume, high income

partners lost the most. From the first half of 2008 to the first half of 2009, exports from these

countries to the EU and US fell from 2.8 trillion to 2.1 trillion dollars. In the US and EU,

quantity effects again dominate price effects. This is particularly true for high-income trading

partners and low-income trading partners; the price effect is actually positive for the latter. In

Brazil and Indonesia, negative quantity effects again dominate, with positive price effects for

high-income and lower-middle income trading partners and negative price effects for the other

partners. This may be driven by the type of products exported by these countries (which we

analyze in a later section). A notable exception is in exports from low-income countries to Brazil

and Indonesia. Here we actually see a small positive quantity effect. This effect on its own

matches anecdotal evidence that South-South trade was less disrupted during the crisis, but it

must be contrasted with the large effect of product exits.

           Among the most salient results is the small change in value for low-income trading

partners; imports from these countries fell by only 4% in the US and EU and 7% in Brazil and
7
    Groupings are given in Appendix A.

                                                                                                     16
Indonesia. Also notable in these countries is the large amount of product churning; the extensive

margins are much larger than for any other trading partners. Also of interest, the extensive

margin (entry and exit) varies considerably across trading partners. While entry and exit roughly

cancel each other in high income exports to the US and EU, entry outweighed exit in the upper

middle income partners, and exit substantially outweighed entry in the lower middle income

partners. For exports to Brazil and Indonesia, exit outweighs entry for upper middle income,

lower middle income, and low income countries.

       It is not clear from the above decomposition to what extent differences across country

income levels is driven by the types of products exported as opposed to macroeconomic

conditions. Accordingly, we also analyze differences across product types. We aggregate across

product sections, a higher level of aggregation than HS-2. A description of this aggregation is

given in Appendix B. For simplicity we consider only imports by the US. Results are shown in

Table 5.

       The results in Table 5 (shown for the United States) confirm the trends identified earlier,

where we contrasted the sharp price declines for commodities and the price increases for

manufactures. In Table 5, we can identify these different effects by product category. The

largest total value change is in minerals, which saw a fall of 134 billion dollars. Almost ninety

percent of that decline was due to fall in the price, with very little of the effect due to reductions

in quantity. Machinery/electrical equipment and transportation equipment also saw large falls in

total volume, but almost all of the changes were due to a decline in quantity. Prices increased in

the following product categories: chemicals, footwear, leather, miscellaneous, and transportation

equipment (note that because the total value change is negative, a positive total price effect is

represented by a negative percentage of the value change). All products saw falls in quantity,



                                                                                                     17
with the quantity effect generally contributing to over half of the total effect. The quantity effect

was only relatively small for minerals, where the price effect was largest. Most of the large

negative price effects were in product categories made up largely of commodities (animal

products, minerals, vegetable products). In light of the very different behavior of prices for

manufactures and commodities following the trade collapse, for the rest of this paper we separate

commodities versus manufactures.

        Using the Rauch (1999) classification of product diversification, we separately analyze

homogenous goods and price-referenced goods (commodities) and differentiated goods

(manufactures). We perform the same decomposition as before, analyzing the importance of

quantity, price, and entry and exit changes to the overall change in aggregate trade. Results are

shown in table 6 and figure 7.

        The difference across product classes is striking. The negative price effect, which

contributed 22% of the total fall in the US and EU shown in Table 1, is apparent for homogenous

goods (commodities) but not for differentiated goods (manufactures). While the price effect

accounted for 90% of the total fall in value for homogenous commodity exports to the US and

73% to the EU, it actually rose for differentiated goods to both the US and EU. The price effect

was also positive for manufactures exported to Brazil and Indonesia, and for Brazil it was larger

than the negative quantity effect. We know that commodity prices fell during the crisis, and that

this was the burst of the pre-crisis bubble. It is thus not surprising that the price effect was large

for commodities; it is, however, noteworthy that the price effect was mostly contained to

commodities. Since we know that demand for manufactures fell during the crisis, the effect on

prices can tell us something about what happened to supply. Where prices rose or where they fell

only slightly, it is plausible that supply shifted in. Where prices fell more, it is more plausible



                                                                                                      18
that supply stayed constant or shifted out. Thus the evidence on manufactures, contrasted with

commodities and particularly in the case of Brazil and Indonesia, points to a negative supply

shock in manufactures in addition to the negative demand shock. This negative supply shock

could be from reductions in trade finance or from the fragmentation of the global supply chain.

       We then further disaggregate the above changes by both shipment method and product

section. For simplicity, we present a graph showing the various margins; tables are available

upon request. Figure 8 summarizes the changes in quantities and prices both by product as well

as by shipment type. Shipment types include shipment by sea and air. As Figure 8 illustrates,

there are not significant differences in trade responses across the mode of transport. However,

the major differences are for manufactures versus commodities. Commodities exhibited both

price and quantity declines, as indicated by both the dark and light bars locating on the left hand

side of the graph for minerals, stone and glass, animal products, and vegetables. In contrast,

manufactures showed quantity declines but mild price increases. The overall trends in Figure 9

are consistent with an overall pattern of demand contraction, with some evidence of supply

constraints in manufacturing. The largest price increases were in the leather and footwear sector,

where credit constraints and trade frictions may have restricted supply.

       For each product section, we also show the changes in value transported by air versus by

sea. For many products, the quantity effect is larger by air, excepting chemicals, foodstuffs, and

transportation equipment. Our story can be further elaborated by returning to the heterogeneity

across trading partner income, but restricting the sample to manufactures (table 7). We

additionally consider China and Sub-Saharan Africa, two regions where researchers have

hypothesized that the trade fall was unique. As mentioned above, it has been theorized that the

trade finance constraint could have been either much more severe or much less severe in Sub-



                                                                                                  19
Saharan Africa. China has been unique both for its more rapid recovery and because it has been a

target for protectionism (Bown 2009).

       For all four income levels, and for both China and Sub-Saharan Africa, quantity effects

were large and negative. This is not surprising; the demand effect hit all countries. The price

effect is positive for all regions, with the exception of exports from Sub-Saharan Africa to the

US and the EU. The consistent positive association between price changes is striking.



3.3 Evidence on Credit Constraints and Trade Collapse



       This section presents the only direct evidence linking credit constraints with upward

pressure on manufacturing prices during the crisis. We adopt the classification scheme of

Bricongne et al (2009) to separate products according to sectoral dependence on external finance.

The Bricongne et al index is based on recent firm data from France and combines two variables:

cash flow over value (as a proxy for self-financing capacity) and financial charges over turnover

(as a proxy for dependence on external finance). Accordingly, we separate all products into two

categories: high dependence on external finance (taking a value of 6 to 10 in the index) and low

dependence (a value of 2 to 5). Table 8 presents the results by importing country/region of the

OLS regression decomposition, which allows us to test the hypothesis that the two types of

product were affected equally by the crisis. As before, we restrict our analysis to manufactures.

       Here we see striking evidence that the positive price effect in the United States was more

pronounced for sectors with high dependence on external finance. This evidence on the price

effect is crucial: at first glance, one sees that overall value fell more in sectors with low

dependence on external finance. However, the separation into price and quantity effects reveals



                                                                                                    20
that this was due to more significant positive price pressure in the high-dependence sectors. The

European Union does not show this effect. For Brazil, overall value fell for the finance-

dependent sectors but rose for the low-dependence sectors. Overall value also fell more for

finance-dependent sectors in Indonesian imports.

       Unfortunately, our data do not allows us to separate general financial constraints from

those specific to trade. However, we do see clear evidence that finance-dependent sectors in the

United States, the epicenter of the financial crisis, experienced more significant upward price

pressure, indicative of supply-side constraints.



3.4 Evidence using a longer time series



       Next we examine whether these findings are unique to the crisis, or whether they

represent the continuation of historical trends. Figures 9 through 12 show the timing of the

collapse in trade by the Rauch classification. Figure 9 shows entry, exit, net entry and total

product counts for US imports and Figure 10 for Indonesian imports. Figures 9 and 10 clearly

show that negative net entry begins between Q3 2008 and Q4 2008, just as the crisis was

breaking. Furthermore, the negative net entry is a result of both more products exiting and fewer

products entering, relative to before the crisis.

       In Figures 11 and 12 we perform the same decomposition as before, but on a quarterly

basis, using data from Q1 2007 to Q3 2009. Entry, exit, price changes, and quantity changes are

now defined relative to the previous quarter, rather than the same quarter of the previous year.

Hence the magnitudes of these changes will not match the magnitudes given in the other tables,

but they do show the specific timing of the collapse in trade. Figures 11 and 12 plot the value of



                                                                                                   21
each margin across time, with the vertical axis showing values in billions of US dollars. It is

clear from the upper left quadrants that, for both US and Indonesian imports, the fall in value

begins in Q3 2008, as the economic crisis was beginning. Furthermore, this is true for both price

and quantity effects. Figure 11 shows the dollar values for each margin for US imports and

Figure 12 for Indonesian imports. For all three types of goods, value drops off beginning in Q3

2008. For differentiated goods, the fall is almost entirely composed of the quantity effect. For

reference priced goods, the value change is a combination of quantity and price effects. For

homogenous goods, the fall in US imports is almost entirely a price effect, whereas for

Indonesian imports there are negative price and quantity effects.




4. Conclusion



       In this paper, we identify a new set of stylized facts on the 2008-2009 trade collapse that

we hope can be used to shed light on the importance of demand and supply-side factors in

explaining the fall in trade. In particular, we decompose the fall in international trade into

product entry and exit, price changes, and quantity changes for imports by Brazil, the European

Union, Indonesia, and the United States. When we aggregate across all products, most of the

countries analyzed experienced a decline in new products, a rise in product exit, and falls in

quantity for product lines that continued to be traded. These effects are similar for high-income

and middle-income partner countries, but trade with low-income partner countries was much less

affected.




                                                                                                    22
        The evidence suggests that the intensive rather than extensive margin mattered the most,

consistent with studies of other countries and previous recessionary periods. On average,

quantities declined and prices fell. This was true for imports by Brazil, the European Union,

Indonesia, and the United States. In the EU and US, net entry accounted for a loss of 24 billion

dollars, the price effect accounted for a loss of 220 billion dollars, and the quantity effect 642

billion dollars. In Brazil and Indonesia, net entry accounted for 1 billion and the quantity effect

25 billion dollars; a positive price effect partially offset this by 3 billion.

        However, these average effects mask enormous differences across different product

types. Price declines were driven primarily by commodities. Within manufacturing, while most

quantity changes were negative, in most cases price changes moved in the opposite direction.

This is particularly true for products imported by developing-country trading partners.

Consequently, within manufacturing, there is some evidence consistent with the hypothesis that

supply side frictions played a role. For the United States, for example, price increases were

most significant in sectors which are typically credit constrained.

        There were also considerable differences across trading partners and shipment methods.

Nevertheless, the consistency of quantity declines suggests that by far the largest contributor to

the crisis was the demand shock. Yet within manufacturing, there is also systematic evidence

consistent with some negative supply shocks, as there were price increases associated with

quantity declines for the United States, the European Union, Brazil, and Indonesia. Generally

only commodities saw a fall in prices, as the pre-crisis commodity bubble burst. The evidence

pointing to supply shocks is most pronounced for sectors dependent on external finance in the

US.




                                                                                                      23
       A large number of open questions remain regarding the falls in trade during the 2009

global economic crisis. It is our hope that the descriptive evidence presented in this paper will

help guide research questions moving forward.




                                                                                                    24
5. References

Baldwin, Richard, ed. 2009. The Great Trade Collapse: Causes, Consequences and Prospects,
      VoxEU.org Ebook, available at http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/4297.

Berman, Nicolas and Philippe Martin. 2010. “The Vulnerability of Sub-Saharan Africa to the
      Financial Crisis: The Case of Trade.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7765.

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2009. “The
       Margins of US Trade.” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99:2, 487–
       493.

Bown, Chad. 2009. “The Global Resort to Antidumping, Safeguards, and Other Trade Remedies
      Amidst the Economic Crisis.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5051.

Bricongne, Jean-Charles, Lionel Fontagne, Guillaume Gauler, Daria Taglioni, and Vincent
       Vicard. 2009. “Firms and the Global Crisis: French Exports in the Turmoil.” Banque de
       France Document de Travail No. 265.

Council of Economic Advisers. 2010. Economic Report of the President, US Government
      Printing Office, Washington, DC.

Eaton, Jonathan, Sam Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis. 2010. “Trade and the Global
       Recession.” Mimeo.

Levchenko, Andrei A., Logan T. Lewis, and Linda L. Tesar. 2010. “The Collapse of
      International Trade During the 2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun.”
      Working Paper.

Malouche, Mariem. 2009. “Trade and Trade Finance Developments in 14 Developing Countries
      Post September 2008: A World Bank Survey.” World Bank Policy Research Working
      Paper No. 5138.

Rauch, James E. 1999. “Networks Versus Markets in International Trade.” Journal of
       International Economics 48(1): 7-35.




                                                                                             25
Figure 1a
                                                            Real exchange rates
                      1.40
                      1.20
  Indexed, 1/2007=1




                      1.00
                      0.80
                      0.60
                      0.40
                      0.20
                      0.00




                                 real euros per US dollar                 real Brazilian reais per US dollar
                                 real Indonesian rupiahs per US dollar


Figure 1b
                                                       Nominal exchange rates
                      1.40
                      1.20
  Indexed, 1/2007=1




                      1.00
                      0.80
                      0.60
                      0.40
                      0.20
                      0.00




                             nominal euros per US dollar                  nominal Brazilian reais per US dollar
                             nominal Indonesian rupiahs per US dollar




                                                                                                                  26
Figure 2
           Total number of products (tallied by partner country), indexed to
                                  January 2007=1
  1.2

  1.1

  1.1
                                                            products - US - index
  1.0
                                                            products - average across EU
  1.0                                                       - index

  0.9                                                       products - Brazil - index

  0.9                                                       products - Indonesia - index
  0.8
        Nov-07




        Nov-08
         Jan-07



         Jul-07
        Sep-07

         Jan-08



         Jul-08
        Sep-08

         Jan-09



         Jul-09
        Sep-09
        Mar-07




        Mar-08




        Mar-09
        May-07




        May-08




        May-09



Figure 3
                  Total value of imports, indexed to January 2007=1
  2.0
  1.8
  1.6
  1.4
                                                              total value - US - index
  1.2
  1.0                                                         total value - average across
  0.8                                                         EU - index

  0.6                                                         total value - Brazil - index

  0.4
                                                              total value - Indonesian -
  0.2                                                         index
  0.0
         Jan-07




        Sep-07

         Jan-08




        Sep-08

         Jan-09
        Nov-07




        Nov-08




        Sep-09
         Jul-07




         Jul-08




         Jul-09
        Mar-07
        May-07




        Mar-08
        May-08




        Mar-09
        May-09




                                                                                             27
Figure 4: Decomposition Along Extensive (Entry and Exit) and Intensive (Price and
Quantity) Margins, Imports before and after the Global Economic Crisis

                                                               quantity effect


                                                               price effect


                                                               exiting products


                                                               new products


  -0.20      -0.15      -0.10        -0.05      0.00    0.05

                                Brazil-Indo   US-EU

Notes: each margin is shown as a percentage of the value in 2008. For details, see table 1.




                                                                                              28
Figure 5a: Price and Quantity Effects, by US Trading Partners, Billions of US$




Figure 5b: Price and Quantity Effects, by US Trading Partners, Billions of US$, Close-up
View




                                                                                           29
Figure 6: Heterogeneity across Exporter Income
                         US-EU                                                   Brazil-Indonesia

                     Low income                                                  Low income

           Lower middle income                                        Lower middle income

           Upper middle income                                        Upper middle income

                    High income                                                  High income

  -0.20          -0.10              0.00               0.10   -0.30      -0.20     -0.10         0.00     0.10       0.20

           quantity effect       price effect                           quantity effect          price effect
           exiting products new products                                exiting products new products

Notes: each margin is shown as a percentage of the value in 2008. For details, see table 4.

Figure 7: Heterogeneity in Commodities (homogeneous) versus Manufactures
(differentiated)
                   homogeneous                                                    differentiated

                                 price effect (Brazil)                                           price effect (Brazil)
                                 price effect (Indo)                                             price effect (Indo)
                                 price effect (EU)                                               price effect (EU)
                                 price effect (US)                                               price effect (US)
                                 quantity effect (Brazil)                                        quantity effect (Brazil)
                                 quantity effect (Indo)                                          quantity effect (Indo)
                                 quantity effect (EU)                                            quantity effect (EU)
                                 quantity effect (US)                                            quantity effect (US)

  -0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0                                -0.4 -0.2 0.0         0.2    0.4

Notes: each margin is shown as a percentage of the value in 2008. For details, see table 6.




                                                                                                                            30
Figure 8: Heterogeneity across Product Types and Shipment Methods (US Imports)
Changes in Import Values as a Percentage of Value in 2008, by Margin

                                                                                   animal - air, sea
                                                                                   chemical - air, sea
                                                                                   foodstuffs - air, sea
                                                                                   foot/headgear - air, sea
                                                                                   leather - air, sea
                                                                                   machinery - air, sea
                                                                                   metals - air, sea
                                                                                   minerals - air, sea
                                                                                   miscel - air, sea
                                                                                   plastics - air, sea
                                                                                   stone/glass - air, sea
                                                                                   textiles - air, sea
                                                                                   transportation - air, sea
                                                                                   vegetables - air, sea
                                                                                   woodproducts - air, sea
   ‐0.60   ‐0.50   ‐0.40   ‐0.30   ‐0.20   ‐0.10      0.00   0.10   0.20    0.30

                                       price effect      quantity effect

Notes: Within each product grouping (e.g. animal products), the upper bar shows the effect on air shipments and the
lower bar shows the effect on vessel shipments. The effects are percentage changes of the total effect within that
shipment type. For instance, the price effect for animal products shipped by sea is divided by the total value in 2008
of animal products shipped by sea. Note that typically sea shipments were much larger in 2008, so the gross value
changes for sea shipments are larger compared to those for air shipments than what is shown above. Entry and exit
are not shown and represent less than 5% of the change in any given category. Continuing products with unobserved
price and/or quantity are also not shown.




                                                                                                                   31
Figure 9: Product-by-Country Counts, US Imports
Vertical axis: number of product-by-country Imports
                            Entry                                                  Exit
  20000                                                            25000
  18000
  16000                                                            20000
  14000
  12000                                                            15000
  10000                                         all goods                                     all goods
   8000                                         differentiated     10000                      differentiated
   6000
                                                reference priced                              reference priced
   4000                                                             5000
   2000                                         homogenous                                    homogenous
      0                                                               0
          Q2 2007
          Q3 2007
          Q4 2007
          Q1 2008
          Q2 2008
          Q3 2008
          Q4 2008
          Q1 2009
          Q2 2009
          Q3 2009




                                                                            Q2 2007
                                                                            Q3 2007
                                                                            Q4 2007
                                                                            Q1 2008
                                                                            Q2 2008
                                                                            Q3 2008
                                                                            Q4 2008
                                                                            Q1 2009
                                                                            Q2 2009
                                                                            Q3 2009
                          Net entry                                            Total Counts
   2000                                                            120000

   1000                                                            100000

                                                                   80000
      0
                                                all goods                                     all goods
          Q2 2007
          Q3 2007
          Q4 2007
          Q1 2008
          Q2 2008
          Q3 2008
          Q4 2008
          Q1 2009
          Q2 2009
          Q3 2009




                                                                   60000
  -1000                                         differentiated                                differentiated
                                                                   40000
  -2000                                         reference priced                              reference priced
                                                homogenous         20000                      homogenous
  -3000
                                                                       0
                                                                            Q2 2007
                                                                            Q3 2007
                                                                            Q4 2007
                                                                            Q1 2008
                                                                            Q2 2008
                                                                            Q3 2008
                                                                            Q4 2008
                                                                            Q1 2009
                                                                            Q2 2009
                                                                            Q3 2009
  -4000

  -5000


                                                                                                                 32
Figure 10: Product-by-Country Counts, Indonesian Imports
Vertical axis: number of product-by-country Imports
                          Entry                                              Exit
  12000                                                        12000

  10000                                                        10000

   8000                                                         8000

   6000                                     all goods           6000                    all goods
                                            differentiated                              differentiated
   4000                                                         4000
                                            reference priced                            reference priced
   2000                                     homogenous          2000                    homogenous
      0                                                           0
          Q2 2007
          Q3 2007
          Q4 2007
          Q1 2008
          Q2 2008
          Q3 2008
          Q4 2008
          Q1 2009
          Q2 2009
          Q3 2009




                                                                       Q2 2007
                                                                       Q3 2007
                                                                       Q4 2007
                                                                       Q1 2008
                                                                       Q2 2008
                                                                       Q3 2008
                                                                       Q4 2008
                                                                       Q1 2009
                                                                       Q2 2009
                                                                       Q3 2009
                        Net Entry                                         Total Count
   2000                                                        45000
   1500                                                        40000
   1000                                                        35000
    500                                                        30000
                                            all goods          25000                    all goods
      0
                                                               20000
          Q2 2007
          Q3 2007
          Q4 2007
          Q1 2008
          Q2 2008
          Q3 2008
          Q4 2008
          Q1 2009
          Q2 2009
          Q3 2009




   -500                                     differentiated                              differentiated
                                                               15000
  -1000                                     reference priced                            reference priced
                                                               10000
  -1500                                     homogenous          5000                    homogenous
  -2000                                                            0
  -2500
                                                                       Q2 2007
                                                                       Q3 2007
                                                                       Q4 2007
                                                                       Q1 2008
                                                                       Q2 2008
                                                                       Q3 2008
                                                                       Q4 2008
                                                                       Q1 2009
                                                                       Q2 2009
                                                                       Q3 2009
  -3000
  -3500


                                                                                                           33
Figure 11: Intensive and Extensive Margins: Changes in Value, US Imports
Vertical Axis: Billions of US$
                                        All Goods                                                                Differentiated Goods
    80.0                                                                           40.0
    60.0                                                                           30.0
    40.0                                                                           20.0
    20.0                                                        quantity effect                                                                quantity effect
                                                                                   10.0
     0.0                                                        price effect                                                                   price effect
                                                                                    0.0
             Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
   -20.0                                                        enter                       Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3                      enter
            2007 2007 2007 2008 2008 2008 2008 2009 2009 2009
                                                                                   -10.0   2007 2007 2007 2008 2008 2008 2008 2009 2009 2009
   -40.0                                                        exit                                                                           exit
                                                                                   -20.0
   -60.0                                                        continue, unobs.                                                               continue, unobs.
                                                                change in value    -30.0                                                       change in value
   -80.0
  -100.0                                                                           -40.0

  -120.0                                                                           -50.0

  -140.0                                                                           -60.0


                               Reference Priced Goods                                                            Homogenous Goods
    6.0                                                                            30.0

    4.0                                                                            20.0

    2.0
                                                                                   10.0
                                                                quantity effect                                                                quantity effect
    0.0
                                                                price effect        0.0                                                        price effect
            Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
   -2.0    2007 2007 2007 2008 2008 2008 2008 2009 2009 2009    enter                       Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3                      enter
                                                                                   -10.0   2007 2007 2007 2008 2008 2008 2008 2009 2009 2009
   -4.0                                                         exit                                                                           exit
                                                                continue, unobs.   -20.0                                                       continue, unobs.
   -6.0
                                                                change in value                                                                change in value
                                                                                   -30.0
   -8.0

  -10.0                                                                            -40.0

  -12.0                                                                            -50.0



                                                                                                                                                                  34
Figure 12: Intensive and Extensive Margins: Changes in Value, Indonesian Imports
Vertical Axis: Billions of US$
                                        All Goods                                                              Differentiated Goods
    6.0                                                                           3.0

    4.0                                                                           2.0

    2.0
                                                               quantity_effect    1.0                                                        quantity_effect
    0.0                                                        price_effect                                                                  price_effect
            Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3                                         0.0
                                                               entry                                                                         entry
   -2.0    2007 2007 2007 2008 2008 2008 2008 2009 2009 2009                              Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
                                                               exit                      2007 2007 2007 2008 2008 2008 2008 2009 2009 2009   exit
                                                                                  -1.0
   -4.0                                                        continue, unobs.                                                              continue, unobs.
                                                               change in value    -2.0                                                       change in value
   -6.0

   -8.0                                                                           -3.0


  -10.0                                                                           -4.0


                               Reference-Priced Goods                                                          Homogeneous Goods
   1.0                                                                            1.5


                                                                                  1.0
   0.5
                                                               quantity_effect    0.5                                                        quantity_effect
                                                               price_effect                                                                  price_effect
   0.0
                                                                                  0.0
           Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3                       entry                                                                         entry
          2007 2007 2007 2008 2008 2008 2008 2009 2009 2009                               Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
                                                               exit                      2007 2007 2007 2008 2008 2008 2008 2009 2009 2009   exit
                                                                                  -0.5
  -0.5
                                                               continue, unobs.                                                              continue, unobs.
                                                               change in value    -1.0                                                       change in value
  -1.0
                                                                                  -1.5


  -1.5                                                                            -2.0



                                                                                                                                                                35
Table 1: Decomposition Along Extensive (Entry and Exit) and Intensive (Price and
Quantity) Margins, Imports before and after the Global Economic Crisis
                                                  average       total
                                                   value        value
                                                  change,      change,       % of        % of
                                                  millions     billions     value in     value
                                      number      of US$       of US$        2008       change
 UNITED STATES &
 EUROPEAN UNION
 new products                         383975         0.17       65.77          1.6       -6.5
 exiting products                     434448        -0.21       -90.00        -2.2        8.9
 price effect                         881780        -0.25      -219.79        -5.5       21.6
 quantity effect                      881780        -0.73      -642.43       -15.9       63.3
 contin. prod., p and q unobs.        538289        -0.24      -128.80        -3.2       12.7
 Total                                                         -1015.25      -25.2       100.0
 BRAZIL & INDONESIA
 new products                          22626         0.21         4.75         3.5       -18.7
 exiting products                      27219        -0.22        -6.09        -4.5       24.0
 price effect                          59253         0.06         3.33         2.5       -13.1
 quantity effect                       59253        -0.42       -24.95       -18.5       98.4
 contin. prod., p and q unobs.         18126        -0.13        -2.41        -1.8        9.5
 Total                                                          -25.36        -18.9         100.0
Notes: The time period represented is from the first half of 2008 (pre-crisis) to the first half of
2009 (mid-crisis). To avoid issues with seasonally-traded products, we do not include the second
half of 2008. The final row for each region shows the value change for continuing products for
which we are unable to observe either price or quantity.




                                                                                                      36
Table 2: OLS Regression Decomposition of the Change in Imports across Trading
Partners, Before and During the Global Economic Crisis
                                   All products                               Manufactures only
                                                        Indo-                                         Indo-
                      US          EU        Brazil      nesia        US         EU         Brazil     nesia
                    -0.0008      -0.01       -0.02      -0.02     -0.0007     -0.0051      0.07        -0.04
 new products
                    (0.0003)    (0.002)     (0.012)    (0.004)    (0.0002)     .0008)     (0.018)     (0.009)

 exiting             0.0023       0.17       0.14       0.04       0.0014      0.0093      -0.02       0.16
 products           (0.0006)    (0.005)     (0.017)    (0.007)    (0.0008)     .0007)     (0.007)     (0.025)

                     0.36        0.19        0.48       0.43        -0.09      -0.11        1.41       -0.25
 price effect
                    (0.018)     (0.006)     (0.105)    (0.031)     (0.008)     .006)      (0.119)     (0.098)

                     0.57        0.50       0.30        0.51        0.99        0.86       -0.60       1.05
 quantity effect
                    (0.017)     (0.007)    (0.103)     (0.026)     (0.009)     .007)      (0.123)     (0.092)

 contin. prod., p    0.07        0.14        0.10       0.03        0.09        0.25       0.13        0.07
 and q unobs.       (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.013)    (0.007)     (0.004)     .003)      (0.012)     (0.014)

  N                    230        5237        225        242         228         4959          216     205
  value in 2008,
                     1062.1      2966.4       80.5       54.1       451.0       1457.9        32.5     18.0
  billions of US$
  value in 2009,
                      724.7      2288.6       70.3       38.8       326.3       1182.0        33.9     16.0
  billions of US$
  % change from
                      -0.32       -0.23      -0.13      -0.28       -0.28        -0.19        0.04    -0.11
  2008 to 2009
Notes: The time period represented is from the first half of 2008 (pre-crisis) to the first half of
2009 (mid-crisis). To avoid issues with seasonally-traded products, we do not include the second
half of 2008. The final row for each region shows the value change for continuing products for
which we are unable to observe either price or quantity. N represents the number of trading
partners. For the European Union, this is tallied by importing country (eg, an average of 194
trading partners for each of the EU’s 27 members).




                                                                                                           37
Table 3: Alternative Decomposition of Intensive (Average Value) and Extensive
(Countries and Products) Margins
                                                                          % change, 08-
                                       2007         2008        2009           09
 US
 Countries                             230           230         230            0.0
 Products                             5020          5021        5020            0.0
 country-products                    113645        111652      105706           -5.3
 Density                              0.098         0.097       0.092           -5.3
 average value, millions of US$       8.63          9.51        6.86           -27.9
 total value, billions of US$          981          1062         725           -31.8
 EU
 Countries                             240           241         240            -0.4
 Products                             5050         5049        5048             0.0
 country-products                    1722493      1740935     1696182           -2.6
 Density                              0.053         0.053       0.052           -2.1
 average value, millions of US$        1.67         1.70        1.35           -20.8
 total value, billions of US$          2879         2966        2289           -22.9
 Brazil
 Countries                             195          203          195            -3.9
 Products                              4728         4577        4538            -0.9
 country-products                     52802        55322        54199           -2.0
 Density                              0.057        0.060        0.061            2.9
 average value, millions of US$        1.28         1.45         1.30          -10.9
 total value, billions of US$           68           80           70           -12.7
 Indonesia
 Countries                             194          195          196            0.5
 Products                              4536         4465        4435            -0.7
 country-products                     48675        48556        45185           -6.9
 Density                              0.055        0.056        0.052           -6.8
 average value, millions of US$        0.77         1.11         0.86          -22.8
 total value, billions of US$          37             54           39          -28.2
Notes: The time period represented is the first half of each year. Here we include territories, such
as Taiwan and Gibraltar. Results are fairly similar if these are excluded. Density equals the total
number of country/product pairs, divided by the number of import partners times the number of
imported products.




                                                                                                       38
Table 4: Heterogeneity Across Exporter Income
 UNITED STATES & EUROPEAN UNION                                 % of value change
                                                                 Upper       Lower
                                                    High        middle      middle          Low
                                                   income       income      income        income
 new products                                       -0.05        -0.12        -0.06        -1.28
 exiting products                                    0.05        0.09          0.10         1.05
 price effect                                        0.11        0.57          0.29        -0.35
 quantity effect                                    0.74         0.38          0.57         1.42
 contin. prod., p and q unobserved                   0.15        0.08          0.10         0.16
 total                                               1.00         1.00         1.00        1.00
 total value in 2008, billions of US$              2779.4        624.2        561.4        29.7
 total value in 2009, billions of US$              2100.6        429.1        449.1        28.4
 % change from 2008 to 2009                         -0.24        -0.31        -0.20        -0.04


 BRAZIL & INDONESIA                                             % of value change
                                                                 Upper       Lower
                                                    High        middle      middle          Low
                                                   income       income      income        income
 new products                                       -0.25        -0.13        -0.11        -1.50
 exiting products                                    0.22        0.28          0.19         2.54
 price effect                                       -0.28        0.24         -0.31         0.37
 quantity effect                                    1.23         0.54         1.04         -0.02
 contin. prod., p and q unobserved                   0.07        0.07          0.19        -0.38
 total                                               1.00         1.00         1.00        1.00
 total value in 2008, billions of US$                76.6         25.3         31.9         0.7
 total value in 2009, billions of US$                64.5         17.7         26.2         0.6
 % change from 2008 to 2009                         -0.16         -0.30         -0.18         -0.07
Notes: The time period represented is from the first half of 2008 (pre-crisis) to the first half of
2009 (mid-crisis). To avoid issues with seasonally-traded products, we do not include the second
half of 2008. The final row for each region shows the value change for continuing products for
which we are unable to observe either price or quantity.




                                                                                                      39
Table 5: Heterogeneity across Product Type, US Imports
                                                % of value change




                                                    price effect
                          products


                                     products




                                                                   quantity
                                                                                                total value




                                                                              p and q
                                      exiting




                                                                    effect


                                                                               unob


                                                                                        total
                            new
                                                                                                  change,
                                                                                                millions of
 US                                                                                                 US$
 Animal                  -0.06     0.09     0.54      0.42     0.00     1.00                        -712
 Chemicals               -0.04     0.12     -0.19     0.97     0.14     1.00                      -11,941
 Foodstuffs              -0.08     0.07      0.61     0.35     0.06     1.00                       -1,284
 Footwear                -0.01     0.01     -0.69     1.44     0.25     1.00                       -1,135
 Leather                  0.00     0.01     -0.48     1.40     0.08     1.00                        -963
 Machinery,
                         -0.01     0.01      0.06     0.76     0.18     1.00          -57,448
 electrical
 Metals                  -0.02     0.08      0.22     0.63     0.09     1.00          -23,443
 Mineral                 -0.01     0.01      0.88     0.11     0.01     1.00         -133,931
 Miscellaneous           -0.01     0.01     -0.05     0.60     0.46     1.00          -14,047
 Plastics                -0.01     0.01      0.03     0.88     0.08     1.00           -6,824
 Stone/glass             -0.01     0.02      0.31     0.52     0.16     1.00          -11,749
 Textiles                -0.02     0.02      0.00     0.89     0.10     1.00           -6,531
 Transportation           0.00     0.00     -0.03     1.01     0.01     1.00          -55,343
 Vegetable               -0.06     0.05      0.57     0.40     0.05     1.00           -1,602
 Wood                    -0.01     0.02      0.09     0.86     0.05     1.00           -6,001
Notes: The time period represented is from the first half of 2008 (pre-crisis) to the first half of
2009 (mid-crisis). To avoid issues with seasonally-traded products, we do not include the second
half of 2008. The “p and q unob” column shows the value change for continuing products for
which we are unable to observe either price or quantity.




                                                                                                              40
Table 6: Heterogeneity in Commodities versus Manufactures
 UNITED STATES                                                  % of value change
                                        homogenous      reference priced differentiated unclassified
 new products                              -0.01              -0.02               -0.01             -0.01
 exiting products                           0.01               0.07                0.02              0.02
 price effect                               0.90               0.44               -0.06              0.36
 quantity effect                            0.10               0.47                0.92              0.47
 contin. prod., p and q unobserved          0.00               0.04                0.14              0.17
 Total                                      1.00               1.00                1.00              1.00
 total value in 2008, billions of US$      212.0              109.4               451.0             289.7
 total value in 2009, billions of US$      102.8               71.9               326.3             223.6
 % change from 2008 to 2009                -0.51              -0.34               -0.28             -0.23
 EUROPEAN UNION                                                 % of value change
                                        homogenous reference priced differentiated unclassified
 new products                               -0.05             -0.19               -0.06             -0.11
 exiting products                            0.09              0.27                0.07              0.12
 price effect                                0.73              0.25               -0.24              0.09
 quantity effect                            0.20               0.54                1.01              0.76
 contin. prod., p and q unobserved           0.03              0.13                0.22              0.14
 Total                                      1.00               1.00                1.00              1.00
 total value in 2008, billions of US$      368.9              479.6              1457.9             660.0
 total value in 2009, billions of US$      216.3              346.2              1182.0             544.0
 % change from 2008 to 2009                 -0.41             -0.28               -0.19             -0.18
 INDONESIA                                                      % of value change
                                        homogenous reference priced differentiated unclassified
 new products                               -0.06             -0.25               -0.31             -0.08
 exiting products                            0.13              0.19                0.60              0.07
 price effect                                0.75              0.28               -1.58              0.50
 quantity effect                            0.14               0.54                2.07              0.47
 contin. prod., p and q unobserved           0.05              0.24                0.23              0.04
 Total                                      1.00               1.00                1.00              1.00
 total value in 2008, billions of US$       10.3                9.5                18.0              16.2
 total value in 2009, billions of US$        6.0                7.0                16.0              9.8
 % change from 2008 to 2009                 -0.42             -0.26               -0.11             -0.40
 BRAZIL                                                         % of value change
                                        homogenous reference priced differentiated unclassified
 new products                               -0.06             -0.13                0.87             -0.28
 exiting products                            0.12              0.25               -0.46              0.47
 price effect                                0.81             -0.39                5.04             -1.08
 quantity effect                            0.14               0.94               -4.81              1.84
 contin. prod., p and q unobserved           0.00              0.33                0.36              0.05
 Total                                      1.00               1.00                1.00              1.00
 total value in 2008, billions of US$       12.1               15.8                32.5             20.1
 total value in 2009, billions of US$         7.1              12.0                33.9              17.4
 % change from 2008 to 2009                 -0.41             -0.24                0.04             -0.13
Notes: The time period represented is from the first half of 2008 (pre-crisis) to the first half of
2009 (mid-crisis). To avoid issues with seasonally-traded products, we do not include the second
half of 2008. The final row for each product type shows the value change for continuing products
for which we are unable to observe either price or quantity.




                                                                                                            41
Table 7: Heterogeneity across Trading Partner Income/Region, Manufactures Only
 UNITED STATES
 & EUROPEAN UNION                                                 % of value change
                                                       Upper       Lower
                                           High       middle      middle       Low
                                          income      income      income     income                    Sub-
                                          trading     trading     trading    trading                  Saharan
                                          partner     partner     partner    partner      China        Africa
 new products                              -0.03       -0.07       -0.11        0.66       -0.05       -0.97
 exiting products                           0.04        0.10        0.16       -0.22        0.06        0.32
 price effect                              -0.15       -0.07       -0.79       1.44        -1.16        0.40
 quantity effect                           0.95        0.91         1.54       -0.90        1.89        1.17
 contin. prod., p and q unobserved          0.20        0.14        0.21        0.02        0.26        0.08
 Total                                     1.00        1.00        1.00        1.00        1.00        1.00
 total value in 2008, billions of US$     1454.3       175.9       257.8       17.3       187.2         7.9
 total value in 2009, billions of US$     1121.5       132.8       233.6       18.5       172.8         6.6
 % change from 2008 to 2009                -0.23       -0.24       -0.09       0.07        -0.08       -0.16
 BRAZIL & INDONESIA                                               % of value change
                                                       Upper       Lower
                                           High       middle      middle       Low
                                          income      income      income     income                    Sub-
                                          trading     trading     trading    trading                  Saharan
                                          partner     partner     partner    partner      China        Africa
 new products                              -2.19       -2.83       -1.29        0.53        0.18       -0.31
 exiting products                           1.66        6.99       1.77        -0.47       -0.31        0.59
 price effect                             -11.28      -14.43      -14.70        0.69        5.04       -0.54
 quantity effect                          12.98       11.51       14.61        0.12        -3.71       1.24
 contin. prod., p and q unobserved         -0.18       -0.24        0.61        0.12       -0.21        0.02
 Total                                     1.00        1.00        1.00        1.00        1.00        1.00
 total value in 2008, billions of US$      32.3         6.3        11.7         0.2         8.0         0.2
 total value in 2009, billions of US$      31.7         6.2        11.5         0.3         8.4         0.1
 % change from 2008 to 2009                -0.02       -0.01       -0.01         0.29         0.05     -0.27
Notes: The time period represented is from the first half of 2008 (pre-crisis) to the first half of
2009 (mid-crisis). To avoid issues with seasonally-traded products, we do not include the second
half of 2008. The European Union and Brazil report quantities in various units, and accordingly
cannot be evaluated with the above decomposition. Data for the US is based on value and weight
of air and vessel shipments, and accordingly does not sum to total imports.




                                                                                                              42
 Table 8: OLS Regression Decomposition, by Dependence on External
 Finance (High versus Low)
                                    United States                      European Union
                                                      t-                                  t-
                           high           low                  high          low
                                                    values                              values
 new                     -0.0009        -0.0003      -1.1    -0.0051        -0.0017     -1.74
                         (0.0005)       (0.0002)             (0.0006)       (0.001)
 exit                     0.0028         0.0009     0.98      0.0059        0.0106      -3.01
                          (0.003)       (0.0002)             (0.0005)      (0.0009)
 price effect             -0.272         -0.029     -14.12    -0.017         -0.131     8.87
                         (0.010)        (0.008)              (0.010)        (0.006)
 quantity effect          1.01            1.00      0.59       0.80          0.83       -2.07
                         (0.010)        (0.009)               (0.010)       (0.008)
 continuing,              0.264           0.033     28.64     0.218          0.293      -9.40
 unobserved              (0.007)         (0.003)             (0.004)        (0.004)
 n                         224             225                4604           4462
 total value in 2008,
                          194.4          252.4                566.4          880.0
 billions of US$
 total value in 2009,
                          153.2          169.5                478.3          694.6
 billions of US$
 % change from
                          -0.21          -0.33                 -0.16         -0.21
 2008 to 2009

                                       Brazil                            Indonesia
                                                      t-                                  t-
                           high           low                  high          low
                                                    values                              values
 new                     0.0285         0.0974      -2.10    -0.0079        -0.0273      1.42
                         (0.014)        (0.019)              (0.010)        (0.009)
 exit                    0.0156         -0.0151     2.52     0.4566         -0.0309     15.46
                         (0.006)        (0.007)              (0.031)        (0.012)
 price effect             0.490          1.258      -3.89     -0.045         -0.314     2.18
                         (0.159)        (0.091)              (0.074)        (0.091)
 quantity effect          0.46           -0.47      4.55       0.52           1.28      -6.35
                         (0.163)        (0.095)              (0.069)        (0.089)
 continuing,              0.007           0.131      -4.3     0.077          0.093      -0.73
 unobserved              (0.014)         (0.016)             (0.020)        (0.012)
  n                         202          177                     189          177
  total value in 2008,
                           12.4          19.8                    7.5          10.4
  billions of US$
  total value in 2009,
                           12.0          21.6                    6.1           9.8
  billions of US$
  % change from
                           -0.03         0.09                   -0.19        -0.06
  2008 to 2009
Notes: The time period represented is from the first half of 2008 (pre-crisis) to the first half of
2009 (mid-crisis). To avoid issues with seasonally-traded products, we do not include the second
half of 2008. N represents the number of trading partners. For the European Union, this is tallied
by importing country (eg, an average of 194 trading partners for each of the EU’s 27 members).
T-values are for the hypothesis that the coefficient in the "high" equation is equal to the coeff-
icient in the "low" equation.




                                                                                                      43
Appendix A: Country Groupings by Income
HIGH                    Saudi Arabia            St. Vincent & the       Thailand
Andorra                 Singapore                         Grenadines    Timor-Leste
Antigua and Barbuda     Slovak Republic         Suriname                Tonga
Aruba                   Slovenia                Turkey                  Tunisia
Australia               Spain                   Uruguay                 Turkmenistan
Austria                 Sweden                  Venezuela, RB           Ukraine
Bahamas, The            Switzerland                                     Vanuatu
Bahrain                 Trinidad and Tobago     LOWER MIDDLE            West Bank and Gaza
Barbados                United Arab Emirates    Albania
Belgium                 United Kingdom          Angola                  LOW
Bermuda                 United States           Armenia                 Afghanistan
Brunei Darussalam       Virgin Islands (U.S.)   Azerbaijan              Bangladesh
Canada                                          Belize                  Benin
Cayman Islands          UPPER MIDDLE            Bhutan                  Burkina Faso
Channel Islands         Algeria                 Bolivia                 Burundi
Croatia                 American Samoa          Cameroon                Cambodia
Cyprus                  Argentina               Cape Verde              Central African
Czech Republic          Belarus                 China                             Republic
Denmark                 Bosnia & Herzegovina    Congo, Rep.             Chad
Equatorial Guinea       Botswana                Côte d'Ivoire           Comoros
Estonia                 Brazil                  Djibouti                Congo, Dem. Rep.
Faeroe Islands          Bulgaria                Ecuador                 Eritrea
Finland                 Chile                   Egypt, Arab Rep.        Ethiopia
France                  Colombia                El Salvador             Gambia, The
French Polynesia        Costa Rica              Georgia                 Ghana
Germany                 Cuba                    Guatemala               Guinea
Greece                  Dominica                Guyana                  Guinea-Bissau
Greenland               Dominican Republic      Honduras                Haiti
Guam                    Fiji                    India                   Kenya
Hong Kong, China        Gabon                   Indonesia               Korea, Dem. Rep.
Hungary                 Grenada                 Iran, Islamic Rep.      Kyrgyz Republic
Iceland                 Jamaica                 Iraq                    Lao PDR
Ireland                 Kazakhstan              Jordan                  Liberia
Isle of Man             Latvia                  Kiribati                Madagascar
Israel                  Lebanon                 Kosovo                  Malawi
Italy                   Libya                   Lesotho                 Mali
Japan                   Lithuania               Maldives                Mauritania
Korea, Rep.             Macedonia, FYR          Marshall Islands        Mozambique
Kuwait                  Malaysia                Micronesia, Fed. Sts.   Myanmar
Liechtenstein           Mauritius               Moldova                 Nepal
Luxembourg              Mayotte                 Mongolia                Niger
Macao, China            Mexico                  Morocco                 Rwanda
Malta                   Montenegro              Nicaragua               Senegal
Monaco                  Namibia                 Nigeria                 Sierra Leone
Netherlands             Palau                   Pakistan                Somalia
Netherlands Antilles    Panama                  Papua New Guinea        Tajikistan
New Caledonia           Peru                    Paraguay                Tanzania
New Zealand             Poland                  Philippines             Togo
Northern Mariana Isl.   Romania                 Samoa                   Uganda
Norway                  Russian Federation      São Tomé & Principe     Uzbekistan
Oman                    Serbia                  Solomon Islands         Vietnam
Portugal                Seychelles              Sri Lanka               Yemen, Rep.
Puerto Rico             South Africa            Sudan                   Zambia
Qatar                   St. Kitts and Nevis     Swaziland               Zimbabwe
San Marino              St. Lucia               Syrian Arab Republic




                                                                                             44
Appendix B: Groupings by Product Section

ANIMAL: Live animals, animal products
HS 1 Live animals
HS 2 Meat and edible meat offal
HS 3 Fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates
HS 4 Dairy produce; birds eggs; natural honey; edible products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included
HS 5 Products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included

VEGETABLE: Vegetable products, animal or vegetable fats and oils and waxes
HS 6 Live trees and other plants; bulbs, roots and the like; cut flowers and ornamental foliage
HS 7 Edible vegetables and certain roots and tubers
HS 8 Edible fruit and nuts; peel of citrus fruit or melons
HS 9 Coffee, tea, maté and spices
HS 10 Cereals
HS 11 Products of the milling industry; malt; starches; inulin; wheat gluten
HS 12 Oil seeds and oleaginous fruits; miscellaneous grains, seeds and fruits; industrial or medicinal plants; straw and fodder
HS 13 Lac; gums, resins and other vegetable saps and extracts
HS 14 Vegetable plaiting materials; vegetable products not elsewhere specified or included
HS 15 Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their cleavage products prepared edible fats; animal or vegetable waxes

FOODSTUFFS: Prepared foodstuffs, beverages, vinegar, tobacco and substitutes
HS 16 Preparations of meat, of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates
HS 17 Sugars and sugar confectionery
HS 18 Cocoa and cocoa preparations
HS 19 Preparations of cereals, flour, starch or milk; bakers' wares
HS 20 Preparations of vegetables, fruit, nuts or other parts of plants
HS 21 Miscellaneous edible preparations
HS 22 Beverages, spirits and vinegar
HS 23 Residues and waste from the food industries; prepared animal feed
HS 24 Tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes

MINERALS: Mineral products
HS 25 Salt; sulfur; earths and stone; plastering materials, lime and cement
HS 26 Ores, slag and ash
HS 27 Mineral fuels, mineral oils and products of their distillation; bituminous substances; mineral waxes

CHEMICALS: Products of the chemical or allied industries
HS 28 Inorganic chemicals; organic or inorgani c compounds of precious metals, of rare-earth metals,of radioactive elements or
         of isotopes
HS 29 Organic chemicals
HS 30 Pharmaceutical products
HS 31 Fertilizers
HS 32 Tanning or dyeing extracts; dyes, pigments, paints, varnishes, putty and mastics
HS 33 Essential oils and resinoids; perfumery, cosmetic or toilet preparations
HS 34 Soap, organic surface-active agents, washing preparations, lubricating preparations, artificial waxes, prepared waxes,
         polishing or scouring preparations, candles and similar articles, modeling pastes, "dental waxes" and dental
         preparations with a basis of plaster
HS 35 Albuminoidal substances; modified starches; glues; enzymes
HS 36 Explosives; pyrotechnic products; matches; pyrophoric alloys; certain combustible preparations
HS 37 Photographic or cinematographic goods
HS 38 Miscellaneous chemical products

PLASTICS: Plastics and rubber and articles thereof

                                                                                                                                  45
HS 39 Plastics and articles thereof
HS 40 Rubber and articles thereof

LEATHER: Raw hides and skins, leather, furskins, articles thereof
HS 41 Raw hides and skins (other than furskins) and leather
HS 42 Articles of leather; saddlery and harness; travel goods, handbags and similar containers; articles of animal gut (other than
         silkworm gut)
HS 43 Furskins and artificial fur; manufactures thereof

WOOD: Wood and articles thereof, charcoal, cork and articles thereof, basketware, pulp, paper, printing
HS 44 Wood and articles of wood; wood charcoal
HS 45 Cork and articles of cork
HS 46 Manufactures of straw, of esparto or of other plaiting materials; basketware and wickerwork
HS 47 Pulp of wood or of other fibrous cellulosic material; waste and scrap of paper or paperboard
HS 48 Paper and paperboard; articles of paper pulp, of paper or of paperboard
HS 49 Printed books, newspapers, pictures and other products of the printing industry; manuscripts, typescripts and plans

TEXILTES: Textile and textile articles
HS 50 Silk
HS 51 Wool, fine or coarse animal hair; horsehair yarn and woven fabric
HS 52 Cotton
HS 53 Other vegetable textile fibers; paper yarn and woven fabric of paper yarn
HS 54 Man-made filaments
HS 55 Man-made staple fibers
HS 56 Wadding, felt and nonwovens; special yarns, twine, cordage, ropes and cables and articles thereof
HS 57 Carpets and other textile floor coverings
HS 58 Special woven fabrics; tufted textile fabrics; lace, tapestries; trimmings; embroidery
HS 59 Impregnated, coated, covered or laminated textile fabrics; textile articles of a kind suitable for industrial use
HS 60 Knitted or crocheted fabrics
HS 61 Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, knitted or crocheted
HS 62 Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, not knitted or crocheted
HS 63 Other made up textile articles; sets; worn clothing and worn textile articles; rags

FOOTWEAR/HEADGEAR: Footwear, headgear, umbrellas
HS 64 Footwear, gaiters and the like; parts of such articles
HS 65 Headgear and parts thereof
HS 66 Umbrellas, sun umbrellas, walking sticks, seatsticks, whips, riding-crops and parts thereof
HS 67 Prepared feathers and down and articles made of feathers or of down; artificial flowers; articles of human hair

STONE/GLASS: Articles of stone, plaster cement, asbestos, mica, ceramics, glass
HS 68 Articles of stone, plaster, cement, asbestos, mica or similar materials
HS 69 Ceramic products
HS 70 Glass and glassware
HS 71 Natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones,precious metals, metals clad with precious metal and articles
         thereof; imitation jewelry; coin

METALS: Base metals and articles thereof
HS 72 Iron and steel
HS 73 Articles of iron or steel
HS 74 Copper and articles thereof
HS 75 Nickel and articles thereof
HS 76 Aluminum and articles thereof
HS 77 (Reserved for possible future use)
HS 78 Lead and articles thereof


                                                                                                                                46
HS 79 Zinc and articles thereof
HS 80 Tin and articles thereof
HS 81 Other base metals; cermets; articles thereof
HS 82 Tools, implements, cutlery, spoons and forks, of base metal; parts thereof of base metal
HS 83 Miscellaneous articles of base metal

MACHINERY/ELECTRICAL: Machinery, mechanical appliances, electrical equipment and parts
HS 84 Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances; parts thereof
HS 85 Electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof; sound recorders and reproducers, television image and sound
         recorders and reproducers, and parts and accessories of such articles

TRANSPORTATION: vehicles, aircraft, vessels, transport equipment
HS 86 Railway or tramway locomotives, rolling-stock and parts thereof; railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings and parts
         thereof; mechanical (including electro-mechanical) traffic signalling equipment of all kinds
HS 87 Vehicles other than railway or tramway rolling stock, and parts and accessories thereof
HS 88 Aircraft, spacecraft, and parts thereof
HS 89 Ships, boats and floating structures

MISCELLANEOUS
HS 90 Optical, photographic, cinematographic, measuring, checking, precision, medical or surgical instruments and apparatus;
        parts and accessories thereof
HS 91 Clocks and watches and parts thereof
HS 92 Musical instruments; parts and accessories of such articles
HS 93 Arms and ammunition; parts and accessories thereof
HS 94 Furniture; bedding, mattresses, mattress supports, cushions and similar stuffed furnishings; lamps and lighting fittings, not
        elsewhere specified or included; illuminated sign illuminated nameplates and the like; prefabricated buildings
HS 95 Toys, games and sports requisites; parts and accessories thereof
HS 96 Miscellaneous manufactured articles
HS 97 Works of art, collectors' pieces and antiques
HS 98 Special classification provisions
HS 99 Temporary legislation; temporary modifications proclaimed pursuant to trade agreements legislation; additional import
        restrictions proclaimed pursuant to section 22 of the Agricultural Adjustment Act, as amended




                                                                                                                                47
