                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




REPORT ON THE STATE OF AVAILABLE DATA FOR THE STUDY OF INTERNATIONAL
                TRADE AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

                                           Robert C. Feenstra
                                            Robert E. Lipsey
                                           Lee G. Branstetter
                                              C. Fritz Foley
                                             James Harrigan
                                           J. Bradford Jensen
                                               Lori Kletzer
                                            Catherine Mann
                                               Peter K. Schott
                                             Greg C. Wright

                                         Working Paper 16254
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16254


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2010




This report is prepared for the Committee on Economics Statistics of the American Economic Association.
We thank W. Erwin Diewert, Susan Houseman, J. David Richardson and several U.S. statistical agencies
for providing valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2010 by Robert C. Feenstra, Robert E. Lipsey, Lee G. Branstetter, C. Fritz Foley, James Harrigan,
J. Bradford Jensen, Lori Kletzer, Catherine Mann, Peter Schott, and Greg C. Wright. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
Report on the State of Available Data for the Study of International Trade and Foreign Direct
Investment
Robert C. Feenstra, Robert E. Lipsey, Lee G. Branstetter, C. Fritz Foley, James Harrigan,
J. Bradford Jensen, Lori Kletzer, Catherine Mann, Peter K. Schott, and Greg C. Wright
NBER Working Paper No. 16254
August 2010
JEL No. F00

                                             ABSTRACT


This report, prepared for the Committee on Economic Statistics of the American Economic
Association, examines the state of available data for the study of international trade and foreign direct
investment. Data on values of imports and exports of goods are of high quality and coverage, but price
data suffer from insufficient detail. It would be desirable to have more data measuring value-added
in trade as well as prices of comparable domestic and imported inputs. Value data for imports and
exports of services are too aggregated and valuations are questionable, while price data for service
exports and imports are almost non-existent. Foreign direct investment data are of high quality but
quality has suffered from budget cuts. Data on trade in intellectual property are fragmentary. The
intangibility of the trade makes measurement difficult, but budget cuts have added to the difficulties.
Modest funding increases would result in data more useful for research and policy analysis.


Robert C. Feenstra                                     C. Fritz Foley
Department of Economics                                Harvard Business School
University of California, Davis                        Soldiers Field
One Shields AvenueDavis, CA 95616                      Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                               and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu                                 ffoley@hbs.edu

Robert E. Lipsey                                       James Harrigan
NBER                                                   Department of Economics
365 Fifth Avenue, Suite 5318                           University of Virginia
New York, NY 10016-4309                                P.O. Box 400182
rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu                                    Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
                                                       and NBER
Lee G. Branstetter                                     harrigan@nber.org
Heinz CollegeSchool of Public Policy
 and Management                                        J. Bradford Jensen
Department of Social and Decision Sciences             McDonough School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University                             Georgetown University
2504B Hamburg Hall                                     Washington, DC 20057
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                   and NBER
and NBER                                               jbj24@georgetown.edu
branstet@andrew.cmu.edu
Lori Kletzer
UC, Santa Cruz
Department of Economics
1156 High St.
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
lkletzer@ucsc.edu

Catherine Mann
Brandeis University
363 Main St
Concord, MA 01742
clmann@verizon.net

Peter K. Schott
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
peter.schott@yale.edu

Greg C. Wright
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
gcwright@ucdavis.edu
                  Report on the State of Available Data for the Study of
                   International Trade and Foreign Direct Investment*

   Subcommittee: Robert Feenstra, Robert Lipsey, co-chairs; Lee Branstetter, C. Fritz Foley,
James Harrigan, J. Bradford Jensen, Lori Kletzer; Catherine Mann, Peter K. Schott, Greg C. Wright

                                                 April 23, 2010

1.      Introduction and Motivation

Increased globalization of the U.S. economy has led to a rising awareness of the importance of
statistics on international trade and investment. A number of recent reports, including those by
the Government Accountability Office (GAO, 2004, 2005), National Academy of Public
Administration (NAPA, 2007), National Research Council (NRC, 2006), the Sloan Foundation
(Sturgeon, 2006), and a 2009 conference on “Measurement Issues Arising from the Growth of
Globalization” sponsored by the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research and the
National Academy of Public Administration, 1 have highlighted the ability and limitations of
publicly available data to accurately analyze phenomena such as offshoring and services trade.2
This report, commissioned by the Committee on Economic Statistics of the American Economic
Association, seeks to provide a comprehensive description of data available for the study of
international trade and foreign direct investment, as well as to identify areas where data
collection could be improved.

As the U.S. economy becomes more integrated with the rest of the world, price developments
abroad become ever more important in affecting inflation in the United States. Indeed, former
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan partially attributed favorable U.S. inflation
performance during the later years of his tenure to falling prices on U.S. imports from China and
other rapidly developing countries.3 While falling import prices may have helped U.S. inflation


* This report is prepared for the Committee on Economics Statistics of the American Economic Association. We
thank W. Erwin Diewert, Susan Houseman, J. David Richardson and several U.S. statistical agencies for providing
valuable comments.
1
  See: http://www.upjohninstitute.org/measurement/final-program.html.
2
  Other reports include the World Trade Organization (2005), and the Office of Senator Joseph Lieberman (2004).
The link between offshoring and U.S. productivity is the subject of articles in Business Week (Mandel, 2007) and the
New York Times (Uchitelle, 2009).
3
  See, for example, http://www.federalreserve.gov/BoardDocs/Speeches/2004/200405062/default.htm
                                                  2

performance, they may have also contributed to pressure on the wages of U.S. workers employed
in producing goods that have to compete with ever-cheaper imports. Understanding the monetary
policy and labor market implications of import prices is only possible with accurate and detailed
data on import prices.

Another key area of policy interest revolves around offshoring and its impacts. Workers face
potential loss of jobs due to the movement of production facilities overseas, but at the same time
U.S. firms and their customers benefit from the reduction in costs made possible through shifting
some activities abroad. Both phenomena require detailed, disaggregate data for understanding
their impacts. For example, whereas overall import prices are useful for understanding
globalization and inflation, import prices disaggregated by product and by source country can
give an important insight into the geography of competition. Likewise, disaggregate import
prices are needed to determine the extent to which offshoring reduces costs for U.S. firms and
contributes to higher productivity.

An example will serve to illustrate the difficulty in tracking international trade flows and their
impact on the U.S. economy. Suppose that a firm has moved its production entirely offshore, and
we wish to determine the impact of this decision on industry employment or wages in the United
States. If the production formerly done in the United States is replaced by merchandise imports
of the same product, then it would not be difficult to measure the increase in those imports and
estimate the impact on employment or wages in that U.S. industry. But this simple example
makes many assumptions that may not hold in practice.

First, it is common for firms to move only a portion of their production process offshore. For
example, they might be exporting unfinished components, assembling them in Mexico, and then
importing the finished product back to the U.S. In that case, the portion of production done
offshore should be measured by its value-added, which can be much less than the imported value
of the product. The situation is even more complicated when, instead of importing a finished
product, the firm imports intermediate inputs that it uses in production of a final product: since
the purchaser or ultimate owner of the imports is not available in the U.S. import statistics, we do
not directly observe the intermediate inputs that are imported by a firm and, therefore, we cannot
directly relate such imports to industry employment or wages. Rather, we need to impute the
                                                   3

value of imported intermediate inputs into an industry. As discussed in section 2.1 and 2.2
below, that imputation involves somewhat crude assumptions that researchers are only beginning
to overcome. Accurate data on the prices of imports and exports, and their comparison to
domestically produced products, are essential to measure the impact of offshoring, as discussed
in section 2.3. These are areas where progress can be made in improving the availability of
international data.

A second major difficulty arises when there is offshoring of service inputs. For example, the
iPod, sold by Apple, is physically produced by several Asian companies, (Linden et al., 2007).
Whether or not the payment that Apple makes to these companies for their services will be
picked up as a U.S. import of goods or services depends on a number of factors, such as the
nature of the contract between Apple and the suppliers. We discuss the conceptual and practical
difficulties in collecting data on services trade in section 2.4.

Tracking the flows of services between firms is slightly easier when they are affiliated with a
multinational enterprise. Information on the activities of U.S. multinationals and foreign
multinationals with affiliates in the United States is collected by the U.S. Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA), as described in section 2.5. Unfortunately, the information collected by the
BEA has been shrinking over time, even while the activities of U.S. multinationals, especially as
they relate to offshoring, are receiving increased attention. The same holds for the activities of
the International Price Program at the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), which has had to reduce
its collection of trade prices – especially in the services area – as a consequence of recent budget
cuts. A final topic we deal with is international knowledge flows, discussed in section 2.6.

Recommendations for improvements in the collection and availability of data are given
throughout the report, and are summarized in section 3. Throughout, we focus on the trade and
foreign direct investment data available for the United States, while omitting discussion of
portfolio investment and international macroeconomic data. The Appendices include a brief
discussion of tariff data along with other data and conventions used by the United Nations and
other international organizations.
                                                 4


2. Summary of International Data

Data on U.S. trade in goods and services, as well as foreign direct investment, are needed to
serve two different purposes. One is to produce a set of data that follow the rules set down by
the IMF in its Balance of Payments Manual (BPM), the most recent of which was promulgated
in 2009, so that the United States can fulfill its obligations under international agreements to
produce data comparable to those of other countries. The other is to produce a set of trade data
that reflect the flows of goods and services and reveal the impact of exports, imports and foreign
direct investment on factors of production located in the United States. While this paper focuses
on the second goal, we include some discussion of the most recent BPM (see sections 2.4 and
2.5), especially when those instructions conflict with the conventional treatment of trade and
foreign investment data.


2.1 Commodity-level U.S. Trade Data

The starting point for any study of the effects of trade on the U.S. economy is the merchandise
exports and imports, including all physical goods that cross the U.S. border —i.e., all
manufactured, agricultural and natural resource goods. These data are collected at the border by
the U.S. Census Bureau according to several different classifications. Prior to 1989, the import
data were collected under the Tariff Schedule of the U.S. Annotated (TSUSA) system, whereas
the export data were collected under the Schedule B classification. Effective in 1989, both
imports and exports switched to the Harmonized System (HS) classification, which is also used
by the United Nations and which at its most disaggregate level contains over 16,000
commodities.

Availability
In addition to the availability of U.S. trade data from the United Nations (see Appendix A), there
are several national sources:
       a) National Trade Databank CD-ROMs that are distributed by the U.S. Department of
           Commerce, available at http://www.stat-usa.gov/tradtest.nsf?OpenDatabase;
       b) U.S. Exports and Imports of Merchandise on CD-ROM [machine-readable data file]
           distributed by the Bureau of the Census, available in government documents of many
           libraries;
                                                         5

         c) A compilation of U.S. import and export data by the NBER (Feenstra, 1996, 1997,
             and Feenstra, Romalis and Schott, 2002), available at www.nber.org/data/, and at
             www.internationaldata.org. These data are available at a disaggregate HS level, and
             the more aggregate Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and North American
             Industry Classification (NAICS),4 and have recently been updated to 2006;
         d) USA Trade On-Line - Distributed by the U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Census
             Bureau and available at www.usatradeonline.gov. Data are available back to 1992 at
             the HS 10-digit level and NAICS 6-digit level, providing several different measures
             of merchandise exports and imports.

Issues
Imports from within the same industry where production occurs are one measure of the impact of
trade on U.S. industries. Recently, attention has shifted instead to the offshoring of U.S
production activities, which is another view of how industries are integrated into the global
economy. Measuring the degree of offshoring, however, is more difficult than just measuring
imports. The report by the National Research Council (NRC, 2006) described the most common
approach to date in academic studies for measuring offshoring, which is based on the so-called
“proportionality” assumption. This approach can be briefly described as follows.

Since offshoring involves the replacement by a firm of intermediate inputs produced in-house
with foreign-produced intermediate inputs, the starting point for the measure is the input-output
tables from the BEA. These data, however, are at the industry level rather than for firms, and
therefore focus on the replacement at the industry level of domestically produced intermediates
with those imported. The goal is to know how the import share of these intermediate purchases
by industry is changing over time. Answering this question requires the key simplifying
assumption: because the input-output tables do not contain information on the share of
intermediates purchases by industries that is imported, this share is proxied by the economy-wide


4
 In order to use the merchandise trade statistics to measure import competition it is essential to concord the
Harmonized System to the classifications used for domestic industries. Prior to 1997, U.S. industries were
categorized according to the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC), and since that time, by the North American
Industry Classification System (NAICS). The disaggregate HS data for both imports and exports described in
Feenstra, Romalis and Schott (2002) include the corresponding SIC code (4-digit, 1987 version) and NAICS code
(6-digit, 1997 version). The U.S. import and export data are also organized by Standard International Trade
Classification code (SITC 5-digit, revision 2 and 3).
                                                         6

share of imports in total domestic consumption for each of the intermediate goods. In other
words, it is assumed that the proportion of intermediates that an industry purchases from abroad
is equal to the share of total domestic consumption in that industry that is imported: this is the
“proportionality” assumption.

To go beyond the proportionality assumption, it would be necessary to track imports by firm and
industry, as discussed in the next section. Short of this, some improvement to the measure of
offshoring obtained using this assumption can be achieved by restricting the economy-wide share
of imports in domestic consumption to be the share of total intermediate imports in domestic
intermediate use. This is done using additional information in the data on the End-use
classification for imports, which distinguishes products as either intermediates or final goods.5 In
the future, a more direct solution at the industry level would be for BEA to begin distinguishing
between domestic- or foreign-produced inputs in the construction of the input-output tables. In
other words, the number of rows in the “Make” matrix could be doubled: outputs could be
distinguished by whether they are delivered to a domestic demander or a foreign demander (via
exports) and, likewise, the “Use” matrix could distinguish between domestic or foreign supplied
inputs(Diewert, 2008). Along these lines, some headway has been recently made by the Census
Bureau, as the 2007 Economic Census includes inquiries regarding whether firms design their
own products, what the firm’s primary activity is, and whether they engaged in domestic or
foreign outsourcing (offshoring). Of course, since these firm responses are qualitative, it may be
worthwhile to consider adding a quantitative field in the future (e.g., the value of offshored
production).

An alternative classification scheme used for U.S. merchandise imports that can also be used to
make some headway on measuring offshoring, even without firm-level data, is the classification
of “general imports” versus “imports for consumption.” General imports are imports as they
come off the dock: they reflect the total arrival of merchandise from foreign countries that
immediately enter consumption channels, and also those that enter as inputs into foreign trade
zones (or bonded warehouses). In contrast, imports for consumption are used for immediate



5
  The End-Use Classification System used by the BEA was designed to categorize items by use or consumption
rather than by the more traditional stage of production. It is the system used to produce the national accounts.
                                                        7

consumption, and include those goods coming out of U.S. foreign trade zones (and withdrawals
from warehouses for consumption).6

Therefore, these two types of data will differ for goods used in foreign trade zones (or entering
into bonded warehouses). Examples include automobiles and their parts, for which in 1993 the
value entering U.S. foreign trade zones was over $12 billion (Swenson, 1997, p. 37). Therefore,
these goods represent the foreign content of goods produced in U.S. foreign trade zones (such as
the foreign content of an American-built Toyota Camry, for example), which is a measure of the
offshoring of intermediate inputs. So, for goods produced in foreign trade zones it is possible to
measure such foreign content, or offshoring. However, for goods not produced in U.S. foreign
trade zones, this method is not available; instead, studies have relied on the “proportionality”
assumption described above to measure the offshoring of intermediate inputs. This raises the
question of whether better measures can be obtained by the use of firm-level trade data, which
we consider next.


2.2 Firm-level U.S. Trade Data

The U.S. merchandise data collected by the U.S. Census Bureau are obtained from reports made
by exporters and importers, which are at the level of the firm. This raises a difficulty with
accessing such data, since they are necessarily confidential. Recognizing this, there are three
datasets available for studying U.S. international trade at the firm level.

Availability
    a) The first two datasets track the universe of U.S. export and import transactions,
        respectively, over the period 1992 to 2009. These datasets are not publicly available but
        may be accessed at one of several Research Data Centers by researchers whose projects
        have been approved by the Census Bureau’s Center for Economic Studies.7 For a more
        detailed discussion of the transactions data, see Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2009).

6
  Since April 1995, the National Trade Databank CD-ROMs that are distributed by the U.S. Department of
Commerce have reported general imports rather than imports for consumption. The earlier U.S. import data
distributed by Feenstra (1996) for 1972-1994 was for “imports for consumption,” but the updated data for 1989-
2006 available at www.nber.org/data/, and at www.internationaldata.org includes general imports. All measures of
exports and imports, including imports for consumption, are available from the U.S. Census Bureau.
7
  See the CES website at http://www.ces.census.gov/ for more information about submitting research proposals for
using these data. The export and import transaction data are a complete enumeration of documentation collected by
                                                          8

    b) The third dataset is the Exporter Database, which provides annual summaries of the
         export activities of U.S. firms, including their number, geographic concentration and
         characteristics. It is compiled and maintained by the Foreign Trade Division of the U.S.
         Census Bureau and can be accessed at the U.S. Department of Commerce’s International
         Trade Administration website at http://ita.doc.gov/td/industry/otea/edb/index.html.

Issues
The firm-level import transaction data can potentially be used to construct a better measure of
offshoring than has been available to date. A preliminary attempt to do so for the U.S. is made by
Feenstra and Jensen (2009). They begin by dividing firm-level imports into intermediate inputs
and final goods. The intermediate purchases are then distributed across each of a firm’s
establishments according to the known levels of consumption of various intermediates by those
establishments. These establishments are classified by industry, and so by aggregating up, one
can determine the value of industry-level imported intermediates. In a comparison with the
industry-level imports obtained from the “proportionality” assumption, Feenstra and Jensen find
instances where these measures deviate quite substantially.


The analysis of Feenstra and Jensen (2009) is too preliminary to allow one to infer the impact of
these differences. But in related work for Germany, Winkler and Milberg (2009) find that
offshoring measured from firm-level imports deviates substantially from that obtained by the
“proportionality” assumption. Furthermore, they find that these differences are important enough
to reverse the sign of the impact of offshoring on wages in some specifications. These results
suggest that further work for the United States would be highly desirable.

An additional starting point in constructing accurate measures of offshoring activity is to use
information from the import transaction data that indicates the share of value for each


the U.S. Census Bureau and the U.S. Customs and Border Protection office. Information available for each
transaction includes: date of shipment, identity of U.S. exporting or importing firm, value of shipment, quantity of
shipment, ten-digit HS category of shipment, the destination or source country, the transport mode, the port of entry
and whether or not the transaction took place between “related parties.” For exports, Foreign Trade Statistics
Regulations, 30.7(v), define a related party transaction as one between a U.S. exporter and a foreign consignee,
where either party owns, directly or indirectly, 10% or more of the other party. For import transactions, Section
402(e) of the Tariff Act of 1930 defines related party trade to include transactions between parties with various types
of relationships including “any person directly or indirectly, owning, controlling or holding power to vote, 6 percent
of the outstanding voting stock or shares of any organization”
                                                 9

commodity shipment that is of U.S. origin. This allows for calculating the foreign value-added
component of goods that originated in the U.S. While this information does not address the
significant portion of offshored production that originates in foreign countries, it may be useful
for studying products containing components of high technological value that are domestically
produced but assembled abroad.

Besides offshoring, there are many other reasons for policy makers and academics to be
interested in the firm-level export and import data. It has been known for many years that a small
number of firms in the United States account for the lion’s share of exports (Richardson, 1995).
More recently, it has been shown that many of these firms are also engaged in importing: they
are the “most globally engaged” firms, according to Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2009). Such
firms are much larger in size and of higher productivity than their competitors, and are of great
importance to the U.S. economy. Understanding the dynamics of these firms is an important
priority for academics, and can lead to valuable insight for policy. As noted above, the firm-level
trade data can be accessed through Research Data Centers by researchers whose projects have
been approved by the Census Bureau’s Center for Economic Studies.


2.3 U.S. International Prices

The usefulness of data on U.S. exports and imports is greatly enhanced by having price indexes
that can be used to convert nominal values into real measures. Thus, the first objective of
international price indexes is to deflate the aggregate values of exports and imports in a manner
consistent with the National Income and Product Accounts. But detailed and internationally
comparable prices are also needed to assess the extent of actual and potential substitution
between domestic and foreign sources. For example, international prices play a key role in
understanding the relationship between exchange rates and inflation at the aggregate level, and
the impact of foreign investment and trade on domestic output and employment at the
disaggregate level. Ideally, such international price data would be available for both goods
(discussed in the preceding sections) and for services (discussed in the following sections). In
practice, however, the price data for services are harder to collect and more limited in scope.

Availability
                                                         10

The main source of data on international prices is the International Price Program (IPP) at the
BLS, available at http://www.bls.gov/mxp/. IPP uses market sale prices for calculating export
and import price indexes for goods.8 Three classification systems are currently used to describe
U.S. merchandise import and export price indexes: North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS), Harmonized system (HS), and End-Use.9 The IPP data generally are available
on a monthly basis. International prices by origin are also available for various sample periods
for specific countries and regions.10

For international services, the available prices from the IPP program at BLS are extremely
limited, and most series and all development were discontinued as of 2007 because of budgetary
constraints. Continuing data are available only for air freight and air passenger fares by selected
country and region, including Europe, Asia, Japan, South Korea for air freight, and Europe,
Other Europe, UK, Asia, Japan, and LAC for air passenger fares. Sample periods and frequency
vary. Other services data, including travel and tourism, education services, and additional data on
passenger fares have been discontinued. The restoration of funding for international service price
collection is of very high importance, but it is not the only area where the activities of IPP
program at BLS can contribute to improved understanding of offshoring and other phenomena,
as discussed below.

Issues
As noted above, the primary function of the export and import price indexes is as deflators of the
export and import volumes used in the U.S. national accounts figures. In this role, they provide

8
  The majority of prices used in calculating import price indexes are quoted FOB (Free On Board) Foreign Port. This
excludes duties, insurance and other extra charges to bring a good into the United States. The majority of prices used
in calculating export price indexes are quoted FAS (Free Along Ship) U.S. Port. This includes inland freight,
insurance and other charges to get the good to the carrier exiting the United States but not afterwards. About 5-10%
of imports and exports currently surveyed are priced in foreign currencies in which case the IPP uses an exchange
rate factor that is an average for the month prior to the pricing month.
9
  The SITC was created by the United Nations and was the first classification system used by the International Price
Program (IPP) to publish its price indexes. These data are available on a quarterly—last month of the quarter—
frequency, and go back as far as 1974 for some categories, but end in 2005 with the beginning of the NAICS
classification system. NAICS data are available monthly, but only from 2005. Price indexes based on HS can be
used with other international source data (see UN Comtrade, Appendix B). Some series go back to 1994 on a
monthly basis and to 1992 on a quarterly basis, using the last month of the quarter. End-use data are available from
1977 on a quarterly—last month of the quarter—basis early in the sample, and monthly beginning in the late 1980s.
10
   These include the Industrialized Countries, Other Countries, Canada, European Union, Latin America, Japan,
Asian Newly Industrialized Countries, France, Germany, United Kingdom, Mexico, Pacific Rim, China, Association
of Southeast Asian Nations, and the Asia Near East.
                                                  11

insight into the impact of trade on U.S. real GDP. In order to correctly measure real GDP,
however, it is essential that the import and export prices are themselves correctly measured. This
creates several challenges for the IPP program at BLS.

First, the best formula to use for any price index is a question that can only be settled by
research. For the consumer price index, that research was done as part of the Boskin et al. (1996)
Commission, as discussed in Diewert (1998). While the same degree of attention has not been
given to the export and import prices indexes, a promising start along these lines is provided by
Alterman, Diewert and Feenstra (1999). They investigate the impact of alternative formulas for
the export and import price index, which currently use Laspeyres formulas. They find that both
indexes overstate the rate of increase in prices as compared to using a geometric (Törnqvist)
formula for the prices indexes. This result is similar to the overstatement of the consumer price
index before the adjustment to geometric indexes was made. But because of budget constraints,
and the lack of further research, no adjustment to the formulas used by IPP has been made.

Because the overstatement in the IPP indexes (as compared to a geometric formula) has been
greater for imports than for exports, it follows that the terms of trade – which is the ratio of
export to import prices – computed from the IPP prices are biased downwards. The United
States has enjoyed greater improvements in the terms of trade, especially since the mid-1990s,
than shown by official indexes (Feenstra, et al., 2009). One implication of that finding is that a
portion of the apparent productivity speedup in the U.S. since the mid-1990s is in fact an
(unmeasured) terms of trade improvement. In order to correctly attribute that gain for consumers
to globalization, rather than to domestic productivity, it is essential to continue to improve the
measurement of international prices.

One of the most difficult areas to deal with is the switching by domestic firms of sources of
supply for an intermediate input from high-price domestic to lower-priced foreign sources. This
switch is analogous to the “outlet substitution bias” in the consumer price index (see Diewert,
1998), as consumers seek out the lowest-price stores. In fact, large shifts in sourcing of
intermediate inputs have been documented in the literature (e.g., Eldridge, 1999; Houseman,
2008) and several papers document significant price discounts due to this switching (e.g., Byrne,
Kovak and Michaels, 2009) However, the drop in price that accompanies this switch is not
                                                         12

currently reflected in any domestic or international price index. A proposal to measure this price
drop has been developed by the IPP program (Alterman, 2009) in what is called an “input price
index.” The input price index would measure the cost of inputs regardless of their source, and
would therefore capture the drop in price when firms switch to lowest cost suppliers, including
those overseas. However, this proposal would require additional funding in order to be
implemented by the IPP.

Besides offshoring, there are many other research questions, too, that can be addressed with
these data. One of these is the impact of exchange rates on the prices of traded goods, and also
on the prices of domestic goods. This is the inflation issue that Federal Reserve Chairman Alan
Greenspan raised (as noted in the Introduction), whereby favorable U.S. inflation performance
during the later years was attributed in part to falling prices on U.S. imports from China and
other rapidly developing countries. Accurate measures of exports and import prices – both at the
aggregate level and for disaggregate sectors – are needed to assess the implications of exchange
rate changes on prices, and thereby on the conduct of monetary policy. Unfortunately, the recent
budget environment has severely limited the ability of IPP to expand the number of countries for
which they publish data from, as well as the level of detailed price data reported for each
country.

Another issue with regard to the international price data arises from differences in classification
philosophies.11 As discussed, with regard to both transactions data and price data, NAICS is the
organizing classification system for much of U.S. data going forward. But NAICS does not
resolve the tension between the production-based philosophy and the balance of payments (BOP)
transaction-based philosophy (which includes both cross-border and affiliate transactions). More
specifically, the philosophy of the NAICS-based Producer Price Index (PPI) has as its objective
to deflate the net output on an industry basis. Thus, intermediate activities are netted out and
intra-firm trade within an industry group that might go along with these intermediate activities is
not included. In contrast, the IPP trade indexes are transactions- or product-based, with the
objective to construct real exports and imports as inputs to the U.S. National Income and Product
Accounts. Export and import transactions are, generally, collected on a gross basis. Accordingly,
so long as the international trade data exist for transactions in intermediates, the IPP would
11
     For more, see William Alterman (1997), pp. 18-32.
                                                      13

construct a price to go with them. The principal difficulty that arises with the tension between
these two concepts is that domestic prices don’t match international prices, raising the challenge
of measuring that fundamental determinant of supply and demand—relative prices.

One example of the difference in these approaches is the NAICS “Information sector”, which
includes establishments that produce, manipulate and distribute information, data, and
transactions, as well as establishments that transmit or distribute these products.12 In the BOP
data, trade for these activities are “scattered across several categories in the tables for cross-
border trade and for sales by affiliates” (Borga and Mann, 1992, Box page 68). Moreover, as
intermediate services, many of these activities are embedded in the flows of and prices
associated with trade in goods.

Finally, as noted above, international services prices are extremely limited and most series and
all development were discontinued as of 2007 because of resource constraints. In the absence of
data on international prices of trade in categories such as business and professional services, it is
impossible to address research questions such as the role of information technology in enabling
more fragmentation and cross-border trade in services.


2.4 U.S. International Trade in Services

Over the past few years, the International Monetary Fund, the United Nations, and the World
Trade Organization have evolved toward greater recognition of the importance of services in
international trade, and have also broadened the definition of international trade in services. In
Appendix C we describe the conceptual issues involved with defining trade in services.

The 2009 Balance of Payments Manual (BPM) changes the instructions for manufacturing
services on physical inputs owned by others, including “processing, assembly, labeling, packing,
etc.” (IMF, 2009, sections under 10.6). Manufacturing operations undertaken by an entity that
does not own the goods concerned, and for which a fee is paid by the owner of the goods, are to
be treated as services. The flow of services is measured by the amount of the fees. The former,


12
  See Economic Classification Policy Committee, “Issues Paper No. 1, Conceptual Issues,”
February 8, 1993. http://www.census.gov/epcd/naics/issues1. See also, “Implications of Implementing NAICS in the
Current Services Program”, http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/naicssvc.html
                                                  14

and still customary, rule was to treat the exports for processing as merchandise exports and the
processed merchandise as imports, including the value of the processing. This new treatment of
exports for processing in the BPM conflicts with the customary collection of merchandise
exports and imports, and thereby creates an inconsistency between the balance of payments data
and international trade data.

In the United States, the BEA presents aggregate data on international services through four
publication programs: (a) cross-border trade in services data in the international transactions
accounts; (b) sales of services through affiliates of multinationals, some portion of which
represent cross-border trade; (c) annual and benchmark input-output tables; and (d) the national
income and product accounts.

Availability
a) Cross-border trade in services
The cross-border trade in services publication program provides the basis for all of BEA’s
services trade data. As a result, this publication program provides the best sense of what trade
data BEA collects:
       The estimates of cross-border transactions cover both affiliated and unaffiliated
       transactions between U.S. residents and foreign residents. Affiliated transactions consist
       of intra-firm trade within multinational companies—specifically, the trade between U.S.
       parent companies and their foreign affiliates and between U.S. affiliates and their foreign
       parent groups. Unaffiliated transactions are with foreigners that neither own, nor are
       owned by, the U.S. party to the transaction…. Cross-border trade in private services is
       classified into the same five, broad categories that are used in the U.S. international
       transactions accounts—travel, passenger fares, “other transportation,” royalties and
       license fees, and “other private services.” (Survey of Current Business, November 2001)

Services trade data are available for varying levels of industry detail for 1986 through 2009. The
number of categories reported for both unaffiliated and affiliated trade increases over the period.
Data are available by service for regions and countries, also. Data are available at:
http://www.bea.gov/international/intlserv.htm .
                                                          15


b) Services Supplied through Affiliates
The data on services supplied through affiliates come from surveys that collect a variety of data
on the financing and operations of multinational corporations. Additionally, these surveys
provide information used in the construction of the cross-border trade in services series, and
there are two key differences in what is collected. First, data on affiliates’ services are classified
based on the primary industry of the affiliate. In contrast, data on cross-border trade are
classified by type of service. Second, the survey data on services supplied through affiliates
measure affiliate sales, but not purchases, whereas the data on cross-border trade consider both
purchases and sales.

The BEA data on services supplied through affiliates are based on surveys conducted through
BEA’s U.S. Direct Investment Abroad and Foreign Direct Investment in the U.S. programs.
Comprehensive benchmark surveys are collected every 5 years and less comprehensive
collections are conducted annually. BEA collects data on U.S. international transactions in
private services through several surveys that it conducts.13

Detailed data on international services transactions are currently available from 1986 through
2006, for cross border trade, and from 1989 for services supplied through affiliates. Service
imports and exports are reported for approximately 30 (1986-1991) to 35 (1992-2006) service
types (with additional detail on whether the transactions are between affiliated or unaffiliated
parties available for some categories). These data are available by country for approximately 35
countries and country groupings for 1986-2006.

Data on services supplied through affiliates, cross-border trade in services, and other information
on methods and concepts are available at: http://www.bea.gov/international/intlserv.htm. The
respondent-level data underlying the cross-border services transactions program are available to
specially sworn researchers (with an approved project and clearance) through BEA’s restricted
access facility.

13
  These surveys fall into two broad categories: (1) The surveys of “selected” services, which cover mainly business,
professional, and technical services; and (2) the surveys of transportation services. These collection programs are the
principal source of BEA’s estimates of trade in services but the estimates of some services are based on data from a
variety of other sources, including U.S. Customs and Border Protection and surveys conducted by other Federal
Government agencies, private sources, and partner countries. BOP data are available at:
http://www.bea.gov/international/index.htm#bop.
                                                        16



c) Benchmark Input-Output Accounts
In addition to the international services transactions data programs described above, BEA also
presents import and export data for services by commodity in the benchmark input-output
tables.14 BEA prepares benchmark input-output accounts for years ending in 2 and 7, which are
based on detailed data from the quinquennial economic censuses that are conducted by the
Bureau of the Census. They are published at the summary level and at the detailed level. The
benchmark accounts show how industries interact at the detailed level; specifically, they show
how approximately 500 industries provide input to, and use output from, each other to produce
gross domestic product. These accounts provide detailed information on the flows of the goods
and services that make up the production processes of industries. The 1997 benchmark input-
output accounts use the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) while the 1992
and earlier benchmark accounts are based on the Standard Industry Classification (SIC).15

Issues
Issues related to the collection of services trade data are explored in great detail in a recent report
produced by the MIT Services Offshoring Working Group, Sturgeon (2006). Drawing on this
report, we highlight the following issues.

First, BEA is making progress in providing more detail for affiliated transactions and now
reports detail that is consistent across unaffiliated and affiliated transactions. However, the data
are still not nearly as detailed as merchandise trade. There are over 10,000 product categories,
but only about 30 service trade categories, and only in the most recent years. Furthermore, the
country breakdown is limited to broad service categories, as is the breakdown between
unaffiliated and affiliated trade. Increasing the level of detail reported for service trade, based on
NAICS industries or other classifications recommended by international guidelines, is an
important priority.




14
  BEA’s International Transaction Accounts are the source for the foreign trade estimates in the I-O accounts.
15
  Benchmark input-output tables are available (at varying levels of aggregation and on various classification
systems) for 1947, 1958, 1963, 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, 1997, and 2002. There is very little service
sector detail prior to 1977. These data and additional information are available at:
http://www.bea.gov/industry/index.htm#benchmark_io .
                                                          17

Second, exemption levels are specific to the type of traded service, but in general they are high
and are rising. High exemption levels mean that firms with import or export transactions below a
certain level are not required to report. For example, U.S. insurance companies involved in
international transactions must fill out a BEA survey if these transactions exceed $8,000,000 in a
calendar year16. For goods transactions, the reporting threshold is $2,500 per transaction.
Exemption levels should be lowered to capture more of the trade activity.

Third, both of the priorities identified above highlight an operational issue the BEA faces in
conducting the surveys that support the trade in services data. The issue is that, in contrast to the
Census Bureau or the BLS, BEA does not have access to a sampling frame derived from the
universe of establishments and firms. Because the Census sampling frame derives from IRS data,
it cannot be shared with other agencies. Data sharing legislation regarding dissemination of these
data would be a useful step forward.

Fourth, BEA allows specially sworn researchers to access respondent level versions of the data
through its restricted access program. BEA should be commended on this program. However,
BEA should take advantage of the Census Bureau Research Data Center network to provide
access to BEA data (both trade in services and FDI data) outside of Washington, DC. The
physical and administrative infrastructure are both available through the CES/RDC program17.

Finally, as noted earlier, one method used to date to measure the extent of offshoring is the
“proportionality” assumption, under which the economy-wide share of imports in domestic
consumption is used to allocate comparable imports of goods across industries. BEA uses the
same approach to allocate imports of services across “using” industries in constructing an input-
output table. As we have argued above for imports of goods, it would be very desirable to
improve on this method for services as well.18


16
   BEA Reporting Requirements, March 2007: http://www.bea.gov/surveys/pdf/surveysu.pdf
17
   For more details see Jensen (2009).
18
   Another issue that arises with respect to the import and export data available in BEA’s input-output tables is that
of “non-comparables.” While many imported services are allocated across commodities and across industries,
certain types of imports are classified as non-comparables and aggregated into a “non-comparables” line in the
Annual Industry Accounts (AIAs). For example, royalties and license fees are classified as non-comparable.
Unfortunately, a significant portion of imported services is assigned to the “non-comparables” line in the AIAs,
greatly restricting the usefulness of the industry classifications. In fact, 80 percent of business, professional, and
technical services were classified as non-comparables in 2004.
                                                         18


2.5 U.S. Direct Investment Data

The BEA collects data on direct investment via a variety of surveys and publishes tabulated
aggregate figures. The data can be grouped into several categories. First, surveys capture
financial and operating information for both the parent companies and foreign affiliates of U.S.
based multinationals. These data are described in detail in Mataloni (1995). The 1977
Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1981)
can be thought of as the first of the modern surveys. The data were collected under the authority
of the International Investment Survey Act of 1976, which was the first to specify 10 percent
ownership by a single owner as the definition of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.19 Subsequent
outward benchmark surveys took place in 1982, 1989, 1994, 1999, and 2004, and annual data
have been collected on a smaller sample since 1983.

In addition to measuring U.S. multinational activity abroad, BEA tracks the activities of foreign
firms operating in the United States. Quijano (1990) describes these data. They cover most of the
data items covered in the outward surveys and the nature of the surveys is similar. However, less
information is collected about the foreign parents of U.S. affiliates than is collected about the
U.S. parents. There is some overlap between the inward and outward surveys because U.S.
parent firms in the outward FDI surveys include firms incorporated in the United States that are
owned by foreign firms, and the foreign-owned affiliates in the inward FDI surveys include those
owned by firms incorporated abroad, but ultimately owned by U.S. owners. The inward FDI
benchmark survey years now coincide with U.S. Economic Census years. The two data sets have
been matched in a joint BEA-Census project for 1987, 1992, 1997, and 2002, the latest of which
is Department of Commerce (2007).20

19
   This was adopted in place of earlier definitions based more on control of the enterprise or ownership shares across
different and independent owners. The evolution of these definitions is described in Lipsey (2003). The data do not
merely measure only those entities that are directly owned by U.S. parents, but they trace out chains of ownership to
measure indirectly owned affiliates. This is an essential aspect of the data given the rise in the use of holding
company structures by U.S multinationals. The 1977 survey also began the practice of including the most detailed
information for majority-owned affiliates, much less information for minority-owned affiliates, and only a small
amount for banks. For majority-owned affiliates, there were detailed balance sheet and income accounts, the
composition of affiliate external financial positions, inventories and property, plant, and equipment by type,
employment and employee compensation (with the distinction between production and non-production workers in
manufacturing), sales, divided between local, sales to the United States, and sales to other countries, R&D
expenditures, and exports shipped to the affiliate from the United States.
20
   The census data differ from the BEA data in that the census data are at the establishment level while BEA
reporting requirements permit a greater level of consolidation. The matched data include information on shipments,
                                                           19

Another set of data, only fragmentary so far, is a match of BEA data on foreign-owned firms in
the U.S. with BLS data on occupations and wages. The data were tabulated for a brief period
around 1990, and the project was then abandoned, but it has recently been revived. Releases
from the earlier effort covered the fourth quarters of 1989, 1990, 1991, and 1992.

Until recently, as a supplement to the quarterly and annual surveys of foreign direct investment
in the United States, BEA collected data on the acquisition of existing U.S. firms by foreign
firms and the establishment of new legal entities by foreign firms. For acquired firms, it includes
information on the assets, sales, and net income in the year of foreign acquisition, and for new
entities, the initial assets. The data also cover the costs of the acquisition or new establishment
and some information on how these costs were funded. This dataset was discontinued by the
BEA following the release of the 2008 data because of a lack of funding.

Finally, BEA also collects quarterly data related to the balance of payments. These include flows
of U.S. direct investment to and from foreign countries, flows from foreign countries into and out
of the United States, and estimates of the U.S.-owned stock of direct investment abroad and the
foreign-owned stock of direct investment in the United States. The methods and definitions used
in constructing these data are partly determined by international standards, as set out in
International Monetary Fund (1993), replaced by International Monetary Fund (2009), and the
UN System of National Accounts (1993), replaced by UN System of National Accounts (2008).

The latest Balance of Payments Manual (BPM) instructions (IMF, 2009) on the location of
multinational firms' activity is a retrogression from the earlier insistence on evidence of physical
production in a country. The earlier definition imposed a requirement for defining location, that
to be a “center of economic interest and to be a resident unit of a country (economic territory)
when the enterprise is engaged in a significant amount of production of goods and/or services
there or when the enterprise owns land or buildings there. The enterprise must maintain at least
one productive establishment in the country...” (IMF, 1993, Par. 73). In contrast, the current
BPM abandons the requirement that some activity actually take place in an affiliate and


employment, and payrolls, by industry, state, and country of ultimate beneficial owner, or the owner that is not
owned or controlled by another person. Not all data are available for all cross-classifications; in particular, payroll
data are not available by state and detailed industry in recent years, although they were in 1982 and 1987.
                                                          20

substitutes a purely legal definition in terms of ownership. The new BPM states that “a
corporation is always resident in its economy of incorporation” (IMF, 2009, Par. 4.21) and “The
residence of entities with little or no physical presence is to be determined from the jurisdiction
of incorporation or registration.” The effect is to accept the assignments of intangible and
financial assets to tax havens to minimize taxes as movements of production, even when no
movement of tangible productive activity takes place. The fictions of corporate accounting are
given precedence over the facts of production censuses and surveys.

Issues
Although the BEA foreign direct investment data are among the most extensive in the world,
there has been a slow deterioration in their coverage in response to budget pressures and
concerns about reporting burdens. BEA now plans to implement further cutbacks in the data it
collects. These changes undermine the accuracy of the published aggregate data and detract from
the value of analysis conducted using the firm-level data. Given the rapid growth in the activities
of multinational firms and the importance of globalization considerations to business and public
policy decisions, we believe that the maintenance of funding for collecting international
investment data would benefit both research and policy analysis.21

Another change that reduces the value of the BEA data to researchers is the introduction of
sampling in the annual surveys. Historically, one advantage of the BEA data was the ability to
follow a large sample of affiliates and parents annually over time. This allowed one to conduct
careful analysis of the effects of policy changes, macroeconomic shocks or other factors that
affect firm behavior. While the use of sampling may not have a large impact on certain aggregate
data, it has deleterious consequences for analysis of activity in smaller countries and industries
and for firm-level analysis using panel data.

21
  Over the last two and a half decades, increased reporting thresholds for multinational firms and the introduction of
shorter forms for certain types of filers have reduced the coverage of the BEA data. For example, in the 1982
Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, each foreign affiliate that had sales, assets or net income with
an absolute value in excess of $3 million and their parents were required to file an extensive form. By the time of the
2004 Benchmark Survey, BEA increased reporting thresholds and used three forms in collecting data from foreign
affiliates, a long form, a short form and a mini form. Approximately one quarter of affiliates filed the long form,
which had a reporting threshold of $150 million and covered around three-quarters of the items covered in 1982;
one-half filed the short form, which had a reporting threshold of $25 million and covered about half the items
covered in 1982; and the remainder filed the mini form, which covered only basic items and had a reporting
threshold of $10 million. Only larger parents were required to file detailed reports, and smaller ones provided only
very basic information.
                                                         21

The proposed changes to the future survey forms include significant cutbacks, some of which
have already taken place. Under these changes, reporting thresholds would increase dramatically,
fewer items would be collected on survey forms, and sampling would continue. We believe these
proposed changes threaten the accuracy of the direct investment data, and we suggest that BEA
be given the resources it needs to restore its data collection and processing efforts to their former
levels.

As was mentioned in Section 2.4, the BEA makes the individual firm data on foreign direct
investment in and out of the United States available to specially sworn researchers with approved
projects who can conduct their research at the BEA office in Washington. For these data, as for
the service trade data, providing access to specially sworn researchers through the Census
Bureau’s Research Data Centers would greatly expand the use of these data by academic
researchers.


2.6 (Mis)Measuring International Trade in Ideas?

While much of this report focuses on the measurement of U.S. exports and imports of goods and
services, global trade in disembodied ideas has also expanded substantially in recent years,
approaching annual levels of $100 billion in the 2000s.22 U.S. firms are important sellers and
buyers of technical processes, patented technologies, and engineering knowhow. How well do
the available data capture American firms’ growing trade in ideas?

Availability
U.S. firms are required to report data on the sales of their intangible property, including
technology, to their own affiliates and to unaffiliated third parties to the BEA .These sales are
used to help compute the U.S. current account, as well as to the IRS. BEA data on these sales are
obtained through a number of different survey instruments, and the set of survey instruments has
changed substantially over time as the BEA has put more resources into the measurement of
international services trade.23 Under U.S. law, firms are required to assign prices to intra-firm

22
  See Athreye and Cantwell (2005).
23
  The BE-10 is the survey of the foreign affiliates of U.S. firms used in benchmark years (roughly once every five
years), and obtains information on royalty payments between U.S. parents and affiliates in those years. The parallel
survey of U.S. affiliates of foreign firms, BE-12, obtains similar information on the royalty payments of U.S.
affiliates to/from their foreign parents. Historically, in non-benchmark years, the BEA used the BE-605 to track
                                                         22

transactions in intellectual property and other intangible assets that reflect the prices they would
charge an unaffiliated third party.

In 2007, total U.S. royalty payments and license fees from foreigners amounted to $82.6
billion.24 More than two-thirds of this flow came from intra-firm transactions: payments received
by U.S. parents from foreign affiliates ($54.7 billion) and payments earned by U.S. affiliates
from foreign parents ($4.1 billion). These flows measure all royalty and licensing fees pertaining
to intangible assets, including franchise fees, payments for use of trademarks, etc. However, the
BEA also breaks aggregate royalty payments and licensing fees down into categories.

Aggregating across inter-firm and intra-firm transactions, the total flows are dominated by
payments for industrial processes ($37.4 billion) and general use computer software ($26.7
billion). While software licensing is a form of technology transfer, it is really the payments for
industrial processes that come closest to measuring the sale of disembodied technology. Intra-
firm licensing of industrial processes in 2007 totaled $29.5 billion, and intra-firm software
licensing totaled $15.3 billion. Total U.S. licensing income from unaffiliated parties totaled
$23.7 billion in 2007, of which $7.9 billion was attributed to sales of industrial processes and
$11.4 billion was earned through licensing of general purpose software.

Issues
While these numbers are not small, they would not seem to loom as large as we might expect
given that U.S. firms’ foreign affiliate sales totaled nearly $5.5 trillion in 2007. U.S. parents’
total receipts from sales of technology to their affiliates were less than 1% of total sales. Large
numbers of affiliates report zero payments to parents for the use of intangible assets. It seems
clear that the reported flows fall far short of a full and complete accounting of all the benefits


transactions between U.S. affiliates and their foreign parent groups, the BE-577 to track royalty payments from
affiliated parties, and the BE-93 to track royalty payments received by U.S. firms from unaffiliated parties. Starting
in 2006, the primary data collection instruments have become the BE-120 Benchmark Survey of Transactions in
Selected Services and Intangible Assets with Foreign persons and the BE-125 Quarterly Survey of Transactions in
Selected Services and Intangible Assets. The BE-120 is a comprehensive survey to be administered once every five
years, while the BE-125 captures data on a quarterly basis, but with higher threshold reporting requirements and less
comprehensive coverage. The BE-120 requires mandatory reports from all U.S. persons with sales exceeding $2
million to foreign persons (or purchases exceeding $1 million) in any category of covered transactions. The BE-125
only requires mandatory reports when sales exceed $6 million (or purchase exceed $4 million)
24
   These and all other numbers in this paragraph are taken from the U.S. BEA website,
http://www.bea.gov/international/xls/tab4b.xls, downloaded on August 30, 2009.
                                                        23

conferred on affiliates by access to the intellectual assets of the parent. Possible reasons why
these numbers are so small include: underreporting by U.S. firms of payments back to the parent
in order to reduce the worldwide tax liability of the parent system;25 intellectual property
migration (Lipsey, 2008), whereby intellectual property in located in affiliates in tax-haven
jurisdictions (such as the Cayman Islands, Ireland, Singapore, the Netherlands, or Hong Kong)
with favorable tax accounting laws; and inadequate data quality and coverage, since thresholds in
the BE-10 survey, which obtains data on multinational firms’ royalty payments, have increased
steadily over time, potentially resulting in deterioration of coverage for smaller firms.26

Budgetary pressures and other priorities have led the BEA in recent years to raise the reporting
thresholds for some of the key survey instruments that measure technology licensing activity by
U.S. multinationals. If these trends continue, then the quality of our official data could
deteriorate even as the need for high quality data rises. We strongly believe additional funds
would improve the quality of the survey instruments and survey processes.

In addition, it should be recognized that from the perspective of U.S.-based multinationals,
intellectual property migration is a rational method of minimizing global tax liability. To what
extent does it meaningfully distort official measures of technology licensing and other
international service flows? Even indicative or incomplete evidence on this question could be
useful, and additional resources would enable the BEA to pursue this issue.

Finally, additional research could also help clarify the extent to which inter-firm licensing
revenues, especially the component based on royalty payments for industrial processes, reflect
broad cross-licensing agreements versus intentional sales of particular technologies. Survey
research focused on a manageably small number of firms who account for large amounts of
technology licensing revenue could be quite helpful in describing how these two very different
sources of licensing revenue have evolved across different industries and over time.




25
   Branstetter, Fisman, and Foley (2006) noted these problems and attempted to account for them in their study of
the response of technology transfer to changes in patent laws.
26
   The BE-10 survey is administered in benchmark years. In non-benchmark years, the BEA now relies on the BE-
125 to track royalty payments between affiliated and unaffiliated parties. The minimum transaction size necessary to
trigger a mandatory report ($6 million in sales) could be high enough to miss some transactions.
                                                  24


3. Proposals

We summarize the proposals implicit and explicit in the discussions above as follows:

With respect to import and export data, understanding the greater fragmentation of the
production process of goods and services requires access to firm-level data, as well as more
complete surveys of the nature of intra-multinational trade. These measures can then be
compared with existing industry-level measures to gauge the extent of mismeasurement of
macroeconomic measures of productivity and GDP growth. To this end, more work is needed in
the construction of measures of goods and services offshoring using the firm-level datasets
collected by BEA and the Census Bureau. While data on trade in services are now available at a
more disaggregate level than at any other time, more detail is sorely needed. And more generally,
the data collection process for the input-output tables constructed by BEA should be expanded to
distinguish between domestic- or foreign-produced inputs in the construction of the input-output
tables.

With respect to international prices, understanding the incentives for firms and consumers to
buy or sell internationally, and the implications of international trade and movements in the
dollar exchange rate for domestic costs and price inflation, require far more detailed international
prices than are currently available. In the face of these data needs the International Price Program
faces severe budget shortfalls. While data on the source and destination of cross-border flows of
services are limited, the already very limited data on international prices of services have been
further curtailed. There are no international prices for business and professional services, a part
of international trade rising rapidly and of particular interest at the new frontier for global
competition in labor markets. It is critical that policy discussions related to services trade are
founded on research that provides clear results and policy guidance. This means having access to
data that are much more disaggregated and comprehensive in scope. Collection of these
international price data, particularly for so-called “other private services”, is a priority. Apart
from data collection, a valuable IPP resource would be created under the proposed program to
construct an “input price index”. This would allow for accurate measurement of prices as the
availability of low-price foreign goods grows—a task that is overdue. However, this program
would require additional funding in order to be implemented by the IPP.
                                                  25

With respect to data on foreign direct investment and multinational trade, over the last 25
years, resource constraints have limited BEA’s ability to keep pace with the growing levels of
international engagement of U.S. firms. As a result, survey coverage of firms is less complete
than in the past, limiting what BEA can report, especially about operations in smaller industries
and countries. Restoring the level of funding for the foreign direct investment surveys would
reverse, or at least contain, the deterioration of the micro-data that BEA collects, and if it permits
less use of sampling in the surveys, would enhance the ability of researchers to make use of
longitudinal data that allow for careful analysis of policy changes and changes in economic
conditions.

With respect to trade in intellectual property and ideas, it is unlikely that in the near future
corporate tax law will be reformed sufficiently to alleviate the problems faced in collecting data
on inter-firm technology transfers. However, targeted surveys of the largest firms could
potentially uncover the basic patterns of trade in ideas. Again, the budget-constrained BEA
would be an ideal partner in this area.

As an alternative to generating new data, another way to enable more research with existing data
is through more extensive data-sharing. For example, there would be significant benefits to
improving data sharing arrangements between BEA and the U.S. Census. Although both of these
organizations are a part of the U.S. Department of Commerce, data sharing between these
entities is limited. In principle, one could match the BEA data on multinational firms and foreign
investment with the firm-level U.S. trade data described in Section 2.2, as well as with the other
firm-level census data. A data set with information on multinational activity, intra-firm trade, and
arm’s length trade would be very powerful in a variety of studies, including studies of
offshoring, the international product life cycle, and the modes by which firms serve foreign
markets. However, legal and bureaucratic hurdles have impeded the creation and use of
combined data. Removing these hurdles would open up many possibilities for research on the
important role of multinationals in U.S. trade.
                                                 26


Appendix A: U.S. Tariff Data

One source for U.S. tariffs is the U.S. trade data described in section 2.1. Those data include a
variable reflecting the tariff duties collected on each product. By dividing the duties by the
customs value of imports, an estimate of the ad valorem tariff is obtained. A second source is the
U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC) which posts the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of
the United States (HTS), www.usitc.org . For the years 1989 to 2001, those files have been
compiled in a tariff database described in Feenstra, Romalis and Schott (2002), available at
www.nber.org/data/ and gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/john.romalis/research/ .


The tariff database includes ad valorem, specific and estimated ad valorem equivalent (AVE)
tariffs based on the most favored nation (MFN) rate of the HTS. The file also indicates products
that are eligible for tariff preferences under free trade agreements such as with Canada, Mexico
and Israel, and indicates products eligible for any preferential programs such as the Generalized
System of Preferences (GSP), the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) and the African Growth and
Opportunity Act (AGOA). The database provides details of the applicable tariffs under all of
these agreements and programs. The other potential advantage is that the tariff database
provides information separately on specific versus ad valorem tariffs.


As mentioned, tariffs can be inferred using data on actual tariffs paid and the value of trade. The
main information contained in the tariff schedule that is not available elsewhere is information
on applicable tariffs where no trade is observed. While the MFN tariff can almost always be
observed in this way, the same is not true for many preferential tariffs, because in many cases
trade in the product between with the relevant country simply does not take place.
                                                  27


Appendix B: United Nations Trade Data

The main United Nations trade data are those of the United Nations Commodity Trade Database
(UN Comtrade), maintained by the United Nations Statistical Office. They include detailed
annual data from 1962 to the present on commodity exports and imports that have been reported
to the UN. The reports for recent years cover almost all the countries in the world, more than
200, many areas that are not countries, and many countries that no longer exist in their former
status. Some countries that existed in 1962 did not begin reporting their trade until after that date,
although their trade may have been reported by their partners. Data for years before 1962 are not
included in the Comtrade database, but were published by the United Nations (United Nations,
1953 and 1962). The Comtrade database is now publicly available for subscription by individuals
or institutions. Information is available at: http://comtrade.un.org.

The Comtrade data include values in all cases and measures of quantity for much of trade. The
data are initially collected by national customs authorities or statistical offices, converted by
them into the statistical classification prescribed by the UN Statistical Office, and supplied by
them to the Statistical Office. The Statistical Office incorporates them in the UN Comtrade
database and publishes abbreviated versions in the UN International Trade Statistics Yearbooks
and other UN publications. At the present time, most countries supply trade data to the UN
according to the Harmonized System (HS) classification, 2002 version, at the six-digit level of
detail or more disaggregate.

The UN data have been supplied to users and published for many years in various versions of the
UN’s Standard International Trade Classification (SITC). The first version of the SITC was
published in 1950, Revision 1 in 1961, Revision 2 in 1974, and Revision 3 in 1986. The
successive versions have expanded greatly. The original SITC contained only 570 product
classifications at the most detailed level, the first revision, 1,312, the second revision 1,924, and
the third, 3,118. That increase in detail means that data reported in a later version of the SITC
can be converted to an earlier version more accurately than data reported in an earlier version can
be converted into a later version. For the earliest years of the Comtrade database, most countries’
reports are only available in SITC Revision 1. For 1962, the first year, 84 countries are covered.
                                                 28

By 2005, 136 countries were available according to SITC Revision 3. The number of countries
that reported in each classification is shown, for several years, in Table A1.


 Table A1: The Number of Countries Available In UN Comtrade Data Base By Classifications
         SITC Rev. 1 SITC Rev. 2      SITC Rev. 3       HS1992         HS1996         HS2002
 1962       84                0           0               0              0              0
 1972       118               0           0               0              0              0
 1982       115              87           0               0              0              0
 1992       113             109           90              56             0              0
 2002       165             165          165             161            154             88
Source: UN Comtrade Database.


In addition to the countries and areas that report their trade to the UN, the database includes the
trade of other countries, to the extent that they appear as trade partners of the reporting countries.
Some of the partner data are in summary geographical categories such as “Africa, n.e.s.” and
cannot be attributed to specific countries. Trade among non-reporting countries is not included at
all.

Since Taiwan is not recognized by the UN, the trade of Taiwan is included in the Comtrade data
base only as it is reported by its trading partners, under the heading “Other Asia, n.e.s.” One
feature of the Comtrade data base is that the UN Statistical Office accepts the member countries’
data and makes no estimates of missing or misclassified data even when omissions or
misclassifications are known. For example, the data on imports into Singapore from Indonesia
were not revealed by the Singapore government from 1964 to 2002, and the Comtrade data base
therefore did not show any such imports.

Countries report their trade to the UN Statistical Office under one of two trade systems, the
“general trade system” or the “special trade system.” Under the general trade system, there is no
distinction between the statistical territory of a country and its economic territory. Imports
therefore include products that do not pass through customs and are later exported, with or
without further processing, and exports include products that had been previously imported.
Under the special trade system, imports include only goods entering the “free circulation area of
a compiling country, which means cleared through customs for home use…and exports include
all goods leaving the free circulation area of a compiling country” (United Nations, 2004, p. 81).
                                                29

The United Nations accepts both systems, but recommends the general trade system. The
distinction is of major importance only for entrepôt countries, such as Singapore, but is one of
the reasons why export and import reports disagree.

The NBER World Trade database for 1962-2000 (Feenstra, Lipsey, et al., 2005) is partly a
modification of UN Comtrade data and partly derived from earlier versions of UN data. For 1962
to 1983, the data had been in SITC Revision 1 categories, and were converted to SITC Revision
2. For the later years, data for 72 countries were obtained from the UN, classified by SITC
Revision 2, and a single-valued trade data set was constructed giving preference to import data,
but using export data from partners where import data were not available.

Two main adjustments were made to the UN data. One was to make corrections or additions to
data for 35 of the countries between 1984 and 2000, by estimating values for trade where either
the partner or the commodity classification had been concealed by the reporting country. Another
adjustment was to shift to Hong Kong exports part of exports by China through Hong Kong.
These were treated by some importers, such as the United States, as imports from China even
though part of the value was added in Hong Kong. In addition to these adjustments, U.S. imports
reported by the U.S. Census Bureau were substituted for U.S. imports reported in the UN data.

The NBER World Trade database is available at www.nber.org/data/, and at
www.internationaldata.org. Because the Comtrade database is now publicly available for
subscription by individuals or institutions, there are no plans to update the NBER World Trade
database beyond 2000.
                                                       30


Appendix C: Concepts of International Trade in Services

There are several criteria used by the UN and WTO to define international trade in services.
First, services can be distinguished from goods in that they are characterized by “abstract
concepts rather than by physical attribute or physical function”.27 Second, international trade in
services is not just cross-border activity between buyers and sellers, but also is linked to foreign
investment and movement of people. Hence, classification and definition of services by
international institutions incorporates various modes of delivery of services, rather than simply
measuring the activity through cross-border trade.

The IMF’s Balance of Payments Manual 5 (BPM5) covers international trade in services in the
traditional cross-border sense, that is, imports and exports in the System of National Accounts.
When the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) came into force in 1995 as part of
the Uruguay Round undertaking, it included a broader definition of internationally traded
services, specifically activities in the host economy associated with direct investment and the
movement of people engaged in service activities. Making the bridge between the BPM5 and the
GATS, the UN, in conjunction with an Interagency Task Force, in 2002 produced the Manual on
Statistics of International Trade in Services. Specifically, the Manual extends the definition of
“international trade in services” to include the value of services provided through foreign
affiliates and by non-permanent movement of persons. Thus, international trade in services
extends significantly beyond the notion of cross-border trade in the “goods” sense.

The GATS’ four modes are important because they explicitly acknowledge linkages between
cross-border trade in the traditional sense, like goods (mode 1 and mode 2), the link between
trade and direct investment inside a corporate organization (mode 3), and the link between trade
and movement of people for economic activities (mode 4).

    Mode 1: “cross-border supply” covers services supplied from one country to another, such as
     international telephone calls or Internet-related web-services (e.g. call-centers) where the
     customer stays in his or her own country.



27
  See paragraph 1.13, Manual on Statistics of International Trade in Services, United Nations, OECD, Eurostat,
IMF, UN Statistics Division, UNCTAD, WTO (2002).
                                                 31

   Mode 2: “consumption abroad” covers activities where consumers from one country travel to
    the other countries to make use of a service in another country, such as tourism, education,
    and medical services.

   Mode 3: “commercial presence” covers activities such as when a company from one country
    sets up subsidiaries or branches to provide services in another country, for example a
    wholesale outlet, or branch bank.

   Mode 4: “presence of natural persons” is when individuals, such as a construction worker or
    software programmer, travel from their own country to supply services in another country, In
    implementation though, there are still problems. First, the GATS modes and the UN Manual,
    while making important strides in defining international trade in services broadly,
    acknowledge significant tensions and blurring between goods and services. Second, the
    match between the SNA and the GATS is imperfect.



With regard to the second issue, Modes 1 and 2 are clearly exports and imports in the SNA
sense, Mode 3 is not, and Mode 4 is troublesome. Mode 4 is acknowledged to be an import or
export of labor services, but data are not usually available to capture these services. Rather they
appear as flows of remittances, in another part of the international accounts, rather than being
incorporated into trade flows. These issues matter for producers of price indexes. In particular,
the Internet and information technology are enabling more activities to be undertaken in Modes 1
and 3 (perhaps as substitutes for Mode 4), particularly as “intermediates” inside a corporate
structure that might be classified within manufacturing. Thus, much of the most interesting and
challenging international service activities have no clear identification in classification schemes
and have no source of detailed data.
                                               32


References
Alterman, William, 1997, “Are Producer Prices Good Proxies for Export Prices?” Monthly
      Labor Review, October, 18-32.

Alterman, William, 2009, “Producing an Input Price Index,” U.S. Dept. of Labor, Bureau of
      Labor Statistics, November.

Alterman, William, W. Erwin Diewert and Robert C. Feenstra, 1999, International Trade Price
      Indexes and Seasonal Commodities. U.S. Dept. of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics,
      Washington, D.C.

Athreye, Suma, and John Cantwell, 2005, “Creating Competition? Globalization and the
      Emergence of New Technology Producers,” working paper.

Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott, 2006, “Transfer Pricing by US-Based
       Multinationals,” working paper.

Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott, 2009, “Importers, Exporters, and
       Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods” in T. Dunne, J.B.
       Jensen and M.J. Roberts, eds., Producer dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data,
       University of Chicago Press, 513-556.

Borga, Maria and Michael Mann, 2002, “U.S. international services, cross-border trade in 2001
       and sales through affiliates in 2000,” Survey of Current Business, October, 76–77.

Boskin, Michael J., Ellen Dulberger, Robert Gordon, Zvi Griliches, and Dale Jorgenson, 1996,
       “Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living.” Final Report to the U.S.
       Senate Finance Committee, Washington, D.C., December

Branstetter, Lee, Raymond Fisman, C. Fritz Foley, 2006, “Do Stronger Intellectual Property
       Rights Increase International Technology Transfer,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       121(1), 321-349.

Byrne, David, Kovak, Brian, and Ryan Michaels, 2009, “Offshoring and Price Measurement in
       the Semiconductor Industry”, Draft, University of Michigan.

Diewert, W. Erwin, 1998, “Index Number Issues in the Consumer Price Index,” The Journal of
      Economic Perspectives, 12(1), Winter, 47-58

Diewert, W. Erwin and William F. Alterman, 2003, “Transfer Pricing and Import and Export
      Price Indexes: Theory and Practice,” mimeo, March 13.

Diewert, W. Erwin, 2008, “Exports and Imports from Production and Expenditure Approaches
      and Associated Price Indices Using an Artificial Dataset”, Chapter 20 in the International
      Monetary Fund Revised Manual for the Export and Import Price Indices
                                               33

Eden, Lorraine, 2001, “Transfer Pricing, Intra-firm Trade, and the BLS International Price
       Program,” U.S. Department of Labor, Working Paper 334, January.

Eldridge, Lucy P., 1999, “How Price Indexes Affect BLS Productivity Measures”, Bureau of
       Labor Statistics

Feenstra, Robert C., 1996, “U.S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances,” NBER Working
       Paper 5515.

Feenstra, Robert C., 1997, “U.S. Exports, 1972-1994: With State Exports and Other U.S. Data,”
       NBER Working Paper 5990.

Feenstra, Robert C. and J. Bradford Jensen, 2009, “Evaluating Estimates of Materials Offshoring
       from U.S. Manufacturing,” prepared from the conference “Measurement Issues Arising
       from the Growth of Globalization,” National Academy of Public Administration.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, and Hengyong Mo, 2005,
       “World Trade Flows: 1962-2000,” NBER working paper no. 11040.

Feenstra, Robert C., Benjamin R. Mandel, Marshall B. Reinsdorf, and Matthew J. Slaughter,
       2009, “Effects of Terms of Trade Gains and Tariff Changes on the Measurement of U.S.
       Productivity Growth,” NBER working paper no. ???.

Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis and Peter Schott, 2002, “U.S. Imports, Exports and Tariff
       Data, 1989-2001,” NBER Working Paper no. 9387.

General Accounting Office, “Current Government Data Provide Limited Insight into Off-shoring
      of Services,” September 2004, and “Offshoring of Services: Overview of the Issues”
      November 2005

Houseman, Susan, 2008, “Outsourcing and Offshoring: Problems for Price and Productivity
      Measurement”, Draft, Upjohn Institute for Employment Research

International Monetary Fund, 1993, Balance of Payments Manual, Fifth Edition, Washington,
        DC, International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/bop/bopman.pdf

International Monetary Fund, 2009, Balance of Payments Manual, Sixth Edition, Washington,
        DC, International Monetary Fund.
        http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/bop/2007/bopman6.htm

Linden, Greg, Kenneth L. Kraemer, Jason Dedrick, 2007, “Who Captures Value in a Global
       Innovation System? The case of Apple's iPod” Personal Computing Industry Center,
       PCIC, Irvine, California, June 2007

Jensen, J. Bradford, 2009, “Measuring the Impact of Trade in Services: Prospects and
       Challenges”, Prepared for Conference on Measurement Issues Arising from the Growth
       of Globalization, Washington, D.C.
                                               34

Lipsey, Robert E., 2003, “Foreign Direct Investment and the Operations of Multinational Firms:
       Concepts, History, and Data,” in E. Kwan Choi and James Harrigan, Editors, Handbook
       of International Trade, Blackwell Handbooks in Economics, Malden, MA and Oxford,
       Blackwell Publishing, pp. 287-319.

Lipsey, Robert E., 2008, “Measuring the Location of Production in a World of Intangible
       Productive Assets, FDI, and Intra-firm Trade,” Review of Income and Wealth,
       forthcoming, 2010.

Mandel, Michael, 2007, “the Real Cost of Offshoring,” Business Week, June 18, pp. 28-34.

Mataloni, Raymond J., Jr., 1995, “A Guide to BEA Statistics on U.S. Multinational Companies,”
      Survey of Current Business, Vol. 75, No. 3, March, pp. 38-55.

National Academy of Public Administration, 2007, “Off-shoring: An Elusive Phenomenon”,
       “Off-shoring: How Big Is It?”, “Off-shoring: What Are Its Effects?” and summary
       document, National Academy of Public Administration, “Off-shoring: New Challenges
       and Opportunities in an Expanding Global Economy.”

National Research Council, 2006, Analyzing the U.S. Content of U.S. Imports and the Foreign
       Content of U.S. Exports.

Office of Senator Joseph Lieberman, 2004, “Data Dearth in Offshore Outsourcing: Policy
       Making Requires Facts,” December.

Quijano, Alicia M., 1990, “A Guide to BEA Statistics on Foreign Direct Investment in the
       United States,” Survey of Current Business, Vol. 70, No.2, February, pp. 29-37.

Richardson, J. David , 1995, Why Exports Really Matter!, Peterson Institute for International
       Economics.

Sturgeon, Tim /Services Offshoring Working Group, 2006, “Why We Can’t Measure the
       Economic Effects of Services Offshoring: The Data Gaps and How to Fill Them,” Sloan
       Foundation, http://web.mit.edu/ipc/publications/pdf/IPC_Offshoring_Report.pdf.

Swenson, Deborah, 1997, “Explaining Domestic Content: Evidence from Japanese and U.S.
      Automobile Production in the United States,” in Robert C. Feenstra, ed. The Effects of
      U.S. Trade Protection and Promotion Policies. Chicago: University of Chicago and
      NBER, 33-53.

Uchitelle, Louis, 2009, “Economists Seek to Fix a Defect in Data that Overstates the Nation’s
       Vigor,” the New York Times, November 9, p. B3.

United Nations 1953, Commodity Trade Statistics, January to December 1952, Statistical Papers,
       Series D, Vol. II, No. 4, United Nations, New York.

____________ 1962, Commodity Trade Statistics, January to December, 1961, Statistical
      Papers, Series D, Vol.XI, No. 4, United Nations, New York.
                                             35

____________ 1993, System of National Accounts, United Nations, New York.

____________ 2004, International Merchandise Trade Statistics Compilers Manual, United
      Nations, New York.

____________ 2008, System of National Accounts, United Nations, New York.

U.S. Department of Commerce, 1981, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1977, Washington, DC,
       Bureau of Economic Analysis, April, Washington, D.C.

_______________ 2007, Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Establishment Data for
      2002, Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census, Washington, D.C.

Whichard, Obie and Maria Borga, “Selected Issues in the Measurement of U.S. International
      Services,” Survey of Current Business, June 2002, available at:
      http://www.bea.gov/scb/pdf/2002/06June/0602intlservices.pdf

Winkler, Deborah and William Milberg, 2009, “Errors from the “Proportionality Assumption” in
      the Measurement of Offshoring: Application to German Labor Demand,” New School for
      Social Research, New York, SCEPA Working Paper 2009-12.

World Trade Organization, 2005, “Offshoring Services: Recent Developments and Prospects,”
      Chapter 3 in World Trade Report 2005, Exploring the Links between Trade, Standards,
      and the WTO.
