NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSURERS' NEGOTIATING LEVERAGE AND THE EXTERNAL EFFECTS OF
MEDICARE PART D
Darius N. Lakdawalla
Wesley Yin
Working Paper 16251
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16251

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2010

We thank Caleb Alexander, Mike Chernew, David Cutler, Richard Frank, Adriana Lleras-Muney,
Joseph Newhouse, David Meltzer, Fiona Scott Morton, Jon Skinner and seminar participants at Boston
University, Brown University, Columbia University, Cornell University, Harvard University, University
of Chicago, University of Pennsylvania Wharton School, University of Illinois at Chicago, ASHE,
NBER, and the Robert Wood Johnson Scholars in Health Policy annual meeting for helpful comments.
The project was funded in part by the RWJ Foundation, and the National Institute on Aging. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Darius N. Lakdawalla and Wesley Yin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Insurers' Negotiating Leverage and the External Effects of Medicare Part D
Darius N. Lakdawalla and Wesley Yin
NBER Working Paper No. 16251
August 2010
JEL No. H57,I11,I18,L11,L51
ABSTRACT
Public financing of private health insurance may generate external effects beyond the subsidized population,
by influencing the size and bargaining power of health insurers. We test for this external effect in the
context of Medicare Part D. We analyze how Part D-related insurer size increases impacted retail drug
prices negotiated by insurers for their non-Part D commercial market. On average, Part D lowered
retail prices for commercial insureds by 5.8% to 8.5%. The cost-savings to the commercial market
amount to $3bn per year, which approximates the total annual savings experienced by Part D beneficiaries
who previously lacked drug coverage.

Darius N. Lakdawalla
Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics
University of Southern California
650 Childs Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0626
and NBER
Darius.Lakdawalla@usc.edu
Wesley Yin
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Rd., Rm 501
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
wyin@bu.edu

1. Introduction
The Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003 established prescription drug benefits for
Medicare beneficiaries through Medicare Part D. The legislation tasked the private-sector with a
substantial role, not unlike that played by Medicare health maintenance organizations (HMO’s).
The federal government prescribes a standard Part D benefit package and provides premium
subsidies for Medicare beneficiaries. Private insurers compete among themselves to design,
price, and administer insurance policies that are at least actuarially equivalent to this prescribed
package.
Much of the existing literature has focused on quantifying the success or failure of private
firms in efficiently disseminating drug insurance to Medicare beneficiaries. There exists general
consensus that the private-sector has improved patients’ access to drug coverage, while lowering
drug prices (Lichtenberg and Sun, 2007; Duggan and Scott Morton, 2008; Ketcham and Simon,
2008; Yin et al., 2008). Specifically, Duggan and Scott-Morton (2008) observe that Part D
lowers aggregate prices by providing previously uninsured seniors with Part D insurance,
through which they benefit from the lower prices available to large private insurers.
The behavioral response of large private buyers imbues the program with an additional
and unique capacity to project its effects beyond the confines of the Part D population. The
MMA dramatically increased the number of Medicare beneficiaries with prescription drug
coverage and injected new customers into the insurance market. Since this increase was
absorbed primarily by existing insurance firms, not new entrants, the MMA generally increased
the enrolled population in each firm. If growth in total enrollment—that is, buyer size—provides
private payers with more bargaining power in their general pricing negotiations, the program
may allow insurers to capture additional rents on behalf of patients who are insured privately
outside the Part D program. These include both Medicare and non-Medicare aged individuals
enrolled in commercial plans of insurers that participate in Medicare Part D.
More generally, this hypothesis suggests the possibility of external effects from policies
that publicly subsidize private health insurance premiums. While Medicare Part D ended up
covering much less than half the Medicare population, its effects may have been seen in even the
non-Medicare population. Similarly, the recent passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable

1

Care Act (PPACA) extends premium subsidies to many uninsured Americans, but its effects on
prices may yet extend well beyond the 45 million uninsured.
In the pharmaceutical context, the presence and size of this external effect depends on the
structure and terms of the negotiations among payers, manufacturers, and pharmacies.
Bargaining plays a major role in the pharmaceutical market, where oligopolistic insurers
negotiate with oligopolistic pharmacies over the prices of drugs produced by both competitive
and monopolistic manufacturers. The upstream and downstream prices of drugs are determined
by bilateral negotiations among these various parties, who do not simply name a uniform linear
price. Rather, prices are negotiated firm-by-firm and drug-by-drug. Conventional wisdom holds
that increases in insurers’ enrollment empower them to extract lower prices from drug
manufacturers and retail pharmacies, since the failure to come to terms with a larger insurer leads
to larger losses of volume. Even so, the impact of buyer size on upstream price negotiations is
theoretically ambiguous (Stole and Zwiebel, 1996; Chipty and Snyder 1999).1 The direction of
the buyer size effect must be quantified empirically in order to assess the implications for the
distribution of rents external to the Part D market.
We present empirical analyses designed to quantify the impact of Part D enrollment on
prices and profits outside the Part D market. The analysis relies on claims data from a large
national retail pharmacy chain that reports the drug prices negotiated between the pharmacy and
every insurer with whom it contracts. An attractive feature of our approach is the absence of ex
post rebates in agreements between pharmacies and insurers, making negotiated pharmacy prices
readily observable and transparent.2 Moreover, economic theory allows us to draw qualitative
inferences for manufacturer profits from information about payer and retail pharmacy profits.

1
In the simplest case where buyer and seller profit functions are linear in buyer size, the outside option for
each side in the Nash game is zero. Non-cooperation penalizes the buyer and seller identically. Hence, the solution
to the game is invariant to buyer size. A large theoretical literature offers a variety of explanations for why buyer
size has an ambiguous effect on upstream negotiations. Recent work includes Stole and Zwiebel (1996), Chipty and
Snyder (1999), and Raskovich (2003) who specify concavity conditions of the supplier’s surplus function in order
for larger buyers to extract larger rents in bilateral negotiations. Conditions in dynamic setting in which bargaining
take place over repeated negotiations are studied by Snyder (1996).
2
Negotiations between insurers and pharmaceutical firms offer a second setting in which to test how
insurer market power affects bargaining outcomes. However, insurer-manufacturer negotiations typically involve
complex pricing arrangements that include upfront pricing terms, or ex post rebates contingent on volume and other
factors (Levy, 1999). And despite the policy importance of evaluating the rebates negotiated by manufacturers, the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) has proscribed the release of this data, which are similarly
unavailable from private data vendors. It is thus difficult to measure directly the effect of market power on price
negotiations with manufacturers.

2

This strategy for indirect inference is valuable, because net prices received by manufacturers are
almost never observed by researchers.
We find that insurers with larger enrollment increases are able to negotiate lower retail
drug prices. Enrolling an additional 100,000 Part D beneficiaries enables an insurer to negotiate
2.1-percent lower prices for seniors, and 1.6-percent lower prices for non-seniors, who are
enrolled in commercial plans of insurers that also participate in Medicare Part D. Consistent with
economic theory, the vast majority of these reductions occur for generic drugs and branded drugs
that face therapeutic competition. Theory also suggests that these gains should be accompanied
by improved payer bargaining power in rebate negotiations with drug manufacturers. Since our
estimates omit these, they serve as a lower bound for the effect of enrollment on total drug costs.
The magnitude of this external effect is substantial. Given the observed change in
enrollment of insurers participating in Part D, the program lowered retail prices for their non-Part
D non-elderly enrollees by 5.8%, and for their non-Part D elderly enrollees by 8.5%. These
savings amount to $3bn per year. If passed onto enrollees, they would be almost equal to the size
of the total cost-savings enjoyed by Part D enrollees who lacked any previous drug coverage. If
the additional rents are retained primarily by the insurer – as may be suggested by the research
demonstrating limited competition in the commercial insurance market (Dafny, 2008) – these
price reductions represent a greater than 20% increase to an insurer’s profits on commercial
prescription drug coverage.
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the MMA, features of the drug
market, and presents a simple Nash-bargaining model that describes how enrollment may impact
profits for all parties. Section 3 lays out the empirical strategy for estimating how enrollment
affects pharmacy profits and prices as a consequence of insurer enrollment increases due to Part
D. Section 4 reports results of the empirical analyses. In Section 5, we decompose the effect of
Part D on total prescription drug expenditure reductions into internal and external effects.
Section 6 concludes.

2. Model of the Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Market
2.1

Background on the Pharmaceutical Market and the MMA

Medicare outpatient prescription drug coverage was established by the 2003 Medicare
Modernization Act (MMA) through the creation of the Part D drug benefit. The federal subsidies
3

required to finance the program are significant, and have led to recent work examining how the
program has impacted pharmaceutical profitability (Frank and Newhouse, 2008; Friedman
2009). The high public cost of the MMA, and concerns over its impact on Medicare’s long-term
sustainability, have drawn attention to the Medicare Part D drug purchasing model.
Under the MMA, the government contracts with private insurers to administer drug plans.
As a consequence, the responsibility of negotiating pharmacy drug prices and manufacturer
rebates is left up to individual private insurers. The purchasing model is summarized in Figure 1.
The black lines follow the flow of drugs; the dotted lines follow cash transfers and
reimbursements. From the perspective of drug manufacturers, revenues are earned by selling
drugs to wholesalers or directly to retail pharmacies at a price negotiated between each retailer
and each manufacturer. Manufacturers also negotiate rebates to insurers (private insurers,
government agencies and PBMs) in exchange for inclusion or preferential tiering of their drugs
in the formularies of insurers. Rebates are negotiated in one-on-one settings between individual
insurers and manufacturers.
Similarly, pharmacies negotiate with individual insurers over the amount they are to be
paid when they dispense prescriptions for an insurer’s enrollees. These negotiations are also done
in a bilateral, take-it-or-leave-it, manner. How the negotiated payment to the pharmacy is then
split between enrollee and insurer depends on the specific premium, copayment and deductible
architecture of the enrollee’s insurance plan.
In principle, Part D insurers are supposed to negotiate manufacturer rebates for Part D
enrollees in a separate and “firewalled” manner. This separation is supposed to limit the
relationship between Part D and commercial lines of business within the same insurer. In
practice, however, an insurer with more Part D enrollees may possess more de facto negotiating
leverage in all transactions. Moreover, no firewall exists for pharmacy retail price negotiations.
Changes in retail prices directly impact insurer and pharmacy profits. They may also indirectly
impact manufacturer profits, because they determine the quantity of surplus available for
pharmacies and manufacturers to share. This indirect effect on manufacturer profits will obtain
even if the rebate firewall is respected.

4

2.2

Overview of Theoretical Model

Arguments for the possible impact of firm size on negotiations with suppliers have been posited
since Galbraith (1952), and studied more formally in recent theoretical and empirical work.3 In
the pharmaceutical industry, where the distribution of rents between manufacturers, retail
pharmacies, insurers and enrollees has implications for health care costs, insurance coverage, and
incentives to innovate, changes to the bargaining power of insurers can have a variety of impacts
that have not been widely studied.4
We present a simple and conventional model of Nash-bargaining, similar in form and
spirit to Chipty and Snyder (1999). We consider price negotiations between a retailer and
buyers, as modeled by Chipty and Snyder. In addition, we include an upstream manufacturer
who negotiates directly with the retailer and each buyer. The three-way Nash-bargaining model
demonstrates three points.
First, buyer size has an ambiguous effect on the negotiations over rents shared by the
manufacturer and buyer. The negotiating leverage of one side depends on the surplus it generates
for its trading partners. If larger buyers generate more surplus per unit for their partners, they
will receive better prices, and vice-versa. Formally, the effects of buyer size on unit surplus
depend on the curvature of the supplier’s surplus function—a general result derived in previous
studies (Stole and Zweibel, 1996; Chipty and Snyder, 1999). If the seller’s surplus function is
convex in quantity, a larger inframarginal buyer generates less surplus per unit sold than would
be generated by a smaller inframarginal buyer.

3

Among many theoretical studies on the topic, recent work includes Stole and Zwiebel (1996), Brooks et al
(1997), Chipty and Snyder (1999), and Raskovich (2003), who specify concavity conditions that the supplier’s
surplus function must satisfy in order for large buyers to extract rents. Snyder (1996) studies this issue in dynamic
settings. In the health literature, Sorenson (2003) studies the extent to which insurers’ ability to exclude hospitals
affect negotiated hospital (supplier) prices. In this paper, we estimate how bargaining power changes with the size of
the buyer, holding constant its ability to steer its market. Indeed, consistent with Sorenson, our model suggests that
buyer size affects bargaining power only when the buyer has some ability to steer its share across suppliers. We then
explicitly test a model in which buyer size can either augment or diminish the impact of threats of network exclusion
on negotiated prices in the pharmaceutical industry.
4
The health care literature has primarily focused on how characteristics of providers affect negotiations
with downstream payers (Town and Vistnes 1999). More recently, Ho (2009) studies how hospital performance and
provider network structure affect bargaining outcomes with downstream payers. In the pharmaceutical industry, the
complex market structure and paucity of negotiated price data makes these issues difficult to study. Exceptions
include Ellison and Snyder (2008), who examine the extent to which larger pharmacies extract rents from
wholesalers on purchases of generic antibiotics. That buyer size may differentially affect price negotiations across
drugs of varying substitutability is a hypothesis we test in the context of negotiations by nearly every Part D insurer,
over the price of each of the top 1000 selling drugs in this market.

5

Second, the manufacturer extracts all the rents in cases where it has all the market power.
Hence, any increase in buyer size will have no effect on the surplus accruing to buyers or
retailers. All downstream parties earn zero profits. Branded drugs that face no therapeutic
substitutes may exemplify such cases.
Third, in cases where all sides have some degree of bargaining power, the changes in the
profits of different players are positively correlated with external shocks that affect both. Among
other things, this means that increases in the size of an insurer will have qualitatively similar
effects on the profits of pharmacies and manufacturers. This property allows us to draw
qualitative inferences about changes in the profits for manufacturers, given information on
pharmacy profits. This is important, because manufacturer profits are unobserved.
All three qualitative implications obtain even if the Part D firewall necessitates parallel
and independent sets of rebate negotiations. Regardless of how insurers negotiate with
manufacturers, a change in insurer size will impact the surplus flowing to pharmacies; this
surplus is ultimately shared with manufacturers. This creates a positive relationship between
pharmacy and manufacturer profits that goes beyond the rebate negotiation. For this reason, it is
simpler to develop the bargaining model without specifying particular assumptions about the
firewall between the Part D and non-Part D markets.

2.3

Correlated Profits and Mark-ups
A monopolistic manufacturer with varying degrees of market power bargains with a

monopolistic pharmacy to set the upstream price of drugs. Downstream, the pharmacy bargains
with a set of insurers. For a given drug, pharmacy profit consists of payments received from n
n

payers,

∑τ

i

, net of the lump-sum transfer T , payable by the pharmacy to the manufacturer, for

i =1

sale of Q units of a given drug. In general, the payments will depend on the total quantity
provided. In addition, the pharmacy may derive other benefits from selling Q units of drugs.
For instance, drug sales may drive traffic to stores and produce sales of other merchandise. The
net return to such activity is represented by G (Q ) . In sum, pharmacy profits are given by
n

G(Q ) + ∑τ i (Q ) − T .
i =1

6

n

Profits of the manufacturer are given by T − ∑ ri (Q ) − C (Q ) , where T is the lump-sum
i =1

n

pharmacy transfer,

∑ r (Q ) the total lump-sum rebates paid to insurers as a function of
i

i =1

aggregate quantity, and C (Q ) the cost of manufacturing and selling the drug.
The outcome of the bilateral negotiation between the manufacturer and the pharmacy maximizes
the Nash product:
γ

1−γ

n
n
 


maxQ ,T  T − ∑ ri (Q ) − C (Q )   G(Q ) + ∑τ i (Q) − T 
i =1
i =1

 


(1)

The exponent γ captures the bargaining power of the manufacturer in negotiations over lumpsum transfers for a particular drug. It can be interpreted as the share of incremental surplus
appropriated by the manufacturer.5 The polar case γ = 1 is one of complete manufacturer market
power, where it sells a drug that faces no competition from either perfect or imperfect withintherapeutic class substitutes. The opposite case γ = 0 obtains when the manufacturer produces a
drug (e.g., a generic) that faces competition from perfect substitutes. This problem has the firstorder conditions:
n

n

i =1

i =1

C ' (Q) + ∑ ri ' (Q) = G ' (Q) + ∑τ i '(Q)
(2)

n

n

i =1

i =1

T = γG(Q) + (1 − γ )C (Q) + (1 − γ )∑ ri + γ ∑τ i (Q)
Substituting the expression for the equilibrium pharmacy transfer into the two surplus functions
gives expressions for the profits of the manufacturer and pharmacy, as a function of aggregate
quantity:

5

This parameter is the focus of Ellison and Snyder (2008) who show empirically that the wholesale price of an
antibiotic negotiated by manufacturers and pharmacies depends on the substitutability of that antibiotic. Another way to capture
bargaining power in this negotiation is to explicitly model the pharmacy’s threat point in the expression of its surplus. The threat
of non-cooperation comes from a) the legal right of the pharmacy to steer demand away from one drug to a therapeutic equivalent
drug; and b) the pharmacy’s discretion over carrying a given drug at the risk of losing customers to competing pharmacies.
Modeling bargaining power in this way generates the same qualitative results for correlated mark-ups and the impact of increased
insurer size as when modeled by Nash exponents in equation (1). Similarly, exponents in the Nash product could be included to
capture varying degrees of bargaining power in the negotiation between manufacture and insurers. For the purposes of this
model, we can capture market power of a manufacturer through the manufacturer-pharmacy negotiation, although it is trivial to
add Nash exponents in the manufacturer-insurer negotiation as well.

7

n
n


Π M (Q ) = γ  G (Q ) − C (Q ) − ∑ ri (Q ) + ∑ τ i (Q ) 
i =1
i =1


n
n


Π P (Q ) = (1 − γ ) G (Q ) − C (Q ) − ∑ ri (Q ) + ∑ τ i (Q )  .
i =1
i =1



(3)

These expressions illustrate two important points. First, changes in pharmacy profits ( Π P ) are
correlated with manufacturer profits ( Π M ) . Note that from equation 3, a literal interpretation of
the model would suggest that any change in log profits will be identical for both the
manufacturer and the retail pharmacy. Second, the market power of the pharmacy vis-à-vis the
manufacturer plays an important role in determining the size of any impact on pharmacy
markups. When pharmacies have little market power—that is, when 1 − γ is small—a given
change in total upstream surplus will have a smaller impact on their profits. We find evidence
for both these results in our empirical analysis.
2.4

Downstream Negotiation and the Impact of Insurer Enrollment Size
Based on the solution to the upstream bargaining problem, the pharmacy bargains

simultaneously downstream with each payer i . The outcome of each negotiation is a quantity
and lump-sum transfer, ( q i ,τ i ) . Under the Nash framework, each payer believes that all other
payers are playing optimally, and that it is the marginal payer in the negotiations.6 The solution
to the negotiation maximizes the product of payer surplus and the incremental profits to the
pharmacy of contracting with the payer. Based on the expression for Π P (Q) from above, this
can be written as:
(4)



 
*
*
*

 G (qi + ∑ q j ) − C (qi + ∑ q j ) − (ri + ∑ r j ) + (τ i + ∑τ j )  − 

j ≠i
j ≠i
j ≠i
j ≠i

 
max qi ,τ i  (1 − γ ) 
 (u (qi ) − τ i + ri )



 G ( q * ) − C ( q * ) − r + τ * 


∑
∑
∑
∑
j
j
j
j

 j ≠i
 
j ≠i
j ≠i
j ≠i




This problem has the following first-order conditions:
6

One could enrich this model by specifying it as an extensive-form game in which there is a set of
probabilities that other players’ negotiations break down. Chipty and Snyder (1999) note that the Nash-bargaining
approach leads to a limiting perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the extensive-form game, in which the probability of
breakdown approaches zero. Practically speaking, the Nash framework is both simple and likely relevant to the
pharmaceutical context, where negotiations rarely break down entirely between the players.

8

u' ( qi ) = −G' ( qi + ∑ q*j ) + C ' ( qi + ∑ q*j )
j ≠i

(5)

j ≠i





2 





 

(τ i − ri ) = 1 u( qi ) −  G(qi + ∑ q*j ) − G(∑ q*j )  +  C (qi + ∑ q*j ) − C (∑ q*j ) 
j ≠i

j ≠i

 

j ≠i



j ≠i

The manufacturer bargains separately but simultaneously with each payer i . The outcome of
each negotiation is a quantity and lump-sum rebate, ( q i , ri ) . It is straightforward to show that
this problem has first-order conditions identical to those in the pharmacy-payer negotiation,
implying that separate expressions for equilibrium τ i and ri cannot be derived.
There are a number of ways to conceptualize an increase in enrollment for a firm. To
economize on notation, we implement it as an amalgamation of two existing payers, h and i .7
The total gross surplus earned by this combined payer is equal to v( qim + qhm ) = u( qim ) + u( qhm ) ,
while the total tariff paid by the merged payer is denoted as τ hi , and the rebate received by the
merged payer denoted as rhi . The linearity in the combined payer’s gross surplus function
implies that enrolling in a larger insurer confers no benefit to an insured, above and beyond any
resulting impacts on quantity. The combined payer bargains with the pharmacy according to:

(6)


  G ( qim + qhm + ∑ q mj* ) − C ( qim + qhm + ∑ q mj* ) − ( rih +
 
j ≠i,h
j ≠i ,h
max 
qi , q h ,τ ih


m*
m*
m
m*
  G ( ∑ q j ) − C ( ∑ q j ) − ∑ rj + ∑τ j 
j ≠i ,h
j ≠i ,h
j ≠i,h

  j ≠i ,h
m
m
u( qi ) + u( qh ) − τ ih + rih

(

∑r

m
j

) + (τ ih +

j ≠i ,h

∑τ
j ≠i ,h

)

m*
j

 
)  − 
 
*




This problem has the first-order conditions:
u' ( qim ) = u' ( qhm ) = C ' ( qim + qhm +

(7)





2 



∑q

j ≠ i ,h

m
j

) − G' ( qim + qhm +

∑q

j ≠ i ,h

m
j

)


 

(τ ih − rih ) = 1 u(qim ) + u(qhm ) −  G(qim + qhm + ∑ q mj* ) − G(∑ q mj* )  +  C (qim + qhm + ∑ q mj* ) − C (∑ q mj* ) 
j ≠i

j ≠i

 

j ≠i

j ≠i



The impact of the merger on the division of rents is ambiguous. The net price paid by payers
strictly falls if C (Q ) − G (Q ) is strictly convex in Q . This result resembles the convexity
condition derived by Chipty and Snyder (1999) in the context of a single seller.
7

The analysis can easily be adapted to the case of uninsured consumers joining an insurer, but at the cost of
some additional notation.

9

For all payers k , the first-order conditions for qkm are identical to the corresponding
conditions for qks . Therefore, it follows that qkm = qks , for all k . This allows us to suppress the
superscripts on the quantity variables for the rest of this section. For convenience, define
J (Q ) ≡ C (Q ) − G (Q ) . Exploiting this result, we can write the following:

(τ ih − rih ) − [(τ i − ri ) + (τ h − rh )] =
(8)

1
{[J (Q ) − J (Q − qi − qh )] − [(J (Q ) − J (Q − qi )) + (J (Q ) − J (Q − qh ))]}
2

The expression above is strictly negative if J is strictly convex.
This result has a number of corollaries, which make clear the theoretical ambiguity of this
prediction. First, increased payer size lowers prices if G is strictly concave, and C is weakly
convex. Alternatively, if G and C are linear, size increase has no impact on prices. Finally, if
J is strictly concave—e.g., due to increasing returns in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals—

increased payer size actually leads to higher net prices paid by insurers. The effects of buyer size
on prices may be non-monotonic and depend on the curvature of the surplus functions at the
margin. These results are analogous to the conditions derived by Chipty and Snyder (1999) for
the single seller model.

3. Data and Empirical Strategy
We empirically examine the impact of insurer enrollment on pharmacy prices and profits, along
with insurer premiums. These findings, coupled with the theoretical insights from above, are
used to draw quantitative and qualitative inferences about the distribution of rents among
manufacturers, pharmacies, insurers, Part D enrollees, and commercial enrollees.

3.1

Data

Data on prescription drug utilization and expenditures come from a national retail pharmacy
chain. As of January 1, 2006, when Medicare Part D was implemented, the pharmacy chain had
retail presence in 45 US states; and prescriptions filled at its pharmacies account for
approximately one-fourth of the US prescription market.
We obtained all pharmacy claims for a five percent random sample of unique pharmacy
customers over the age of 60. For these individuals, we obtained data on claims for every
prescription filled at the chain between September 1, 2004 and April 31, 2007. Each claim

10

reports the National Drug Code (NDC) of the prescription filled, its therapeutic class, pill
quantity, number of treatment days, and date dispensed, identification of the third-party payer,
out-of-pocket and third-party payer expenditures, and the address of the pharmacy where the
claim took place. The claims data also contain information on subjects' demographic
characteristics (date of birth, sex, language preference, and zip code of residence).
The pharmacy claims data report drug utilization that is largely consistent with that
reported in the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) for the same period. Table 1 lists the
top 25 drugs by pharmacy revenues utilized by seniors between 2004 and 2006. The
corresponding rank among drugs utilized by seniors in the MEPS between 2004 and 2005 is also
reported. The drug ranking in the pharmacy claims tracks the MEPS rankings closely. Notable
exceptions in the MEPS are listed in the table notes. These tend to be physician-administered
drugs and are thus under-represented in out-patient retail pharmacy claims.
With these data, we are able to determine the drug prices negotiated between the
pharmacy and each insurer for every drug that appears in the claims. Negotiated pharmacy
profits vary considerably across insurers and across drugs. Figure 2a shows the distribution of
average pharmacy profits per prescription for a given insurer and drug NDC code. The
distribution of profits earned on generic drugs is everywhere to the right of the profit distribution
for branded drugs. The mean profit on a generic drug prescription is $2.25 higher (p < 0.001)
than that on a branded drug. This fact is consistent with greater surplus accruing to pharmacies
when manufacturers have less market power, and is particularly striking given the much lower
total prices of generic drugs.
A more subtle implication of manufacturer market power concerns the variance in profits
within a drug, but across insurers. As an example, when manufacturers hold all the market
power, economic profits for pharmacies (and payers) will be uniformly zero, and with zero
variance. If not, pharmacy profits will vary depending on the pharmacy’s negotiating leverage
against a payer. This prediction about variance is borne out in Figure 2b, which depicts how the
dispersion of pharmacy profits across insurers varies by drug. The empirical analysis examines
whether differences in enrollment growth across insurers helps explains variation in negotiated
drug prices.
Our database contains most large insurers that participate in Medicare Part D. In general,
there are only two reasons why a Part D insurer would not appear in our claims database: (1) the
11

pharmacy did not contract with the insurer; or (2) claims from the insurer are not sampled from
the full pharmacy claims. Both these reasons suggest that smaller insurers are less likely to
appear in the claims data. Table 2 shows the distribution of Part D insurers represented in our
sample of pharmacy claims according to their 2007 Part D enrollment. In total, 86 Part D
insurers appear in the claims data. While this list includes insurers that offer Part D Plan (PDP),
Medicare Advantage plans, or demonstration plans, our analysis is eventually restricted to the set
of insurers that offer at least one PDP. The columns parse the insurer universe by Part D
enrollment. Note that the distribution of Part D enrollment by insurer is highly skewed. For
instance, the median Part D insurer enrolls less than 6,400 Part D seniors, while the 90th
percentile Part D insurer has more than 20-times greater Part D enrollment.
Data on enrollment, premiums and benefit design for Part D and Medicare Advantage
plans come from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Plan-level information
also identifies the sponsoring insurance firm, so that enrollment can be aggregated to the insurer.
Premium information is published annually, and corresponds to end-of-year open-enrollment
premium pricing for coverage beginning the following year. Enrollment and Part D Landscape
files are publicly available on the CMS website.
3.2

Empirical Strategy

Insurer’s Drug Cost Equation
To test how enrollment affects prices and profits, we exploit the introduction of Part D, which

3.2.1

brought about nearly 25 million new insured individuals to the rolls of existing insurers. We test
whether insurers that experienced greater enrollment increases negotiated lower pharmacy drug
prices. Since enrollment changes may be driven by unobserved changes in cost or bargaining
leverage, we use geographic variation in insurer location to generate plausibly exogenous
variation in their exposure to Part D enrollees.
Ideally, we would like to estimate how total insurer enrollment affects negotiated
pharmacy drug prices. However, data on insurers’ total prescription drug enrollees are not
available.8 We do, however, have Part D enrollment data from CMS. Therefore, we model the
8

Data on insurers’ total medical insurance enrollment are available from several sources. For instance,
TheStreet.com (and previously Weiss Ratings), report enrollment, network size, assets and income for every medical
underwriter annually. However, enrollment in drug insurance—the relevant measure of buyer size for drug price
negotiations—is not reported separately. Further, enrollment of prescription benefits managers (PBMs) is not
reported by these publishers.

12

impact of new Part D enrollment on changes in negotiated prices. Unobserved changes in
commercial enrollment appear in the error term. Correlation with Part D enrollment could create
a potential errors-in-variables problem, discussed below.
Framework
We estimate the following cost equation in first differences:

∆ ln( priced ,i,t ) = α + β∆Enrollmenti ,t + γ∆X d ,i,t + ε d ,i ,t

(9)

The dependent variable is the percent change in the log price per pill over all prescriptions of
drug d filled by enrollees of insurer i between period t-1 and t.9 We define periods to be a halfyear in length, where the second half of 2005 is the base year in each specification. Both the first
and second halves of 2006 are used as the post-Part D-implementation comparison period in
order to investigate the timing of any effect of enrollment on bargaining. Negotiated prices in the
second half of 2004 are compared to prices in the second half of 2005 in our falsification tests, to
assess whether there are any pre-existing trends that might contaminate our estimation. The key
independent variable is the set of changes in each insurer’s Part D enrollment due to the
implementation of Medicare Part D in 2006. This serves as a proxy for changes in its total
enrollment.
The vector of covariates, X, include a measure of each insurer’s exposure to the
pharmacy10 and the average wholesale price of the drug.11 Note that the first-difference
specification necessarily differences out time-invariant drug, insurer, and market-level
characteristics. Use of enrollment changes, rather than log changes, generates a semi-elasticity
estimate that captures the average effect of enrollment increases on negotiated prices across
9

Price negotiations for drugs between insurers and pharmacies are conducted at the national level; hence,
this study is conducted at the insurer-drug level. In a previous version of this paper, we conducted the analysis at the
insurer-drug-state level in order to capture slight differences in factor costs (and hence, prices) across states. These
differences are negligible and are averaged-out in the insurer-drug-state analysis. Indeed, conducting the analysis at
the disaggregated level yields nearly identical results to those reported here. Also, while “pills” may represent larger
or smaller units of treatment, our study of changes in the log unit price eliminates the need for consistent units across
drugs.
10
Theory suggests that greater exposure to the pharmacy may affect market power in bilateral negotiations.
Each insurer’s exposure to the pharmacy is calculated as the weighted average of the pharmacy’s market share in
markets where the insurer is present, where market weights reflect that each market’s contribution to the insurer’s
total commercial business. Data on pharmacy market share was obtained from the Chain Store Guide, which reports
annual sales and store counts of all pharmacies (total and by-chain) for local geographies in the US, for 2005
through 2008.
11
We also include a measure of average number of pills sold per prescription for a given drug d and insurer
i. Recall that the dependent variable is the price per pill averaged over all prescriptions observed in each cell. Given
that prescriptions contain any number of pills, this measure controls for changes in the average number of pills per
prescription in each cell over time, which may affect average price per pill through bulk-rate pricing.

13

insurers of all sizes. Throughout the analysis, we allow for nonlinear enrollment effects, as the
theory makes no clear predictions about functional form. For ease of notation, however, we
write down models for the simpler, linear case.
It is worth reiterating that the enrollment elasticity captures the change in the price paid
to the pharmacy, and not literally the change in the price paid by the insurer, in response to
enrollment changes. However, Nash-bargaining between pharmacy and manufacturer induces
correlation between the changes in pharmacy and manufacturer profits that result from changes
in insurer bargaining power.
Approach to Identification
A key concern in estimating equation (9) is the potential endogeneity of changes in enrollment to
changes in negotiated drug prices. These prices represent the marginal cost of drug utilization to
enrollees in the deductible and in any coverage gap, and serve as the base drug price in coinsurance corridors. Consequently, enrollment may respond directly to pharmacy drug prices, a
behavior that would bias β1 away from zero. Recent studies, however, suggest that this bias is
unlikely to be large. Seniors’ Part D plan choices often do not adequately account for the
marginal cost of drug utilization; instead, seniors appear to weight plan premiums and nonmonetary plan characteristics such as brand name heavily when choosing plans (Kling et al,
2008; Abaluck and Gruber, 2009). More threatening is the possibility that lower drug costs filter
down as lower Part D plan premiums, which may encourage larger Part D enrollment. This
possibility would result in estimates of β1 that are biased away from zero. However, note that
premiums are set in the month of July preceding the coverage year. Hence, while variation in
premiums may reflect level differences in negotiated drug costs across insurers, bias occurs only
if premium variation reflects differences in anticipated changes in negotiated drug prices for the
following year—a mechanism for which we find little evidence.
Alternatively, sicker patients (and hence, those with greater expenditure risk) may be
more sensitive to the marginal cost of drugs. Adverse selection into plans with low marginal cost
of drugs may lead to higher premiums and lower total enrollment, resulting in a downward bias
in the estimate of β1. Finally, as mentioned earlier, we do not observe changes in insurers’ total
enrollment; we only observe changes in their Part D enrollment. Correlation between Part D
enrollment and commercial enrollment changes may also bias our estimate of β1.

14

To address these potential sources of bias, we implement an instrumental variables
strategy that exploits two predictors of insurers’ initial 2006 Part D enrollment: each insurer’s
total potential Part D enrollment; and each insurer’s “pure” price of coverage, a measure we call
its “quality-adjusted premium.” Intuitively, insurers may find themselves to be in stronger or
weaker positions to capture Part D enrollees, purely as a function of their geographic presence
several years prior to the implementation of Part D. This idea underlies the first instrument. In
addition, insurers may vary in their levels of efficiency, or their desire to pursue greater or less
Part D market share, as measured by the second instrument.12
These two instruments imply the following first-stage equation, which precedes the costenrollment equation:
(10)

∆Enrollment i ,t = γ 0 + γ 1 Potential Part D Enrollment i
+ γ 2 Quality adjusted Premiums i ,t + ΓX i ,t + η i ,t

An insurer’s Potential Part D Enrollment is simply the count of seniors without private health
insurance in 2005 (and hence, without prescription drug coverage) within markets (i.e. states) in
which a given insurer is present in 2005, the year prior to Part D implementation.13 That is, we
define Potential Part D Enrollment as:
(11)

Potential Part D Enrollment i ≡ ∑ ( Seniors w / o PHI m ,t = 2005 ⋅ 1 [insureri in m]t =2005 )
m

Since insurance is regulated at the state-level, entry into a new state is costly. Labor and other
capacity constraints may also compound the regulatory barriers. Hence, commercial
underwriting presence in a state prior to Part D facilitates entry into that state’s Part D market.
Indeed, among Part D insurers, there is little difference between their 2006 Part D state
penetration and their 2004 commercial presence.
Naturally, insurers with large potential Part D enrollment are on average likely to be large
insurers with national commercial presence. A potential issue with validity arises if larger
insurers are both more likely to be present in more markets and more likely to experience
12

The exclusion restriction for validity of the quality-adjusted premium instrument is satisfied so long as
the level of efficiency is uncorrelated with changes in the prices insurers will pay for drugs. We explicitly test this
hypothesis later.
13
This count includes seniors enrolled in Medicaid prior to Part D implementation. While seniors eligible
for both Medicaid and Medicare received their drug coverage through state Medicaids prior to Part D, they are
covered by private Part D insurers under the MMA, and thus constitute a large part of the increase in enrollment in
private insurance rolls as a result of Part D implementation.

15

systematically different price changes. To test this hypothesis, we estimated the relationship
between firm size and changes in drug prices, prior to Part D implementation. We found no
relationship between the two quantities, as detailed in Appendix Table 1.
The second instrument captures pure price variation in the premium, or premium
variation that is unrelated to plan generosity. To construct this measure of the quality-adjusted
premium, we purge observed premium data of benefit design and plan generosity
characteristics.14 The result is a quality-adjusted price that more accurately reflects the effective
load on a standardized insurance policy. Specifically, the instrument is constructed from the
insurer fixed-effects in the following premium analysis run at the plan-level on Medicare Part D
plan data from 2006:
(12)

ln( premiums p ,i ,m ) = α + D p ,i ,m β + δ i + θ m + ε p ,i ,m .
Conceptually, the fixed-effects  represent the quality-adjusted premiums charged by

insurer i. We regress the log premium of plan p offered by insurer f in market m on plan design
characteristics, D,15 and indicators for each insurer. In equation (12), markets are demarcated by
CMS-defined region. The region indicator variable,  , eliminates premium variation across
CMS markets.
A key issue for validity is whether the quality-adjusted premiums are uncorrelated with
expected changes in drug prices from the time premiums are set (in mid-2005) to the time
premiums are observed in 2006. If the two were in fact correlated – e.g., if more efficient firms
at one point in time experience larger changes in drug prices—the instrument would not be
exogenous with respect to changes in drug prices. We test this directly by regressing
Δ



,

the changes in the insurers’ negotiated cost of a market-weighted basket of drugs

14
An advantageous feature of the Part D market is that CMS defines a standard (minimum benefits)
coverage plan. The majority of Part D plans offered by private insurers are either standard plans, are plans that are
actuarially equivalent to the standard plan—plans that are virtually identical to the standard design, however with
small (and observable) differences in deductibles, co-payment design and formularies. Equation (12) is restricted to
standard and actuarially equivalent plans offered in the same market, greatly reducing any source of bias due to
unobserved plan characteristics. So-called “premium” plans (plans that offer greater levels of coverage set by the
insurer, but are priced higher than standard plans) are omitted from estimation of equation (12). CMS data on plan
design and premiums clearly identify plan type (standard, actuarially equivalent, or premium), and plan design. This
is in large part due to the fact that CMS reimbursements to private insurer for Part D coverage is tied to plan type
and benefit design, which necessitates development of a clear typology of all Part D plans in the market.
15
Specifically, the vector D contains: the plan-level deductible for the year; whether the plan is a low
income subsidy plan; whether the plan covers generics and branded drugs in the “coverage gap;” whether the plan
covers generics and some branded drugs in the coverage gap; and whether the plan covers no drugs in the coverage
gap.

16

between mid-year 2005 and the first half of 2006, on the  terms.16 We find no evidence of
correlation between these terms.17
Insurer Enrollment and Pharmacy Profits
The impact of Part D on the profitability of commercially enrolled patients goes more directly to
3.2.2

the heart of bargaining power, since firms ultimately bargain over rents, rather than prices.
Moreover, impacts on the profits of pharmacies and insurers have a qualitatively predictable
theoretical relationship with the profits of manufacturers, as demonstrated in the theory. This
allows us to infer effects on rents flowing to all parties involved in price negotiations.
To estimate pharmacy profits, we require data on the acquisition cost of drugs to the
pharmacy. In order to calculate pharmacy profits, we estimate the pharmacy’s acquisition cost
per drug using the minimum pharmacy price negotiated across all insurers for a given drug d.
This methodology is similar to the minimum dependent variable estimator for the unobserved
censoring point in Tobit models (Zuehlke, 2003; Carson and Sun, 2007).18 We calculate:

Costd ,t = min( priced , f ,t )
∀f

(13)

Π d , f ,t = priced , f ,t − Costd ,t

Costd,t is the per-pill cost of a given drug d at time t. Π d , f ,t is the profit per-pill earned by the
pharmacy for filling the prescription for drug d for an enrollee of insurer f. We average the
profits over all prescriptions for a given drug-insurer to construct an average profit per pill over
period t. Equation (14) estimates changes in log average profits per pill, Π d , f ,t , on changes in
each insurer’s Part D enrollment:
(14)

∆ ln( Π d , f ,t ) = α + β ∆Enrollment f ,t + γ∆X d , f ,t + ε d , f , m ,t .

16

The basket comprises the top 1000 expenditure-weighted drugs from the national retail pharmacy claims
data. Each drug’s weight in the basket is pegged to drug-specific expenditure weight estimated from the 2005 and
2006 pharmacy claims.
17
The coefficient estimate implies that a 10-percent increase in plan premiums relative to the market
average for identical plans is associated with a $0.62 increase in cost of the standardized basket of drugs (mean
normalized cost of the drug basket is $1365). The effect is economically small and statistically insignificant. The tstatistic on the estimated adjusted premium variable is 0.85.
18
In these models, regression parameters are consistently estimated when the minimum value of the
dependent variable is used as an estimate of the unobserved censoring point. While the current setting is not a Tobit,
the motivation for the minimum dependent variable estimator is similar, particularly under the assumption that the
estimate of the censoring point comes from an ordered statistics that converges to the true value as the number of
groups increase (in our case, groups are the number of insurers).

17

As in equation (9), the analysis is conducted in first-differences, which sweeps out any
time-invariant effects of each drug, insurer and market. Potential endogeneity of enrollment is
addressed using the instrumental variables approach discussed earlier.
3.3

Understanding the Enrollment and Pricing Instruments
The two instrumental variables each play different roles across our sample of insurers.

Table 3 illustrates the operation of the potential enrollment instrument. The table presents data
on four insurers, approximately similar in the sizes of their total commercial enrollment, and
ordered from smallest to largest in terms of commercial claims expenditures, reported in column
(1). Observe, however, that their exposure to the Part D marketplace, reported in column (2), is
not a simple function of size. Insurer A (the smallest) has the greatest potential Part D exposure,
due to its heavy market penetration into states (such as Florida) with high elderly population
shares. Column (3) reports actual Part D enrollment. The greatest Part D enrollment ends up
accruing to Insurer A, as the potential enrollment variable predicts. The ranking of actual
enrollment values tracks that of potential enrollment, except potential enrollment fails to
distinguish between Insurers B and C, which have very similar potential enrollment values.
There are 33 insurers in our data for which we can calculate all the necessary
covariates.19 Figure 3 reports actual versus potential enrollment for 32 of these 33. While
potential enrollment is not perfectly correlated with actual enrollment, there is a visual upward
slope to the relationship. The “noise” in the relationship appears to come from some insurers
who stay out of the Part D market, rather than insurers who secure far greater Part D enrollment
than predicted. This suggests that potential enrollment creates option-value for insurers, which
many (but not all) exercise.
The figure excludes one insurer, Humana, whose actual enrollment of 4.5M would skew
the figure so much as to render the other points indistinguishable. Yet, Humana’s potential
enrollment figure of 13.85M is not substantially outside the range of observed variation, even

19

The first-difference estimation framework outlined above requires repeated claims for each drug-insurer
cell. 74 of the 89 Part D insurers observed in the claims data have repeated claims for at least one insurer-drug cell.
33 of these insurers offer at least one Part D plan (PDP), in addition to any plans offered through employer-based
retirement coverage or Medicare Advantage plans. PDP premium data are required for the construction of the
quality-adjusted premium instrument. Hence, the main analyses are based on claims data from the 33 private
insurers for which we have stand-alone Part D plan premium data.

18

though it is quite large. This appears to threaten the credibility of the instrument, until we turn to
Figure 4.
Figure 4 shows the distribution of the quality-adjusted premium variable for the 33
insurers for which this instrument can be calculated. The height of the bars reflects the relative
size of each “bin” in the histogram, in terms of the number of firms. The numerical labels report
mean Part D enrollment in the bin. Recall that the quality-adjusted premium measure is purged
of differences in plan generosity, controlling for market fixed-effects. Therefore, this should be
taken as pure price dispersion. There appears to be a relatively tight bell-shaped distribution of
the quality-adjusted premium measure.
It is clear that Humana is an outlier in this distribution. With an enrollment of 4.5M, and
a quality-adjusted premium that is fully 50% lower than its nearest competitor, it is atypical in
the degree to which it under-prices its Part D plans and gained Part D enrollment. On average,
this insurer prices plan premiums at a 70-percent discount relative to the average premiums for
identical plans sold in the same market. The finding is consistent with Humana’s widely
publicized business strategy to rapidly gain Part D market share and subsequently switch
enrollees into their highly profitable Medicare managed care plans (Krasner, 2006;
BusinessWeek, 2006). Moreover, from 2006 to 2008, Humana quadrupled its Part D premiums
from their baseline levels (Hoadley et al., 2008). To the extent that other insurers engage in
similar, but perhaps less intensive, “loss-leader” pricing strategies, the quality-adjusted premium
instrument should capture its effect on Part D enrollment. In general, both instruments capture
distinct and substantive sources of plausibly exogenous variation in Part D enrollment, and are
therefore included in all first stage specifications.
3.4

Specifying the Second-Stage Equation
The theoretical model does not specify the functional form that obtains between profits

and enrollment. In principle, a flexible specification for insurer enrollment is preferred for the
empirical analysis. Unless the true model is nearly or exactly linear, linear approximations to it
are likely to produce misleading results, given the fairly wide distribution of Part D enrollment
observed in the data. In the case of diminishing effects of enrollment on pharmacy profits, a
linear specification will underestimate the true enrollment elasticity.

19

As an example, Humana is the single largest insurer with enrollment approximately 10
times larger than the median firm, and nearly 5 times larger than its nearest competitor. Potential
non-linearity of the enrollment effect can be seen graphically. We calculate residuals from the
change in log drug price equation (equation 14) including all covariates except the key
explanatory variable: insurers’ Part D enrollment. We then plot residuals from this regression
against insurers’ Part D enrollment. Figure 5a shows the scatter plot of residuals against Part D
enrollment increases. If we ignore the firms with trivial numbers of Part D enrollees (as these
have little influence on a weighted regression), a downward-sloping relationship is visually
evident. But this relationship appears to weaken with enrollment size, particularly in light of the
rightmost observation, Humana. This observation is dropped in Figure 5b in order to focus on the
range of enrollment increases experienced by the rest of the insurer sample. The relationship is
quite close to linear for insurers with non-trivial numbers of Part D enrollees.
In light of these facts, we pursue the following estimation strategy throughout our
analyses:
1) Estimate simple linear models that exclude Humana.
2) Estimate more general nonlinear models that include all insurers in the sample in
order to capture diminishing enrollment effects given large enrollment increases
experienced by some insurers;
Both specifications produce very similar quantitative predictions for the mean and aggregate
effects of Part D enrollment on prices and profits suggesting that Humana’s unique strategic
decision-making is not associated with substantially different effects of enrollment on the
aggregate pharmaceutical market.

4. Results
We first examine the effects of insurer enrollment size on pharmacy profits in the commercial
market. Our initial empirical focus on profits is motivated by the theory which directly points to
a potential impact of buyer size on retailer profits. We then turn to the effect of insurer
enrollment on retail prices in the commercial market in order to quantify the external buyer size
effect on retail expenditures by insurers.

20

4.1

Enrollment and Retailer Profits in the Commercial, Non-Part D, Market

Table 4 reports enrollment effects on pharmacy profits-per-pill from estimation of equation (14)
on all commercially insured, non-Part D claims. Recall, the retail pharmacy data includes claims
for subjects ages 60 and above, as described in Section 3. Columns (1) and (2) report results
from a linear model that includes all insurers, as well as Humana. The two instruments do a
sufficient job predicting changes in enrollment, but the estimated effects are quite small. An
extra 100,000 enrollees lowers profits per pill by just 0.2%. Taken at face value, these results
suggest small effects of enrollment everywhere, even at the very top of the enrollment
distribution. As an example, Humana’s 4.5M enrollees would lower profits per pill by less than
8%, compared to an insurer with no additional enrollment. Specifically, this would suggest Part
D enrollment has no external effects for the insurers other than Humana, and that all the results
are driven by the difference between Humana and its competitors. In addition, the results also
suggest that potential enrollment is a poor instrument, and that all the variation is driven by the
adjusted premium instrument.
The other models, however, demonstrate the pitfalls of this interpretation. Humana’s
much greater than average enrollment increase highlights the possibility of diminishing
enrollment effects on profits. Columns (3) and (4) report linear models that exclude Humana.
Among the other insurers, enrollment does indeed impact profits. 100,000 additional Part D
enrollees lower profits per pill earned by retailers in the commercial market by 2.7% in the OLS
specification, and 4.3% in the IV specification. Potential enrollment is the primary driver of
first-stage variation among these insurers. For the mean prescription, given the actual
distribution of insurer enrollment increases, Part D is predicted to have lowered profits per pill
by 15%. The median effect is 18%.
These results are robust to including Humana, provided we account for the possible
nonlinearity of the enrollment effect. Columns (5) and (6) report results for a quadratic
specification that includes all insurers. From an identification perspective, the nonlinear model
differs in the strength of the adjusted premium instrument. This is likely due to the presence of
Humana, whose large enrollment increase is explained almost entirely by its much lower qualityadjusted premium. Even so, it is striking that the quantitative implications of this model are
similar to those of the linear model without Humana. Part D lowered profits for the mean
prescription by about 18%, or 21% at the median. Including Humana raises the predicted effects
21

slightly, but by much less than Humana’s enrollment size would suggest. This is consistent with
the view that enrollment’s effects on profits are diminishing.
Table 5 presents some sensitivity analyses and validity tests using alternate comparison
periods. Columns (1) and (2) present IV models that compare the second half of 2005 to the
second half of 2006. This allows for a longer delay between the pre and post comparison
periods. The effect of enrollment goes up somewhat. For the model with all insurers, Part D is
predicted to have lowered retailer profits in the commercial market by 23%, as compared with
15% for the short-term comparison.
The last two columns of Table 5 present falsification tests that compare the second half of
2005 to the second half of 2004. We are relating retailer profit changes from 2004 to 2005, to
Part D enrollment. If the effects reported in Table 4 and columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 are
causal, then there should be no such relationship evident in the falsification test. However, if
there are differential trends in profits per pill that are systematically correlated with firms’
geographic distributions, these placebo regressions would turn up significant effects. Instead, we
obtain fairly precise zeroes. The standard errors on the coefficients are about one-third to onequarter the size as in our benchmark models, but the estimates are insignificant. This provides
evidence against the concern that our main results are driven by long-term trends in price
negotiations that happen to be correlated with changes in Part D enrollment.
The theory predicts that results might differ by the degree of market power held by the
manufacturer. Recall that if manufacturers hold all the market power, enrollment will have no
impact on prices or profits for pharmacies or insurers, because all the rents remain with the
manufacturer. To assess this hypothesis, we repeat the analysis stratifying the sample by
branded and generic drugs. Results are reported in Table 6. An enrollment increase of 100,000
lowers profits on generic drugs sold in the commercial, non-Part D, market by 10.4% but has no
statistically significant impact on the profits of branded drugs. Stratifying the branded drug
sample further reveals a continuum of effects that vary with the degree of market power held by
the branded manufacturer.
We define a branded drug’s degree of competition to be the number of substitutes for a
given branded drug. Two conventional definitions are used: the number of generic drugs for the
same compound (e.g., on-patent branded drugs face zero substitutes by this definition); and the

22

number of generic manufacturers in the market within the same therapeutic sub-class.20 Columns
(3) and (4) of Table 6 stratify the sample of branded drugs into those that have zero withincompound substitutes, and those with one or more. For non-competitively manufactured drugs—
i.e. on-patent drugs by this definition—the enrollment effect is negative, small in size and
statistically insignificant. Notably, this set of drugs accounts for roughly 50-percent of all
expenditures on pharmaceuticals in the US. In contrast, for drugs with one or more direct
substitutes, the enrollment effect is approximately 10% per 100,000 enrollees.
Sub-classes provide for a broader categorization than unique compounds, and are able to
capture competition from imperfect therapeutic substitutes that treat the same disease. Columns
(5)-(7) repeat the analysis stratifying the sample of branded drugs into terciles based on the
number of within-subclass therapeutic competitors faced by each drug. Here too, the enrollment
effect for branded drugs facing the least competition is close to zero and statistically
insignificant. As the number of substitutes increase, so does the magnitude of the estimated
enrollment effect on unit profits earned by the pharmacy. For branded drugs in the highest tercile
(column 7), we estimate that insurers experiencing an enrollment increase of 100,000 are able to
negotiate away 4.01 percent of profits earned by the pharmacy on a drug prescription. For drugs
in the lower or middle tercile, however, there is no statistically significant impact of enrollment.
Results from the linear enrollment specification for the insurer sample excluding Humana are
reported in Appendix Table 2. The results from all specifications are consistent with the notion
that manufacturers appropriate nearly all available profits for molecules with few competitors,
leaving little for pharmacies and insurers to bargain over, regardless of changes in their market
power.
Theory suggests that pharmacy profits on a particular product are positively correlated with
the profits of the corresponding manufacturer. These results suggest, therefore, that Part D
health insurers experienced gains at the expense of pharmacies, who lose profits they were
previously earning on drugs in competitive classes, including: generic drugs, off-patent brands,
and other branded drugs facing considerable therapeutic competition. This also suggests gains in
bargaining power versus manufacturers of those drugs.

20

Therapeutic sub-class definitions are taken from the Multum drug class categorization used in the
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey Prescribed Medicines file.

23

4.2

Enrollment and Negotiated Drug Prices in the Commercial, Non-Part D, Market

We next turn to the external effects of enrollment on retail drug prices in the commercial market,
as presented in equation (9). Results can be interpreted as effects on insurer retail expenditures.
The results are reported in Table 7, where standard errors are clustered at the level of the insurer.
Columns (1) through (3) report the effects for the commercial population ages 65 and older,
while columns (4) through (6) report the external effects on the non-elderly commercial market.
Column (1) reports estimates of the enrollment effect for the entire sample of branded and
generic drugs on changes in drug prices between the second half of 2005 and the first half of
2006. An additional 100,000 enrollees leads to an approximate 2.5% decline in retail prices
observed for seniors in the non-Part D commercial market. This decomposes into a 5.4% decline
in generic prices, but only a 0.3% decline in branded prices. On average, Part D lowered the
price of the mean prescription by 19% for generic drugs, 0.9% for branded drugs, and 8.5%
overall.
We repeat estimation of equation (9) using pharmacy claims associated with prescriptions
filled by the non-elderly commercially enrolled (i.e., outside both Medicare and Medicaid).
Results are reported in columns (4)-(6) of Table 7. An additional 100,000 Part D enrollees leads
to roughly 1.8% lower prices overall for the non-elderly commercial enrollees; this can be
decomposed into 3.7% lower generic prices and 0.35% lower branded prices. On average, the
implementation of Part D lowered the mean prescription price by 5.8% overall, 12.4% for
generics, and 1.1% for branded drugs. Results from the linear enrollment specification for the
insurer sample excluding Humana are virtually identical, and are reported in Appendix Table 3.
Note these effects are smaller than the corresponding estimates for the elderly population.
This would be true if Part D had the greatest impact on drugs used heavily by seniors, and if drug
utilization patterns differed across age groups. This would dampen the overall effect of average
price declines for the commercially enrolled non-elderly.
In any case, this result implies that on the margin, administering Medicare drug insurance
under the umbrella of private insurers has both a direct benefit—e.g. effects on drug utilization,
as found by Lichtenberg and Sun (2007), Yin et al (2008), Duggan and Scott-Morton (2008) and
Ketcham and Simon (2008)—and an external benefit for insured outside of the Part D program.

24

5. Quantifying the Internal and External Effects of Part D
The results in the previous section allow us to decompose reductions in drug cost across
enrollees inside and outside the Part D program, as shown in the following equation:
(15)

/

∆   ∑∆

'(),&
*(),&

· "#,
$ % ∑∆& · "#,
$ % ∑∆& · "#,
$

,

In equation (15), "#, represents the total quantity of drug i purchased by individuals in group j;
,

∆ represents the average decline in price of drug i due to Part D among individuals in group j.
The three terms on the right hand side of the equation represent the expenditure reductions for:
1) Part D enrollees who were previously uninsured; 2) seniors who were commercially insured
prior to Part D; and 3) non-elderly commercially insured enrollees. The savings in 1) represent
the compositional effect of enrolling cash-paying seniors in commercial Part D plans. This is the
direct “internal” effect of Part D. The expenditure reductions for the latter two groups represent
an “external” effect of Part D: enrollment increases due to Part D enhance the bargaining power
of insurers; consequent prices declines negotiated by insurers accrue to all enrollees of the
insurer.
We estimate the components of equation (15) as:
'(),&
*(),&

∆    #
-. %  #
-/ %  #
-0 .
,

 # represents total drug expenditures among individuals in group j prior to the
implementation in Part D. -, represents the average Part D-related decline in log prices for
,

individuals in group j. For all groups j, we estimate  # from the 2005 Medical

Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS).  #
is the average out-patient prescription drug

expenditure among seniors without health insurance coverage at any period during 2005.
,,&

 #

is the average out-patient prescription drug expenditure among senior or non-

seniors who report having private commercial insurance (or private Medigap) as the usual thirdparty payer for drugs purchased during 2005.
We use the pharmacy claims data to estimate the average decrease in the cash to coverage
drug prices between 2005 and 2006, for the sample of drugs used in the enrollment elasticity
analysis. Define this as 1. . In our data, we estimate that the average Part D enrollee who was
previously uninsured experiences a 30% reduction in annual drug costs, holding quantity at prePart D levels. We take this as our estimate of 1. .
25

Since not every uninsured cash-paying senior in 2005 chooses to enroll in Part D, this
number must be scaled to account for the fact that not every previously uninsured patient ended
up with this decline in drug costs. We use the MEPS to estimate the expenditure-weighted share
of uninsured patients who enroll in Part D. The coefficient of interest can be recovered as
-.  2. 1. , where 2. is this expenditure-weighted share of uninsured patients enrolling. From
the MEPS, we estimate that the fraction of uninsured seniors dropped from 24-percent to 8percent of seniors between 2005 and 2006. This is virtually identical to estimates based on the
Health and Retirement Survey (Levy, et al). We assume that the two-thirds of individuals who
enrolled in Part D have the highest expenditures within this group.21 This yields an estimate of

2.  0.94. We thus estimate -.  0.94$ 7 80.30$, and  #
 $13.4.

-/ is the average percentage change in price for commercially enrolled seniors, and -0 is the
corresponding quantity for commercially enrolled non-seniors. We begin with our estimated
declines in expenditure for each group due to observed insurer enrollment increases.
,,&

Specifically, we use the models in columns (1) and (4) of Table 7, holding "#, and other
regression covariates constant at 2005 levels. These estimates must be scaled to account for the
fact that our sample is restricted to Part D insurers, rather than the entire commercially enrolled
population. Hence -,  2, 1, , where 2, represents the fraction of the commercial market j that is
covered by an insurer participating in Medicare Part D. We estimate the 2 terms using the
pharmacy claims data and assume the 1 terms also apply to Part D insurers outside our sample.
'(),&
This approach yields 2/  0.40, 12  80.085, and  #
 $37.2; and 20  0.40,
*(),&
13  80.058, and  #
 $74.6.

These parameter estimates imply a total reduction in drug expenditures of $6.78B (again,
,

holding "#, and other regression covariates constant at 2005 levels), of which $3.78B (56percent) can attributed to the direct effect of insuring two-thirds of the previously uncovered
seniors. Importantly, 44-percent of the total effect of Part D on market-wide reductions in drug
expenditures ($3.00B) can be attributed to the external effect of greater insurer bargaining power
from Part D enrollment increases. Note that these savings are annual savings, accruing to the
insurer and enrollees in each year after the implementation of Medicare Part D.

21

This generate an upper bound estimate for the internal effect of Part D on previously uninsured seniors,
resulting in an underestimate of the relative size of the external effect.

26

It is not clear how much of this expenditure reduction is retained by insurers, and how much
flows to the commercially insured. At a minimum, there is evidence of noncompetitive behavior
in the group insurance market (Dafny, 2008). Regardless of where the rents end up, they are
likely to have significant effects on the distribution of welfare in the market.
On the one hand, if they are passed through to commercial enrollees, the total savings would
be relatively small on a per capita basis, but sizeable in the aggregate. The total savings of
$3.00B would imply that commercial enrollees of insurers that participate in Part D accrued total
savings nearly equal to the savings enjoyed by the newly insured Part D beneficiaries.
If retained entirely by health insurers, we estimate this would have boosted the profitability
of commercial prescription drug insurance operations by more than 20%. We arrive at this backof-the-envelope estimate using the profit and cost margins reported by Aetna, the only major
health insurer to break out health care costs and premia in sufficient detail to facilitate a
calculation of this sort. Moreover, we have no reason to believe that margins are substantially
different for Aetna than for other insurers. According to its 2008 annual report, Aetna paid out
81.5 cents of health care expenses on every dollar of premium earned, for a gross operating
margin of 18.5%. Assuming these margins are similar for prescription drug coverage, a 5.2%
reduction in drug costs would have boosted this margin by 23%. In other words, for a constant
revenue base, Part D would have raised annual net income on commercial insurance by 23%.

6. Conclusion
Part D enrollment seems to have tilted market power in the favor of its participating health
insurers. Gains in negotiating leverage came at the expense of pharmacies, generic drug
manufacturers, and branded manufacturers facing generic or therapeutic competition. Branded
drug manufacturers with a great deal of ex ante market power seem to have escaped losses. The
total size of the price reduction in the commercially enrolled marketplace was quite significant in
relationship to health insurer profitability, and in terms of its aggregate value to the
commercially enrolled population.
Our results illustrate the interaction between insurer market power, and the competitive
pressure faced by manufacturers. For molecules with little competition, insurer consolidation is
unlikely to make significant price inroads, as manufacturers appear to hold all or nearly all the
market power available. However, for drugs that have identical or therapeutically similar
27

molecular equivalents, price-negotiation by insurers can have significant benefits for consumers.
Naturally, the optimal degree of competitiveness faced by manufacturers depends both on
efficient drug pricing, and the provision of sufficient incentives to innovate. Therefore, it is not
clear whether policies to reduce manufacturer profitswould harm future welfare by more than
they enhance current welfare.
More generally, our findings suggest an important external effect of public subsidies for
private health insurance. Direct and indirect subsidies are becoming more prevalent in the US
health care system, whether in the form of tax-exemption for employer-based health insurance
premiums, or direct subsidies for insuring the poor. The welfare analysis of such policies should
consider the pricing impacts on consumers outside the subsidized group. In our context, those
external effects were quite significant, relative to the internal price effects of the program.
Finally, our results highlight an important, but little discussed effect of the Part D
contracting model: its external effects on the non-Part D marketplace. If Part D confers
competitive advantages on payers who write insurance outside the Part D environment, its social
gains may extend beyond the Part D population. Indeed, given the concentration of the
prescription drug insurance marketplace, these external effects have the potential to affect many
outside the Part D program, and perhaps to rival the direct benefits of Part D to those
participating in the program. It is significant to note that these external effects are present, in
spite of the theoretical separation between commercial price-negotiations and Part D pricenegotiations, and that these effects can only exist when Part D is administered through the
private insurers with large commercial enrollment external to Medicare.

References
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2009) “Choice Inconsistencies Among the Elderly: Evidence from
Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 14759. Cambridge, MA.
Brooks, J. M., A. Dor and H. S. Wong (1997). "Hospital-insurer bargaining: an empirical
investigation of appendectomy pricing." J Health Econ 16(4): 417-34.
BusinessWeek (2006). Plan A: Hook Them With Part D. BusinessWeek.
Carson, R. and Y. Sun (2007). “The Tobit model with a non-zero threshold” Econometrics
Journal v10, pp. 488–502.
28

Chipty, T. and C. M. Snyder (1999). "The Role of Firm Size in Bilateral Bargaining: A Study of
the Cable Television Industry." Review of Economics and Statistics 81(2): 326-40.
Congressional Budget Office (2007) “The Long-Term Outlook for Health Care Spending” Pub.
No. 3085
Dafny, L. (2008). "Are Health Insurance Markets Competitive?" National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 14572. Cambridge, MA.
Dafny, L. (2008). “Competition in Health Insurance Markets.” Unpublished manuscript (under
revision), Northwestern University
Duggan, M. and Fiona Scott-Morton (2006). "The Distortionary Effects of Government
Procurement: Evidence for Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing." Quarterly Journal
of Economics, February, 2006, 1-30
Duggan, M. and F. Scott Morton (2008). "The Effect of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical
Prices and Utilization." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13917.
Cambridge, MA.
Ellison, S. and C. Snyder (2008). “Countervailing Power in Wholesale Pharmaceuticals,”
forthcoming , The Journal of Industrial Economics
Frank, R. and Joseph P. Newhouse (2008). “Should Drug Prices Be Negotiated Under Part D Of
Medicare? And If So, How?” Health Affairs 27(1), pp. 33-43.
Friedman, J. N. (2008) “The Incidence of the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit: Using Asset
Prices to Assess its Impact on Drug Makers” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard
University.
Gruber, J. (2001) “The Impact of the Tax System on Health Insurance Coverage” International
Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, Vol. 1, No. ¾
Gruber, J. and J. Poterba (1994) “Tax Incentives and the Decision to Purchase Health Insurance:
Evidence from the Self-Employed” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109, No. 3
(Aug., 1994), pp. 701-733.
Ho, K. (2009). “Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market" American Economic
Review, 99(1): 393-430.
Hoadley, J., J. Thompson, E. Hargrave, et al. (2008). "Medicare Part D 2009 Data Spotlight:
Premiums." Kaiser Family Foundation Report 7835.
Ketcham, J. and K. Simon. 2008. "Medicare Part D's Effects on Elderly Drug Costs and
Utilization", American Journal of Managed Care, November. p14-22

29

Kling, J., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, L. Vermeulen and M. Wrobel (2008). “Misperception in
Medicare Drug Plans” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Krasner, J. (2006). Insurer Hits Millions of Seniors with Drug Cost Hike. Boston Globe. Boston,
MA.
Levy, R. (1999). "The pharmaceutical industry. A discussion of competitive and antitrust issues
in an environment of change." Bureau of Economics/Federal Trade Commission staff
report.
Lichtenberg, F. R. and S. X. Sun (2007). "The impact of Medicare Part D on prescription drug
use by the elderly." Health Affairs 26(6): 1735-1744.
Lucarelli, C., J. Prince and K. Simon (2008). “Measuring Welfare and the Effects of Regulation
in a Government-Created Market: The Case of Medicare Part D Plans” NBER working
paper no. 14296.
Raskovich, A. (2003) “Pivotal Buyers and Bargaining Position,” Journal of Industrial
Economics 51: 405–426
Snyder, C. M. (1996) “A Dynamic Theory of Countervailing Power,” Rand Journal of
Economics 27: 747–769
Sorenson, A. (2003). “Insurer-Hospital Bargaining: Negotiated Discounts in Post-Deregulation
Connecticut” The Journal of Industrial Economics LI No. 4, 469-490.
Stole, L. A. and J. Zwiebel. (1996) “Organizational Design and Technology Choice Under
Intrafirm Bargaining,” American Economic Review 86: 195–222
Town, R. and G. Vistnes. (2001) “Hospital competition in HMO networks,” Journal of Health
Economics 20:5 733-753
Yin, W., A. Basu, J. X. Zhang, et al. (2008). "The Effect of the Medicare Part D Prescription
Benefit on Drug Utilization and Expenditures." Ann Intern Med 148(3): 169-177.
Zuehlke, T. (2003). “Estimation of a Tobit model with unknown censoring threshold” Applied
Economics 35, 1163–1169.

30

Figure 1. Transfers and Payments in the Prescription Drug Market
Manufacturers
(e.g. Pfizer)

Purchasers/Insurers:
PBMs (Medco)
PDPs (United)
Govt’s (Medicaid)

Wholesalers

Pharmacy
(e.g. CVS)

Enrollees

31

0

.05

.1

Density
.15

.2

.25

Figure 2a. Distribution of Pharmacy Profits

0

5

10

15

20

25

Profits ($)
Branded

Generics

0

1

Density

2

3

Figure 2b. Distribution of Dispersion in Pharmacy Profits

0

.5
1
1.5
Normalized Deviation of Pharmacy Profits Across Insurers w/in NDC
Branded

2

Generics

Figure 2a shows the distribution of average profits per prescription at the insurer-NDC level earned by the
pharmacy. For illustrative purposes, data come from a single point in time, September 2005, so that all
variation in pharmacy profits comes from variation across insurers and drugs in the cross-section. Figure 2b
shows the distribution of standard deviations within NDC code, across insurers in the profits earned by the
pharmacy, where standard deviations of profits within NDC code have been normalized by the mean profits
earned by the pharmacy for that NDC.

32

0

Actual 2006 Part D Enrollment (M)
.2
.4
.6
.8

1

Figure 3. Actual and Potential Part D Enrollment

0

5
10
Potential 2006 Part D Enrollment (M)

15

Humana not shown: Potential Enrollment = 13.85M; Actual Enrollment = 4.54M

Each dot on the figure represents a single insurer. “Potential Part D enrollment” measures the exposure of
each insurer to the Medicare-eligible population in 2006, according to the insurer’s geographic distribution
prior to Part D. The detailed formula is provided in the text.

Figure 4. Distribution of Quality-adjusted Premiums
2.5

Difference in ln(Premium) Relative to Market Average (2006)

Density
1.5

2

199K

1

48K

.5

342K

0

4.5M
-1

-.5
0
Quality-adjusted Premiums

.5

The figure shows the distribution of insurers’ quality-adjusted premiums, which is used as an instrument
for insurers’ actual Part D enrollment. An insurer’s quality-adjusted premium is calculated as the difference
in log premiums between its standardized Part D plans and identical plans offered in the same market.
Insurers’ realized 2006 Part D PDP enrollment is labeled above key points in the distribution. Note that the
enrollment figure listed for the peak bin is an average across all the insurers in the bin.

33

Figure 5a. Changes in Drug Prices and Enrollment

-.0002

0

Residuals
.0002 .0004

.0006

.0008

All Drugs

0

.5

1

1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
2006 Part D Enrollment Increases (M)

4

4.5

Figure 5b. Changes in Drug Prices and Enrollment

-.0002

0

Residuals
.0002 .0004 .0006 .0008

All Drugs

0

.25
.5
.75
2006 Part D Enrollment Increases (M)

1

Figure does not include observations from Humana

Figure 5a shows the scatter plot of average residual change in log drug prices against Part D enrollment
increases. Residuals are calculated from the regression of log changes in drug prices against all model
covariates except Part D enrollment increases, where residuals are averaged across all drugs to the insurer
level. Figure 5a shows this scatter plot for all 33 insurers that are included in the main model specifications.
Figure 5b shows the same scatter plot except that the observation from Humana is not shown. The size of
circles reflects the size of insurers as measured by the number of observed claims in the data.

34

Table 1. Rank of Drugs by Sales among Seniors in Pharmacy Claims
Rank
Drug
MEPS Rank (Among Seniors)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

LIPITOR
PLAVIX
ZOCOR
NORVASC
PREVACID
NEXIUM
FOSAMAX
ADVAIR
PROTONIX
PRAVACHOL
DIOVAN
ACTOS
CELEBREX
TOPROL XL
AVANDIA
COREG
AMBIEN
ARICEPT
ACTONEL
LEVAQUIN
ZETIA
ZOLOFT
FLOMAX
ACIPHEX
COSAAR

1
4
2
6
10
5
8
16
15
11
14
17
12
7
18
21
58
20
31
98
19
22
33
34
40

The table lists the top 25 drugs, ranked by expenditures during 2004 and 2005 in the pharmacy claims data for seniors
aged 65 and above. Expenditures are measured as the sum of payments to the pharmacy made by the customer plus
third party payers. The corresponding rank for these drugs among seniors in the 2004 and 2005 Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey (MEPS) Prescription Medicines module. High ranking drugs in the MEPS that do not appear in the
pharmacy claims data include Procrit (rank #3 in the MEPS, rank #79 in the pharmacy claims) and Atenolol (#9 in
MEPS, #62 in pharmacy claims), both of which are largely physician administered and therefore less likely to appear in
outpatient pharmacy claims. Other drugs ranked in the top 25 by the MEPS include ; Metformin (#13 in the MEPS, #29 in
the pharmacy claims); Ranitidine (#23 MEPS, #122 claims); Evista (#24 MEPS, #33 claims); and Lotrel (#25 MEPS, #41
claims).

Table 2. Distribution of Insurers by 2007 Part D Enrollment
50-75th
75-90th
Below Median Above Median
Percentile
Percentile
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
28,000Insurer's Part D Enrollment
< 6,400
> 6,400
6,400-28,000
126,000
No. of Insurers
124
124
62
36
No. of Insurers Appearing in Claims
15
71
29
21
Fraction of Insurers Appearing in Claims
0.22
0.87
0.46
0.54

90-95th
Percentile
(5)
126,000354,000
13
9
0.70

Above 95th
Percentile
(6)
> 354,000
13
12
0.95

The table shows the distribution of insurers by their Part D enrollment. For each enrollment bin, the table reports the number insurers participating in Part D, and among these
insurers, the number of insurers that are observed in the pharmacy claims. The last row reports the fraction of Part D participating insurers that appear in the claims, weighted by
their Part D enrollment.

Table 3. Illustration of the Potential Part D Enrollment Instrument

Insurer A
Insurer B
Insurer C
Insurer D

Total Expenditures in 2005
(1)
$4.6M
$5.4M
$6.8M
$7.0M

Potential Part D Enrollment
(2)
12.6M
3.4M
3.3M
8.2M

Actual 2006 Part D Enrollment
(3)
986,108
20,735
37,388
221,359

This table illustrates the explanatory power of the potential Part D enrollment instrument. The insurer-level variable is defined as the number of seniors in 2005 without private
drug insurance (including those on Medicaid) residing in states in which the insurer is present in the commercial market, weighted by the insurer's commercial marketshare in
those states. Data on drug coverage come from the 2005 Current Population Survey. The table lists four insurers that are similar in their commercial market size, as measured
by the total reimbursesments to the pharmacy (column 1). Column 2 reports the wide variance in the potential Part D enrollment among these four insurers. Actual Part D
enrollment in 2006 is reported in column 3.

Table 4. Enrollment Effect on Pharmacy Profits-per-Pill: Second Half 2005 vs First Half 2006
Dependent Variable: ∆ln(Drug Profit per Pill)
Model
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment (1M)
-0.017*
-0.019*
-0.265**
-0.432**
-0.316**
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.117)
(0.201)
(0.138)
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment2 (1M)
0.062**
(0.030)
∆ Log Exposure to Pharmacy
-0.825
-0.807
-0.478
-0.578
-0.500
(0.869)
(0.860)
(0.451)
(0.463)
(0.461)
∆ Log Avg Quantity per Rx
0.407***
0.408***
0.392***
0.390***
0.364***
(0.051)
(0.051)
(0.041)
(0.041)
(0.044)
∆ Log AWP of Drug
0.084***
0.083***
0.017
0.016
0.015
(0.026)
(0.027)
(0.034)
(0.031)
(0.029)
Constant
0.007
0.009
0.147***
0.198***
0.154***
(0.082)
(0.082)
(0.033)
(0.047)
(0.032)
First Stage
Excluded Instruments
Potential Enrollment (1M)

Endogenous Variable
∆Enrollment
0.090**
(0.043)

Endogenous Variable
∆Enrollment
0.037***
(0.007)

-3.663***
(0.192)

-0.270
(0.193)

203.22

13.75

Endogenous Variable
2
∆Enrollment ∆Enrollment
-0.058
-0.097
(0.104)
(0.355)
0.005
0.007
(0.005)
(0.017)
0.812**
5.737***
(0.387)
(1.353)
-4.446***
-23.588***
(0.371)
(1.271)
3849.75
9370.42

Potential Enrollment2 (1M)
Adjusted Premium
Adjusted Premium2
F-stat for Excluded Variables
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 25th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 50th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 75th
Overall Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill)
R-squared
Insurer Observations
Insurer-Drug Observations

-0.003
-0.007
-0.008
-0.014
0.027
33
9985

-0.004
-0.008
-0.009
-0.015
0.025
33
9985

-0.056
-0.110
-0.114
-0.094
0.027
32
9254

-0.091
-0.180
-0.186
-0.153
0.025
32
9254

IV
(6)
-0.555**
(0.232)
0.112**
(0.049)
-0.643
(0.484)
0.362***
(0.043)
0.013
(0.027)
0.220***
(0.053)

-0.064
-0.121
-0.125
-0.107
0.021
33
9985

-0.112
-0.212
-0.218
-0.184
0.018
33
9985

The table reports the effect of a change in insurer enrollment on the change in the log of profits earned by the pharmacy on prescriptions associated with commercial claims. The dependent variable is
the change in the log of the average profit per pill earned on a given drug for prescriptions associated with a given insurer between the second half of 2005 and the first half of 2006. The key regressor is
the change in the insurer's Part D enrollment between 2005 and 2006. Covariates include the change in the log average number of pills per prescription, the change in the drug's average per-pill
wholesale price, and the change in each insurer's exposure to the pharmacy (calculated as the pharmacy's share of the pharmacy market in areas where the insurer is present). The sample of drugs
comprises the top 1000 drugs, ranked by expenditures, observed in the claims. Instruments for Part D enrollment include potential Part D enrollment, calculated as the number of uninsured seniors in
2005 residing in states where the insurer is present in the commercial market, weighted by the insurer's commercial marketshare in those markets; and quality-adjusted premium, calculated the
difference in log premiums between standardized Part D plans offered by one insurer relative to the average for identical plans in the same market. Columns (3) and (4) no not include observations from
Humana. Changes in log profits earned by the pharmacy predicted by the model are reported for the insurer of the 25th, 50th and 75th percentile prescription, as ordered by the enrollment change of the
associated insurer. Also reported is the overall predicted change in log profits given the observed distribution of enrollment increases. Parentheses report standard errors clustered at the insurer level. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 5. Enrollment Effect on Pharmacy Profits-per-Pill: Alternative Comparison Periods
Model
Time Periods
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment (1M)
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment2 (1M)
∆ Log Exposure to Pharmacy
∆ Log Avg Quantity per Rx
∆ Log AWP of Drug
Constant

Dependent Variable: ∆ln(Drug Profits per Pill)
IV
IV
Second Half 2005 vs
Second Half 2005 vs
Second Half 2006
Second Half 2006
(1)
(2)
-0.543**
-0.677**
(0.263)
(0.315)
0.136**
(0.066)
-0.893
-0.968
(0.647)
(0.684)
0.404***
0.379***
(0.062)
(0.060)
0.320***
0.315***
(0.088)
(0.075)
0.193***
0.215***
(0.062)
(0.072)

IV
Second Half 2005 vs
Second Half 2004
(3)
0.088
(0.085)

0.138
(0.086)
-0.426***
(0.042)
-0.072**
(0.031)
-0.099***
(0.031)

IV
Second Half 2005 vs
Second Half 2004
(4)
0.065
(0.086)
-0.014
(0.018)
0.126
(0.078)
-0.397***
(0.045)
-0.102***
(0.036)
-0.088***
(0.031)

1st Stage F-stat on linear enrollment term
1st Stage F-stat on squared enrollment term

14.04

4309.95
12325.15

13.17

4521.98
9816.09

Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 25th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 50th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 75th
Overall Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill)
R-squared
Insurer Observations
Insurer-Drug Observations

-0.115
-0.226
-0.234
-0.193
0.030
32
8152

-0.137
-0.258
-0.267
-0.226
0.024
33
8849

0.019
0.037
0.038
0.031
0.017
32
9037

0.013
0.025
0.025
0.019
0.013
33
8383

The table reports IV estimates of the effect of a change in insurer enrollment on the change in the log of profits earned by the pharmacy on prescriptions associated with commercial claims.
The dependent variable is the change in the log of the average profit per pill earned on a given drug charged to a given insurer between the time periods noted in the column headings. The
key regressor is the change in the insurer's Part D enrollment between 2005 and 2006. The unit of analysis is the insurer-drug. The regressions control for the change in the log average
number of pills per prescription, the change in the drug's average per-pill wholesale price, and the change in each insurer's exposure to the pharmacy (calculated as the pharmacy's share of
the pharmacy market in areas where the insurer is present). The sample of drugs comprises the top 1000 drugs, ranked by expenditures, observed in the pharmacy claims. Instruments for
Part D enrollment include potential Part D enrollment, calculated as the number of uninsured seniors in 2005 residing in states where the insurer is present in the commercial market, weighted
by the insurer's commercial marketshare in those markets; and quality-adjusted premiums, calculated the difference in log premiums between standardized Part D plans offered by one insurer
relative to the average for identical plans in the same market. Linear specifications in columns (1) and (3) do not include observations from Humana. Changes in log profits earned by the
pharmacy predicted by the model are reported for the insurer of the 25th, 50th and 75th percentile prescription, as ordered by the enrollment change of the associated insurer. Also reported is
the overall predicted change in log profits given the observed distribution of enrollment increases. Parentheses report standard errors clustered at the insurer level. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 6. Enrollment Effect on Pharmacy Profits-per-Pill for Branded Drugs, by Competitveness
Dependent Variable: ∆ln(Drug Profits per Pill)
Panel A: Second Half 2005 vs First Half 2006
Drug Sample All Branded
Definition of Substitute
(1)
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment (1M)
-0.175
(0.187)
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment2 (1M)
0.035
(0.039)
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 25th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 50th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 75th
Overall Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill)
R-squared
Insurer Observations
Insurer-Drug Observations

-0.035
-0.067
-0.069
-0.056
0.010
33
5372

All Generics
(2)
-1.116***
(0.364)
0.226***
(0.076)
-0.225
-0.426
-0.439
-0.376
0.086
33
4613

Branded:
Branded:
0 Substitutes >0 Substitutes
Generic Drugs w/in Compound
(3)
(4)
-0.103
-1.083***
(0.193)
(0.416)
0.021
0.213**
(0.040)
(0.085)
-0.021
-0.039
-0.040
-0.034
0.000
33
5009

-0.219
-0.415
-0.427
-0.377
0.013
33
363

Branded: Low Branded: Mid Branded: High
Tercile
Tercile
Tercile
Drugs Within Therapeutic Sub-Class
(5)
(6)
(7)
-0.030
-0.002
-0.421*
(0.134)
(0.187)
(0.250)
0.006
-0.000
0.085
(0.028)
(0.039)
(0.052)
-0.006
-0.011
-0.012
-0.010
0.010
33
650

0.000
-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
0.010
33
2612

-0.085
-0.161
-0.166
-0.138
0.000
33
2110

Panel B: Second Half 2005 vs Second Half 2004
Drug Sample All Branded
Definition of Substitute
(1)
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment (1M)
0.114
(0.130)
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment2 (1M)
-0.027
(0.027)
Insurer Observations
Insurer-Drug Observations

33
4814

All Generics
(2)
0.051
(0.121)
-0.008
(0.025)
33
4223

Branded:
Branded:
No Substitutes No Substitutes
Generic Drugs Within
(3)
(4)
0.158
-0.216
(0.136)
(0.241)
-0.036
0.038
(0.028)
(0.049)
33
4366

33
448

Branded: Low Branded: Mid Branded: High
Tercile
Tercile
Tercile
Drugs Within Therapeutic Sub-Class
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.522
0.128
-0.006
(0.507)
(0.140)
(0.128)
-0.103
-0.036
0.003
(0.105)
(0.029)
(0.026)
33
629

33
2313

33
1872

Panel A reports IV estimates of the effect of a change in insurer enrollment on the change in pharmacy profits per pill for branded drug prescriptions associated with commercial claims,
stratified by degree of therapeutic substitutability. Columns (1)-(2) report enrollment elasticities separately for branded and generic drugs, respectively. Two conventional definitions of
substitutes are used: columns (3)-(4) stratify branded drugs by the number of generic substitutes each faces; columns (5)-(7) stratifies branded drugs by the number of drugs within its
Multum-defined therapeutic subclass. The dependent variable is the change in the log average profit per pill earned by the pharmacy on a given drug on prescriptions associated with a
given insurer between the 2nd half of 2005 and the 1st half of 2006. The regressions control for the change in the log average number of pills per prescription, the change in the drug's
average per-pill wholesale price, and the change in each insurer's exposure to the pharmacy (calculated as the pharmacy's share of the pharmacy market in areas where the insurer is
present). The sample of drugs comprises the top 1000 drugs, ranked by expenditures, observed in the pharmacy claims. Instruments for Part D enrollment include potential Part D
enrollment and quality-adjusted premium variables, described in the text and in previous tables. Changes in log profits earned by the pharmacy predicted by the model are reported for the
insurer of the 25th, 50th and 75th percentile prescription, as ordered by the enrollment change of the associated insurer. Also reported is the overall predicted change in log profits given the
observed distribution of enrollment increases. Panel B reports similar IV estimates of the effect of a change in insurer enrollment between 2005 and 2006 on the change in pharmacy profits
per pill log change in profits between 2004 and 2005. Parentheses report standard errors clustered at the insurer level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 7. Enrollment Effect on Pharmacy Prices-per-Pill for Branded Drugs: Second Half 2005 vs First Half 2006
Population
Model
Drug Sample
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment (1M)
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment2 (1M)
∆ Log Avg Quantity per Rx
∆ Log Exposure to Pharmacy
∆ Log AWP of Drug
Constant

1st Stage F-stat on linear enrollment term
1st Stage F-stat on squared enrollment term
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 25th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 50th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 75th
Overall Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill)
R-squared
Insurer Observations
Insurer-Drug Observations

Dependent Variable: ∆ln(Drug Price per Pill)
Commerically Insured Ages 65 and Over
IV
IV
IV
All
Branded
Generics
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.262***
-0.027**
-0.564***
(0.053)
(0.013)
(0.115)
0.053***
0.005**
0.115***
(0.011)
(0.003)
(0.024)
-0.117***
-0.042***
-0.207***
(0.016)
(0.007)
(0.021)
-0.177
-0.015
-0.330
(0.158)
(0.036)
(0.313)
-0.058***
0.146***
0.015
(0.013)
(0.018)
(0.014)
0.036*
0.041***
0.026
(0.019)
(0.004)
(0.037)

Under 65 Commerically Insured
IV
IV
IV
All
Branded
Generics
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.183***
-0.035***
-0.382***
(0.070)
(0.011)
(0.142)
0.037**
0.007***
0.077***
(0.015)
(0.002)
(0.029)
-0.175***
-0.042***
-0.301***
(0.020)
(0.006)
(0.031)
-0.059
-0.095**
-0.021
(0.272)
(0.038)
(0.549)
-0.035***
0.113***
0.032***
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.012)
0.032*
0.043***
0.012
(0.019)
(0.003)
(0.037)

3869.87
9491.00

4236.10
11356.13

3444.72
7948.32

3880.81
10048.83

4123.53
11190.82

3682.08
9204.10

-0.053
-0.100
-0.103
-0.085
0.037
33
10301

-0.005
-0.010
-0.011
-0.009
0.072
33
5639

-0.114
-0.215
-0.222
-0.189
0.063
33
4662

-0.037
-0.070
-0.072
-0.058
0.059
33
6835

-0.007
-0.014
-0.014
-0.011
0.074
33
3756

-0.077
-0.146
-0.150
-0.124
0.116
33
3079

The table reports IV estimates of the effect of a change in an insurer enrollment on changes in the log of drug prices for prescriptions associated with commercial claims. The dependent
variable is the change in the log average price per pill of a given drug for prescriptions associated with a given insurer between the second half of 2005 and the first half of 2006. The key
regressor is the change in the insurer's Part D enrollment between 2005 and 2006. The regressions control for the change in the log average number of pills per prescription, the change in
the drug's average per-pill wholesale price, and the change in each insurer's exposure to the pharmacy (calculated as the pharmacy's weighted average share of the pharmacy market in
areas where the insurer is present). The sample of drugs comprises the top 1000 drugs (ranked by expenditures) observed in the pharmacy claims. Instruments for Part D enrollment include
potential Part D enrollment and quality-adjusted premiums (described in the text and in previous tables). Columns (1)-(3) report the price elasticity of insurer enrollment in the commercial
market among pharmacy customers aged 65 and above. Columns (4)-(6) report the price elasticity of insurer enrollment in the commercial market among pharmacy customers below age 65.
Changes in log profits earned by the pharmacy predicted by the model are reported for the insurer of the 25th, 50th and 75th percentile prescription, as ordered by the enrollment change of
the associated insurer. Also reported is the overall predicted change in log profits given the observed distribution of enrollment increases. Parentheses report standard errors clustered at the
insurer level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Appendix Table 1. Pre-Part D Trends in Drug Prices by Insurer Size
Dependent Variable: ∆ln(Drug Price per Pill)
Model
OLS
Medium Insurer
Large Insurer
∆ Log Avg Quantity per Rx
∆ Log Exposure to Pharmacy
∆ Log AWP of Drug
Constant

R-squared
Number of Insurers
Insurer-Drug Observations

(1)
-0.014
(0.015)
0.010
(0.013)
-0.197***
(0.027)
-0.000
(0.019)
0.083***
(0.023)
-0.007
(0.013)
0.076
33
9975

The table reports whether trends in negotiated pharmacy drug prices prior to the implementation of Part D
differed according to the size of insurers. Insurer size is measured by the total expenditures during in 2005 on
all prescriptions observed in the claims associated with that insurer. The insurer sample is partitioned into
terciles based on size. The indicator for the smallest insurer size is the omitted insurer category. The median
Medium (Large ) insurer is approximately 5 (65) times the size of the median Small insurer. The dependent
variable is the change in the log average negotiated price per pill paid to the pharmacy on a given drug by a
given insurer between the second half of 2004 and the second half of 2005. The constant captures the
change in negotiated drug prices for the omitted group, controlling for covariates. Controls include the change
in the average per-pill wholesale price of the drug, and the change in each insurer's exposure to the
pharmacy, which is calculated as the pharmacy's weighted average share of the retail pharmacy market in
areas where the insurer is present, and the change in the log average wholesale price of a drug. The sample
of drugs comprises the top 1000 drugs, ranked by expenditures, observed in the claims. Parentheses report
standard errors clustered at the insurer level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Appendix Table 2.Linear Enrollment Effect on Pharmacy Profits-per-Pill for Branded Drugs, by Competitveness

Model

Dependent Variable: ∆ln(Drug Profits per Pill)
Panel A: Second Half 2005 vs First Half 2006
IV
IV
IV
IV

Drug Sample All Branded
Definition of Substitute
(1)
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment (1M)
-0.071
(0.174)
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 25th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 50th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 75th
Overall Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill)
R-squared
Insurer Observations
Insurer-Drug Observations

-0.015
-0.030
-0.031
-0.025
0.000
32
4948

All Generics
(2)
-0.920***
(0.306)
-0.194
-0.383
-0.397
-0.332
0.096
32
4306

Branded:
Branded:
0 Substitutes >0 Substitutes
Generic Drugs w/in Compound
(3)
(4)
-0.011
-0.939***
(0.179)
(0.343)
-0.002
-0.005
-0.005
-0.004
0.000
32
4618

-0.198
-0.391
-0.405
-0.344
0.010
32
330

IV

IV

IV

Branded: Low Branded: Mid Branded: High
Tercile
Tercile
Tercile
Drugs Within Therapeutic Sub-Class
(5)
(6)
(7)
-0.158
0.052
-0.239
(0.155)
(0.173)
(0.225)
-0.033
-0.066
-0.068
-0.058
0.011
32
596

0.011
0.022
0.022
0.018
0.000
32
2411

-0.050
-0.099
-0.103
-0.085
0.010
32
1941

The table reports IV estimates of the linear effect of changes in insurer enrollment on changes in pharmacy profits per pill for branded drugs prescriptions associated with commercial
claims, stratified by degree of therapeutic substitutability, excluding observations from Humana. Columns (1)-(2) report enrollment elasticities separately for branded and generic drugs,
respectively. Two conventional definitions of substitutes are used: columns (3)-(4) stratify branded drugs by the number of generic substitutes each faces; columns (5)-(7) stratifies branded
drugs by the number of drugs within its Multum-defined therapeutic subclass. The dependent variable is the change in the log average profit per pill earned by the pharmacy on a given
drug on prescriptions associated with a given insurer between the 2nd half of 2005 and the 1st half of 2006. The regressions control for the change in the log average number of pills per
prescription, the change in the drug's average per-pill wholesale price, and the change in each insurer's exposure to the pharmacy (calculated as the pharmacy's share of the pharmacy
market in areas where the insurer is present). The sample of drugs comprises the top 1000 drugs, ranked by expenditures, observed in the pharmacy claims. Instruments for Part D
enrollment include potential Part D enrollment and quality-adjusted premium variables, described in the text and in previous tables. Changes in log profits earned by the pharmacy
predicted by the model are reported for the insurer of the 25th, 50th and 75th percentile prescription, as ordered by the enrollment change of the associated insurer. Also reported is the
overall predicted change in log profits given the observed distribution of enrollment increases. Parentheses report standard errors clustered at the insurer level. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Appendix Table 3. Linear Enrollment Effect on Pharmacy Prices-per-Pill for Branded Drugs: Second Half 2005 vs First Half 2006
Population
Model
Drug Sample
∆Firm's PartD Enrollment (1M)
∆ Log Avg Quantity per Rx
∆ Log Exposure to Pharmacy
∆ Log AWP of Drug
Constant

Dependent Variable: ∆ln(Drug Price per Pill)
Commerically Insured Ages 65 and Over
IV
IV
IV
All
Branded
Generics
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.233***
-0.023*
-0.491***
(0.042)
(0.012)
(0.094)
-0.121***
-0.043***
-0.202***
(0.018)
(0.008)
(0.022)
-0.162
-0.012
-0.296
(0.158)
(0.035)
(0.310)
-0.060***
0.146***
0.009
(0.015)
(0.021)
(0.016)
0.035**
0.040***
0.021
(0.017)
(0.004)
(0.032)

Under 65 Commerically Insured
IV
IV
IV
All
Branded
Generics
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.154***
-0.028**
-0.326***
(0.057)
(0.011)
(0.116)
-0.175***
-0.039***
-0.291***
(0.022)
(0.007)
(0.032)
-0.037
-0.088**
0.022
(0.260)
(0.040)
(0.528)
-0.030**
0.116***
0.033**
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.014)
0.028
0.041***
0.006
(0.017)
(0.003)
(0.034)

1st Stage F-stat on linear enrollment term

13.75

14.17

13.04

12.30

11.43

13.14

Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 25th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 50th
Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill): 75th
Overall Predicted ∆ln(Drug Profit/Pill)
R-squared
Insurer Observations
Insurer-Drug Observations

-0.044
-0.080
-0.083
-0.082
0.040
32
10301

-0.006
-0.011
-0.012
-0.008
0.073
32
5639

-0.116
-0.212
-0.219
-0.177
0.058
32
4662

-0.032
-0.058
-0.059
-0.052
0.061
32
6259

-0.008
-0.015
-0.016
-0.009
0.073
32
3430

-0.074
-0.134
-0.138
-0.112
0.114
32
2829

The table reports the linear effect of a change in an insurer enrollment on changes in the log of drug prices negotiated between the pharmacy and the insurer for prescriptions associated
with associated with claims from the commerical market. The samples for linear specifications exclude observations from Humana. The dependent variable is the change in the log average
price per pill of a given drug for prescriptions associated with a given insurer between the second half of 2005 and the first half of 2006. The key regressor is the change in the insurer's Part
D enrollment between 2005 and 2006. The regressions control for the change in the log average number of pills per prescription, the change in the drug's average per-pill wholesale price,
and the change in each insurer's exposure to the pharmacy (calculated as the pharmacy's weighted average share of the pharmacy market in areas where the insurer is present). The
sample of drugs comprises the top 1000 drugs (ranked by expenditures) observed in the pharmacy claims. Instruments for Part D enrollment include potential Part D enrollment , calculated
as the number of uninsured seniors in 2005 residing in states where the insurer is present in the commercial market prior to Part D, weighted by the insurer's commercial marketshare in
those markets; and adjusted premiums , calculated as the difference in logs between premiums for standardized Part D plans offered by an insurer relative to the market for identical plans
in the same market. Column 1-3 reports the price elasticity of insurer enrollment in the commercial market among pharmacy customers aged 65 and above. Column 4-6 reports the price
elasticity of insurer enrollment in the commercial market among pharmacy customers appearing in the claims below age 65. Changes in log profits earned by the pharmacy predicted by the
model are reported for the insurer of the 25th, 50th and 75th percentile prescription, as ordered by the enrollment change of the associated insurer. Also reported is the overall predicted
change in log profits given the observed distribution of enrollment increases. Parentheses report standard errors clustered at the insurer level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%

