NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC MONOPOLY AND ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD'S ENTRY DECISIONS
Katja Seim
Joel Waldfogel
Working Paper 16258
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16258

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2010

We thank seminar participants at Kellogg, MIT, Ohio State, Texas, Toronto, Virginia, Wisconsin,
the Tenth CEPR Conference on Applied Industrial Organization, and the 2010 NBER Winter IO Meetings
at Stanford. We are grateful to Tim Bresnahan for comments on an earlier draft. We thank Thomas
Krantz at the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board for helping us to get access to the data. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Katja Seim and Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Public Monopoly and Economic Efficiency: Evidence from the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board’s Entry Decisions
Katja Seim and Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 16258
August 2010
JEL No. L13,L21,L3,L81
ABSTRACT
While private monopolists are generally assumed to maximize profits, the goals of public enterprises
are less well known. Using the example of Pennsylvania’s state liquor retailing monopoly, we use
information on store location choices, prices, wholesale costs, and sales to uncover the goals implicit
in its entry decisions. Does it seek to maximize profits or welfare? We estimate a spatial model of
demand for liquor that allows us to calculate counterfactual configurations of stores that maximize
profit and welfare. We find that welfare maximizing networks have roughly twice as many stores as
would maximize profit. Moreover, the actual network is much more similar in size and configuration
to the welfare maximizing configuration. An alternative to a state monopoly would be the common
practice of regulated private entry. While such regimes can give rise to inefficient location decisions,
little is known about the size of the resulting inefficiencies. Even for a given number of stores, a simple
characterization of free entry with our model results in a store configuration that produces welfare
losses of between 3 and 9% of revenue. This is a third to half of the overall loss from unregulated
free entry.

Katja Seim
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
kseim@wharton.upenn.edu
Joel Waldfogel
Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics
3-177 Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
jwaldfog@umn.edu

I.

Introduction
Governments operate a substantial number of enterprises around the world, sometimes
with legal monopolies. In addition to familiar examples such as roads, public transport, and
utilities, various levels of government in the U.S. also provide mail delivery services and operate
municipal libraries, hospitals, elementary and secondary schools, and retail stores in products
such as liquor.1 Examples of public enterprise are plentiful outside of the U.S. as well and
include airlines, telecommunication services, and retail banking services. One such government
monopoly is the retail liquor business in Pennsylvania. The Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board
(PLCB) has the exclusive right to operate liquor (“wine and spirits”) shops in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and it operates over 600 stores throughout the state. Prices are
set by the state legislature via markup rules, but the PLCB controls entry; it has the authority to
choose the number of stores it operates as well as where to locate them.
It is customary to assume that a private monopolist would choose a store configuration to
maximize its profits, and economic theory provides clear guidance on how to do this. But what
goals do public enterprises pursue through their managerial decisions?2 The operation of the
PLCB provides some evidence on this question. Using Pennsylvania data, we ask what goal the
PLCB pursues through its store location decisions. Does it seek to maximize profits? Or does
the state’s planner take account of consumers as well as producers in determining its
configuration? To study these questions we develop a simple model of demand for a product
located in geographic space. In our model – as in the empirical context that we study – prices are
fixed. Consumers are distributed across the state, and they benefit, in the form of lower effective
prices, from proximity to outlets. Additional outlets, however, are costly to run. The state’s
problem is to choose a set of store locations – and a corresponding number of stores operating –
to best serve its objective. Given the state’s choice of locations for stores, our goal is to compare
the actual configuration to the two theoretical benchmarks of profit and welfare maximization.
We estimate a model of demand for liquor as a function of the price, distance to stores,
and other demographic characteristics. The price elasticity and the disutility from travel are the
two key parameters that together allow us to quantify the consumer benefit from greater
proximity. We observe the fixed retail price as well as the wholesale cost, allowing direct
calculation of producer surplus. The model allows us to calculate demand, consumer surplus,
and producer surplus for any configuration of stores. In particular, we calculate configurations
of stores that maximize profit as well as configurations that maximize total welfare. We then
1

See, for example, Boardman and Vining (1989) for a prominent study comparing the efficiency of private and
public enterprises. Glaeser (2001) provides a discussion of public enterprises in cities.
2
There is a literature on public sector pricing (See Bös (1985)). We instead focus on a public enterprise’s entry
decisions.

1

compare the actual PLCB store network to these analogs of theoretical benchmarks. We find
that welfare maximizing networks have roughly twice as many stores as would maximize profit.
Moreover, the actual network is much more similar in size and configuration to the welfare
maximizing configuration. We conclude that the state’s behavior is better described by welfare
than by profit maximization.
We then turn to simulating alternative policies for controlling the size of the store
network. In the absence of a state monopoly, Pennsylvania might follow most other states with
regulated private entry. In most places around the U.S., jurisdictions regulate the maximum
number of liquor stores using transferrable licenses, and independent private agents choose
where to locate them within each jurisdiction. It is well known in theory – since Hotelling
(1929) – that free entry in differentiated product markets can give rise to inefficient location
decisions, but the magnitude of the resulting inefficiencies are unknown. We use our model –
and an implementable notion of private entry – to explore the properties of regulated private
entry. Not surprisingly, unregulated entry generates welfare losses relative to the welfare
maximizing configuration of 10 to 15% of welfare maximizing revenue due to both incorrect
numbers of entrants and suboptimal location choices. But even for a given number of stores,
unregulated entry results in welfare losses from excessive clustering of stores around highdemand areas of between 3 and 9% of revenue in the contexts we analyze, a third to half of the
overall loss. Of course, these losses must be balanced against other possible effects of private
entry beyond what we model, such as price changes and reductions in the cost of operating
stores.
Our paper proceeds in eight sections. First, section 2 presents a simple theoretical model
that illustrates the differing theoretical benchmarks of profit-maximization, welfaremaximization, and competition. We then proceed to a description of the PA liquor retailing
system, current policy discussions, and a discussion of the data used in the study. Section 3
describes the data and documents the relationships of interest for the study. Section 4 presents
estimates of a simple model of liquor demand at particular stores. We then turn to exercises
made possible by the model. Section 5 evaluates the system based on the incremental benefits of
existing stores and infers the implicit welfare weights that PLCB entry decisions attach to
various types of consumers. Section 6 presents simulation results based on profit and welfare
maximization for five counties of varying sizes: (i) we derive the optimal geographic
configuration of stores for profit and welfare maximization; (ii) and we develop a tractable
algorithm for calculating optimal configurations in larger areas, and we show that it
approximates the exact solution well for the counties. Section 7 turns to the statewide problem
and uses the simple algorithm to determine profit and welfare-maximizing configurations for the
2

whole state. Section 8 then analyzes the welfare properties of regulated but atomistic private
entry. We first present an approach to determining approximate free entry equilibria in small
(and medium-sized) pieces of geography. We then run this algorithm on our five counties in
Pennsylvania. We calculate the number of stores operating under free entry as well under
regulated private entry to target the actual number of stores operating.
II.

A Model Illustrating Rationales for Entry Patterns

Consider the following simple model with fixed prices and transport costs. Consumers
are uniform on [0, 100]. The price of the product is $10. Marginal costs are $0, and fixed costs
are $240. Consumers derive
60
.
Assume temporarily that firms choose equidistant locations. Provided at least one firm
operates and chooses its profit maximizing location, all 100 consumers buy since
0
throughout the space. With outlets spaced symmetrically at
2 ,
0,…,
1 and
, consumer surplus can then be expressed as a function of the distance traveled by
consumers at the midpoint between two stores, :
100 60

10

.

(1)

If one firm operates, it will garner the most business locating at 50. Because U > 0
throughout the space when the store locates at 50, all 100 consumers buy, so revenue is $1,000
(and profits are $760). Consumer surplus is 2,500. If more firms operate, all consumers will
continue to buy, so revenue and producer surplus remain $1,000, although profits fall by the
fixed cost with each entrant. Consumer surplus rises even though prices are fixed because stores
get closer to consumers who therefore incur smaller travel costs. That profits fall with entry
while consumer surplus rises creates the tension between the interests of consumers and
producers.
In this setup, a monopolist maximizing profits would choose a single store (
1). A
welfare maximizing planner, by contrast, chooses
3. Free entry dissipates the entire
producer surplus (up to an integer constraint) and results in 4 firms operating.3
While simple, this model shows important consequences of different firm goals and
ownership arrangements. A monopolist seeking to maximize profits would operate too few
outlets. Free entry, on the other hand, would result in too many. Equi-distantly spaced location

3

This simple model does not allow additional stores to raise revenue, but welfare maximization yields more entry
than monopoly in more general models. See Spence (1976), Dixit & Stiglitz (1977), and Mankiw and Whinston
(1986).

3

choices are typically not sustainable in equilibrium; hence free entry also has the potential for
generating losses from firms choosing the wrong locations in addition to the welfare losses from
the wrong number of firms. For example, the well-known Hotelling duopolists cluster at the
center of the space under free entry even though welfare maximization dictates spreading. The
Hotelling result is fragile, and it is in general difficult to analytically predict effects of ownership
structure on product mix. With three stores or more, the model has no pure strategy Nash
equilibrium when consumers patronize their nearest store (de Palma, Ginsburgh, and Thisse
(1987)). We consider similar benchmarks for comparison with the PLCB’s entry decisions
below.4
III.

Background and Data

Background
Pennsylvania is the largest of 18 “control” states that control the sale and distribution of
alcohol at the wholesale and retail levels in different forms. The states take different approaches
to liquor retailing, however. Some states employ regulated private entry, allowing fully private
retailing operations but limiting the supply of licenses, generally within each municipality; others
turn over the operation of state stores to private enterprises; yet others continue to operate staterun stores that in some cases compete with privately-run stores. Pennsylvania operates a
privatized system for the sale of beer, but acts as a state monopolist in the wholesale and retail
distribution of wine and liquor through a system of state-run stores.
As of the first week of 2005, the state operated 624 stores. We can calculate each store’s
ambient demographics, based on Census tracts for which the store is closest. By this method, for
the first week of the year, the average ambient population of a store was 18,154. The interquartile range ran from 12,842 to 24,781. Assuming that all population resides at Census tract
centroids, the average (median) great-circle distance to the nearest store was 3.2 (2.4) kilometers,
with an interquartile range of 1.0 to 3.6 km.
While privatization is not currently under discussion, the PLCB has taken strides toward
improving the system’s efficiency and consumer friendliness. In the 1970s the stores consisted
of a front counter where a customer would request a bottle of liquor from the back room. In the
last few years the stores have added chilled rooms for fine wines in many stores. According to
an August 2007 press release, the agency has recently tried to operate more “like a business” and
hired a CEO to oversee day to day operations: “Governor Rendell has given this agency a
4

A number of studies examine the positive effects of ownership structure – and internalization of business stealing –
on product spreading. See Steiner (1952), Berry and Waldfogel (2001), and Sweeting (2009).

4

mandate to operate like a business, and that means getting costs under control.” One strategy the
PLCB has recently pursued is reducing the number of stores operating. According to PLCB
Chairman Patrick Stapleton, “We took important steps last year toward that end, starting with
reducing the number of stores in our system to 630 from 646 a year earlier. This year, PLCB 75
[the Board’s strategic plan] will continue to make improvements to our operations that will have
a direct impact on our bottom line, and in how Pennsylvanians interact with us.”5
External observers agree that store closings are an avenue to greater profitability for the
system. A private equity lawyer quoted in the Pittsburgh Gazette speculated that private owners
would achieve greater profitability by closing stores in remote locations rather than by replacing
union workers with minimum wage clerks. At the same time, the Independent State Store Union
criticized the PLCB for being too focused on profit in reducing the number of stores, suggesting
that small, rural communities are hurt in availability from a move toward profit maximization.6
There is also speculation in the press that political lobbying and considerations play a significant
role in store closing, countering the stated profit motives of the board.7
In 2005 and 2006, the PLCB opened a small number of outlets within the premises of
grocery stores. The PLCB further operates seven “outlet” stores near the borders with
neighboring states.8
As of the first week of 2005, 65 stores, or 10.37%, are designated
premium-collection stores that are larger in size and carry a wider variety of products than the
remaining locations. Lastly, approximately 25% of stores are open part of the day on Sunday.
While most of the remaining stores are open 6 days per week, 56 stores are closed on two or
more days per week. 17 additional stores were closed for part of some (random) weeks in 2005,
presumably for repairs etc. These asynchronous closures provide useful variation for identifying
the relationship between store proximity and purchase behavior.
The PLCB charges an identical retail price for a particular product in all of its stores and
uses a simple mark-up rule to determine the price, applying a 30% markup and an 18% liquor tax
to the wholesale price.9 The PLCB engages in some promotional activity, using manufacturers’
5

PA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD REPORTS RECORD RETURN FOR FISCAL 2006-07, August 28, 2007.
Press release. http://www.lcb.state.pa.us/webapp/agency/press/press_detail.asp?press_no=0718&psearch=&offset=4, accessed October 17, 2008.
6
Pittsburgh Post Gazette, “Is Time Right to Sell State Stores?” June 12, 2007. http://www.postgazette.com/pg/07163/793365-85.stm, accessed October 17, 2008.
7
Pittsburgh Post Gazette, “LCB works in curious ways” January 1, 2008. http://www.postgazette.com/pg/08028/852743-85.stm, accessed October 17, 2008.
8
In addition to the typical selection, the PLCB sells certain products at outlet stores that are unavailable in the
remaining stores. These tend to be larger-sized bottles or multi-packs.
9
The specific pricing rule is:
1.3
1.18 , where the bottle fee
amounts typically to $1 and the PLCB rounds the resulting retail price to end in the nearest nine cents. In addition,
the consumer pays a 6% PA sales tax.

5

coupons and running system-wide monthly sales (28-day period beginning on the Monday
closest to the end of the month).
The PLCB negotiates wholesale prices directly with its suppliers. A new product’s
wholesale price remains fixed for one year after introduction. For established products, the
PLCB re-negotiates over cost increases on a quarterly basis rotating through product categories
over the course of its four-week long reporting periods. Each reporting period, the wholesale
price of a subset of products is adjusted, translating into changes in the retail price. In contrast to
sales periods, reporting periods begin on a Thursday, usually in the middle of the month. Prices
can therefore change at two discrete times per month.10
We consider as fixed costs the PLCB’s cost to run stores (personnel, rental cost of
property, storage, etc.) and warehousing. We do not observe store-level fixed costs directly, but
we know that system-wide, the PLCB used $245.9 million to run stores and warehousing in
fiscal year 2004-‘05. This corresponds to $394,051 per store in annual fixed costs (or $1,110 per
day), given 624 stores in operation as of 1/2005.11
Data
The basic data set for the study is a store-level panel obtained from the PLCB under the
Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law.12 It contains daily information on quantities sold and gross
receipts at the product and store level during 2005. In addition, we received information on the
wholesale cost of each product that is constant across stores and varies over time according to the
reporting periods described above. We geocode the stores’ street addresses to assign them to a
geographic location, which we link to data on population and demographic characteristics for
nearby consumers based on information from the 2000 Census and Reference USA. Because
stores open and close during the year, the characteristics of stores’ ambient consumers change
over time.
We aggregate our data across products to the level of either the day or the week. This
periodicity accounts for the strong seasonality inherent in liquor sales, which are disguised in
more aggregate definitions. Averaging across 32,509 store weeks in 2005, stores sell an average
of 2,674 bottles per week. Figure 1 exhibits the strong seasonal pattern to sales, with a trough
after New Years (week 1) and peaks at July Fourth (week 26), Thanksgiving (47), and Christmas
through New Year’s Eve (50-52).
10

In our data below, 90.26% of price changes occur within one week from the beginning of a new reporting or sales
period, reflecting that not all products have daily sales in at least one PLCB store.
11
PLCB’s fiscal year 04-05 summary, http://www.lcb.state.pa.us/plcb/cwp/view.asp?a=1334&q=557420&tx=1,
accessed 11/5/2008.
12
65 P.S. §§ 66.1 et seq., as amended.

6

Because we treat liquor as a single quantity in our analysis below, we also need a single
price. PLCB stores carry literally thousands of products, and we calculate a state-wide price
index, shown in Figure 2, that is a weighted sum of the system-wide product prices in each week.
We use fixed weights – the products’ shares of 2005 sales – to avoid contaminating the price
index with quantity responses. The resulting price series resembles a step function, reflecting the
discrete changes in prices due to either sales or wholesale cost changes discussed above.
While stores differ in the product composition of purchases, these differences reflect
heterogeneity in consumer preferences more than differences in the availability of products
across stores. Absent inventory information at the store and product level, we can derive product
availability from observed purchases only and treat a product as being available in a store if it
sold at least once during a given week. Of the 100 best selling products statewide in 2005, the
median store carried 98.0% in its median week, while a store at the fifth percentile carried 72.0%
of the products. Similarly, of the 1000 best selling products statewide in 2005, the median store
carried 82.03% in its median week, while a store at the fifth percentile carried 44.2% of the
products. The product availability at premium stores is somewhat better than the average, with
the median premium store carrying all of the top 100 products and 95.1% of the top 1000
products. But most stores carry most products, supporting our assumption below that differences
in product availability do not drive customers’ store choices to a significant degree. In our
empirical exercises below we employ a single statewide price index reflecting our model’s
implicit assumption of a single identical product available at each store.13
Descriptive Evidence
Our model of demand will link purchase behavior to demographic characteristics, the
configuration of stores, and price. In this section we explore these relationships as a step toward
more formal estimation. We first examine the relationship between prices and demand, via
regressions of log quantities on measures of log prices as well as flexible time effects. Our price
measures vary only across time and not place, in line with the PLCB’s uniform pricing policy,
and thus do not allow fully flexible time dummies. It is possible that prices move endogenously
with anticipated changes in demand. We address this potential endogeneity of the price series in
a number of ways.
First, we employ a price index that removes price declines due to potentially endogenous
sales. We call this the list price and build a statewide, fixed weight, price index based on it. The
first two columns of Table 1 report the results of log-log regression of weekly quantity on the
13

We performed various descriptive exercises (like those in Table 2 below) with store-specific price indices, and
their use gives rise to demand elasticities similar to those implied by the statewide index.

7

state-bundle list price index with selected holiday week dummies and, in column (2), store fixed
effects. This results in a price elasticity of approximately –1. Columns (3) and (4) repeat this
exercise with a more flexible quadratic seasonality specification, allowing seasonal effects to
differ in the last six weeks of the year from the trend of the earlier months. Because we include
flexible week dummies, the price elasticity is identified from the co-variation in quantity and the
price index after accounting for the constant-across-store change in sales experienced at the same
time. This approach yields an elasticity of –1.3.
Second, we use a price index based on the actual price series, which reflects price
reductions due to sales. We control for unusual spikes or declines in demand around holidays by
including time dummies for holiday weeks or days. These time effects address endogeneity
concerns to the extent that they control for the relevant temporary changes in demand that the
PLCB anticipates in choosing its sale prices. Repeating the exercises of columns (1) through (4)
using the actual price gives a similar range of price elasticity estimates, from –0.9 to –1.9, in
columns (5) through (8). Columns (9) and (10) use the actual price with daily data, allowing
finer controls for seasonality, giving elasticity estimates of –0.6 and –0.7.
Last, we limit our sample to days immediately prior to and immediately following price
changes. If the PLCB chooses sales in response to other anticipated non-holiday demand spikes
in addition to the ones we control for, the price elasticities in columns (5) through (10) would
still be biased. The immediate response in sales to a price change provides clean identification
provided the underlying demand does not change significantly between the day before and the
day of a price change and provided that customers do not anticipate the sale. Columns (11) and
(12) depict estimated elasticities for this subsample of the daily data (–0.7 and –1.2), again in
line with the results above.
Table 1 thus indicates that demand for liquor is higher when the price is lower, with a
price elasticity between –0.6 and –1.9. This is in line with estimates from the large empirical
literature attempting to measure the elasticity of demand for liquor. Cook and Moore (1999)
review the literature on demand for alcohol, most of which use state-level time series data.
According to Chaloupka, Grossman, and Safer (2002), “An extensive review of the economic
literature on alcohol demand concluded that based on studies using aggregate data (i.e., data that
report the amount of alcohol consumed by large groups of people), the price elasticities of
demand for beer, wine, and distilled spirits are –0.3, –1.0, and –1.5, respectively (Leung and
Phelps 1993).”
The second relationship of interest is between ambient population and quantity
demanded. Table 2 explores this relationship systematically with multiple regression. The first
8

column reports a regression of average weekly bottles on ambient population and the distance to
nearby stores, using the cross section of stores operating in the first week of the year. The
population coefficient is positive: each additional 1000 people nearby add 17 bottles per day.
The farther people live from the store, the lower is demand. Column (2) repeats the exercise
using log sales as the dependent variable. Using the daily data gives us temporal price variation,
and when the list price is included in column (3), population increases demand while distance
decreases it, and the elasticity of demand with respect to the statewide bundle price is –0.9.
Given that we have multiple observations on quantity and demographic characteristics for
each store, fixed effects seem a natural approach to deal with unobserved spatial heterogeneity.
Ideally, if we had, say, tract level data on demand, then tract fixed effects would allow us to
estimate the distance parameter cleanly using only the variation in demand between days when
the distance to the nearest store changes. However, we do not observe the demand associated
with particular consumers. Instead, we observe store-level demand. Because the group of
consumers nearest each store varies across days, a store fixed effect does not control for the same
consumers’ unobserved demand. Hence, the usual argument why fixed effects provide an
estimate purged of unobserved heterogeneity is not correct in this context. Nevertheless, we
provide estimates with store fixed effects to see what suggestive descriptive relationships the
data contain. With store fixed effects and the statewide bundle price (in columns (3) and (4)),
the population and distance coefficients both decline in absolute magnitude, but their signs
remain consistent with earlier estimates. Columns (5) and (6) revisit the analyses of (3) and (4)
using the actual price, with similar results.
Since our data are at the store, rather than the consumer, level, we cannot directly explore
the extent to which people who live further from a store choose to make fewer, but larger,
shopping trips and store the product more. However, we do not observe a larger response to a
price decline for stores that serve a more distant population. In regressions of the absolute or
percentage change in daily sales on the day (or days) following a price decline, stores with a
higher average distance to consumers experience a lower, generally statistically insignificant,
increase in sales due to the drop in prices, conditioning on the amount of the price change and
other demographics of the catchment area. If storage were important, we would expect a larger
response with consumers in more distant areas stocking up more intensively.
We also explored descriptively how sensitive the results in Table 2 are to some of the
salient features of the Pennsylvania liquor market. First, we re-estimated specifications (3) and
(4) excluding holiday weeks (Thanksgiving week and last three weeks of December) from the
sample, to test whether the base results are driven by differences in willingness to pay for liquor
or travel to the store in these unusual weeks. We obtained very similar results with this limited
9

sample. Second, we explored whether systematic differences in demand in areas close to
Pennsylvania’s borders, including in Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, drive the relationships in Table
2. Demand in these areas may be more elastic than in the interior of the state due to the easier
access to alternative shopping sources. The descriptive regressions did not yield conclusive
evidence to that effect.
Table 1 and Table 2 provide clear evidence for the mechanisms that underlie our story:
having more potential customers nearby raises demand, as does their proximity to their nearest
store. Higher prices reduce demand, via the demand curve. We now turn to a simple model to
estimate these effects, while allowing us to predict sales under alternative store configurations.
IV.

A Simple Model of Demand with Travel Cost

We seek a model that, for any set of store locations, can indicate both the demand and
producer and consumer surplus from consumption by individuals in each piece of geography.
The key behavioral relationships that the model must describe are a) the sensitivity of demand to
consumers’ distance to stores and b) the price elasticity of demand, which allows us to attach a
dollar value to proximity. We could directly relate quantities sold at a store to, say, population in
its area and other demand shifters, such as the percent black or median income in the area. Table
2 reports such regressions, but they cannot be used to predict sales under a counterfactual set of
stores or locations and, in turn, to calculate the change in consumer surplus from an additional
store or a change in store configuration. This goal, instead, requires a model of demand at the
level of geography where consumers reside. We use a discrete-choice framework to model the
consumer’s decision to purchase liquor and estimate its parameters based on the PLCB’s current
stores to address these requirements.
Demand and Distance
There are stores located around the state. We assume that a consumer patronizes the
store nearest his residence. This assumption, which would arise endogenously if stores were
identical in selection, given that pricing is identical across stores, divides the state into
catchment areas containing all of the population nearest to each store. We make this assumption,
as well as several others, to facilitate the determination of optimal store configurations using
integer programming, discussed below.
We denote each store’s catchment area by

. Formally,
is the set of consumer
locations such that store location is the closest to location on day , or
:
min
1, … , ,
1, … , , where
denotes the distance, measured in an
appropriate metric, of consumer in location from the store’s location . Since in our data, we
10

observe a single store per location, we denote both the store and its location by . Due to
permanent store closures and openings and variation in store openings over the course of the
week, catchment areas vary over time.
We discretize consumer locations in the state by modeling demand at the level of the
Census tract and place all resident at each tract’s centroid. We then assign Census tracts to store
catchment areas by finding the store that is closest in distance to each tract centroid. While the
use of Census tracts – relative to finer divisions of the state such as Census block groups –
introduces some measurement error into the distances consumers travel, it yields a more
manageable set of 3,125 potential store locations for the simulations that follow.
Our lack of data on individual purchases does not allow us to distinguish between the
decision to visit a store and the decision of how many bottles to purchase. Instead, we assume
that consumers purchase a single bottle of liquor during a shopping occasion and model
consumer ’s conditional indirect utility from traveling to store on day to purchase a bottle of
liquor as:
.

(2)

We aggregate consumers to demographic groups , differentiating between black ( ) and otherrace residents ( ). In equation (2),
is a vector of attributes for consumers of type in
location and seasonal effects.
denote unobserved utility shifters that we assume to be
distributed extreme value.
A consumer chooses to purchase from his store provided that his utility exceeds the
utility of the outside option of not purchasing. We normalize its value to zero. Our assumption
of extreme-value distributed
yields Logit purchase probabilities for consumers of each
demographic group in a particular location :
.

(3)

To derive a store’s predicted demand, we aggregate over the decisions of potential
consumers across demographic groups within a tract location and across all of the locations that
. We consider as potential consumers the population of each
make up a store catchment area,
Census tract over the age of 21. Aggregate demand for liquor in tract ,
, and at store ,
,
is thus the weighted average probability of purchase across demographic types and, for the store,
across tracts, using as weights each tract’s mass of consumers of a particular type, scaled up by
the total potential consumers:

11

∑

,

,

∑
where
∑
∑

,

|β
(4)

,

denotes the number of potential consumers of type in tract location and
the potential consumers in the store’s aggregate catchment area.
,

Estimation proceeds via maximum likelihood. The parameter estimates maximize the
likelihood of observing actual sales in store on day ,
, given data on the price of liquor and
on the demographics and distance from the store of the locations making up the store catchment
area. The log-likelihood function is given by:
ln

∑

∑

ln

ln 1

,

(5)

is an indicator of whether store is open on day . We identify the parameters
where
from observing variation in the price of liquor over time (
and cross-sectional and time-series
variation in the composition of catchment areas, resulting in variation in distances traveled (
and demographic attributes
.
Demand Model Estimates
To keep the data manageable, we rely on a randomly drawn 10% subset of the daily
data. We allow each demographic group’s utility function to have its own intercept that shifts
with the group’s per-capita income and median age using data from the Census 2000. We
further include in utility each tract’s number of churches per-capita, derived from a state-wide
listing of religious organizations (NAICS 81311008) from Reference USA, to proxy for variation
in local attitudes toward liquor consumption.
14

As in our descriptive regressions, we address the fact that the PLCB may time sales and
thus price reductions to coincide with unobserved temporal variation in liquor demand by
employing the list-price prior to sales as our price index for the composite liquor product. We
also control for seasonal effects flexibly by including day of the week effects, week dummies for
holiday weeks (the week after New Years (week 1), July Fourth (week 26), Thanksgiving (47),
and Christmas through New Year’s Eve (50-52)), and additional holiday dummies for Memorial
Day (May 28, 2005), days close to July 4 (June 30, July 1 – July 3), Labor Day (September 3,
2005), and days around Thanksgiving (November 23 – 26). The price elasticity is thus identified
from a response in sales to price changes in otherwise similar days.
14

For the descriptive regressions in Table 2, the estimated parameters using the subsample do not differ significantly
from the results obtained using the full sample of data.

12

Lastly, we consider three different distance-based proxies for travel cost. We employ the
great-circle distance in kilometers between locations. A more realistic proxy for the consumer’s
travel cost consists of the distance traveled along the existing road network. We compute the
distances based on the shortest route between two locations, using the program MPMileage. We
do so for the distances between all PA Census tracts and the existing stores, as well as – for the
purposes of computing demand under counterfactual store configurations below – between all
PA Census tracts and the 25 tracts closest to each tract based on great-circle distance.
MPMileage further generates the average travel time in minutes between any two locations,
which we use as our last travel cost proxy, to capture differences between urban, suburban, and
rural locations in congestion and in the types of roads used to travel to the store.
Driving distance (and time) is, not surprisingly, systematically larger than, but closely
related to, great-circle distance. A regression of driving distance to the closest store on greatcircle distance to the closest store for each of Pennsylvania’s 3,125 tracts indicates that each
additional kilometer of great-circle distance adds 1.4 km of driving distance, with an R2 of 0.94.
The regression also indicates that, on top of the aspect of driving distance that is proportional to
great-circle distance, driving distance contains an additional 0.2 km, or systematic deviations
from proportionality. These deviations from proportionality leave room for possible differences
in the estimated demand models using the alternative distance measures.
The coefficients of the estimated demand function appear in Table 3. Column (1) reports
results based on driving distance in km as our distance metric. These are the results we rely on
in the remainder of the paper. Columns (2) and (3) report the results based on great-circle
distance and driving time in minutes, respectively. Most of the parameters are stable across
specifications. The estimated price coefficients translate into an average price elasticity of –1.18
to –1.28, similar to the estimates in Table 1 and Table 2.
In specification (1), the estimated distance parameter of –0.066 indicates that demand
declines by 40 cents (64 cents) for every kilometer (mile) driven to the store. The marginal
effect of distance on the probability of purchase is 0.04, in-between the estimates in Table 2.
Based on straight-line distance in column (2), we estimate a travel cost of 68 cents per kilometer
of straight-line distance to the store. The increase in the estimated effect relative to the driving
distance model reflects that driving distance is typically larger than great-circle distance. The
estimated travel cost is similar to the implied travel cost under driving distance when scaled
down by the factor of proportionality of 1.4 above, resulting in an equivalent travel cost of 48
cents per kilometer of driving distance. In the driving-time model in specification (3), we
estimate an implied travel cost of 46 cents per minute added to each leg of a round trip to the
store. Based on customers traveling somewhere between 35 to 50 km per hour, this translates
13

into a cost per kilometer of driving distance of 28 to 40 cents.
specifications thus result in relatively similar travel costs.

Our alternative distance

Our travel cost estimates are consistent with the existing work, although the literature
contains a relatively wide range of travel cost estimates. Davis (2006) estimates that a consumer
who travels 3.2 km in total incurs a travel cost of approximately 20 cents per km of great-circle
distance, while Thomadsen (2005) finds travel costs of $1.86 per kilometer of driving distance.
McManus (2007) finds that consumers are willing to pay $4 to avoid walking an additional mile
from their location to the retail outlet reflecting the increase in time spent to cover one mile
walking relative to driving. Houde (2009) estimates that an average consumer is willing to add 1
minute in travel time to save 67 cents on a purchase of 20 liters of gasoline.
Across specifications, areas with higher median income have higher demand; demand
does not vary significantly with age. It is lower in areas with a larger number of churches per
capita, suggesting that this variable may be successful in proxying for general attitudes toward
alcohol consumption. Controlling for number of churches per capita, neighborhoods with a
larger percent of black households have higher demand.
While we rely primarily on specification (1) in the simulations that follow, we
investigated several alternative specifications of our travel demand model in unreported results.
First, we approximated the cost of travel with a more flexible, quadratic distance specification.
The price elasticity under this alternative specification is –1.21 and the majority of the remaining
coefficients remain stable. The travel cost implied by the quadratic specification increases
slightly in distance. At the mean distance of consumer to store locations, it amounts to 44 cents
per km of driving distance, similar to the one above, and ranges from 29 cents to 59 cents for the
10th and 90th percentile of distances traveled, respectively. Second, we estimated a variant of
specification (1) based on both daytime and evening / weekend population, allowing consumers a
choice of consuming either from their place of residence or from their place of work. The
estimates are similar to the main results with a price elasticity of –1.33 and an implied cost per
kilometer of 44 cents. Last, we allowed for systematic variation in the travel cost depending on
features of the consumer’s place of residence by interacting the distance traveled to the store
with the percent of tract households that do not own a car. This specification reflects that the
mode of transportation to the store may differ between residents of cities and those in less urban
areas. The results suggests that travel costs increase in the percentage of households without a
car; based on the 10th and 90th percentiles, travel costs per kilometer range from 37 cents (when
virtually all households have access to a car) to 150 cents (when 35% of households do not have
access to a car). The fact that travel cost falls in access to a car reflects again the difference in
time taken to cover one mile when walking and driving and provides additional evidence that our
14

distance coefficient indeed reflects travel costs. The price elasticity under this specification
amounted to –1.33. Both the travel cost estimates and the price elasticity are thus stable across
alternative specifications.
Welfare Measures
To evaluate openings or closures of stores and changes in store locations, we need to
compute the welfare benefit of alternative store configurations. Our model shows how much the
demand by persons in each location (and, by extension, the quantity sold at each store) changes
with the distance to the closest store. Opening a store near location has two effects on
consumer welfare: First, consumers in and close to location who already purchase face a lower
effective price (inclusive of travel). Second, a larger share of consumers in location purchase
under the lower effective price. This generates additional consumer surplus.
For the chosen specification, consumer surplus (CS) for consumers in location

is given

by:
∑

,

ln 1

e

(6)

if store serves tract location (see Small and Rosen (1981)). The consumers in location
generate producer surplus (PS) to the store, that is the usual variable profit prior to fixed cost,
based on the markup of the retail price over the wholesale price :
.

(7)

The total surplus (TS) generated by store is therefore:
∑
where

,

(8)

denotes the daily fixed cost of operating a store.

Comparing Alternative Entry Patterns
To assess the goals underlying the PLCB’s store configuration, we derive several
benchmark configurations, including the store layout chosen by a profit-maximizing monopolist
and a benevolent monopolist. These rely on the
matrix of consumer location to store
to be one when consumers in location are served by a store in
location matches. We define
location , and zero otherwise. The
matrix also indicates S, the total number of stores
R
∑s 1 . We continue to assume in our simulations that locations are
operating, as trace
Census tracts.
For a given store configuration, the average daily profits of the system are then:
15

Π

∑

∑

∑

∑

,

(9)

The profit in (9) includes two parts. The first, ∑ 1⁄ ∑ ∑
, is the producer
surplus that results from a particular configuration of stores and the rule that demand is assigned
to its closest locations. The second part of the maximand is simply the fixed cost of operating
the chosen number of stores. The profit-maximizing monopolist’s problem is to find the store
configuration that maximizes profit, while the benevolent monopolist’s problem is to find the
configuration that maximizes welfare.
Solving this optimization problem is difficult because of the sheer number of possible
store configurations. There are 2R possible configurations of stores to evaluate. Even with a
small set of possible locations (e.g. 25), there are over 33 million configurations. Operations
researchers have developed efficient integer programming algorithms, such as “branch and
bound,” for solving problems of this sort.15 We are able to rely on these sophisticated algorithms
to solve problems of moderately large size.16
Expressed as an integer programming problem, the planner’s maximand is:
∑
∑ ∑
max Π ∑

(10)

subject to
∑

1
, ,
0,1

,
,
, .

(11)
(12)
(13)

Constraint (11) indicates that each demand location must be assigned to a single store
location. Constraint (12) prevents the assignment of demand to locations without a store.
Constraint (13) makes the assignment of demand to supply binary: each demand location is
either served by a particular supply location, or not. The alternative problem where the
monopolist maximizes full surplus less fixed costs can be expressed analogously.
Finding a solution via integer programming requires fixed coefficients on the binary
and
. That is,
store-location variables. Here, these fixed coefficients are the values of
we need to know the amount of demand or welfare that each demand location would contribute
to each store in each possible configuration. We are able to calculate these coefficients in
15

We employ LINGO 11.0 to solve these problems.
Our problem is closely related to the facilities location problem analyzed in Perl and Ho (1990). Chan,
Padmanabhan, and Seetharaman (2007) employ integer programming techniques in their study of the optimal
location choices of another public retail monopoly, the publicly operated retail gas market in Singapore. They
illustrate how to infer unobserved market demand from realized location choices under the maintained assumption
that the government’s objective is social welfare maximization and that actual location choices are optimal given
this objective.
16

16

advance of the optimization because our demand model assigns each demand location to its
nearest store. This would not be the case if we allowed consumers to choose not only whether to
purchase liquor, but also from which store to purchase in a multinomial choice model of demand.
Then a store’s demand from any location would depend not simply on the distance between the
store and demand locations but rather on the entire configuration of stores. That is, each
would depend on the entire 2R configuration.

and

Integer programming approaches are strained by the problem of locating stores
throughout the state’s 3,125 tracts.
“Greedy” algorithms provide intuitive and less
computationally burdensome approaches (Daskin (1995)). We implement such an algorithm,
which we term “sequential myopic entry” (SME), as follows. Beginning from a first location
that maximizes its standalone profits (or welfare), we keep adding stores that maximize
incremental profit (or welfare), holding the previous stores’ locations fixed, until the marginal
profit or welfare of the incremental location falls below the fixed cost of an additional store.
Define as the vector of store locations the main diagonal of matrix . The incremental
average daily profit associated with adding a store (going from a set of store locations
and
consumer-to-store mapping
to another configuration
1 and consumer-to-store
mapping
1 , where
1 has one additional store operating) is:
ΔΠ

∑

1 ,

∑

∑

1

, (14)

while the change in total welfare is:
ΔW

1 ,

∑

∑
ΔΠ

∑
1 ,

1
.

(15)

Define
1 as the vector containing one store that produces more profit (or welfare)
than any other single-store configuration and
2 | 1 as the vector containing two stores that
1 .
2 | 1 , the optimal two-store configuration
maximizes profit by adding one store to
under sequential myopic entry, maximizes ΔΠ 2 , 1 | 1 . The process continues with
calculation of
|
1 and so on, until the increment to profit falls below zero. An
analogous procedure generates the welfare maximizing configuration under sequential myopic
entry.
|
1 is not in general the same as the -store configuration
that
simultaneously maximizes the profit available from stores. Sequential myopic entry overstates
the benefit of each entrant because its marginal benefit is – myopically – predicated on the
1 stores already operating, rather than the total number that will ultimately operate. When
17

the last store has been added, the marginal benefits of the infra-marginal stores are smaller than
they were when they were marginal. To assess the magnitude of such biases, we compare results
under sequential myopic entry with the simultaneous-move optima for small areas where these
can be calculated.17
Private Entry
In addition to examining profit and welfare maximizing store configurations, we would
also like to explore configurations that would arise under atomistic private entry, either
unconstrained or regulated to a constrained number of entrants. The usual condition for
equilibrium with free entry by symmetric firms is that the firms in
are profitable while
18
1 would not be.
Here, because of the vagaries of geography, equilibrium is more
complicated. Each firm (store) must be profitable; there must be no room for further entry; no
firm may wish to switch its location.
While the two-firm game has a unique pure strategy Nash equilibrium, we can verify that
the simultaneous entry game involving 3 players has no pure strategy Nash equilibria (de Palma,
Ginsburgh, and Thisse (1987)). This raises a question of how to model counterfactual free entry.
Two strategies seem sensible.
First, for small numbers of stores and possible store locations, we could in principle
calculate each store’s profits for every configuration and allow stores to enter sequentially in a
Stackelberg fashion. This would allow us to directly calculate each store’s best response
function mapping other stores’ locations to its best choice. The sequential order of moves would
generally avoid the non-existence of a pure strategy Nash equilibrium in the simultaneous move
version of the game. However, the need to evaluate all possible configurations makes this
computationally challenging even for small markets for the same reason that direct enumeration
was intractable above.
Second, we can employ a simple but less burdensome solution. We can use a sequential
myopic algorithm analogous to those introduced above, although some adaptation is needed for
free entry. First, find the location that maximizes a lone store’s revenue. If this location is
profitable, it remains. The second store locates at the location that generates the most profit,
17

A natural alternative to SME would be the reverse: sequential myopic exit. This is implemented by saturating
geography with stores, one in each of R locations, and then removing the store whose withdrawal minimizes
ΔΠ
,
1 |
or ΔW
,
1 |
. This procedure is repeated until the incremental benefit
of the least beneficial store rises to the fixed cost K. The procedure is myopic in the sense that a store gets
eliminated based on its marginal benefit when all currently existing stores are assumed to continue to exist even
though many will be eliminated later in the procedure.
18
This is the condition for equilibrium in homogeneous goods entry models such as Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) and
Berry (1992). Entry models dealing with product positioning include Mazzeo (2002) and Seim (2006).

18

given the location of the first store. That is, the second store locates at its best response,
evaluated given the first store’s location. If either store is unprofitable, it is withdrawn. Then
another store locates at the most profitable available location, and so on. The process ends when
there is no location for profitable entry, and each existing store is profitable. This deviates from
Nash equilibrium because the stores, while profitable, might be more profitable if they switched
locations. Only the last entrant is necessarily on its best response function. Still, the algorithm
shows – approximately – how many stores free entry could support. (That said, if inframarginal
stores moved and diverted business from competitors, then the market might not be able to
support as many as the algorithm suggests. It is also possible, though, that location switches
could expand the market, allowing more stores to fit.)
This algorithm is clearly neither fully rational nor – as a result – fully optimal. When
stores enter, while they find the best location, given existing entry, they do not anticipate how
subsequent entry will affect the profitability of locations they choose. Entrepreneurs are
therefore somewhat sentient. They enter where it is currently most profitable and continue
operating until they are rendered unprofitable by other entry that is, by definition, unforeseen by
them. Still, it seems reasonable to expect, if simultaneously operating stores are profitable,
that the free entry equilibrium has at least stores. Even this simple algorithm is somewhat
computationally challenging since in each iteration, we must check the profitability of each store
(rather than just the entire system).
Our use of myopic algorithms to characterize the number of stores operating under free
entry is reminiscent of the approach of evolutionary game theory to equilibrium. In evolutionary
game theory, agents are assumed to be myopic and inertial. They respond weakly to incentives,
changing to better strategies when opportunities to change arise. These processes are allowed to
unfold over multiple periods, giving rise to characterizations of equilibrium. See Samuelson
(1997) or Fudenberg and Levine (1998) for extensive discussions of evolutionary game theory.
V.

Analysis of Existing System

Incremental Benefit of Existing Stores
We can get some insight into the relationship between the current configuration and
optimality by comparing the marginal daily benefit of each of the actual stores with our estimate
of daily fixed costs . In a profit-maximizing system, for example, each store’s increment to
profit would equal – or, with integer constraints, exceed – . If the marginal increments are
systematically lower, then there are too many stores. We estimate the incremental benefit of
each store by calculating the benefit (profit or total welfare) of the entire PLCB system with and
19

without the store given our demand estimates. In these calculations, when we hypothetically
remove each store, we reassign consumers in the catchment area of the removed store to their
second-closest remaining store. The relationship between the distribution of resulting declines in
consumer surplus and variable profit and store fixed costs provides suggestive evidence of
system goals.
Figure 3 depicts each store’s incremental contribution to profit and to total welfare and
each store’s stand-alone variable profit for our main specifications from column (1) in Table 3.
We set the retail and wholesale prices to their mean values in 2005 with = $12.38 and marginal
cost = $7.31. While the daily cost of operating a store is $1,110 on average, the mean daily
incremental producer surplus based on the driving distance model is $361, and the median is
$273. The mean – and most of the distribution of – incremental profitability being below
clearly implies that the state has more stores than would maximize profit.
While the state does not appear to be maximizing profit by its store configuration, it is
possible that the state seeks to maximize welfare. This would be implemented – without integer
problems – if each store’s incremental total surplus equaled the cost of operation. For the
driving distance model, the mean incremental welfare is $822, and the median is $617. These
are much closer to our rough estimate of daily .
We can also compare each store’s total, rather than incremental, producer surplus to fixed
cost. Under the current system, the mean total producer surplus is $2,122, and the median is
$1,814. Because the marginal store’s variable profits substantially exceed , the system appears
to have fewer stores than would operate under free entry.
The marginal analysis thus indicates that the state operates too many stores for profit
maximization but fewer than would operate under free entry. The marginal benefits under
welfare maximization are closest to the fixed cost estimate. Our conclusions are robust to the
specific distance metric used; we derive similar conclusions from comparisons based on models
estimated with straight-line distance or driving time.
Robustness to Alternative Demand Estimates
The simulations in this paper, by their nature, rest solidly on two estimated parameters,
the price elasticity of demand and the distance parameter. This section explores the sensitivity of
the paper’s basic results to different values of these parameters. Because some of the simulation
exercises we undertake later are computationally intensive, we focus here on the incremental
exercises above, comparing the average incremental benefit of a store to average fixed costs,
which are easy to compute.
20

To explore different values of the price elasticity and distance parameters, we re-estimate
the basic demand model using driving distance, with specifications embodying each of the
following constraints: 1) twice or half the baseline price coefficient, holding the distance
coefficient constant; or 2) twice or half the baseline distance parameter, holding the price
coefficient constant. By re-estimating all remaining parameters outside the price and distance
effects, we re-fit the quantities observed under the actual configuration. Table 4 reports mean
variable profit, incremental producer surplus, and incremental total surplus for the different
parameter combinations.
Variable profit is roughly the same for all combinations because it depends only on
predicted quantities under the actual configuration and not on changes arising from hypothetical
store elimination.
Withdrawing a store changes quantity demanded, relative to the baseline case, only if the
distance parameter has changed relative to the baseline. Since the price effect does not depend
on the actual catchment area that a store faces, simulations involving a changed price elasticity
do not predict a different change in quantity. As a result, neither the implied incremental PS nor
variable profit change with changes in the price elasticity. Simulations involving a changed
distance parameter, by contrast, directly affect the change in quantity consumed with the
inclusion of each store. A distance parameter higher in absolute value implies a larger
incremental PS.
Incremental total surplus, because it includes both producer and consumer surplus,
depends on both the price and distance coefficients. Higher price coefficients imply lower
benefits of additional stores to consumers. Larger distance parameters, by contrast, imply higher
benefits of additional stores to consumers.
Under all of the alternative parameter values, the mean incremental producer surplus
remains below the average fixed cost (of $1,110), indicating that even with rather different
parameter estimates, the current configuration has more stores than would maximize profit.
is
closer to mean incremental TS than it is to mean incremental PS, confirming our baseline results.
While our demand specification controls for observed shifters of alcohol demand, our
lack of quantity data for narrow levels of geography makes it difficult to control for unobserved
demand shifters. To the extent that these are important and correlated with distance – and given
that we lack an appealing instrument for store locations – we may over or underestimate the

21

importance of travel cost in demand.19 These robustness checks suggest, however, that for a
wide range of distance parameters, we would draw the same conclusion.
Welfare Weights Rationalizing Existing Entry Patterns
Our results so far imply that while the state comes closer to welfare than profit
maximization in its choice of number and location of stores, discrepancies remain. A possible
explanation lies in the state valuing different types of consumers differently.
The exercise above delivers the incremental welfare (or total surplus) from each store,
which we term Δ
for each store s. If each catchment area had the same population, and if the
planner valued all households equally, then Δ would be equal across stores. Suppose instead
we observe higher incremental welfare for one area than another, even though both have the
same number of households. The planner would then be maximizing welfare only if he attached
greater importance to households in the first area. To see this, suppose the planner locates stores
to maximize welfare given the number of stores operating, based on welfare function
. ,…,
. . Opening the ith store raises social welfare by Δ Δ . Assuming that
each store is equally costly to operate, welfare maximization implies that Δ Δ is equal for all
stores . Because we have calculated Δ we can deduce Δ up to a factor of proportionality as
1/Δ . We can explore the weights that the state attaches to types of people by relating Δ to
characteristics of the catchment area, via a regression.
Table 5 reports results , using as dependent variable the inverse of each store’s per-capita
incremental total welfare, or
. In effect, we are inferring the weights that render the
state’s store location decision welfare maximizing. Implicitly, the state places higher weights on
blacks and lower weights on higher-income people. How plausible are these estimates? One
source of insight into the planner’s objectives is the average distance that blacks and others live
from stores. Using black population in each tract as weights, the average driving distance to the
nearest liquor store is 2.1 kilometers, while the analogous average for non-black population is
5.1 kilometers. The stores are sited to be, on average, two and a half times closer to black
people. This is consistent with the state’s willingness for the stores with proportionally larger
black clienteles to have smaller incremental welfare.

19

Note that the PLCB stores are typically well-established. Using the year of each store’s first appearance in the
Yellow Pages as its birth, ReferenceUSA data suggests that the median PLCB store is 15.5 years old. While local
preferences are likely to have persistent components over time, the stores’ age thus limits the extent of correlation
between the PLCB location decisions and current unobservable taste shifters.

22

VI.

Profit and Welfare Maximizing Entry in Five Counties

Our analysis so far indicates directions of welfare or profit increasing reform to the
system; the marginal analysis does not however directly inform the correct system size for profit
or welfare maximization.20 Taken literally, our demand model can also indicate the
configuration of stores that maximizes an outcome of interest such as profit or welfare. We
begin with distinct pieces of geography – counties within Pennsylvania – for illustrative
purposes. We choose five counties that satisfy three conditions: they contain an interior
population center and a low-density periphery, they are not too large for our integerprogramming algorithms (effectively, less than half a million in population), and they are not on
the state border.
As an example, we begin with Blair County. Blair County, in the south central part of
Pennsylvania fully contains Altoona, PA and is otherwise not urbanized. The county has
129,144 people in 34 Census tracts, and the population is concentrated away from the periphery
of the county. The county covers 527 square miles. The PLCB operated six stores in the county
during the sample period. Figure 4 shows both the locations of the Blair County stores, as well
as the population density of Census tracts in Blair County.
The four other counties are Berks (population 373,638), which contains Reading;
Lancaster County (population 470,658), which contains the city of Lancaster; Lycoming
(population 120,044) with a population concentration in Williamsport; and Schuylkill
(population 157,342), which contains Pottsville.
Simulations require particular values for model parameters. As in the incremental
surplus analyses, we use a price of p = $12.38, a marginal cost of c = $7.31, and an average store
operating cost of K = $1,100 as fixed cost. Parameter values for demand are taken from
specification (1) in Table 3. Similar results obtain under the demand estimates from alternative
distance metrics. We have two possible maximands for the social planner: profit and social
welfare. We find optimal configurations under each objective using integer programming.
Table 6 reports the number of stores operating, along with the quantity sold, profits, and
welfare, under different possible store configurations, including the actual network
(characterized by locating outlets at centroids of tracts containing actual stores), the profit
maximizing configuration, and the welfare maximizing configuration. Profit maximization
would be achieved with two stores, which together generate $6,742 in daily profit while

20

Our calculation of marginal benefits of existing stores recalls the literature on tax reform, where local elasticity
estimates allow determination of welfare-increasing directions of tax reform. See Ahmad and Stern (1984).

23

generating $111,765 in daily welfare. A five-store configuration maximizes welfare, producing
$5,218 in daily profit and $112,532 in daily welfare.
The state currently operates six stores in Blair County, generating daily profit of $3,063
and daily total welfare of $109,078, according to the model.21 This is more than the model’s
profit-maximizing number of two stores. The state’s actual configuration – see Figure 4 – is
slightly more geographically compressed around Altoona than the welfare-maximizing
configuration. Based on the number of stores operating in Blair County, the state’s objectives
are better described by welfare maximization than profit maximization.
Results for the remaining four counties also indicate that the profit maximizing number
of stores is always substantially below the welfare maximizing number, usually by a factor of
close to three. The actual number of stores is generally much closer to the welfare maximizing
number than the profit maximizing number.22 To investigate whether the system comes closer to
welfare maximization than profit maximization not only in terms of number of stores, but also in
terms of location choices, we compute the distribution of distances traveled by consumers to
their closest store under both the actual configuration and the configurations that maximize
profits or welfare. Table 7 reports these by county and for the combined 276 tract locations in
the five county markets. The population-weighted average distance traveled to the actual store
lies in-between the distance traveled to the closest store under welfare maximization and under
profit maximization. As with the number of stores, it is typically closer to the distance under
welfare-maximization. This suggests, again, that this public system is not simply maximizing
profits and indeed often comes closer to welfare maximization than profit maximization.
Comparing Sequential and Simultaneous Entry
How do the simultaneous solutions calculated via integer programming compare with
solutions calculated with myopic (“greedy add”) algorithms? The question is of interest because
the sophisticated algorithms are not implementable for large problems, such as the problem of
choosing the optimal configuration for the entire state (which contains over 3000 Census tracts
and – currently – over 600 stores). Table 8 compares the profit and welfare maximizing
configurations calculated via SME.

21

We evaluate the “actual” system using the model and placing stores at the centroids of tracts containing stores.
These simulations assume that the fixed store operating costs are identical across tracts and across counties. We
also ran the simulations for the five county markets assuming that a given store’s fixed costs are proportional to its
tract’s median rent, as a proxy for local rental costs, and that fixed costs continue to sum to the PLCB’s total store
operating costs across stores, with largely similar results. Rental expenses also account for only 16 percent of PLCB
store operating costs, placing a limit on the importance of land values in determining operating costs.

22

24

Table 8 reports quantity, net welfare, and profit for profit-maximizing and welfaremaximizing configurations determined via SME. The last two columns report the percent
deviation between the SME and the simultaneously optimal values for the relevant maximand
(from Table 6). The myopic algorithm produces similar answers. For example, the maximum
profit is within two percent in all five counties, and the maximum welfare is within one percent.
VII.

Whole State Simulations

The similarity of simultaneous and sequential configurations for the five counties
provides some justification for using the SME approach for larger possible systems. Given a list
of possible store locations and a list of possible sources of demand, a maximand (profit or
welfare), and a store operation cost, the model and the SME algorithm can determine a list of
stores to operate. For any list of possible store locations, we begin by calculating the revenue
(welfare) accruing to a lone store if it were in each of the possible locations. Having found the
best location for a single store, we then add a second store in the location that maximizes the
increment to profit or welfare. We repeat the process until the incremental benefit of the last
store falls to the cost of operating an additional store.
We locate stores around the state “starting from scratch” using, as above, the geographic
center of each of the 3,125 Census tracts as possible store locations. Using SME based on total
surplus, the welfare maximizing number of stores is 394, generating daily welfare of $11.44
million and profit of $887 thousand. SME based on producer surplus gives 185 as the profitmaximizing number of stores. The profit-maximizing system produces $971 thousand in daily
profit. See Table 9.
The SME algorithm adds locations that maximize incremental benefit (profit or welfare),
but it does so myopically, that is, without cognizance of the locations added subsequently. As a
result, the marginal benefit of each store when added will exceed its marginal benefit at the
optimum. It is possible that stores added by the algorithm will add less to the maximand than
their cost, when their incremental benefits are evaluated in the optimal configuration. In short,
SME could lead to more stores than would actually maximize profit. In practice, this is rare in
our application: only 5 of the 185 stores a profit-maximizing monopolist would operate under
SME are unprofitable ex-post, while 17 of the 394 welfare-maximizing stores under SME
generate negative net welfare ex-post.

25

VIII. Free Entry and Social Inefficiency
In the absence of a state-run monopoly, Pennsylvania might follow many other states
with regulated private entry. Local areas determine how many stores will operate, and atomistic
private firms choose locations. We can use our estimates to provide some insight into the effects
of such a regime. However, in our context – and in our model – prices and markups are fixed.
The price-reducing mechanism usually operating with free entry is absent, so the model will
likely generate more stores than would actually operate if entry were truly unregulated. Hence,
the number of firms under unregulated free entry from the model should be viewed either as an
upper bound or as simulations of a fixed-price regime, as might operate if the state regulated
prices with an optimal Pigouvian tax.
There are two sources of inefficiency from atomistic entry. There is the well-known
possibility of excessive entry, dissipating profits through expenditures on fixed costs (see Berry
and Waldfogel (1999) for an empirical assessment of the extent of such excess entry in radio
broadcasting). Even with the “right” number of stores determined by regulators, atomistic
entrants can choose the wrong locations, causing welfare losses relative to the planner’s optimal
configuration. We consider these below in turn.
Table 10 reports features of the free entry configurations in each of the five counties
based on the driving distance demand estimates. Note that for computational reasons, we cannot
implement our free entry algorithm on the whole state. We measure welfare losses by comparing
welfare under free entry with a) welfare under the planner’s best actual-sized configuration (from
Table 10), and b) welfare under the planer’s best configuration (from Table 6) and normalize the
welfare difference by the revenues under the respective welfare maximizing configurations.
Unconstrained entry would allow 29 stores in Berks County, more than twice the actual number
and almost twice the welfare-maximizing number. The associated welfare losses amount to 15.4
percent of the revenue achieved under the best actual-sized configuration. Free entry similarly
produces more than the actual number of stores in two of the remaining four counties, and it
produces more than the welfare maximizing number of stores in all but one. The extent of
inefficiency from free entry varies across the remaining four counties: 15, 12, 12, and 10 percent,
respectively, in Blair, Lancaster, Lycoming, and Schuylkill counties.
In Schuylkill county, free entry leads to fewer stores than would be welfare maximizing,
while it leads to excess entry in the other four counties. Free entry generates inefficiently too
few stores when the total benefit of entry (including both consumer and revenue) exceeds
while revenue alone does not.

26

Separate from the effects of network size, we can simulate the pure effect of location
choice under free entry by comparing free entry configurations to other systems of equal size.
One natural benchmark is the actual number of stores. We run our free entry algorithm under a
range of hypothetical taxes (additional fixed costs) to get free entry configurations with the
actual number of stores.23
Table 10 compares welfare-maximizing and free entry configurations, for given numbers
of stores in each county.24 We make the comparison based on the actual numbers of stores
operating in each county. Holding network size fixed, free entry produces a welfare loss equal to
3, 7, 5, 8, and 4 percent of the revenue under the welfare maximizing actual-sized configuration
in the five counties. These losses are, on average, 42 percent of the total losses from free entry.
Across counties, they vary between 21 and 70 percent.
While our procedure for determining the free entry configuration is intuitively
reasonable, its properties are not known. Recall that there exists no pure strategy Nash equilibria
for the entry game. Our goal is to determine the efficiency properties of plausible free entry
equilibria, and we are concerned that our iterative procedure converges to an arbitrary
configuration, rather than one representative of what might prevail under free entry. To explore
this, we tried alternative starting values. That is, while our baseline procedure begins by locating
the most profitable standalone store, we would alternatively begin by locating a store in any – as
opposed to the myopically best – location. Using Blair County as a test case, we ran our free
entry algorithm locating a first store in each of the county’s 34 tracts, producing a distribution of
configurations resulting from the algorithm. In 25 of 34 cases, the algorithm converges to the
same configuration.
IX.

Conclusion

While it is commonly understood that private monopolists make strategic decisions to
maximize profits, we know less about the behavior of public enterprises. The Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board provides a rare opportunity to study a public retailing monopoly. We use
data on its entry decisions to see whether its operation is better described by welfare or profit
maximization. We find that it operates more like a benevolent monopoly than a profit
maximizing one. That is, it operates far more stores – roughly three times more – than would
maximize profit and much closer to the quantity that would maximize welfare.
23

In these simulations, while the condition for profitability – and therefore firms’ entry decisions – involves a
comparison of revenue to tax-inclusive fixed cost, the welfare calculation is predicated only on actual fixed costs.
Because the taxes are losses to the firms but gains to taxpayers, they are neutral in welfare calculations.
24
The welfare maximizing configuration with the actual number of stores is determined with an integer program that
finds maximum welfare for a configuration of given size.

27

We have separately analyzed the welfare properties of free entry with geographic
differentiation with particular attention to the welfare loss due to wrongly placed products. It is
well known in theory that free entry results in too many stores, possibly clustered too close
together. We find that the size of the locational inefficiencies can be large, ranging from 3.3 to
8.3% of total net welfare in the counties we study. This compares to overall losses in net welfare
of 9.6 to 15.4% from free entry overall, which includes welfare losses due to excess entry in
addition to incorrect product placement. Hence the pure locational inefficiencies are a third to a
half of the overall losses from free entry.
A number of important caveats are in order. It should be noted again that the simulations
in the paper take prices as given. We also note that our simulations take current store costs as
given. If the PLCB employs too many workers or otherwise has excessive costs, then the true
value of is lower than the value we have used, and the optimal number of stores would be
larger than we have calculated, under each of the regimes. This is essentially a case study of one
government entity, so we cannot say whether results here apply to other entities. Still, we hope
that our study provides some insight into the rationales underlying entry decisions in a market
run by a government monopolist, and we think additional work on other contexts would be
fruitful.

28

X.

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Weekly Average Number of Bottles Sold per Store, 2005

Weekly Sales 2005

0

Average Bottles per Store
2000
4000
6000

8000

Unusual Weeks Noted

0

10

20
30
week during 2005

40

50

01jan2005

7.25

12.5

7.15
7.2
Average wholesale cost

Statewide average price
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
01apr2005

01jul2005
ddate

Statewide average price

01oct2005

01jan2006

Statewide average list price

01jan2005

7.1

12

12

12.1

12.2

12.3

12.4

12.5

Figure 2: Price Index, 2005

01apr2005

01jul2005
ddate

Statewide average price

29

01oct2005

01jan2006

Average wholesale cost

Figure 3: Incremental Benefit of Each Store in Current Configuration
Based on Estimated Demand Model using Driving Distance

0

1 .0e -04

De nsity
2 .0e -04 3 .0e -04

4 .0e -04

Driving Distance Model

0

5000

10000

15000

Variable Profit

0

5 .0e -04

De nsity
.0 01
.0 01 5

.0 02

Driving Distance Model

0

500

1000
1500
PS at Incremental Store

2000

0

De nsity
2 .0e -04 4 .0e -04 6 .0e -04 8 .0e -04

.0 01

Driving Distance Model

0

1000

2000
3000
Total Surplus at Incremental Store

30

4000

5000

Figure 4: Comparison of Actual and Optimal Store Configurations in Blair County
(a) Actual PLCB Stores (n=6)

(b) Welfare Maximizing Store Configuration (n=5)

(c) Profit Maximizing Store Configuration (n=2)

31

Table 1: Price Elasticity Evidence

Log State Bundle
List Price
Log State Bundle
Price
Constant

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.9627
(1.230)

-1.0900
(0.176)**

-1.3184
(1.356)

-1.3396
(0.181)**

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

-1.9404
(0.105)**
12.3476
(0.265)**

-0.8591
(0.822)
9.5368
(2.071)**

-0.8587
(0.110)**
9.5396
(0.276)**

-0.5799
(0.390)
7.3699
(0.980)**

-0.688
(0.109)**
6.8425
(0.275)**

-0.7402
(0.998)
7.8785
(2.509)**

-1.2023
(0.267)**
8.253
(0.671)**

9.8875
(3.095)**

10.2075
(0.444)**

10.6897
(3.410)**

10.7466
(0.454)**

-1.8926
(0.738)*
12.2274
(1.857)**

Observations
R-squared

32,509
0.06

32,509
0.77

32,509
0.07

32,509
0.80

32,509
0.06

32,509
0.77

32,509
0.07

32,509
0.80

191,994
0.19

191,994
0.76

23,532
0.07

23,532
0.39

Sample

weekly

weekly

weekly

weekly

weekly

weekly

weekly

weekly

daily

daily

daily,
price
changes

daily,
price
changes

32

Holiday weeks
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Yes
Quadratic time
no
no
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
No
trend
Holidays
yes
yes
no
No
Day of the Week
yes
yes
yes
Yes
Store FE
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
Yes
Notes: Dependent variable is log bottles per time period per store. Regressions of log bottles sold on various measures of the price. Holiday weeks include
weeks 1, 26, 47, 50, 51, and 52. We include separate time trends for the period January - October and the holiday period of November - December. Standard
errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. State-bundle prices use a constant bundle for computing the price and vary only by time and not
across stores.

Table 2: Demand, Population, and Distance to the Nearest Store

Catchment Area Pop
Average Distance to
Nearest Store
Log State Bundle
List Price
Log State Bundle
Price
Constant

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Average
Daily Sales
per Store

Average
Log Daily
Sales per
Store

Log Daily
Sales per
Store

Log Daily
Sales per
Store

Log Daily
Sales per
Store

Log Daily
Sales per
Store

173.7613
(12.4713)**
-23.8609
(2.8530)**

0.4485
(0.0302)**
-0.0812
(0.0069)**

0.1873
(0.0194)**
-0.0768
(0.0066)**
-0.8458
(0.1759)**

0.0359
(0.0007)**
-0.0163
(0.0004)**
-0.6573
(0.1284)**

0.1872
(0.0194)**
-0.0768
(0.0066)**

0.0359
(0.0007)**
-0.0163
(0.0004)**

-0.6230
(0.1386)**
7.0251
(0.3930)**

-0.6963
(0.1092)**
6.8094
(0.2744)**

191,921
0.33
No

191,921
0.77
Yes

273.7057
(25.1748)**

5.3648
(0.0609)**

7.5861
(0.4515)**

6.7124
(0.3228)**

Observations
635
635
191,921
191,921
R-squared
0.27
0.33
0.33
0.77
Store FE
No
No
No
Yes
Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

33

Table 3: Demand Model Estimates

State-bundle list price
Driving distance

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.1657

-0.1533

-0.1365

(0.0734)**

(0.0843)**

(0.0932)*

-0.0656
(0.0117)***

Straight-line distance

-0.1047
(0.0151)***

Driving time

-0.0633
(0.0174)***

Black
Median Income
Median Age
No Churches per capita
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday

0.0557

-0.0964

0.0831

(0.0202)***

(0.1434)

(0.1990)

0.0373

0.0390

0.0330

(0.0051)***

(0.0037)***

(0.0046)***

0.0024

0.0047

0.0132

(0.0108)

(0.0111)

(0.0113)

-0.1329

-0.2312

(0.0929)*

(0.0751)***

0.7088

0.5966

0.6606

(0.0639)***

(0.0517)***

(0.0834)***

0.7251

0.6542

0.6566

(0.0673)***

(0.0609)***

(0.0845)***

0.8581

0.7595

0.8007

(0.0635)***

(0.0518)***

(0.0828)***

1.0132

0.9103

0.9714

(0.0593)***

(0.0517)***

(0.0854)***

1.5682

1.4668

1.5072

(0.0541)***

(0.0549)***

(0.0832)***

1.5857

1.4920

1.5378

(0.0575)***

(0.0468)***

(0.0815)***

Implied elasticity of demand
-1.2795
-1.1830
-1.2850
Implied travel cost ($) per
unit
0.3957
0.6827
0.4641
Note: Results based on daily store-level data for a 10% subset (19,255 obs) of all store-day
observations. Bootstrapped standard errors (50 replications). We also include separate
holiday effects for May 28, June 30-July 3, Sept 3, and Nov. 23-26. Specification (1) uses
the shortest travel distance in km along the road network as the measure of distance;
specification (2) the straight-line distance in km; and specification (3) the travel time in
minutes associated with the shortest travel distance.

34

Table 4: Sensitivity of Incremental Welfare Measures

High elas

Incremental PS
360.88

Incremental TS
590.50

Variable
Profit
2,114.47

Travel Cost
/ km
0.198

Elasticity
–2.559

Low elas

362.24

1,281.60

2,119.59

0.792

–0.640

High distance

637.55

1,435.88

2,153.14

0.792

–1.277

Low distance

194.60

437.54

2,050.21

0.198

–1.280

Actual estimates

361.42

821.78

2,121.72

0.396

–1.280

Table 5: Correlates of Per-Capita Welfare Weights that Render Existing PLCB Entry Optimal
(1)
% Black

(2)

(3)

2.7088

2.2742

1.6577

(0.5490)**

(0.5678)**

(0.5877)**

-0.0186

-0.0237

(0.0067)**

(0.0068)**

Avg. Median Inc (000s)

-0.1032

Avg Pop-Weighted Driving
Distance to Nearest Store (km)
Constant
Observations

(0.0286)**
0.7882

1.5696

2.2717

(0.1143)**
614

(0.3025)**
614

(0.3572)**
614

0.04

0.05

0.07

R-squared

Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

35

Table 6: Comparison of Regimes

County

Regime

# of
Stores

Total
Profit

Net
Welfare

Quantity
Sold

Welf rel
to Max

%Δ
Welf†

Berks
(pop: 373,638)

Actual
Profit Maximization
Welf. Maximization

14
5
18

20,897
26,323
21,185

334,221
331,862
338,673

7,208
6,294
8,147

-1.31%
-2.01%

-4.99%
-7.63%

Blair
(pop: 129,144)

Actual
Profit Maximization
Welf. Maximization

6
2
5

3,063
6,742
5,218

109,078
111,765
112,532

1,927
1,771
2,132

-3.07%
-0.68%

-14.48%
-3.22%

Lancaster
(pop: 470,658)

Actual
Profit Maximization
Welf. Maximization

15
7
14

22,735
30,284
27,328

396,944
402,744
405,933

7,791
7,517
8,477

-2.21%
-0.79%

-9.32%
-3.31%

Lycoming
(pop: 120,044)

Actual
Profit Maximization
Welf. Maximization

7
2
4

1,768
5,871
4,813

99,803
102,025
102,446

1,892
1,599
1,831

-2.58%
-0.41%

-11.29%
-1.80%

Schuylkill
(pop: 157,342)

Actual
10
-391
133,291
2,128
-5.56%
-29.79%
Profit Maximization
3
7,080
140,195
2,058
-0.67%
-3.58%
Welf. Maximization
10
3,105
141,137
2,817
†
The change in welfare is expressed as a percentage of the consumers’ expenditure under the welfare maximizing
configuration.

Table 7: Distribution of Distance Traveled to Closest Store, Alternative Configurations

ProfitMax

Targeted
WelfMax

Regulated
Private
Entry

County

Actual

WelfareMax

Berks
Blair
Lancaster
Lycoming

5.825
6.764
6.077
6.083

3.305
4.312
4.656
7.305

8.099
8.732
7.022
10.187

4.236
3.840
4.529
4.508

5.936
5.818
5.795
7.243

Schuylkill

5.527

4.541

10.530

4.541

5.160

Total

6.010

4.455

8.358

4.357

5.892

36

Table 8: Performance of Myopic Algorithm

county

obj func

No
stores

net welf

Q

profit

Berks
Blair
Lancaster
Lycoming
Schuylkill
Berks
Blair
Lancaster
Lycoming

profit max
profit max
profit max
profit max
profit max
welfare max
welfare max
welfare max
welfare max

5
2
7
2
3
17
5
14
4

331,862
111,409
402,594
102,025
140,195
338,125
112,341
405,890
102,353

6,294
1,740
7,506
1,599
2,058
8,006
2,115
8,473
1,824

26,323
6,584
30,230
5,871
7,080
21,587
5,133
27,309
4,775

net welf
dev†

profit
dev†
0.00%
-2.34%
-0.18%
0.00%
0.00%

-0.16%
-0.17%
-0.01%
-0.09%

Schuylkill
welfare max
7
141,767
2,579
5,251
0.45%
The welfare (profit) deviations are calculated as the percentage change in welfare (profit) in going from the welfare
(profit) under the welfare (profit) maximizing configuration to the welfare (profit) under the configuration predicted
by the myopic algorithm to maximize welfare (profit).

†

Table 9: Whole State Summary
Net
System's Size
Method
N
Profit
Welfare
Profit Maximization
SME(profit)
185
971,076 11,329,609
Welfare
SME(welfare)
394
887,189 11,437,280
Maximization
†
Actual size
616
614,607 11,130,868
†
We exclude 8 stores without or with incorrect location information.

37

Quantity
232,321

Average
Distance
7.46

261,853

4.63

257,033

4.84

Table 10: Regime Comparison: Constrained Welfare Maximization,
Regulated Private Entry, and Free Entry*

# of
County
Regime
Stores
Berks
Constr. Welf. Maximization
14
(pop: 373,638)
Regulated Entry
14
Free Entry
29

Total
Profit
23,466
21,359
10,403

Net
Welfare
338,153
335,007
323,487

Quantity
Sold
7,715
7,299
8,445

Blair
Constr. Welf. Maximization
(pop: 129,144)
Regulated Entry
Free Entry

6
6
8

4,468
3,572
2,231

112,253
110,232
108,270

Lancaster
Constr. Welf. Maximization
(pop: 470,658)
Regulated Entry
Free Entry

15
15
31

26,657
24,461
11,691

Lycoming
Constr. Welf. Maximization
(pop: 120,044)
Regulated Entry
Free Entry

7
7
6

2,772
1,816
2,624

Δ Welf as
Welf rel to % of Welf
max
Max Exp†
-0.93%
-4.34%

-3.29%
-15.35%

2,204
2,027
2,204

-1.80%
-3.55%

-7.41%
-14.60%

405,837
400,873
387,853

8,565
8,132
9,141

-1.22%
-4.43%

-4.68%
-12.28%

102,056
99,912
99,014

2,090
1,901
1,840

-2.10%
-2.98%

-8.29%
-11.76%

Schuylkill
Constr. Welf. Maximization
10
3,105
141,137
2,817
(pop: 157,342)
Regulated Entry
10
2,588
139,928
2,715
-0.86%
-3.47%
Free Entry
8
3,135
136,577
2,382
-3.23%
-9.61%
†
The change in welfare from free or regulated entry is expressed as a percentage of the consumers’ expenditure
under the welfare maximizing configuration.
*
Both regulated free entry and constrained welfare maximization refer to scenarios where the number of stores is
fixed to be equal to the number of stores actually operating in each of the county markets.

38

XI.

References

Berry, Steven T., “Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline Industry.” Econometrica 60
(1992): 889-917.
Berry, Steven T. and Joel Waldfogel, “Free Entry and Social Inefficiency in Radio
Broadcasting.” RAND Journal of Economics 30(3) (1999): 397-420.
Berry, Steven T. and Joel Waldfogel, “Mergers and Product Variety.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116 (2001): 1009-1025.
Boardman, Anthony E., and Vining, Aidan R. “Ownership and performance in competitive
environments: A comparison of the performance of private, mixed, and state-owned
enterprises.” Journal of Law and Economics 32 (1989): 1-33.
Bös, Dieter. “Public Sector Pricing.” In Handbook of Public Economics, A.J. Auerbach and M.
Feldstein, eds. North Holland, Amsterdam. 1985.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Peter C. Reiss, “Entry and Competition in Concentrated Markets.”
Journal of Political Economy 99 (1991): 977-1009.
Chaloupka, Frank J., Michael Grossman, and Henry Saffer, “The Effects of Price on Alcohol
Consumption and Alcohol-Related Problems.” Alcohol Research and Health 6(1) (2002):
22-34.
Chan, Tat Y., V. Padmanabhan, and P.B. Seetharaman, “An Econometric Model of Location and
Pricing in the Gasoline Market.” Journal of Marketing Research XLIV (2007): 622-635.
Cook, Phillip J. and Michael J. Moore, “Alcohol.” NBER Working Paper 6905 (1999).
Daskin, Mark, Network and Discrete Location: Models, Algorithms and Applications, John
Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York. 1995.
Davis, Peter, “Spatial competition in retail markets: movie theaters.” RAND Journal of
Economics 37(4) (2006): 964-982.
de Palma, André, Victor Ginsburgh, and J-F. Thisse, “On the Existence of Location Equilibria in
the 3-Firm Hotelling Problem.” Journal of Industrial Economics 36 (1987): 245-252.
Dixit, Avinash and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity.” American Economic Review 67 (1977): 297-308.
39

Fudenberg, Drew and David K. Levine. The Theory of Learning in Games, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA. 1998.
Hotelling, Harold, “Stability in Competition,” The Economic Journal 39(153) (1929): 41-57.
Houde, Jean-Francois, “Spatial differentiation in retail markets for gasoline,” mimeo. University
of Wisconsin-Madison (2009).
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Michael D. Whinston, “Free Entry and Social Inefficiency.” RAND
Journal of Economics 17(1) (1986): 48-58.
Mazzeo, Michael, “Product Choice and Oligopoly Market Structure.” RAND Journal of
Economics 33(2) (2002): 241-242.
McManus, Brian, “Nonlinear Pricing in an Oligopoly Market: the Case of Specialty Coffee.”
RAND Journal of Economics 38(3) (2007): 512-532.
Perl, Jossef and Peng-Kuan Ho, “Public Facilities Location under Elastic Demand.”
Transportation Science 24(2) (1990): 117-136.
Samuelson, Larry. Evolutionary Games and Equilibrium Selection. MIT Press, Cambridge. 1997.
Seim, Katja, “An Empirical Model of Firm Entry with Endogenous Product-type Choices.”
RAND Journal of Economics 37(3) (2006): 619-640.
Small, Kenneth and Harvey Rosen, “Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete Choice Models.”
Econometrica 49(1) (1981): 105-130.
Spence, Michael, “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition.” Review of
Economic Studies 43 (1976): 217-236.
Steiner, Peter, “Program Patterns and the Workability of Competition in Radio Broadcasting,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 66 (1952): 194-223.
Sweeting, Andrew, “The Effects of Mergers on Product Positioning: Evidence from the Music
Radio Industry.” RAND Journal of Economics, forthcoming (2009).
Thomadsen, Raphael, “The Effect of Ownership Structure on Prices in Geographically
Differentiated Industries,” RAND Journal of Economics, 36(4) (2005): 908-929.
40

