                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE IMPACT OF CHILD CARE SUBSIDIES ON CHILD WELL-BEING:
EVIDENCE FROM GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION IN THE DISTANCE TO SOCIAL SERVICE AGENCIES

                                                Chris M. Herbst
                                                 Erdal Tekin

                                             Working Paper 16250
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w16250


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         August 2010




    Chris Herbst gratefully acknowledges financial support from the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
    Research. The authors would like to thank seminar participants at Georgia State University, University
    of Maryland at Baltimore County, Florida International University, Deakin University, Griffith University,
    and the 2010 meetings of the European Society of Population Economics for helpful comments and
    suggestions. Alexander Brumlik and Urmimala Sen provided excellent research assistance. The views
    expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
    of Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2010 by Chris M. Herbst and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
    two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
    is given to the source.
The Impact of Child Care Subsidies on Child Well-Being: Evidence from Geographic Variation
in the Distance to Social Service Agencies
Chris M. Herbst and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 16250
August 2010
JEL No. I18,I2,J13

                                             ABSTRACT

In recent years, child care subsidies have become an integral part of federal and state efforts to move
economically disadvantaged parents from welfare to work. Although previous empirical studies consistently
show that these employment-related subsidies raise work levels among this group, little is known about
the impact of subsidy receipt on child well-being. In this paper, we identify the causal effect of child
care subsidies on child development by exploiting geographic variation in the distance that families
must travel from home in order to reach the nearest social service agency that administers the subsidy
application process. Using data from the Kindergarten cohort of the Early Childhood Longitudinal
Study, our instrumental variables estimates suggest that children receiving subsidized care in the year
before kindergarten score lower on tests of cognitive ability and reveal more behavior problems throughout
kindergarten. However, these negative effects largely disappear by the time children reach the end
of third grade. Our results point to an unintended consequence of a child care subsidy regime that
conditions eligibility on parental employment and deemphasizes child care quality.


Chris M. Herbst
Arizona State University
School of Public Affairs, ASU, Mail Code 3720
411 N. Central Ave., Ste. 450
Phoenix, AZ 85004-0687
chris.herbst@asu.edu

Erdal Tekin
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
tekin@gsu.edu
I. Introduction

             Child care subsidies are increasingly used by state and local governments to facilitate

employment and reduce welfare use among economically disadvantaged families. Most public

expenditures on child care assistance are funneled through the federal Child Care and Development

Fund (CCDF), which was created alongside welfare reform in 1996. Consistent with the explicit

goal of welfare reform, CCDF funds are targeted primarily at low-income families participating in a

state-defined work activity.                   As such, these employment-related subsidies are intended to defray

only those child care expenses accrued during work hours, and they maximize parental choice by

placing few restrictions on the quality of care that can be purchased (Adams & Rohacek, 2002;

Adams et al., 2007; Blau, 2001; 2003). Such design features highlight a longstanding tension

between the twin objectives of child care policy in the U.S.: facilitating parental employment and

ensuring that children have access to safe and stimulating early care environments.

             The existing empirical evidence confirms that child care subsidies administered through the

CCDF encourage low-skilled parents to move from welfare to work (Blau & Tekin, 2007; Herbst,

2010; Tekin, 2005; 2007). Yet researchers have paid little attention to the potential impact of these

work-related subsidies on children’s well-being.                                Most of what is currently known about the

developmental effects of subsidized child care comes from international studies of the Canadian

(Baker et al., 2008), Danish (Gupta & Simonsen, 2010), and Norwegian (Havnes & Mogstad, 2010)

regimes. In contrast, there is an extensive literature on publicly subsidized early education programs

such as Head Start and state pre-kindergarten as well as the model programs Perry Preschool and

Abecedarian (e.g., Barnett, 1995; Berlinski et al., 2008; 2009; Currie & Thomas, 1995; Fitzpatrick,

2008; Garces et al., 2002; Gormley & Gayer, 2005; Karoly et al., 2005; Ludwig & Miller, 2007;

Ramey et al., 2000).2

             Although it is tempting to draw conclusions about the impact of child care subsidies from the

2
    See Blau and Currie (2006) for a thorough summary of this literature.

                                                                            1
largely positive results generated by early education interventions, there are reasons to doubt their

comparability. Head Start and pre-kindergarten are explicitly designed to promote school readiness

by setting relatively high quality standards and offering children educational services. Head Start, in

particular, is regarded as a ―two generation‖ program that offers bundles of services (e.g., nutrition,

social services, and mental health services) to children as well as parents. Subsidized child care, in

contrast, currently operates as a labor market policy that encourages parental employment by

reducing the costs associated with child care services. In fact, unlike early education programs,

eligibility for subsidies is conditioned on parental involvement in work-related activities. Moreover,

a key feature of the CCDF is the principle of ―parental choice,‖ in which parents may take their

subsidy to any legally-operating child care provider.        Although this design feature increases

flexibility for working parents, it also means that children may be exposed to low-quality care.

       To our knowledge, only two studies provide direct evidence on the relationship between

CCDF child care subsidies and children’s well-being. Using data from the Kindergarten cohort of

the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS-K), Herbst and Tekin (2010a) find that child care

subsidy receipt in the year before kindergarten is associated with negative cognitive and behavioral

outcomes at kindergarten entry.     In a related paper, the same authors examine children’s weight

outcomes throughout kindergarten and find that subsidized children are more likely to be overweight

and obese (Herbst & Tekin, 2010b). While these studies provide an initial picture of the

developmental effects of child care subsidies, they fall short of establishing a causal relationship

because of remaining concerns over the potential endogeneity of subsidy receipt. Furthermore, both

studies focus on the immediate impact of subsidies, ignoring the possibility that these benefits

continue to influence child well-being throughout the school-age years.

       In this paper, we provide new evidence on the impact of child care subsidy receipt on

children’s cognitive, behavioral, and psychomotor outcomes. Our paper contributes to the child care

literature in several ways. First, very little is known about the potential consequences of child care
                                                  2
policy reforms that are designed to interact with parents’ employment decisions. Given that the

welfare reform law is scheduled to be reauthorized in 2010, our results may have important policy

implications. Furthermore, the evidence to date focuses exclusively on short-term measures of child

well-being. In this study, we reexamine the ECLS-K, exploiting its longitudinal design to examine

the trajectory of child development over the first five years of children’s school experiences.

          Finally, we pay careful attention to providing causal estimates by leveraging plausibly

exogenous variation in subsidy utilization through a novel instrumental variable. Finding exogenous

sources of variation in child care costs and related policy reforms presents challenges for studying

maternal and child outcomes. In fact, identification problems are commonly cited as being primarily

responsible for the diversity of empirical estimates documented throughout the child care literature

(e.g., Anderson & Levine, 2000; Bernal & Keane, 2009). In this study, we identify the impact of

subsidy receipt by exploiting geographic variation in the distance that low-income families must

travel from home in order to reach the nearest social service agency that administers the subsidy

application process. To implement our empirical strategy, we collected information on the precise

location of virtually every public social service agency in the U.S., used these addresses to generate

geocodes for each agency, and then calculated the distance between these administrative offices and

the residential location of families in our data. Instrumenting for subsidies using our distance

measure is conceptually equivalent to comparing the developmental outcomes of children who differ

in their propensity to receive subsidized care because they reside various distances from social

service agencies.3

          We develop and test a simple theoretical model in which employment-related child care

subsidies do not directly influence child well-being. Rather, we show that subsidy receipt operates

indirectly through three primary channels in the child production function. First, child care subsidies


3
  The distance database we construct is also a potentially valuable tool for researchers examining the effects of child care subsidies on other
relevant outcomes such as maternal employment.

                                                                      3
encourage maternal employment, which has been shown by previous work to have implications for

child well-being. In particular, the most recent studies suggest that early maternal work is associated

with small, negative effects on early and later cognitive ability (Baum, 2002; Bernal, 2008; Brooks-

Gunn et al., 2002; James-Burdumy, 2005; Liu et al., 2003; Ruhm, 2004; 2008), increases in a number

of adverse health outcomes (Morrill, 2009), and increases in childhood obesity (Anderson et al.,

2003).4 Second, subsidies increase the use of non-parental child care services, especially center- and

family-based care, which is shown to have conflicting effects on child well-being (Bernal & Keane,

2008; Blau, 1999; NICHD, 2003a; 2003b). However, there is an emerging consensus that high-

quality care is beneficial for disadvantaged children (Hill et al., 2002; NICHD & Duncan, 2003).

Finally, subsidies can influence child well-being through increases in parental income, which could

be spent on goods and services that enhance child quality. The existing evidence suggests that the

effect of income on child well-being is small (Blau, 1999; Korenman et al., 1995). In sum, the

overall impact of child care subsidy receipt is theoretically ambiguous.

           Using data from the Kindergarten cohort of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS-

K), we apply our instrumental variables strategy to examine the short- and long-term impact of

receiving subsidized child care in the year before kindergarten entry. Our results point to sizeable

negative impacts on cognitive ability tests and teacher-reported behavioral measures in the fall and

spring of kindergarten. For example, our estimates suggest that subsidized children score 0.4 and 0.3

standard deviations lower on tests of reading and math ability, respectively. However, these negative

effects begin to fade by the end of first grade and are completely attenuated by the end of fifth grade.

Interestingly, we find robust evidence that the adverse effects of subsidy receipt are concentrated

among children of high-skilled mothers.


4
  The literature on the effect of maternal employment has generally produced mixed results. Bernal and Keane (2009) summarize the results from
this literature and conclude that about one-third of the studies report negative effects and another one-third report positive effects, with the
remainder documenting effects that are either insignificant or that vary by the sub-group analyzed or the timing of the inputs. It is important to
note, however, that several recent papers, which attempt to address the endogeneity of maternal employment, consistently find negative effects
(Bernal, 2007; Bernal & Keane, 2009; James-Burdummy, 2005; Liu et al., 2010).

                                                                        4
II. Introduction to the CCDF and Its Implications for Child Development

       As previously stated, the CCDF was created alongside the passage of the 1996 Personal

Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA). Overall, welfare reform

legislation allocated $21 billion for child care assistance over the first seven years, 70 percent of

which was earmarked to subsidize child care costs for families receiving welfare or transitioning into

work (Greenberg et al., 2000). In 2007, approximately $10.2 billion was spent through the CCDF,

providing subsidies to 1.7 million children per month (Child Care Bureau, 2007). In comparison,

Head Start in 2005 served 906,993 children, with expenditures totaling $6.8 billion, and state pre-

kindergarten programs enrolled 801,902 children at a cost of $2.8 billion (NIEER, 2005). Thus,

expenditures on and recipients of CCDF child care subsidies exceed those of other early care and

education programs.

       In order to qualify for a subsidy, families must have at least one child under age 13, have an

income below 85 percent of the state median income, and be employed or participate in a state-

defined work-related activity (e.g., education, job search, or job training). Subsidized child care is

available to eligible families largely through vouchers and contracts with providers. In 2007, 86

percent and 10 percent of children were served by vouchers and contracts, respectively, while the

remainder were served by cash (Child Care Bureau, 2007). States are given substantial latitude to

establish key program parameters, including income eligibility thresholds, benefit reimbursement

rates, and co-payment rates. Market rate surveys are conducted periodically to ensure that recipient

families have ―equal access‖ to high-quality providers, defined as reimbursements that cover 75

percent of the local child care price distribution and copayments that do not exceed 10 percent of

family income (Greenberg et al., 2000).

       States are able to use CCDF funds in a variety of ways to directly influence child care quality

within the market. For example, states are required to spend a minimum of four percent of the

annual CCDF allocation to support such initiatives as teacher training and education, improvements
                                                  5
to health and safety conditions, and establishing quality rating systems. However, there is substantial

variation in quality-related expenditures across the states, with some jurisdictions spending over 10

percent of its total on these initiatives (nine states) and others spending just below the four percent

minimum (13 states). Overall, quality expenditures comprise about six percent of CCDF spending,

while direct service provision accounts for 82 percent (Child Care Bureau, 2007).

        In addition, several features of the CCDF may indirectly influence the quality of care

purchased by parents. Perhaps the most important design feature is the principle of ―parental

choice,‖ in which parents may utilize subsidies to purchase most legally-operating child care

services, including unregulated relatives and in-home caregivers. The increased flexibility through

―parental choice‖ enables parents to quickly transition into employment, but it raises concerns over

whether subsidized children enroll in high-quality child care environments. Without strong quality

restrictions, for example, it is plausible that parental decision-making is instead guided by a range of

other factors, including personal biases and cultural expectations, word-of-mouth recommendations,

and convenience (Pungello & Kurtz-Costes, 1999). Furthermore, previous research finds that parents

allocate little time to the child care search (Walker, 1991), consistently overestimate the quality of

their children’s arrangements (Cryer & Buchinal, 1997), and are unable to distinguish low- from

high-quality services (Mocan, 2007). These information asymmetries therefore interact with certain

features of the CCDF to discourage low-income parents from purchasing high-quality care, which

may ultimately undermine child well-being.

        The CCDF also creates quality challenges on the supply-side of the market. For example, by

mandating only minimum quality standards, the CCDF reduces the incentive for providers to invest

in costly quality improvements that promote child development. In addition, conditioning subsidy

eligibility on parental employment further discourages providers from offering high-quality services.

Child care providers that rely heavily on subsidized children as a source of revenue may experience

severe fiscal shortfalls when parents lose eligibility or use their subsidy to pay another provider. The
                                                   6
volatility associated with serving subsidized children prevents child care providers from making

long-term quality investments (Adams & Rohacek, 2002; Adams et al., 2007). Frequent changes in

eligibility due to changes in parental work status or earnings can also increase instability for

children.5 Indeed, Ha (2009) provides evidence that parents cycle on-and-off the child care subsidy

rolls, with 50 percent of first spells ending within six months (Ha, 2009). If accompanied by frequent

changes in child care arrangements, these interruptions could have adverse effects on child well-

being (Huston et al., 2002; Loeb et al., 2004; Shonkoff & Phillips, 2000; Tran & Weinraub, 2006).6

A final supply-side constraint is created by states’ reimbursement-rate policies.                                              It is only a

recommendation that subsidy reimbursements be set at the 75th percentile of the local price

distribution, leaving states with considerable flexibility to set lower benefit rates. In fact, only nine

states in 2007 abided by the federal recommendation (Schulman & Blank, 2007).                                                              Low

reimbursement rates limit parental access to high-quality early care environments and intensify

resource constraints among providers.

           Beyond these child care constrains, the type and quality of parental employment obtained

through child care subsidies may also have implications for child well-being. For example, previous

studies find that parents receiving subsidies typically work in low-wage occupations that offer few

training opportunities (e.g., Okuyama & Weber, 2001). Indeed, studies produce mixed evidence on

the impact of subsidy receipt on earnings (e.g., Berger & Black, 1992; Danziger et al., 2004).

Furthermore, the loss of government-provided health insurance is commonly cited in studies of

welfare leavers (Loprest, 1999). Therefore, it is possible that the employment effects of child care

subsidies lead to dramatic changes in the home environment—ranging from increased parental stress


5
  Ha and Meyer (2009) find that job separation accounts for many of the exists from the subsidy rolls.
6
  Ha (2009) finds that among children beginning another subsidy spell, 61 percent do so with a different child care provider. Even while
receiving subsidized care, children have an average of three providers over a 12-month subsidized period (Weber, 2005). A survey of welfare
mothers from California finds that recipients identify payment policies and practices in the subsidy system as negatively affecting affordability,
availability, and access to high-quality child care (Pearlmutter & Bartle, 2003). A growing body of research compares child care quality across
subsidized and unsubsidized (low-income) children. Results from these studies generally find that subsidized children receive lower-quality care
(Adams et al., 2001; Jones-Branch et al., 2004; Mocan, 2007; Raikes et al., 2005; Queralt et al., 2000; Thornburg et al., 2002; Whitebook et al.,
2004; Witt et al., 2000).

                                                                        7
and anxiety to the loss of other policy supports—without an offsetting increase in material well-

being.

III. Data Description

           The dataset used in this paper is the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten

Cohort (ECLS-K), a nationally representative survey of 21,260 children entering kindergarten in the

fall of 1998. Children in the ECLS-K are followed through the eighth grade, with detailed parent,

child, and teacher interviews conducted in the fall and spring of kindergarten (1998 and 1999) and

the spring of first (2000), third (2002), fifth (2004), and eighth (2007) grade. More than 20 children

per school from over 1,200 public and private schools are included in the sample.

           Analyses in this study are based primarily on the fall of kindergarten wave of data collection,

in which child cognitive and behavioral assessments were conducted and parents were asked about

child care subsidy receipt in the year prior to kindergarten entry. We also exploit the longitudinal

design of the ECLS-K and examine child outcomes in the spring of kindergarten and the spring of 1 st,

3rd, and 5th grades.7 Our analysis sample retains children living with an unmarried biological mother

or female guardian (related and unrelated) as of the fall of kindergarten. 8 We focus on unmarried

mothers because this group constitutes approximately two-thirds of eligible subsidy recipients

(Herbst, 2008). Exclusions from the sample are made if the child is missing information on all

outcome variables (1,766) or the entire fall of kindergarten parent interview (740), the questions

regarding child care subsidy receipt (35), and census tract identifiers (2,256). We exclude an

additional 12,607 children who do not meet our requirements for residence with an unmarried

mother.9 The resulting analysis sample includes 3,848 children.

           We begin by exploring the impact of child care subsidy receipt on nine child outcomes
7
  Behavioral assessments were not administered in the spring of 8 th grade. The psychomotor skills assessments (fine and gross motor skills) were
administered only in the fall of kindergarten.
8
  In particular, children in our sample live with (1) a biological mother only, (2) a biological mother and a partner ―father,‖ (3) an unmarried
adoptive mother who may or may not be living with a partner ―father,‖ and (4) or an unrelated, unmarried guardian who may or may not be living
with a partner ―father.‖
9
  Additional deletions are made because the mother reported a nonsensical age (6), or information from parent interview could not be merged
with the geographic variables (2).

                                                                       8
measured in the fall of kindergarten. Tests of reading and math ability comprise the outcomes in the

cognitive domain.10              The reading test measures language and literacy skills, including print

familiarity, letter recognition, beginning and ending sounds, vocabulary, and reading comprehension.

The math test evaluates identification of one- and two-digit numerals, recognition of geometric

shapes, counting and reading numerals, pattern and sequence recognition, and solving simple word

problems. Reading and math outcomes are transformations of the raw scores into T-scores, which

are population-referenced measures of children’s achievement. For ease of interpretation, T-scores

are scaled to have a mean of 50 and a standard deviation of 10. Effect sizes are derived by dividing

all parameter estimates by 10.

          In addition to the overall cognitive assessments, we examine subject-area proficiency scores

in reading and math. Such measures are useful for understanding performance in domain-specific

content areas. In particular, we analyze five increasingly difficult reading and math domains through

proficiency probability scores, which use the individual test score items to provide a measure of the

likelihood that a given child has mastered each skill set.                               In the reading domain, we analyze

proficiency scores for letter recognition, beginning sounds, ending sounds, word recognition, and

word comprehension. In the math domain, we explore numbers and shapes, relative sizes, ordinality,

addition and subtraction, and multiplication and division.

          In the behavioral domain, we explore teachers’ subjective reports of children’s externalizing

behavior problems, internalizing behavior problems, approaches to learning, self-control, and

interpersonal skills. The externalizing behavior scale inquires about the frequency of acting out

behaviors, including arguing, fighting, anger, and impulsive behavior. The internalizing behavior

scale asks about the frequency with which children display anxiety, loneliness, low self-esteem, and

sadness.       The approaches to learning scale measures behavior reflecting the ease children display in
10
  The reading and math tests were designed specifically for use in the ECLS-K. However, many of the individual items are derived from existing
instruments, all with high reliability scores. For example, instruments such as the Peabody Individual Achievement Test—Revised (PIAT-R),
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-3 (PPVT-3), and the Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery—Revised (WJ-R) were used to create the
ECLS-K measures.

                                                                      9
the learning environment, including attentiveness, task persistence, and eagerness to learn. The self-

control scale measures the extent to which children are capable of controlling behavior by respecting

the property of others, limiting temper, and responding appropriately to peer-pressure. Finally, the

interpersonal skills scale provides information on children’s ability to form and maintain friendships,

comfort or help others, and show sensitivity toward one’s peers. All of the behavioral outcomes are

measured on a scale of one to four. Higher scores on the internalizing and externalizing behavior

scales indicate more frequent behavior problems, while higher scores on the remaining scales

indicate increasingly positive behavior. These measures are scaled to have a mean of zero and a

standard deviation of 10.

       The final set of outcomes explored in the study focus on children’s psychomotor skills,

specifically fine and gross motor skills. Fine motor skills capture hand-eye coordination and include

such tasks as building a gate, drawing a person, and copying simple figures. The test of gross motor

skills evaluates children in the areas of balancing, hopping, skipping and walking backward. Fine

motor skills are measured on a scale of zero to nine, and gross motor skills are measured on a scale of

zero to eight, with higher scores indicating greater abilities. As with the behavioral outcomes, these

measures are scaled to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 10.

       The primary right-hand-side variable in this analysis is a measure of child care subsidy

receipt, defined as a binary indicator that equals unity if a given child received subsidized, non-

parental child care in the year prior to kindergarten. During the fall of kindergarten interview,

parents were asked about non-parental child care arrangements utilized throughout the previous 12

months.    For each arrangement, a set of follow-up questions were then directed at parents to

ascertain whether any help was received in paying for child care expenses. Specifically, parents were

asked the following: ―Did any of the following people or organizations help to pay for this …

provider to care for {CHILD} the year before {he/she} started kindergarten?‖ Four possible choices

were then presented to parents, and we coded those answering ―a social service agency or welfare
                                                  10
office‖ as receiving a child care subsidy. 11 Thirteen percent of children in our analysis sample are

coded as receiving a child care subsidy. This figure is consistent with the U.S. Department of Health

and Human Services’ finding that 12 percent to 15 percent of eligible families received a CCDF

subsidy around the same period (U.S. DHHS, 1999).12

           Also included in the production function are several exogenous determinants of child well-

being, including the child’s gender, age (months), race and ethnicity (four dummy variables), weight

in the fall of kindergarten (pounds), and dummy variables for premature birth, low birth weight, fair

or poor health status, and first-time kindergartner. Maternal characteristics include age at the fall of

kindergarten (years), educational attainment (three dummy variables), number of other children in

the family (two dummy variables), a dummy variable to indicate whether English is the primary

home language, log of family income, and a dummy variable indicating urban residence. In addition,

we account for the neighborhood environment by adding census tract- and school-level controls for

the log median household income, log of population density, percent non-Hispanic white, percent

foreign born, percent ages 65 and over, percent female, percent of children ages 0-2, 3-5, 6-11, 12-

13, 14, and 15-17 living in female-headed households, percent of children in the school eligible for

free or reduced price lunch, a dummy variable indicating whether a majority of children in the school

are minorities, and a dummy variable indicating whether the school receives Title I funding. Finally,

our fullest specification incorporates state fixed effects.13

           Summary statistics for the child and maternal variables are presented in Appendix Table 1.

Subsidized children are more likely to be black and in fair or poor health than their unsubsidized

counterparts. Such children also reside in families with lower incomes. It is somewhat surprising,


11
   Local social service agencies and welfare offices are typically the entities responsible for administering CCDF child care subsidies in the U.S.
The Child and Dependent Care Credit is another employment-related benefit intended to defray families’ child care expenses. However, this
program is a federal tax credit and is not administered by local social service agencies.
12
   The subsidy question in the ECLS-K is similar to those in several other nationally representative surveys (e.g., National Survey of America’s
Families and the Survey of Income and Program Participation). The rates of child care subsidy receipt calculated by researchers using the NSAF
match our ECLS-K estimate. For example, Tekin (2007) calculates a participation rate of 11.6 percent for a sample of single mothers, and Herbst
(2008) estimates a take-up rate of 13.9 percent, also from a sample of single mothers.
13
   We create dummy variables that equal unity for observations with missing data on the explanatory variables.

                                                                       11
therefore, that subsidized children are less likely to be born prematurely and deemed low birth

weight. Moreover, mothers of subsidized children are less likely to be high school drop-outs and

more likely to have some college education. These conflicting results imply that subsidy utilization

is a complex phenomenon that likely reflects parental tastes for work and child care as well as state-

specific practices to systematically ration benefits.       Consistent with this, we find that mothers

receiving a subsidy are more likely to be employment (79 percent compared to 72 percent) and make

greater use of center-based care for their children (39 percent compared to 10 percent). Furthermore,

the positive association between maternal education and subsidy receipt might reflect the skills and

motivation necessary to navigate the complex application and recertification process (Blau & Tekin,

2007). It could also be an indication of local administrators’ preferences for higher-skilled mothers,

who might find employment more rapidly than those drawn from the bottom of the skill distribution.

IV. Theoretical Model and Econometric Framework

Child Care Subsidies and the Production of Child Well-Being

        The conceptual framework for our analysis is based on the economic model of the family

developed by Becker (1981), in which households combine time and market resources to maximize a

utility function. In our case, a household receives utility from the mother’s leisure (L), a vector of

consumption goods (X), and child quality (Q) according to the function

(1)     U = U(Q, L, X, Z, ε),

where Z and ε are observed and unobserved determinants of preferences, respectively. A i subscript

for the ith single mother is suppressed for clarity.

        Child quality can be modeled as a production function determined by the quality of maternal

care (QM), the quality of market care (QC), and purchased goods related to child quality (G):

(2)     Q = Q(QM(H, J), QC(C, s(dc)), G(I)).

        As shown in (2), the quality of maternal care is a function of the mother’s hours of work (H)

and hours of maternal care (J); the quality of market care is a function of hours of market care (C)
                                                       12
and child care subsidy receipt (s); and the quantity of purchased goods is determined by the mother’s

total income (I).14 In this model, we assume that subsidy receipt is a function of the distance (d c) that

a mother travels to reach the nearest social service agency that administers the subsidy program in

her county of residence. Below we elaborate further on role of travel distance in determining

household behavior. Note that G captures the additional consumption that occurs when subsidized

families spend less on purchasing child care services. In addition, while G can be beneficial for child

quality (e.g., books, cognitively stimulating toys, and fresh fruits/vegetables), it can also be

potentially harmful (e.g., video games and fast food).

           In principle, the impact of all inputs in (2) can be period-specific and can vary over the

child’s life (Ruhm, 2004). It is possible, for example, that children have multiple subsidy receipt

spells prior to kindergarten entry, and that each spell differentially affects child well-being over time.

Data restrictions preclude a fully specified child production function, so we instead focus on a

contemporaneous representation, which yields the impact of each input in the current period

combined with those in previous periods. Therefore, s should be interpreted as commingling the

contemporaneous and lagged effects of child care subsidy receipt.

           The mother’s time constraint is

(3)        T= H + L + J

and the child’s time constraint is

(4)        T = C + J.15

           The household’s budget constraint is the following

(5)        wH + Y = C(pc - s(dc) ps) + pgG + pxX,




14
   In principle, we can distinguish between the quality of various types of market care such as center-based care, relative care, and family home
care. Since we do not model the process by which the choice of a particular type of care is affected by child care subsidy receipt, we do not make
such a distinction.
15
   We assume that the total time available to a mother and child is identical. However, relaxing this assumption would not change any of the
implications.

                                                                       13
where pc , pg, and px are the prices of market care, purchased goods related to child quality, and other

consumption goods, respectively. The ps is the hourly equivalent of child care subsidy benefits if the

household is eligible for and receives them; w is the mother’s hourly wage rate; and Y is non-labor

income.     It is further assumed that ∂Q/∂QM>0 and ∂Q/∂QC>0. The effect of G on child quality

depends on the extent to which the mother uses I to purchase goods that enhance child quality or

goods that might hamper it. Therefore, ∂Q /∂G is ambiguous.

        As the model shows, subsidy receipt can influence child well-being through three channels.

First, it enters directly into the quality of market care. This is due to the aforementioned design

features embedded in the CCDF that have implications for child care quality. Such characteristics

are likely to have negative effects on child care quality, although we do not constrain the relationship

between QC and s to be negative (i.e., ∂QC/∂s<0) a priori. Second, the quality of maternal care is

influenced by the mix of time spent in the labor market and time engaged in maternal care. Given

that eligibility for child care subsidies is conditioned on employment, subsidy receipt should lead to

an increase in labor market time and a decrease in the amount of time allocated to maternal care.

Assuming that hours of maternal care is positively related to the quality of maternal care (i.e.,

∂QM/∂J>0) and hours of work is negatively related to maternal quality (i.e., ∂QM /∂H < 0), a subsidy

should have a negative effect on the quality of maternal care among non-working mothers. This

relationship is unclear for mothers already in the labor force because subsidy receipt is predicted to

have complicated employment effects at the intensive margin (i.e., hours of work) due to opposing

income and substitution effects. However, it is unlikely that an employed mother would significantly

alter her work effort after starting to use subsidized child care in light of the work requirements tied

to these benefits. Therefore, the net effect of subsidy receipt on the quality of maternal care is

anticipated to be negative. Finally, a child care subsidy can reduce expenditures on child care,

thereby freeing up resources to increase consumption in other areas. However, as noted above, the

effect of G on child quality is ambiguous. In sum, the overall impact of child care subsidies on child
                                                  14
well-being is ambiguous and therefore an empirical question.

        The mother maximizes utility subject to the child quality production function and budget and

time constraints. This optimization problem is solved to yield a reduced form quality demand

function that depends on subsidy receipt (s), all prices, the mother’s wage rate, non-labor income,

exogenous production shifters (Z), and unobserved components of productivity and preferences. The

production function can be formalized with the following equation:

(6)     Q = α0+ α1s + Zα2 + α3Y + ∑kαkpk + ε,

where k = {c, g, x, and s}. The coefficient of interest is α1, the impact of subsidy receipt on child

well-being. There are a number of obstacles associated with estimating (6). Since labor market

earnings is one of the predicted channels through which subsidies can influence measures of Q, a

model including hourly wages would no longer be reduced form and would complicate the

interpretation of α1. Furthermore, hourly wages is potentially endogenous. Therefore, we substitute

its exogenous determinants (e.g., age, race, and education) in the production function. Another

complication stems from data limitations in the ECLS-K that prevent us from calculating child care

expenditures and subsidy reimbursements, both of which are likely to be endogenous. These inputs

to child well-being are assumed to be a function of child care quality, states’ child care policy

parameters, and the observable characteristics of children and parents (Tekin, 2007). We capture

these inputs by substituting their exogenous family determinants and including detailed controls for

the neighborhood environment. Finally, state fixed effects are added to account for states’ subsidy

policies as well as unobserved time-invariant determinants of child well-being that are correlated

with subsidy receipt. This results in the following fully reduced form empirical model:

(7)     Q = δ0+ δ1s + Hδ2 + Nδ3 + ∑jδj + ν,

where H is a vector of exogenous child and maternal determinants of child well-being; N represents a

vector of neighborhood attributes; ∑jδj is a set of state fixed effects; and ν is an idiosyncratic error

term. It is important to note that (7) yields an estimate of the overall impact of child care subsidy
                                                  15
receipt that commingles the three channels through which subsidies may influence child well-being

(i.e., child care quality, maternal time, and consumption). This is consistent with the main goal of

the paper.

           Estimating (7) with ordinary least squares (OLS) will yield an unbiased estimate of the

impact of child care subsidies only if the unobserved determinants of child well-being are

uncorrelated with subsidy receipt. This assumption is unlikely to hold in practice because parental

decisions regarding work and child care are not the result of random processes (Tekin, 2007). For

example, highly motivated mothers or those with strong work preferences may be more likely to

request child care assistance. Since labor force participation is one of the channels through which

subsidies can influence child well-being, failing to control for maternal motivation and preferences

may produce a biased estimate of δ1. Another selection mechanism deals with the possibility that

mothers take children’s cognitive ability and temperament into consideration when deciding whether

to work and obtain a child care subsidy. If mothers differentially select work and child care choices

based on unobserved child characteristics, the coefficient on subsidy receipt will once again be

biased. Finally, it is possible that subsidy administrators systematically ration child care benefits

according to specific household characteristics. For example, administrators might target the least

employable mothers in order to ease their transition into the labor market. Alternatively, case

workers may give priority to higher-skilled mothers, thereby generating the greatest ―return on

investment‖ and allowing states to meet work participation targets.16 These possibilities suggest that

subsidy receipt is correlated with unobserved family and program characteristics. Therefore, we are

concerned that estimating (7) with OLS will yield biased estimates of δ1.17

Identification Strategy




16
  Our conversations with local CCDF administrators confirm that both practices are common.
17
  Another reason for bias in the estimate for the effect of subsidy receipt from OLS is potential measurement error in the reporting of subsidy
receipt.

                                                                       16
       In the absence of a research design that randomly distributes child care subsidies to single

mothers, we rely on a novel instrumental variable to generate quasi-experimental variation in child

care subsidy receipt.   To produce consistent estimates of the impact of subsidy receipt using

instrumental variables, we need at least one variable that is correlated with subsidy utilization but

uncorrelated with measures of child well-being except through its relationship with subsidy receipt.

Our proposed instrument is based on the distance that families must travel from home in order to

reach the nearest social service agency that administers the subsidy application process.         The

plausibility of this instrument rests in part on the assumption that families living in an area with an

agency nearby face lower costs of obtaining a subsidy. It is therefore hypothesized that an inverse

relationship exists between the likelihood of subsidy utilization and the distance between home and

the closest social service agency. Furthermore, as outlined in the behavioral model, it is plausible

that mothers’ travel distance to an agency influences work and child care decisions only through its

impact on subsidy utilization and should not directly influence child well-being.

       To implement this strategy, we began by creating a database containing the precise location

(building number, street name, city, state, and zip code) of virtually every social service agency in

the U.S. In doing so, we were careful to ensure that a given agency is involved in eligibility and

benefit determination for CCDF child care subsidies. Our database contains location information on

over 3,600 social service agencies. The next step in the process involved geocoding the location of

administrative offices by assigning a latitude and longitude coordinate to each. In the final step, we

calculated the Euclidean (or as-the-crow-flies) distance (in miles) between the location of social

service agencies and the centroid (or geographic center) of the census tract in which ECLS-K

families reside. We generate the distance measure based on families’ census tract because residential

addresses are not available in the ECLS-K. Furthermore, given that states’ child care subsidy

programs are administered primarily at the county-level, we use families’ county of residence as the



                                                  17
geographic boundary for calculating the distances.18 Appendix A provides a detailed description of

the steps taken to construct the agency database and distance measure.

           There are several reasons to expect that the geographic accessibility of social service

agencies influences the costs and benefits associated with subsidy participation. 19 First, it has been

well-documented that low-income families already face substantial work- and child care-related costs

because of the limitations of public transportation systems and low car ownership rates (Allard, 2009;

Berube & Raphael, 2005; Ong, 2002). Edin & Lein (1997) estimate that single mothers’ work

commutes sum to an average of 10 hours per week, with another study finding that mothers’ daily

trip from home to the child care provider adds 28 percent more time to the total commute

(Michelson, 1985).              It is therefore not surprising that low-income working mothers stress the

importance of locating child care services close to home or work (Henly & Lyons, 2000). 20                                                  These

preferences appear to translate in practice: a study of child care subsidy recipients in Cuyahoga

County, Ohio finds that such families travel only two miles to center-based providers and 1.5 miles

to family daycare homes (Bania et al., 2000).

           Further intuition for a relationship between the distance measure and subsidy receipt is

developed by examining states’ policies regarding the subsidy application and recertification process.

Generally speaking, proximity to a social service agency can impact utilization during multiple

stages of a family’s interaction with the subsidy system (Herbst & Tekin, 2010c). In particular, most

parents are required to make one or more personal visits to an agency to conduct the initial in-take



18
   Approximately one-third of single mothers in our sample have access to two or more social service agencies in their county of residence. In
those cases, our measure is defined such that the minimum distance is assigned to a given single mother. In robustness checks, we test an
alternate distance measure that makes more explicit use of the presence of multiple agencies.
19
   Previous research consistently finds that measures of geographic accessibility are strongly associated with participation in other social services
and means-tested programs. For example, Allard et al. (2003) show that greater spatial proximity to social service providers increases the
probability that welfare recipients receive these services. Neidell & Waldfogel (2009) analyze the impact of local Head Start availability on
immigrant children’s participation. The authors find that having a Head Start center in a child’s census tract significantly increases the likelihood
of enrollment. It has also been shown that the distance to medical care facilities is negatively correlated with health care utilization (e.g., Nemet
& Bailey, 2000) and treatment intensity for acute myocardial infarction (McClellan et al., 1994). Geographic variation in proximity to college
campuses during childhood appears to be highly correlated with later college attendance (Card, 1995).
20
   Another study finds that nearly 70 percent of low-income parents rate ―conveniently located services‖ as very important to their child care
decisions, compared to 50 percent among high-income parents (U.S Department of Education, 1995).

                                                                        18
and eligibility screening.21               The number of office visits largely depends on state-specific rules

governing the stringency of income and employment documentation and the extent to which families

require assistance locating suitable child care providers. In addition, parents in many jurisdictions

are required to report in-person all changes to employment and income. This can be particularly

challenging for low-income parents, who tend to have less access to automobile transportation and

are more likely to experience frequent job turnover, seasonal or irregular work hours, and highly

volatile earnings.           Finally, policies regarding eligibility recertification require parents to make

multiple trips to the local social service agency. In particular, the time-limited nature of child care

subsidies—usually lasting three to 12 months—implies that parents need to restart the eligibility

process every few months or risk benefit termination.

           Empirically, previous work by Herbst and Tekin (2010c) uses the ECLS-K to provide direct

evidence on the relationship between the distance to social service agencies and subsidy utilization.

Results suggest that increases in the travel distance (in miles) reduce the likelihood that a potentially

eligible family receives a child care subsidy. The authors estimate an elasticity of subsidy receipt

with respect to distance of -0.13. To formalize this relationship in the context of the current study,

we estimate regressions of subsidy receipt on single mothers’ travel distance, controlling for a rich

set of child and family characteristics. Appendix Table 2 presents coefficients for two variants of

this model. The top panel presents results using the natural logarithm of the distance to the nearest

social service agency. We also allow for a non-linear relationship by incorporating polynomials in

distance. These results are presented in the bottom panel. Column (1) includes only the distance

21
   A growing number of states allow families to apply for subsidies via the mail, online, or over the telephone. However, as of 1998—the year
subsidy information was ascertained in the ECLS-K— these application modes were substantially less common. Only 14 states in our ECLS-K
sample allowed families to request subsidy applications mail, telephone, or email (Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine,
Michigan, Missouri, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, and Washington). Another five states (Maine, Michigan, Oregon,
Texas, and Washington) allowed families to complete the subsidy application via mail or telephone. Furthermore, although some parents may not
be required to visit an office to receive a subsidy, there are numerous factors that may necessitate in-person visits both initially and later at
recertification, such as lack of trust by parents in the system, errors made by parents or case workers, and visits required by case workers to
provide additional documentation (Adams, Synder, & Sandfort, 2002). Finally, single mothers in our sample may not have the resources to
navigate application process through online or telephone interactions. Therefore, it is plausible that distance continues to be costly for families
that are allowed to submit subsidy applications through alternative means. Herbst and Tekin (2010c) show that the distance measure is associated
with a statistically significant reduction in subsidy utilization irrespective of whether families must make personal visits to the social service
agency in the county in which they reside.

                                                                       19
measure, while Columns (2) and (3) add the child and family characteristics, respectively.            As

expected, results in the top panel reveal a negative and statistically significant relationship between

the distance measure the likelihood of subsidy receipt. The coefficient on the distance variable

implies that a one percent increase in the mileage to the nearest social service agency reduces the

probability of subsidy utilization by 1.8 percentage points. Results in the bottom panel reveal that

the relationship between distance and subsidy receipt is highly non-linear, with the distance variables

individually and jointly statistically significant.

        An implication of the behavioral model is that the monetary and psychic costs associated

with a given travel distance are expected to vary according to where a family resides. For example,

there is substantial geographic variation in the availability of local roads and highways, the amount

of traffic congestion associated with these roads, and the accessibility of substitute forms of public

transportation.   Such differences within and across states imply that it is not appropriate to constrain

the relationship between travel distance and subsidy receipt to be the same for mothers across all

jurisdictions. To investigate this issue, we produce county- and state-specific correlations between

the distance measure and subsidy receipt. As expected, both sets of correlations are negative on

average, but the amount of variation is substantially greater among counties, as evidenced by a

comparison of the standard deviations: 0.305 for the county-specific correlations and 0.172 for the

state-specific correlations. Additional evidence of between-county variation in the distance-subsidy

relationship is provided by comparing correlations across urban and rural counties. Not surprisingly,

the average correlation in rural counties is nearly three times larger than that in urban counties, but

the spread of correlations around the mean is also greater (SD rural: 0.397 versus SD urban: 0.277).

Our identification strategy therefore exploits this county-level variation in travel distance by

interacting the distance measure with mothers’ county-of-residence indicators. With a p-value less




                                                      20
than 0.001, the set of distance-county interactions is highly statistically significant in the first-stage

equation.22

           In order for the distance measure to serve as an instrument to identify the impact of subsidy

receipt on child well-being, it has to be validly excluded from the child production function. One

concern is that the distance measure could be determined in part by the joint location preferences of

families and social service agencies. For example, given the low car ownership rates among low-

income families, such individuals may prefer to live near critical support services or employment

centers.       In addition, administrative offices might locate in low-income neighborhoods to be

accessible to large numbers of potentially eligible clients. If these unobserved family and agency

preferences influence the distance measure in ways that affect child well-being, the coefficient on

subsidy receipt will be biased.

           Recent empirical work finds little support for the notion that individuals Tiebout sort across

space in order to access government-provided goods and services (Rhode & Strumpf, 2003).

Furthermore, although endogenous location choices are more plausible for entitlement programs or

services with open-ended funding streams, it is highly unlikely that low-income parents move to a

given neighborhood to be close to an agency administering child care subsidies. These benefits are

heavily rationed by local agencies, and consequently it is common for parents to experience frozen

intake or long waiting lists (Herbst, 2008). Therefore, it seems fairly risky to choose a residential

location based on the location of these agencies. As pointed out by Allard (2009), the location

choices of social service agencies are constrained in important ways, limiting the ability to adjust

rapidly to changes in the spatial distribution of low-income families. These constraints help to

explain why one-fifth of the social service agencies in Allard’s (2009) three-city study had been




22
  Coefficients on the other variables are consistent with those documented by previous studies on the determinants of child care subsidy receipt.
For example, the likelihood of subsidy utilization increases with mothers’ education. In addition, black mothers and those with greater numbers
of young children are more likely to receive a subsidy. Results from the first-stage equation are available from the authors upon request.

                                                                      21
operating in the same location for six to 10 years, and over half were in the same location for more

than 10 years.

          Another concern is that our distance measure is a proxy for neighborhood and family

characteristics that influence child well-being. For example, it is possible that mothers facing shorter

distances to an agency do so in part because they reside in high-population-density (urban) and low-

income neighborhoods. Conversely, those with longer distances may reside in largely rural and

racially homogenous areas. To the extent that the neighborhood environment directly affects child

well-being or is correlated with resident family characteristics, we might be worried that the travel

distance is systematically related to child development. If these environmental factors are not

properly accounted for in the production function, the distance measure would not constitute a valid

instrument.

          Table 1 explores the relationship between select family characteristics and the distance

measure.        Specifically, columns two through five present the means for child and maternal

characteristics at each quartile of the distance distribution. Column six displays the p-value from an

F-test of the equivalence of means before conditioning on the neighborhood environment. Column

seven shows the p-value from a specification test that adjusts the means for median household

income and population density in the census tract of residence. The raw means indicate that children

living closer to an agency are significantly less likely to be white and more likely to be in fair or poor

health than children living father away. In addition, mothers living near an agency have higher WIC

participation rates and lower levels of educational attainment, and they are more likely to be drawn

from the lowest quintile of the SES distribution.23 Such results justify our concern that child and

maternal characteristics may not be random with respect to the distance measure. However, these

family-level differences are driven by neighborhood-level heterogeneity across the distance


23
   The SES measure was created by ECLS-K administrators, and reflects mother’s and father’s education, mother’s and father’s occupational
status, and total family income.

                                                                  22
distribution. In particular, families living near an agency tend to be located in low-income and

densely populated census tracts with high rates of non-white households and those receiving public

assistance. For example, differences in neighborhood household median income and population

density by distance quartile are large in magnitude and highly statistically significant (F=110.56 and

F=268.08, respectively).               In fact, conditioning on these two neighborhood characteristics alone

makes each of the child and maternal differences disappear (column seven). It is remarkable that

background characteristics like socio-economic status, WIC participation, and maternal education are

randomized over the distance distribution after controlling for these neighborhood characteristics.

Such results indicate that the neighborhood environment is responsible for generating the observed

family-level differences across the distance distribution, and as long as neighborhood controls are

included in the production function, the distance measure can serve as a valid instrument.

           To further bolster our confidence in the identification strategy, we incorporate an additional

13 census tract- and school- level variables in the child production function, for a total of 15

controls.24 These variables capture several dimensions of neighborhoods’ wealth and resources,

urbanicity, racial and ethnic composition, and family structure that are either directly related to child

well-being or correlated with the relevant attributes of our ECLS-K families.                                                As previously

mentioned, we also include state fixed effects to account for state-level policy, economic, and

demographic unobservables that may influence child outcomes. Finally, in robustness checks, we

estimate the production function separately on children living in urban areas. By making the sample

more homogenous, it is an additional check on the impact of endogenous residential choices and

unobserved neighborhood characteristics. Results from this exercise are consistent with our main

findings.



24
  The census tract (neighborhood) variables include the log of median household income, log of population density, percent non-Hispanic white,
percent foreign born, percent ages 65 and over, percent female, and percent ages 0-2, 3-5, 6-11, 12-13, 14, and 15-17 in female-headed
households. The school variables include the percent of children in school who are eligible for free lunches, a dummy variable indicating
whether a majority of children in school are racial/ethnic minorities, and a dummy variable indicating whether the school receives Title I funding.

                                                                       23
V. Estimation Results

The Impact of Child Care Subsidy Receipt on Child Well-Being

        Tables 2 through 4 present the main results for this study. We begin by examining raw

differences in the fall of kindergarten outcomes for subsidized and unsubsidized children (Table 2).

We then present OLS results for the child production function that condition on a rich set of

observable child, family, and neighborhood characteristics (Table 3). Finally, we deal explicitly with

the potential endogeneity of subsidy receipt by implementing our instrumental variables strategy

(Table 4).

        Table 2 provides the means and standard deviations for the child outcomes measured in the

fall of kindergarten. We present these summary statistics for our full ECLS-K sample and for the

sub-sets of subsidized and unsubsidized children. Note that the full sample reading and math test

scores are below 50, indicating that children of unmarried mothers score lower than the average

ECLS-K child. In addition, children in our sample display more externalizing and internalizing

behavior problems and fewer positive social behaviors than other ECLS-K children. This is not

surprising given that single-parent families tend to have fewer resources to invest in the production of

child quality. The table also shows that subsidized children score lower on tests of cognitive ability

and display more behavior problems than their unsubsidized counterparts. In fact, subsidy recipients

perform worse in eight of the nine outcome measures (the exception is fine motor skills), and the raw

differences are statistically significant for seven of the outcomes.      Such differences should be

interpreted with caution, however, as they do not account for the possibility that subsidy receipt is

correlated with other factors that determine child well-being.

        We begin to address the presence of potentially confounding variables in Table 3, which

presents OLS estimates of the relationship between child care subsidy receipt and child well-being.

Recall that subsidy receipt is measured in the year prior to kindergarten entry, and the outcomes are

measured in the fall of kindergarten.      Thus, these estimates reveal the short-term implications
                                                  24
associated with receiving subsidized child care. Each cell in the table presents the coefficient on

subsidy receipt and its standard error (adjusted for clustering at the county level). Column (1) shows

the estimates for subsidy receipt without controls. Columns (2) and (3) add the child and family

covariates, respectively, and column (4) incorporates the neighborhood-level controls. Finally, our

fullest OLS specification is presented in column (5), which adds state fixed effects to account for

unobserved heterogeneity at the state-level that might be correlated with subsidy receipt and child

well-being.

       As shown in Table 3, the estimates for subsidy receipt exhibit considerable variation as

controls are added to the specification. In the test score models, the impact of child care subsidies

decreases in magnitude and loses statistical significance between columns (1) and (5). On the other

hand, subsidy coefficients in the motor skills’ models generally increase in size and become more

precisely estimated. Finally, in the behavioral models, the impact of subsidy receipt is largely robust

to the increased number of controls. Nevertheless, the results consistently point to poorer outcomes

for subsidized children. Looking at column (5), we find that subsidy receipt is related to lower

reading and math test scores and increased behavior problems, although only the behavioral

measures show statistically significant results. Children receiving subsidized care, for example,

score 2.4 points higher on the measure of externalizing behavior problems and about two points

lower on the measures of self-control and interpersonal skills.       Findings for the psychomotor

outcomes are mixed, with the subsidy coefficient indicating significant increases in fine motor skills

and decreases in gross motor skills. In sum, the OLS results are indicative of a negative relationship

between child care subsidies and child well-being.        These estimates, however, should not be

interpreted as causal because the models do not fully account for the possibility that families non-

randomly select into subsidy utilization. Furthermore, the fluctuating estimates create considerable

uncertainty about the likely direction of the OLS bias.

       Table 4 presents the causal results for the impact child care subsidy receipt using our
                                                  25
instrumental variables approach.     The key results are presented in Column (3), in which two-stage

least squares (2SLS) is used to estimate the equation of interest. Each regression includes the full set

of child and maternal variables, neighborhood controls, and state fixed effects. The standard errors

once again account for clustering at the county-level.

        The instrumental variables estimates consistently point to negative effects of child care

subsidy receipt on child well-being.       Furthermore, the estimates grow in magnitude and are

statistically significant for all outcomes except fine and gross motor skills. The finding that the

coefficients increase in magnitude from the OLS to the instrumental variables method is consistent

with the presence of measurement error in the subsidy receipt variable. Looking first at the cognitive

outcomes, we find that children receiving subsidized care score nearly five points lower on the

reading test and four points lower on the math test. These point estimates correspond to effect sizes

of about 0.49 and 0.37 standard deviations, respectively, and would move the median child to the 36th

percentile of the reading score distribution and the 29th percentile of the math score distribution.

        In the behavioral domain, subsidy receipt is shown to have a deleterious effect on all five

outcomes. The parameter estimates are statistically significant, and they correspond to larger effects

than those in the cognitive domain. Interestingly, subsidy participation is expected to increase both

externalizing (e.g., aggressive) and internalizing (e.g., anxious) behavior problems. The coefficients

imply a seven-point increase in the externalizing scale and a three-point increase in the internalizing

scale. These translate to effect sizes of 0.71 and 0.29 standard deviations, respectively. Our

estimates also suggest that subsidy receipt reduces a number of positive social behaviors, including

self-control and interpersonal skills.       Parameter estimates consistently imply reductions of

approximately five points—or half of a standard deviation—in the various measures of positive

social behaviors.

        Turning finally to the psychomotor domain, the coefficient on subsidy receipt points to

negative effects on fine and gross motor skills, but the estimates are statistically insignificant.
                                                   26
Furthermore, the effect sizes are smaller than those in the other domains. Such results are not

surprising given that these assessments are largely designed to measure bodily-kinesthetic skills (e.g.,

hand-eye coordination, balancing, hopping, skipping, and walking backward). These skills are less

likely to be influenced by short-run home and child care changes associated with subsidy utilization.

Unfortunately, the psychomotor assessments were not administered again by the ECLS-K, which

prevents us from exploring longer-term effects.

          In light of the negative correlation between travel distance and subsidy participation rates, if

child care subsidies have a causal effect on child well-being, then a reduced form relationship

between the distance measure and child outcomes should emerge. Appendix Table 3 reports average

values of the fall of kindergarten outcome measures across the quartiles of the distance distribution.

We also report p-values from two sets of F-tests: one testing differences in the unconditional means

(column five) and another testing differences conditional on child and family characteristics (column

six). Unconditional results point to a statistically significant relationship between the distance

measure and seven of the nine child outcomes. Controlling for child and family covariates reduces

this number to five significant relationships. A consistent pattern emerges from this analysis:

measures of child well-being improve monotonically as the distance to the nearest agency increases.

Such results, together with the negative correlation between the distance measure and subsidy

receipt, imply that the 2SLS estimates of a negative impact on child well-being can be interpreted as

causal.

          To put these findings into perspective, we compare effect sizes in Table 4 with those reported

elsewhere in the early care and education literature. Bernal and Keane (2009) document that an

additional year of non-parental child care is associated with a 0.11 standard deviation decrease in

children’s cognitive test scores. In a study of the Quebec’s child care program, Baker, Gruber, and

Milligan (2008) find that subsidized children show a reduction in social development of 0.17

standard deviations. Gormley and Gayer’s (2005) evaluation of Tulsa, Oklahoma’s pre-kindergarten
                                                    27
program finds effect sizes of 0.39 (cognitive ability), 0.38 (language ability), and 0.24 (motor skills).

Magnuson, Ruhm, and Waldfogel (2007a) estimate effect sizes of 0.24 (reading test) and 0.20 (math

test) for pre-kindergarten attendance among disadvantaged ECLS-K children. Finally, an analysis of

intensive early education programs reveals an effect size of 0.97 for Perry Preschool participants and

0.62 for Abecedarian participants at age five (Karoly et al., 2005). It appears that the absolute value

of our effect sizes is at the upper end of the range of previous estimates. However, it is important to

bear in mind that the impact of subsidy receipt is averaged over potentially large changes in maternal

employment, children’s child care arrangements, and families’ financial resources. Although pre-

kindergarten and Head Start programs introduce changes in the early care environment, parental

employment is not likely to be an important channel through which these programs influence child

well-being. Thus, the estimates presented here are comparable to those found elsewhere.

        The 2SLS results discussed above suggest that subsidy receipt leads to significant reductions

in tests of reading and math ability. Fortunately, the ECLS-K allows us to unpack these broad effects

by exploring domain-specific proficiencies in reading and math.              In particular, proficiency

probability scores were created to represent a hierarchical progression of knowledge and skills at the

beginning of kindergarten. As shown in Appendix Table 4, we examine the impact of subsidy

receipt on five subject-area proficiencies in each of the overall cognitive domains, with the individual

clusters representing increasingly difficult sets of reading and math test items. Since these measures

are expressed as probability scores, the outcome means [presented in column (2)] are interpreted as

the fraction of children reaching proficiency in a given domain. For example, approximately 57

percent of children are deemed proficient in letter recognition, and 89 percent are deemed as such in

number and shape identification as of the fall of kindergarten. The likelihood of reaching proficiency

decreases across the reading and math achievement domains as the subject areas grow in difficulty.

        The 2SLS results presented in column (3) of Table 4 suggest that subsidy participation lowers

a variety of domain-specific reading and math skills.        As for reading achievement, subsidized
                                                   28
children perform worse than their unsubsidized counterparts in every subject area. For example,

children who received a subsidy in the year before kindergarten are 15 percentage points less likely

to be proficient in letter recognition and between 12 and 14 percentage points less likely to be

proficient in recognizing beginning and ending word sounds. The results for math achievement are

mixed, with subsidized children performing the same as their unsubsidized counterparts in the most

and least complex subject areas, but underperforming in several of the mid-level tasks. For example,

whereas subsidy receipt is expected to decrease the probability of reaching proficiency in number

and shape recognition (the least complex mathematical task) by 4 percentage points, the impact

estimate becomes substantially larger in the relative size (13 percentage points) and ordinality (11

percentage points) domains before decreasing once again in multiplication/division (the most

complex mathematical task).

Heterogeneous Effects of Child Care Subsidy Receipt

       Our results so far have assumed that the impact of child care subsidies on child well-being is

the same for all children. However, the estimates may vary with the characteristics of the child and

mother. To explore this possibility, we estimate 2SLS models for subsets of the full ECLS-K

analysis sample. In particular, we examine differential effects of subsidy receipt by children’s

gender, mothers’ educational attainment, and families’ socioeconomic status (SES). These analyses

are particularly important for instrumental variables given that the impact estimates apply only to the

group of unmarried mothers whose subsidy decisions are influenced by the distance instrument. As

such, 2SLS estimates are often referred to as the local average treatment effects (LATE) (Angrist &

Imbens, 1994). We might be concerned that this subset of unmarried mothers differs from the full

sample of unmarried mothers in important ways. In particular, the OLS and IV estimates might

differ because OLS recovers the average effect of subsidy receipt, while the IV results apply to a

non-representative subset of the sample. It is plausible, in other words, that child care subsidies are

beneficial for large numbers of disadvantaged children while showing detrimental effects among
                                                  29
specific groups. We address this concern by estimating the 2SLS model on sub-groups of children in

our ECLS-K sample.

        Columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 present the subsidy estimates separately for boys and girls,

respectively. Results in these columns reveal an interesting role for gender in the impact of child

care subsidies. In the cognitive domain, boys’ math scores are more negatively affected by subsidy

receipt. In fact, the coefficient on subsidy receipt for boys is more than double that for girls and is

highly statistically significant. Conversely, the impact of subsidy receipt on reading test scores is

larger for girls by about 0.10 standard deviations. In addition, subsidy receipt has large negative

effects on the behavioral outcomes for boys, while the effects for girls are small in magnitude and

usually imprecisely estimated. The finding of a pronounced effect of work-related subsidies on boys’

behavior is consistent with several studies which find that boys tend to be more adversely affected by

early maternal employment (Blau & Grossberg, 1992; Brooks-Gunn et al., 2002; Desai et al., 1989;

Hill & Duncan, 1987; Richards & Duckett, 1991; Ruhm; 2008). It is plausible child care subsidies

aggravate the gender disparity in the development of behavior problems (Buchnical et al., 2000;

Scarr & Eisenberg, 2003).

        Several studies find that the negative effects of child care participation and maternal

employment are concentrated among economically advantaged children (Anderson et al., 2003;

Bernal & Keane, 2009; Brooks-Gunn, et al., 2002; Ruhm, 2004; 2008). It is plausible that such

heterogeneity exists with respect to child care subsidies. To explore this possibility, we first estimate

the 2SLS models separately for low- and high-skilled mothers. Low-skilled mothers are defined as

those with a high school degree or less, and high-skilled mothers are those with at least some college

education. We then estimate the models separately for children drawn from the bottom and top

quintiles of the SES distribution.

        As shown in columns (3) through (6), our results largely confirm those in previous work.

Looking first at the findings stratified by maternal education, it appears that child care subsidies have
                                                   30
similar effects on cognitive ability test scores for children with low- and high-skilled mothers. In the

behavioral domain, however, the impact of subsidy receipt is concentrated among children with high-

skilled mothers. In particular, the estimated effect of subsidy utilization is large and statistically

significant for externalizing behavior problems, approaches to learning, self-control, and

interpersonal skills. The comparable behavioral results for children with low-skilled mothers are

small in magnitude and never precisely estimated.

        It is important to note that splitting the sample by maternal education may not be the most

appropriate way to test for subsidy effects across different family environments. It is possible, for

example, that education alone may not capture the most important familial inputs to child

development. Therefore, we also consider models that stratify the sample according to the bottom

and top quintiles of the SES distribution. As shown in columns (5) and (6), the results now strongly

indicate that subsidy receipt among high SES children adversely affects well-being, compared to

neutral or even positive consequences among low SES children. Effect sizes for reading and math

tests, for example, are -0.56 and -0.21 for high SES children, while their low SES counterparts

experience effect sizes of 0.06 and -0.11. High SES children who receive subsidized care show

substantial increases in behavior problems, especially externalizing behaviors, and reductions in all

three positive social behaviors. In contrast, their low SES counterparts are neutral with respect to

externalizing and internalizing behaviors, and actually show increases in all three measures of

positive social behaviors, one of which is statistically significant (interpersonal skills).

         To explain these results, we find that child care subsidies trigger more dramatic changes in

maternal employment and child care arrangements among high SES children. For example, 93

percent of subsidized high SES mothers are employed, compared to 65 percent among their low SES

counterparts.    Furthermore, among those who are employed, subsidized high SES mothers are

working more intensively: 81 percent of such mothers are employed full-time (35+ hours per week),

versus 74 percent among subsidized low SES mothers. Subsidized high and low SES children also
                                                    31
participate in different child care services, with the former less likely to be enrolled in center- and

family-based care. Finally, note that the marginal productivity of maternal time is assumed to be

positive in the child production function. It is reasonable to further assume that this marginal

productivity is greater for high-skilled (and high SES) mothers. If this is the case, then the subsidy-

induced reduction in maternal time inputs (and the attending rise in intensive paid employment)

would be expected to adversely affect children in high SES families.

Robustness Analyses

           We subject the main results to a number of specification checks to ensure robustness. Results

from this exercise are presented in Table 6. The plausibility of our 2SLS estimates hinges on the

validity of our identifying assumption that, conditional on the observable family and neighborhood

controls and state fixed effects, the distance instruments can be excluded from the child production

function. This assumption cannot be tested directly, but we offer some indirect evidence through a

falsification test. If our identification strategy is valid, then a variable predicting child care subsidy

receipt should not affect children in families that are highly unlikely to be eligible for assistance.

Since all families in the ECLS-K have children, we focus the falsification test on two-parent families

in the top two quintiles of the SES distribution. We first estimate the first-stage subsidy receipt

equation on the sample of single mothers in order to calculate a predicted probability of subsidy

receipt for the subset of two-parent families in the top SES quintiles. We then include this variable in

the child production function. The falsification test provides no evidence against the validity of our

identification strategy: in no case do we find that predicted subsidy receipt negatively influences the

well-being of children in high SES two-parent families.25

           Although our expanded instrument set can increase the efficiency of the IV estimates, it can

also lead 2SLS to perform poorly. In particular, the ―many-and-weak-instruments‖ problem is shown

25
   For example, the coefficient (and standard error) on subsidy receipt in the reading test model is: 0.803 (1.761). The comparable result in the
math test model is: 3.330 (1.735), which is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. In no other case is the coefficient on subsidy receipt
statistically significant. Full results are available from the authors upon request.

                                                                        32
to produce bias in the 2SLS estimates that converge to the OLS estimates as the number of

identifying instruments increases (Bound et al., 1995; Hansen et al., 2006). We deal with this

concern by using an alternative to 2SLS, the jackknife instrumental variables estimator (JIVE), to

examine the impact of child care subsidy receipt on child well-being. The JIVE exhibits finite-

sample properties superior to those of 2SLS and comparable to alternative estimators such as limited

information maximum likelihood in the presence of many weakly correlated instruments (Angrist et

al., 1999). The JIVE estimator has also been shown to perform well in Monte Carlo simulations (Poi,

2006). Column (1) in Table 6 presents the JIVE estimates for the impact of subsidy receipt. These

results are largely consistent with those of 2SLS, although in most cases the magnitude of the subsidy

estimates are slightly larger, suggesting that the 2SLS estimates may be biased toward OLS.

           Until this point, our IV estimates have been based on mothers’ travel distance to the nearest

social service agency. As previously discussed, some mothers have multiple agencies from which to

choose in the county of residence. For these mothers, we have assumed that the relevant agency is

the one closest to the residential location. We believe this is a plausible assumption. However, to

make more explicit use of the presence of multiple administrative offices, we estimate the IV models

using the sum of the inverse distances as an alternative instrument.26 An advantage of this measure is

that it gives more weight to distances closer to mothers’ residential location. As shown in column

(2), results using this measure are not substantially different from the main findings.

           To the extent that our instrumental variables are orthogonal to child well-being, our

estimation strategy should produce consistent estimates of the impact of subsidy receipt. We guard

against the possibility that the distance instrument is correlated with unobserved child and maternal

characteristics by including in the model a detailed set of family, neighborhood, and school controls.

To further strengthen our confidence, we incorporate additional controls for parental participation in


26
   In results not reported, we add to the model a dummy variable that equals unity if a given family has access to multiple social service agencies
in the county of residence. Our results are unchanged by the inclusion of this variable.

                                                                       33
several cash assistance programs (TANF and food stamps) in column (3) of Table 6. In addition to

controlling for unobserved work and welfare preferences that may influence child well-being,

inclusion of these variables should account for the possibility that parents need to travel to the same

social service agencies to apply for cash assistance. If welfare or food stamp participation is

correlated with both the distance measure and various dimensions of child well-being, then failure to

include these in the production function would invalidate our distance instrument. Fortunately, our

main results do not change when TANF and food stamp participation are included in the model.

        Next, we explore the impact of omitting Head Start children from the analysis. Note that

about 10 percent of children in our analysis sample are enrolled in Head Start. A very small number

of these children (11) report receiving subsidies for their Head Start services. Such a small number is

auspicious given that Head Start is a fully subsidized program for which CCDF child care subsidies

are not necessary to help defray program costs. Therefore, we believe these children have been

erroneously coded as receiving a subsidy. Our main results are robust to the exclusion of these 11

children from the analysis. In addition, we test the sensitivity of our results to the exclusion of all

Head Start children from the analysis sample. This exercise is important because, while the presence

of Head Start might be relevant to the decision to apply for child care assistance, it is considerably

less important to mothers’ work and child care decisions after obtaining a subsidy. As shown in

column (4) of Table 6, our results remain very similar when we exclude Head Start children

altogether.

        We also estimate models in which children living in non-urban areas are excluded from the

analysis.     We do so because families living in urban neighborhoods are presumably more

homogeneous with respect to family and neighborhood attributes that influence both the travel

distance to social service agencies and measures of child well-being. In particular, it is plausible that

urban families face relatively similar psychic and monetary costs associated with accessing major

roadways and public transportation. Therefore, an urban sample is less likely to suffer from
                                                   34
endogenous location choices and unobserved neighborhood characteristics that affect child well-

being. Our empirical estimates are once again robust to this change in sample definition, as shown in

column (5) of Table 6.

        Until this point, all 2SLS models have included a control for the (log of) total family income.

Unfortunately, the ECLS-K does not allow researchers to identify the individual sources of parental

income, including labor market earnings and various sources of non-wage income. Ideally, we

would prefer to omit sources of income that change as a result of utilizing a child care subsidy. For

example, the employment effects of subsidy receipt may cause earnings to increase while reducing

the amount of income drawn from traditional cash assistance programs. To the extent that subsidized

families experience an increase in disposable income, these additional resources can be spent on

goods and services that might positively impact child well-being. This is one of the anticipated

channels through which subsidy receipt can influence child outcomes. However, the permanent

component of family income is likely to be correlated with subsidy receipt and child well-being.

Failure to account for such resources may therefore bias the IV estimates. To assess whether our

results are robust to the exclusion of total family income, we estimate the 2SLS models without this

control. As reported in column (6), exclusion of income as a right-hand-side variable does not

significantly alter our results

Longer-Term Effects of Child Care Subsidy Receipt

        The results discussed so far indicate that child care subsidies lower cognitive ability test

scores and increase teacher-reported behavior problems in the year following their utilization. An

important question is whether these negative effects persist throughout the school-age years. To

address this question, we estimate the 2SLS models using the available outcomes measured in the

spring of kindergarten and the spring of first, third, and fifth grade. Note that the assessments of

psychomotor skills are not administered beyond the fall of kindergarten, but all other outcomes

measures are available through the fifth grade survey wave.
                                                  35
        As shown in Table 7, the impact of child care subsidy receipt persists throughout

kindergarten. As of the end of kindergarten, subsidized children continue to experience lower

reading and math test scores and increased behavior problems. The effects remain sizeable and

statistically significant at conventional levels. However, one year later—at the end of first grade—

these negative effects largely disappear. The remaining negative and statistically significant effects

are found for the measures of self-control and interpersonal skills. The impact of subsidy receipt

continues to attenuate in both magnitude and statistical significance throughout the third and fifth

grade. In fact, by the end of fifth grade, the effect sizes are substantially smaller than was the case in

the fall of kindergarten, and none of the subsidy coefficients are precisely estimated.

        The evidence presented in Table 7 partially alleviates the concerns raised by the large,

negative short-run effects of subsidy receipt. It is beyond the scope of this paper to provide a full

assessment of the explanations underlying the attenuation of subsidy effects over time. Nevertheless,

we offer several observations about these results. First, it is possible that subsidy receipt during the

preschool years has a so-called ―sleeper‖ effect on children’s long-term development. In other

words, the attenuation of subsidy effects throughout the first few years of children’s schooling may

not be representative of its full effects later in life. Future research should therefore consider the

possibility that the negative effects of early subsidy receipt might reemerge in other ways as children

age. Second, our finding of a declining impact of subsidy receipt is mirrored by studies evaluating

other early childhood interventions. For example, recent work finds that the early effects of pre-

kindergarten programs (Barnett, 1995; Magnuson et al., 2007b) and Head Start (Barnett & Camilli,

2002; Currie & Thomas, 1995) tend to fade out within a few years. However, whereas children in

these programs experience declining benefits over time, the subsidized children in our study

experience declining negative effects. To explain the lack of persistence in program effects, most

researchers distinguish between ―fade out‖ and ―catch up,‖ with the former indicating that the school

performance of children who attended early interventions decreases to the level of their peers, and
                                                   36
the latter implying that the school performance of non-participants improves relative to program

participants.        That subsidized children finish first grade at parity with their unsubsidized

counterparts—after falling behind throughout kindergarten—strongly suggests that these children

―catch up‖ to their peers. 27 A final and related point is that early school experiences likely play a

critical role in the extent to which subsidized children are able to catch up. Previous work finds that

classroom characteristics matter greatly for whether the positive effects of pre-kindergarten persist

over time (e.g., Magnuson et al., 2007b). Thus, it seems plausible that subsidized children placed in

high-quality classrooms might be able to fully erase the subsidy-induced academic and behavioral

deficits that emerge throughout kindergarten. Such issues are fruitful avenues for future research.

VI. Conclusion

          Parental decisions regarding employment and child care can have important implications for

children’s well-being. Given that child care subsidies are found to affect both decisions, they also

have the ability to shape the developmental trajectory of young children. Yet despite the potentially

important ways in which subsidies can influence child well-being, much of the child care literature

continues to focus on maternal outcomes. In contrast, there is a substantial literature evaluating the

impact of Head Start and other early education programs on children’s cognitive and behavioral

outcomes. Results from this body of work, however, cannot provide a useful guidepost for child care

subsidies. Programs such as pre-kindergarten and Head Start focus explicitly on school readiness,

whereas the key feature of CCDF child care subsidies is the rapid facilitation of disadvantaged

mothers to move from welfare to work. Consequently, there are reasons to be concerned about the

consequences of child care subsidies for low-income children’s short- and long-term well-being.

          Using rich longitudinal data from the ECLS-K, this paper provides a comprehensive

examination of the impact of subsidy receipt on child development. To identify the effect of child
27
   It is also possible that the employment effects of child care subsidies may not result in an immediate increase in maternal financial and
psychological well-being, as the ―work-first‖ philosophy of the subsidy system may push vulnerable women into initially low paying jobs with
undesirable work conditions. However, if parental work experience and training increase over time, material well-being could improve. This
scenario is consistent with subsidies causing short-run negative effects on child development that attenuate over time.

                                                                    37
care subsidies, we use a novel instrumental variable based on the distance between mothers’

residential location and the nearest social service agency that administers the subsidy application

process. Our empirical results suggest that subsidy receipt in the year prior to kindergarten entry

substantially reduces reading and math test scores and increases a variety of behavior problems at the

start of kindergarten. Our estimates indicate that subsidized children score approximately 0.4 to 0.5

standard deviations lower on reading and math tests, and 0.3 to 0.7 standard deviations higher on

measures of internalizing and externalizing behavior problems. The sub-group analyses indicate that

the deleterious effects of subsidies tend to be larger for boys and children living in high SES families.

Although the negative effects of subsidy receipt persist throughout kindergarten, our results show

that they largely disappear by the end of first grade.

        These results have potentially important implications for child care subsidy policy in the U.S.

In particular, the current policy regime intensifies the tension between the twin goals of child care:

enabling parents to work and promoting child development. Consistent with the primary goal of

welfare reform, the CCDF focuses almost exclusively on facilitating parental employment, while

placing few restrictions on child care quality and deemphasizing low-income children’s health and

well-being. Indeed, eligibility for CCDF subsidies is conditioned on participation in a work-related

activity, and as discussed in Section II, there is an array of design features embedded in the CCDF

that may discourage parents from purchasing and providers from offering high-quality care. Such

design features stand in stark contrast with states’ pre-kindergarten programs and ―two generation‖

service-based programs such as Head Start. These services are child-development-related and hence

generally do not mandate parental employment.

        There are a few reasons why the government may wish to establish employment-related child

care subsidies. This type of intervention in the child care market is often justified on the grounds that

subsidies increase long-term economic self-sufficiency by generating human capital. Evidence from

subsidy take-up data suggests that human capital development is occurring through two channels:
                                                   38
fully 80 percent of recipients use child care subsidies for direct work experience, while 12 percent are

engaged in education and job training programs.        These activities, in turn, might lead to future

earnings and tax revenue that exceed the short-run cost of providing child care assistance, thus

increasing government’s net savings in the long-run (Robins, 1991).

        However, child care subsidies are at best an indirect approach to inculcating a work ethic and

increasing human capital among low-skilled families. If low-wages create work disincentives as well

as discourage individuals from developing relevant skills, labor market policies such as the EITC and

minimum wage are more direct interventions. At their worst, employment-related subsidies attempt

to remedy a distortion in the labor market, but instead create distortions in the child care market that

did not initially exist. For example, these subsidies encourage a shift in child care demand from

unpaid to paid services. In addition, CCDF child care policy, in particular, may exacerbate quality

constraints in the larger child care market by increasing parental choice and discouraging child care

providers from making costly quality enhancements.

        Consistent with the concerns raised by Blau (2001), our empirical results suggest that

employment-related child care subsidies have an important unintended consequence: in the short-run,

at least, subsidy receipt adversely affects the well-being of low-income children.   By design, CCDF

child care subsidies influence child well-being through their positive employment effects or by

encouraging parents to purchase low-quality child care. Indeed, the empirical evidence we cite in

Section I suggests that early maternal work has deleterious effects on children’s cognitive and

behavioral development. Since high-quality early care and education programs have been shown to

be particularly beneficial for economically disadvantaged children, it is not surprising that policies

which promote work and increase parental flexibility in choosing child care could adversely affect

child development..




                                                  39
References

Adams, D., Roach, M., Riley, D., & Edie, D. (2001). Are program characteristics linked to child care
      quality? Wisconsin Child Care Research Partnership. Issue brief 3. Madison, WI, University
      of Wisconsin-Extension.

Adams, G., & Rohacek, M. (2002). More than a work support? Issues around integrating child
      development goals into the child care subsidy system. Early Childhood Research Quarterly,
      17, 418-440.

Adams, G., Snyder, K., & Sandfort, J. (2002). Navigating the child care subsidy system: Policies and
      practices that affect access and retention. In New Federalism: Issues and Options for States.
      Series A, No. A-50: Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.

Adams, G., Tout, K., & Zaslow, M. (2007). Early care and education for children in low-income
      families: Patterns of use, quality, and potential policy implications. Working Paper No. 4.,
      The Urban Institute: Roundtable on Children in Low-income Families.

Allard, S. (2009). Out of Reach: Place, Poverty, and the New American Welfare State. New Haven,
        CT, Yale university Press.

Allard, S., Tolman, R., & Rosen, D. (2003). Proximity to service providers and service utilization
        among welfare recipients: The interaction of place and race. Journal of Policy Analysis and
        Management, 22, 599-613.

Anderson, P. M., Butcher, K. F., & Levine, P. B. (2003). Maternal employment and overweight
      children. Journal of Health Economics, 22, 477-504.

Angrist, J. D., Imbens, G. W., & Krueger, A. B. (1999). Jackknife instrumental variables estimation.
        Journal of Applied Econometrics, 14, 57-67.

Baker, M., Gruber, J., & Milligan, K. (2008). Universal child care, maternal labor supply, and family
       well-being. Journal of Political Economy, 116, 709-745.

Bania, N., Coulton, C., & Leete, L. (2000). Welfare reform and access to job opportunities in the
       Cleveland metropolitan area. Working Paper No. 00-02, Case Western Reserve University,
       Center on Urban Poverty and Social Change.

Barnett, W. (1995). Long-term effects of early childhood programs on cognitive and school
        outcomes. The Future of Children, 5, 25-50.

Barnett, W., & Camilli, G. (2002). Compensatory preschool education, cognitive development, and
        race. In W. S. Barnett & S. S. Bobcock (Eds.), Early Care and Education for children in
        poverty: Promises, programs and long-term results. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

Baum, C. L., II. (2002). A dynamic analysis of the effect of child care costs on the work decisions of
      low-income mothers with infants. Demography, 39, 139-164.



                                                  40
Berger, M. C., & Black, D. A. (1992). Child care subsidies, quality of care, and the labor supply of
        low-income, single mothers. Review of Economics and Statistics, 74, 635-642.

Berlinski, S., Galiani, S., & Gertler, P. (2009). The effect of pre-primary education on primary school
       performance. Journal of Public Economics, 93, 219–234.

Berlinski, S., Galiani, S., & Manacorda, M. (2008). Giving children a better start: Preschool
       attendance and school-age profiles. Journal of Public Economics, 92, 1416–1440.

Bernal, R. (2008). The effect of maternal employment and child care on children’s cognitive
        development. International Economic Review, 49, 1173-1209.

Bernal, R. & Keane, M. (2010). Child care choices and children’s cognitive achievement: The case
        of single mothers, Universidad de los Andes Working Paper WP-July 31.

Bernal, R., & Keane, M. P. (2010). Quasi-structural estimation of a model of childcare choices and
        child cognitive ability production. Journal of Econometrics, 156, 164-189.

Berube, A., & Raphael, S. (2005). Access to cars in New Orleans. Washington DC, The Brookings
       Institution, Metropolitan Policy Program.

Blau, D. (2001). The child care problem: An economic analysis. New York NY, Russell Sage
       Foundation.

Blau, D., & Currie, J. (2006). Preschool, Day Care, and After School Care? Who's Minding the Kids.
       In E. Hanushek & F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook on the Economics of Education (Vol. 2, pp.
       1164-1278): North Holland Press.

Blau, D., & Tekin, E. (2007). The determinants and consequences of child care subsidies for single
       mothers in the USA. Journal of Population Economics, 20, 719−741.

Blau, D. (1999). The effect of income on child development. Review of Economics and Statistics,
       81, 261-276.

Blau, D. (2003). Child Care Subsidies as Social Policy. CESifo DICE Report, 1(4), 03-07.

Blau, F. & Grossberg, A. (1992). Maternal labor supply and children’s cognitive development.
        Review of Economics and Statistics, 74, 474-481.

Bound, J., Jaeger, D., & Baker, R. (1995). Problems with instrumental variables estimation when
       the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous explanatory variable is weak.
       Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90, 443-450.

Brooks-Gunn, J., Han, W.-J., & Waldfogel, J. (2002). Maternal Employment and Child Cognitive
       Outcomes in the First Three Years of Life: The NICHD Study of Early Child Care. Child
       Development, 73, 1052-1072.




                                                  41
Card, D. (1995). Using geographic variation in college proximity to estimate the returns to schooling.
       Working Paper No. 4483. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Child Care Bureau. (2007). FFY 2007 CCDF Data Tables. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
       Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families, Child Care Bureau.
       Accessed from http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ccb/data/index.htm.

Cryer, D. & Burchinal, M. (1997). Parents as child care consumers. Early Childhood Research
       Quarterly, 12, 35-58.

Currie, J., & Thomas, D. (1995). Does Head Start make a difference? American Economic Review,
        85, 341-364.

Danziger, S. K., Ananat, E. O., & Browning, K. G. (2004). Childcare Subsidies and the Transition
       from Welfare to Work. Family Relations, 53, 219-228.

Desai, S., Chase-Lansdale, P., & Michael, R. (1989). Mother or market? Effects of maternal
        employment on four-year-olds’ intellectual abilities. Demography, 26, 545-561.

Edin, K., & Lein, L. (1997). Making Ends Meet. New York, NY Russell Sage Foundation.

Fitzpatrick, M. D. (2008). Starting school at four: The effect of universal pre-kindergarten on
        children’s academic achievement. B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 8, 1-38.

Garces, E., Thomas, D., & Currie, J. (2002). Longer-term effects of Head Start. American Economic
       Review, 92, 999-1012.

Gormley, W., & Gayer, T. (2005). Promoting school readiness in Oklahoma: An evaluation of
      Tulsa’s pre-k program. Journal of Human Resources, 40, 533-558.

Greenberg, M., Lombardi, J., & Schumacher, R. (2000). The child care and development block
      grant: An overview. Washington, D.C.: The Center for Law and Social Policy.

Gupta, N. D., & Simonsen, M. (2010). Non-cognitive child outcomes and universal high quality child
       care. Journal of Public Economics, 94, 30-43.

Ha, Y. (2009). stability of child-care subsidy use and earnings of low-income families. Social Service
        Review, 83, 495-523.

Ha, Y. & Meyer, D. R. (2009). Child care subsidy patterns: Are exits related to economic setbacks or
       economic successes? Unpublished manuscript.

Gupta, N. D., & Simonsen, M. (2010). Non-cognitive child outcomes and universal high quality child
       care. Journal of Public Economics, 94, 30-43.

Havnes, T. & Mogstad, M. (2010). No child left behind: universal child care and children’s long-run
       outcomes. Discussion Paper No. 582. Statistics Norway, Research Department.



                                                 42
Henly, J., & Lyons, S. (2000). The negotiation of child care and employment demands among low-
        income parents. Journal of Social Issues, 56, 683-706.


Herbst, C. (2008a). Do social policy reforms have different impacts on employment and welfare use
        as economic conditions change? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27, 867-889.

Herbst, C. (2008b). Who are the eligible non-recipients of child care subsidies? Children and Youth
        Services Review, 30, 1037-1054.

Herbst, C. (2010). The labor supply effects of child care costs and wages in the presence of subsidies
        and the earned income tax credit. Review of Economics of the Household, 8, 199-230.

Herbst, C., & Tekin, E. (2010a). Child care subsidies and child development. Economics of
        Education Review, 29, 618-638.

Herbst, C., & Tekin, E. (2010b). Child care subsidies and childhood obesity. Forthcoming Review of
        Economics of the Household.

Herbst , C. & Tekin, E. (2010c). Distance matters: Proximity to social service agencies and the
        utilization of child care subsidies. Unpublished manuscript. School of Public Affairs,
        Arizona State University.
        http://www.chrisherbst.net/PDFs/C._Herbst_Proximity_to_Social_Service_Agencies.pdf

Hill, J., Waldfogel, J., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2002). Differential effects of high quality child care.
          Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 21, 601–627.

Hill, M. S., & Duncan, G. J. (1987). Parental family income and the socioeconomic attainment of
        children. Social Science Research, 16, 39-73.

Huston, A. C., ZChang, Y. E., & Gennetian, L. (2002). Family and individual predictors of child care
       use by low-income families in different policy contexts. Early Childhood Research
       Quarterly, 17, 441-469.

Imbens, G. W., & Angrist, J. D. (1994). Identification and estimation of local average treatment
       effects. Econometrica, 62, 467-475.

James-Burdumy, S. (2005). The effect of maternal labor force participation on child development.
       Journal of Labor Economics, 23, 177-211.

Jones-Branch, J., Torquati, J., Raikes, H., & Edwards, C. (2004). Child care subsidy and quality.
       Early Education and Development, 15, 329-341.

Karoly, L. A., Kilburn, M. R., & Cannon, J. S. (2005). Early Childhood Interventions: Proven
       Results, Future Promise. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Korenman, S., Miller, J. E., & Sjaastad, J. E. (1995). Long-term poverty and child development in
      the United States: Results from the NLSY. Children and Youth Services Review, 17, 127-155.


                                                   43
Liu, H., Mroz, T. A., & van der Klaauw, W. (2010). Maternal employment, migration, and child
        development. Journal of Econometrics, 156, 212-228.

Loeb, S., Fuller, B., Kagan, S. & Carrol, B. (2004). Child care in poor communities: Early learning
       effects of type, quality and stability. Child Development, 75, 47–65.

Loprest, P. (1999). Families who left welfare: Who are they and how are they doing? Discussion
       Paper 99-02., Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.

Ludwig, J. & Miller, D. (2007). Does Head Start improve children’s life chances? Evidence from a
      regression discontinuity design. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 159-208.

Magnuson, K., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2007a). Does prekindergarten improve school preparation
      and performance? Economics of Education Review, 26, 33-51.

Magnuson, K., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2007b). The persistence of preschool effects: Do
      subsequent classroom experiences matter? Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 22, 18-38.

McClellan, M., McNeil, B., & Newhouse, J. (1994). Does more intensive treatment of acute
      myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality? Analysis using instrumental variables.
      Journal of the American Medical Association, 272, 859-866.

Meyers, M., Heintze, T., & Wolf, D. (2002). Child care subsidies and the employment of welfare
       recipients. Demography, 39, 165-180.

Michelson, W. (1985). From Sun to Sun. Toronto, Rowman and Allanheld.

Mocan, N. (2007). Can consumers detect lemons? An empirical analysis of information asymmetry
      in the market for child care. Journal of Population Economics, 20, 743-780.

Morrill, M. (2009). The effects of maternal employment on the health of school-age children.
        Working Paper: Department of Economics, North Carolina State University.

National Institute for Early Education Research (NIEER). (2005). The State of Preschool: 2005 State
       Preschool Yearbook. New Brunswick, NJ, Rutgers University.

National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). (2003a). Does quality of
       childcare affect child outcomes at age 4 ½? Developmental Psychology, 39, 451-469.

National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). (2003b). Does amount of time
       spent in childcare predict socioemotional adjustment during the transition to kindergarten? .
       Child Development, 74, 976-1005.

National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), & Duncan, G. (2003).
       Modeling the impacts of child care quality on children’s preschool cognitive development.
       Child Development, 74, 1454-1475.

Neidell, M., & Waldfogel, J. (2009). Program participation of immigrant children: Evidence from the
        local availability of Head Start. Economics of Education Review, 28, 704-715.
                                                44
Nemet, G. F., & Bailey, A. J. (2000). Distance and health care utilization among the rural elderly.
       Social Science and Medicine, 50, 1197-1208.

Okuyama, K., & Weber, R. (2001). Parents receiving child care subsidies: Where do they work?
      Albany, Or, Linn-Benton Community College, Oregon Child Care Research Partnership.

Ong, P. (2002). Car ownership and welfare-to-work. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
       21, 239-252.

Pearlmutter, S. (2003). Participants' perceptions of the childcare subsidy system. Journal of
       Sociology and Social Welfare, 30, 157.

Pungello, E. P. (1999). Why and how working women choose child care: A review with a focus on
       infancy. Developmental Review, 19, 31.

Queralt, M., Witte, A. D., & Griesinger, H. (2000). Changing policies, changing impacts:
        Employment and earnings of child‐care subsidy recipients in the era of welfare reform. Social
        Service Review, 74, 588-619.

Raikes, H. A., Raikes, H. H., & Wilcox, B. (2005). Regulation, subsidy receipt and provider
        characteristics: What predicts quality in child care homes? Early Childhood Research
        Quarterly, 20, 164-184.

Ramey, C. T., Campbell, F. A., Burchinal, M., Skinner, M. L., Gardner, D. M., & Ramey, S. L.
      (2000). Persistent effects of early childhood education on high-risk children and their
      mothers. Applied Developmental Science, 4, 2-14.

Rhode, P., & Strumpf. (2003). Assessing the importance of tiebout sorting: Local heterogeneity from
       1850 to 1990. American Economic Review, 93, 1648-1677.

Richards, M. H., & Duckett, E. (1994). The Relationship of Maternal Employment to Early
       Adolescent Experience With and Without Parents. Child Development, 65, 225-236.

Robins, P. K. (1990). Federal financing of child care: Alternative approaches and economic
       implications. Population Research and Policy Review, 9, 65-90.

Ruhm, C. (2004). Parental employment and child cognitive development. Journal of Human
      Resources, 39, 155-192.

Ruhm, C (2008). Maternal employment and adolescent development. Labour Economics, 15, 958-
      983.

Schulman, K. & Blank, H. (2007). State child care assistance policies 2007: Some steps forward,
      more progress needed. Issue Brief. Washington, DC: National Women’s Law Center.

Shonkoff, J., & Phillips, D. (2000). From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of Early
      Childhood Development. Washington, DC, National Academy Press.


                                                  45
Tekin, E. (2005). Child care subsidy receipt, employment, and child care choices of single mothers.
       Economics Letters, 89, 1-6.

Tekin, E. (2007). Childcare subsidies, wages, and employment of single mothers. Journal of Human
       Resources, 42, 453-487.

Thornburg, K., Scott, J., & Mayfield, W. (2002). Early childhood program in Missouri: Workforce,
      quality, and policy-related findings. Report to the Midwest Child Care Research Consortium.
      Columbia, MO: Center for Family and Policy Research.

Tran, H., & Weinraub, M. (2006). Child care effects in context: Quality, stability, and multiplicity in
       nonmaternal child care arrangements during the first 15 months of life. Developmental
       Psychology, 42, 566-558.

US Department of Education. (1995). Characteristics of children’s early care and education
      programs: Data from the 1995 National Household Education Survey (NHES). Washington,
      DC, National Center for Education Statistics: U.S. Department of Education.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Administration for Children and Families. (1999).
       Access to Child Care for Low-Income Working Families. In. Washington, DC.:
       www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ccb/research/ccreport/ccreport.

Walker, J. R. (1991). Public policy and the supply of child care services. In D. Blau (Ed.), The
       Economics of Child Care: Russell Sage Foundation.

Whitebook, M., Phillips, D., Bellm, D., Crowell, N., Almaraz, M., & Jo, J. (2004). Two years in
      early care and education: A community portrait of quality and workforce stability, Alameda
      County, California. Berkeley, CA: Center for the Study of Child Care Employment, Institute
      of Industrial Relations, University of California, Berkeley.

Witt, R., Queralt, M., & Witte, A. (2000). Changes in the availability, quality, and price of child
        care in Massachusetts between 1997 and 1999. Working Paper 2000-12. Wellesley, MA:
        Department of Economics, Wellesley College.




                                                  46
                                           Table 1: Select Child and Family Characteristics by Distance Quartile
                                                                                Distance Quartile                                           F-test of Equivalence: p-value
                                                                                                                                              Adjusted for Neighborhood
                                                                                                                                            Income and Population Density
Variable                                                  Full Sample             1st             2nd            3rd            4th              No             Yes
Distance to Social Service Agency (miles)                     6.87               1.56            3.75           7.24           19.92

Child Characteristics
  Boy (%)                                                     0.499             0.502           0.511           0.502          0.474             0.471                 0.788
  White (%)                                                   0.380             0.283           0.348           0.452          0.511             0.000                 0.684
  Premature Birth (%)                                         0.184             0.189           0.188           0.176          0.177             0.835                 0.965
  Low Birth Weight (%)                                        0.077             0.080           0.077           0.079          0.066             0.700                 0.636
  Fair/Poor Health (%, fall of k)                             0.046             0.056           0.046           0.032          0.045             0.082                 0.542
  First-Time Kindergartner (%)                                0.944             0.949           0.936           0.951          0.939             0.348                 0.313

Family Characteristics
  Mother: Age (years, fall of k)                              30.45             29.93           30.56           30.71          30.87             0.005                 0.217
  Mother: Less than High School (%)                           0.208             0.261           0.196           0.185          0.161             0.000                 0.307
  Mother: WIC participation Rate (%)                          0.741             0.808           0.723           0.696          0.700             0.000                 0.234
  In the Bottom SES Quintile (%)                              0.334             0.403           0.318           0.285          0.296             0.000                 0.375
  Two or More Other Children (%)                              0.351             0.362           0.345           0.335          0.362             0.527                 0.594
  ln(family income) ($, fall of k)                            9.664             9.471           9.701           9.849          9.735             0.000                 0.175
Notes: Analyses are conducted on children and mothers with non-missing data. Means are derived from an OLS regression of each child/family characteristic on four distance
quartile dummy variables (with the constant omitted). The p-values are based on F-tests of the null hypothesis of the equality of means across the distance quartiles. P-values in
the second column are derived from OLS regressions that add controls for log of household income and log of population density (measured at the census tract-level).




                                                                                        47
          Table 2: Child Outcomes by Subsidy Participation Status, Fall of Kindergarten
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)
                            Observations      Full        Subsidy           Non-      Ho:(3)–(4)=0
Outcome                                     Sample       Recipient       Recipient      p-value
Reading Test Score             3,528         47.43         46.27           47.61         0.003
                                             (9.06)        (8.71)          (9.10)

Math Test Score                              3,719   47.38     46.63      47.50          0.055
                                                     (9.21)    (8.52)     (9.30)

Externalizing Behavior                       3,738    1.79       3.79       1.48         0.000
                                                     (10.81)   (11.84)    (10.62)

Internalizing Behavior                       3,675     1.24      1.26       1.24         0.968
                                                     (10.77)   (11.24)    (10.70)

Approaches to Learning                       3,785    -2.12     -3.05      -1.98         0.027
                                                     (10.14)   (10.15)    (10.13)

Self-Control                                 3,647    -2.00     -3.70      -1.74         0.000
                                                     (10.22)   (10.51)    (10.16)

Interpersonal Skills                         3,596    -1.79     -3.29      -1.56         0.001
                                                     (10.12)   (10.38)    (10.06)

Fine Motor Skills                            3,705    -2.22     -1.98      -2.26         0.585
                                                     (10.36)   (10.04)    (10.40)

Gross Motor Skills                           3,683     0.05     -0.74       0.17         0.068
                                                     (10.13)   (10.04)    (10.14)
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                      48
 Table 3: Ordinary Least Squares Estimates of the Relationship between Child Care Subsidy Receipt
                           and Child Well-Being, Fall of Kindergarten
                               (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)
                           Baseline         + Child        + Family       + Local        + State
Outcome                                    Controls        Controls      Controls          FE
Reading Test Score          -1.340***       -1.084**        -0.670        -0.582        -0.376
                            (0.484)         (0.484)         (0.466)        (0.465)       (0.449)

Math Test Score                         -0.861*                -0.669                -0.427               -0.402               -0.210
                                        (0.470)                (0.444)               (0.415)              (0.418)              (0.411)

Externalizing Behavior                   2.310***               2.199***              2.274***             2.264***             2.400***
                                        (0.637)                (0.614)               (0.621)              (0.624)              (0.625)

Internalizing Behavior                   0.020                  0.159                 0.179                0.091                0.169
                                        (0.604)                (0.596)               (0.597)              (0.581)              (0.596)

Approaches to Learning                  -1.076*                -0.897*               -0.899*              -0.964*              -0.971*
                                        (0.582)                (0.537)               (0.535)              (0.552)              (0.552)

Self-Control                            -1.956***              -1.748***            -1.834***             -1.920***            -2.105***
                                        (0.547)                (0.511)              (0.506)               (0.508)              (0.526)

Interpersonal Skills                    -1.728***              -1.534***            -1.544***             -1.576***            -1.674***
                                        (0.557)                (0.524)              (0.530)               (0.521)              (0.513)

Fine Motor Skills                        0.275                  0.536                 0.667                0.813                0.877*
                                        (0.530)                (0.535)               (0.549)              (0.542)              (0.529)

Gross Motor Skills                      -0.905                 -1.093*              -1.140**              -1.079*              -0.929*
                                        (0.557)                (0.561)              (0.563)               (0.552)              (0.535)
Notes: Each cell presents the coefficient on child care subsidy receipt in the year before kindergarten entry and the standard error (in
parentheses) that is adjusted for clustering at the county-level. Column (2) adds controls for child’s gender, child’s age, child’s age
squared, race/ethnicity, child’s weight in the fall of kindergarten, premature birth, low birth weight, fair/poor health status, and first-
time kindergartner. Column (3) adds controls mother’s age, mother’s educational attainment, number of other children in the family,
English as the primary home language, log of family income, and urban residence. Column (3) adds controls for log of median
household income, log of population density, percent non-Hispanic white, percent foreign born, percent ages 65 and over, percent
female, percent of children ages 0-2, 3-5, 6-11, 12-13, 14, and 15-17 living in female-headed households (all at the census tract-level),
percent of children in the school eligible for free/reduced price lunch, an indicator for whether a majority of children in the school are
minorities, and an indicator for whether the school receives Title I funding. Column (5) adds state fixed effects. *, **, *** indicate
that the subsidy coefficient is statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                                    49
Table 4: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Impact of Child Care Subsidy Receipt
                      on Child Well-Being, Fall of Kindergarten
                                              (1)           (2)             (3)
                                          Outcome Participation            IV:
 Outcome                                    Mean           Rate           2SLS
 Reading Test Score                         47.43         0.134          -4.891**
                                                                         (2.045)

 Math Test Score                                              47.38               0.131                -3.713**
                                                                                                       (1.675)

 Externalizing Behavior                                        1.79               0.132                  7.172***
                                                                                                        (2.123)

 Internalizing Behavior                                        1.24               0.130                  2.926*
                                                                                                        (1.722)

 Approaches to Learning                                        -2.12              0.132                -5.084**
                                                                                                       (2.167)

 Self-Control                                                  -2.00              0.131                -5.839**
                                                                                                       (2.326)

 Interpersonal Skills                                          -1.79              0.132                -4.468*
                                                                                                       (2.390)

 Fine Motor Skills                                             -2.22              0.131                 -0.446
                                                                                                        (1.583)

 Gross Motor Skills                                            0.05               0.130                 -2.790
                                                                                                        (1.768)
 Notes: Each cell in columns (3) presents the coefficient on child care subsidy receipt in the year before
 kindergarten entry and the standard error (in parentheses). Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the
 county-level. The model includes controls for child’s gender, child’s age, child’s age squared, race/ethnicity,
 child’s weight in the fall of kindergarten, premature birth, low birth weight, fair/poor health status, first-time
 kindergartner, mother’s age, mother’s educational attainment, number of other children in the family, English
 as the primary home language, log of family income, urban residence, log of median household income, log of
 population density, percent non-Hispanic white, percent foreign born, percent ages 65 and over, percent female,
 percent of children ages 0-2, 3-5, 6-11, 12-13, 14, and 15-17 living in female-headed households (all at the
 census tract-level), percent of children in the school eligible for free/reduced price lunch, an indicator for
 whether a majority of children in the school are minorities, an indicator for whether the school receives Title I
 funding, and state fixed effects. *, **, *** indicate that the subsidy coefficient is statistically significant at the
 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                          50
Table 5: Heterogeneous Effects of Child Care Subsidy Receipt, By Child and Maternal Characteristic
                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)
                                            Boys                 Girls               Low-                 High-               Low                  High
   Outcome                                                                          Skilled              Skilled              SES                  SES
   Reading Test Score                      -1.816              -2.714*              -3.422*              -3.211**             0.548               -5.586***
                                           (1.927)             (1.594)              (1.847)              (1.472)             (1.881)              (1.712)

   Math Test Score                         -3.838**             -1.475              -4.181**             -1.811              -1.086               -2.057
                                           (1.730)              (1.316)             (1.867)              (1.493)             (1.947)              (1.675)

   Externalizing Behavior                   5.307*               3.498**              0.668               8.184***            0.192              10.206***
                                           (2.772)              (1.759)              (2.051)             (1.982)             (2.281)             (2.182)

   Internalizing Behavior                   5.305**             -0.256               -0.399               0.638               -0.337               1.112
                                           (2.265)              (1.700)              (2.410)             (1.902)             (2.191)              (2.015)

   Approaches to Learning                  -5.404**             -1.331               -0.766              -4.756***            2.057               -7.025***
                                           (2.343)              (1.889)              (2.207)             (1.850)             (2.011)              (2.219)

   Self-Control                            -4.885**             -2.118               -0.349              -5.340**             2.166               -8.455***
                                           (2.302)              (2.082)              (1.826)             (2.119)             (2.192)              (2.342)

   Interpersonal Skills                    -3.696               -0.848                0.896              -4.783**             4.556**             -6.780***
                                           (2.311)              (2.147)              (2.301)             (2.009)             (2.095)              (2.319)

   Fine Motor Skills                       -0.644                2.388               -0.017              -0.600               1.548               -1.479
                                           (1.842)              (1.688)              (2.055)             (1.540)             (1.955)              (1.573)

   Gross Motor Skills                      -2.369               -2.282               -2.734              -0.462              -1.248               -0.470
                                           (2.471)              (1.862)              (2.260)             (2.015)             (2.493)              (1.853)
   Notes: Each cell presents the coefficient on child care subsidy receipt in the year before kindergarten entry and the standard error (in parentheses).
   Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the county-level. Low-skilled is defined as mothers with a high school degree and less, and high-skilled
   is defined as mothers with some college education and above. Low SES is defined as families in the bottom SES quintile, and high SES is defined as
   families in the top SES quintile. The model includes controls for child’s gender, child’s age, child’s age squared, race/ethnicity, child’s weight in the
   fall of kindergarten, premature birth, low birth weight, fair/poor health status, first-time kindergartner, mother’s age, mother’s educational attainment,
   number of other children in the family, English as the primary home language, log of family income, urban residence, log of median household
   income, log of population density, percent non-Hispanic white, percent foreign born, percent ages 65 and over, percent female, percent of children
   ages 0-2, 3-5, 6-11, 12-13, 14, and 15-17 living in female-headed households (all at the census tract-level), percent of children in the school eligible
   for free/reduced price lunch, an indicator for whether a majority of children in the school are minorities, an indicator for whether the school receives
   Title I funding, and state fixed effects. *, **, *** indicate that the subsidy coefficient is statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
   respectively.



                                                                               51
                                                            Table 6: Robustness Checks
                                            (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
                                            IV:                Inverse             + TANF and                Omit                 Urban             Omit Control
Outcome                                    JIVE                Distance            Food Stamp             Head Start             Children            for Family
                                                                                     Controls              Children                                    Income
Reading Test Score                        -5.168**              -4.308**              -4.078*               -4.493**               -4.558*            -5.034**
                                          (2.349)               (2.023)               (2.101)               (1.969)                (2.510)             (2.046)

Math Test Score                          -4.227                 -3.878**               -3.120*               -3.888**               -3.086               -3.937**
                                          (3.301)               (1.660)                (1.691)               (1.663)               (1.979)               (1.673)

Externalizing Behavior                     3.897*                7.887***               7.226***              6.906***              5.808**               7.221***
                                          (2.359)               (2.238)                (2.239)               (2.071)               (2.552)               (2.109)

Internalizing Behavior                     4.436*                3.120*                 3.043                 2.211                 3.847*                3.082*
                                          (2.413)               (1.735)                (1.903)               (1.694)               (2.277)               (1.708)

Approaches to Learning                    -5.374**             -4.165*                 -4.907**              -5.984***             -6.879***             -5.191**
                                          (2.192)              (2.343)                 (2.288)               (2.138)               (2.416)               (2.155)

Self-Control                              -5.061**              -5.439**               -5.890**              -6.835***             -5.142*               -5.966***
                                          (2.286)               (2.423)                (2.417)               (2.284)               (2.659)               (2.298)

Interpersonal Skills                      -4.923**             -4.750*                 -4.250*               -5.290**              -5.019*               -4.588*
                                          (2.209)              (2.492)                 (2.462)               (2.411)               (2.816)               (2.374)

Fine Motor Skills                         -2.962                 -0.229                -0.014               -0.844                  0.926                -0.633
                                          (4.172)               (1.483)                (1.629)              (1.629)                (1.892)               (1.572)

Gross Motor Skills                        -2.985                -2.145                 -2.451               -3.293*                 -2.089               -3.033*
                                          (4.073)               (1.767)                (1.857)              (1.725)                (2.159)               (1.756)
Notes: Each cell presents the coefficient on child care subsidy receipt in the year before kindergarten entry and the standard error (in parentheses) that is adjusted
for clustering at the county-level. JIVE is jackknife instrumental variables estimator. The model includes controls for child’s gender, child’s age, child’s age
squared, race/ethnicity, child’s weight in the fall of kindergarten, premature birth, low birth weight, fair/poor health status, first-time kindergartner, mother’s age,
mother’s educational attainment, number of other children in the family, English as the primary home language, log of family income, urban residence, log of
median household income, log of population density, percent non-Hispanic white, percent foreign born, percent ages 65 and over, percent female, percent of
children ages 0-2, 3-5, 6-11, 12-13, 14, and 15-17 living in female-headed households (all at the census tract-level), percent of children in the school eligible for
free/reduced price lunch, an indicator for whether a majority of children in the school are minorities, an indicator for whether the school receives Title I funding,
and state fixed effects. *, **, *** indicate that the subsidy coefficient is statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                                                  52
       Table 7: The Long-Term Impact of Child Care Subsidy Receipt
                                            (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                                          Spring                Spring 1st           Spring 3rd           Spring 5th
Outcome                                Kindergarten              Grade                Grade                 Grade
Reading Test Score                        -3.739**               -2.681                -0.757              -0.512
                                          (1.913)                (1.927)               (1.541              (1.871)

Math Test Score                             -3.356*               -0.239               -0.289               -3.573
                                            (1.730)               (1.850)              (1.765)              (2.266)

Externalizing Behavior                       8.612***              2.899                2.782               -2.056
                                            (2.522)               (2.305)              (2.060)              (2.165)

Internalizing Behavior                       2.662                 0.552                1.461              -0.445
                                            (2.152)               (2.113)              (1.995)             (2.214)

Approaches to Learning                      -6.530***             -3.451               -4.088**              1.037
                                            (2.237)               (2.169)              (2.022)              (2.016)

Self-Control                                -7.284***             -4.868**             -2.280              -0.118
                                            (2.072)               (2.345)              (2.137              (2.118)

Interpersonal Skills                        -4.283**              -4.706**             -2.585                1.507
                                            (2.151)               (2.347)              (2.135)              (2.134)
Notes: Each cell presents the coefficient on child care subsidy receipt in the year before kindergarten entry and the
standard error (in parentheses) that is adjusted for clustering at the county-level. The model includes controls for
child’s gender, child’s age, child’s age squared, race/ethnicity, child’s weight in the fall of kindergarten, premature
birth, low birth weight, fair/poor health status, first-time kindergartner, mother’s age, mother’s educational
attainment, number of other children in the family, English as the primary home language, log of family income,
urban residence, log of median household income, log of population density, percent non-Hispanic white, percent
foreign born, percent ages 65 and over, percent female, percent of children ages 0-2, 3-5, 6-11, 12-13, 14, and 15-17
living in female-headed households (all at the census tract-level), percent of children in the school eligible for
free/reduced price lunch, an indicator for whether a majority of children in the school are minorities, an indicator for
whether the school receives Title I funding, and state fixed effects. *, **, *** indicate that the subsidy coefficient is
statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                          53
                      Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics for the ECLS-K Sample
Variable                                    Full Sample       Subsidy Recipient  Non-Recipient
ln(distance to agency, miles)                              1.419                     1.296                     1.438
                                                          (0.998)                   (0.975)                   (1.000)
Boy (%)                                                    0.499                     0.506                     0.498
                                                          (0.500)                   (0.501)                   (0.500)
Child’s Age (months, fall of K)                           68.396                    68.268                    68.415
                                                          (4.488)                   (4.168)                   (4.535)
White (%)                                                  0.380                     0.325                     0.389
                                                          (0.486)                   (0.469)                   (0.488)
Black (%)                                                  0.345                     0.411                     0.335
                                                          (0.476)                   (0.493)                   (0.472)
Hispanic (%)                                               0.205                     0.174                     0.209
                                                          (0.404)                   (0.379)                   (0.407)
Asian (%)                                                  0.030                     0.018                     0.032
                                                          (0.170)                   (0.133)                   (0.175)
Other Race/Ethnicity (%)                                   0.040                     0.072                     0.035
                                                          (0.196)                   (0.259)                   (0.185)
Child’s Weight (pounds, fall of K)                        46.824                    47.295                    46.753
                                                          (9.402)                   (9.644)                   (9.364)
Premature Birth (%)                                        0.184                     0.171                     0.185
                                                          (0.387)                   (0.377)                   (0.389)
Low Birth Weight (%)                                       0.077                     0.057                     0.080
                                                          (0.266)                   (0.232)                   (0.271)
Child’s Health is Fair/Poor (%)                            0.046                     0.054                     0.045
                                                          (0.210)                   (0.226)                   (0.207)
First-Time Kindergartner (%)                               0.944                     0.946                     0.944
                                                          (0.230)                   (0.226)                   (0.231)
Mother’s Age (years, fall of k)                           30.448                    29.232                    30.631
                                                          (6.413)                   (5.772)                   (6.485)
Less than High School (%)                                  0.208                     0.161                     0.215
                                                          (0.406)                   (0.368)                   (0.411)
High School (%)                                            0.374                     0.385                     0.372
                                                          (0.484)                   (0.487)                   (0.483)
Some College (%)                                           0.326                     0.394                     0.316
                                                          (0.469)                   (0.489)                   (0.465)
B.A.+ (%)                                                  0.092                     0.060                     0.097
                                                          (0.289)                   (0.237)                   (0.296)
Only Child (%)                                             0.292                     0.235                     0.300
                                                          (0.455)                   (0.425)                   (0.458)
One Sibling (%)                                            0.357                     0.345                     0.359
                                                          (0.479)                   (0.476)                   (0.480)
Two or More Siblings (%)                                   0.351                     0.420                     0.341
                                                          (0.478)                   (0.494)                   (0.474)
English Primarily Spoken at Home (%)                       0.899                     0.932                     0.894
                                                          (0.301)                   (0.252)                   (0.308)
ln(total family income)                                    9.664                     9.528                     9.685
                                                          (1.535)                   (1.437)                   (1.549)
Urban Residence (%)                                        0.845                     0.815                     0.850
                                                          (0.362)                   (0.389)                   (0.358)
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. Analyses are conducted on children and mothers with non-missing data.




                                                             54
                 Appendix Table 2: Estimates of the Relationship between the Distance to
                          Social Service Agencies and Child Care Subsidy Receipt
                                                             (1)              (2)                                              (3)
Linear Specification
   ln(distance to agency)                                  -0.016***        -0.016***                                       -0.018***
                                                           (0.005)          (0.006)                                         (0.006)
Non-Linear Specification
   Distance to Social Service Agency                       -0.005***        -0.005***                                       -0.006***
                                                           (0.001)          (0.001)                                         (0.001)
   (Distance to Social Service Agency)2 (/100)                              0.008***                 0.008***                0.008***
                                                                           (0.003)                  (0.003)                 (0.003)
   (Distance to Social Service Agency)3 (/10000)                           -0.003**                 -0.002**                -0.003**
                                                                           (0.001)                  (0.001)                 (0.001)
Child Controls                                                               No                       Yes                     Yes
Family Controls                                                              No                       No                      Yes
Number of Observations                                                      3,848                    3,848                   3,848
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Distances are measured in miles. Column (2) adds controls for child’s gender, child’s
age, child’s age squared, race/ethnicity, child’s weight in the fall of kindergarten, premature birth, low birth weight, fair/poor health
status, and first-time kindergartner. Column (3) adds controls mother’s age, mother’s educational attainment, number of other children in
the family, English as the primary home language, log of family income, and urban residence. *, **, *** indicate that a given distance
coefficient is statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                                  55
   Appendix Table 3: Child Outcomes in the Fall of Kindergarten by Distance Quartile, Reduced Form Relationships
                                                      Distance Quartile                F-test of Equivalence: p-value
                                                                                           Adjusted for Child and
                                                                                           Family Characteristics
Variable                                     1st        2nd        3rd        4th           No              Yes
Reading Test Score                         46.13       47.54      48.30      48.36        0.000            0.010
Math Test Score                            45.98       47.57      48.75      47.95        0.000            0.015
Externalizing Behavior                     2.410       1.373      2.067      0.966        0.017            0.015
Internalizing Behavior                     1.612       0.716      1.217      1.327        0.290            0.392
Approaches to Learning                    -2.679      -1.708     -2.120     -1.707        0.085            0.652
Self-Control                              -2.746      -1.527     -1.932     -1.411        0.013            0.081
Interpersonal Skills                      -2.601      -0.956     -1.744     -1.565        0.003            0.030
Fine Motor Skills                         -2.939      -1.742     -2.055     -1.868        0.030            0.890
Gross Motor Skills                        -0.189       0.021      0.723     -0.266        0.178            0.143
Notes: Analyses are conducted on children and mothers with non-missing data. Means are derived from an OLS regression of each child outcomes on four
distance quartile dummy variables (with the constant omitted). The p-values are based on F-tests of the null hypothesis of the equality of means across the
distance quartiles. P-values in the second column are derived from OLS regressions that add controls for child’s gender, child’s age, child’s age squared,
race/ethnicity, child’s weight in the fall of kindergarten, premature birth, low birth weight, fair/poor health status, first-time kindergartner, mother’s age,
mother’s educational attainment, number of other children in the family, English as the primary home language, log of family income, and urban residence.




                                                                               56
Appendix Table 4: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Impact of Child Care Subsidy Receipt
                   on Subject-Area Proficiency Scores, Fall of Kindergarten
                                             (1)                     (2)             (3)
                                         Outcome                  Outcome            IV:
Outcome                                 Description                 Mean            2SLS
Reading
  Letter Recognition         Identify upper-/lower-case letters     0.574          -0.153**
                                                                                   (0.078)

    Beginning Sounds                      Associate letters with sounds at                      0.212                 -0.138**
                                          the beginning of words                                                      (0.070)

    Ending Sounds                         Associate letters with sounds at                      0.106                  -0.118**
                                          the end of words                                                             (0.048)

    Word Recognition                      Recognize by sight or read simple                     0.015                  -0.042***
                                          words                                                                        (0.015)

    Word Comprehension                    Understand words in context                           0.006                  -0.017**
                                                                                                                       (0.007)

Math
  Number and Shape                        Identify numbers; recognize                           0.887                  -0.041
                                          shapes; count up to 10 objects                                               (0.034)

    Relative Size                         Recognize sequences; count                            0.446                  -0.129**
                                          beyond 10                                                                    (0.063)

    Ordinality                            Read two-digit numbers; identify                      0.126                  -0.112**
                                          ordinal position of objects                                                  (0.045)

    Add/Subtract                          Solve simple addition and                             0.014                 -0.018*
                                          subtraction problems                                                        (0.011)

    Multiply/Divide                       Solve simple multiplication and                       0.001                  -0.002
                                          division problems                                                            (0.001)
Notes: Each cell in columns (3) presents the coefficient on child care subsidy receipt in the year before kindergarten entry and
the standard error (in parentheses). Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the county-level. The model includes controls
for child’s gender, child’s age, child’s age squared, race/ethnicity, child’s weight in the fall of kindergarten, premature birth, low
birth weight, fair/poor health status, first-time kindergartner, mother’s age, mother’s educational attainment, number of other
children in the family, English as the primary home language, log of family income, urban residence, log of median household
income, log of population density, percent non-Hispanic white, percent foreign born, percent ages 65 and over, percent female,
percent of children ages 0-2, 3-5, 6-11, 12-13, 14, and 15-17 living in female-headed households (all at the census tract-level),
percent of children in the school eligible for free/reduced price lunch, an indicator for whether a majority of children in the
school are minorities, an indicator for whether the school receives Title I funding, and state fixed effects. *, **, *** indicate that
the subsidy coefficient is statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                                 57
Appendix A: Construction of the Database on U.S. Social Service Agencies
         The process for creating the distance measure began by collecting data on the precise location
of every social service agency in the U.S. In most cases, address data were available on the website
of the state agency responsible for administering the child care subsidy system. For example, the
Department of Economic Security administers the subsidy program in Arizona, and the office
locations can be found here: https://www.azdes.gov/main.aspx?menu=128&id=2724. In Maryland,
the subsidy program is managed by the Office of Child Care in the Department of Education, and
information on agency locations can be found here: http://www.dhr.state.md.us/county.php. For
some states, we were not able to readily find the office locations on states’ websites, so we relied on
administrator contact lists provided by the National Child Care Information Center (NCCIC):
http://nccic.acf.hhs.gov/statedata/dirs/display.cfm?title=ccdf#az) and the Child Care and
Development Fund Report of State Plans (various years) for this information. We were careful to
ensure that each agency is involved in eligibility and benefit determination for child care subsidies.
         For each social service agency, we collected information on the state name, state FIPS code,
county name and county FIPS code in which each office is located; the address (including building or
suite number), city, and zip code; telephone and fax numbers; and the name of the agency that
administers the subsidy program. Most states organize social service provision at the county-level,
with one agency located in each county. However, in some urban counties and many cities, there are
multiple agencies located in the jurisdiction. For example, La Paz county, located in Western
Arizona, is a rural jurisdiction, and its residents have access to a single social service agency.
Maricopa county, in contrast, is an urban area (containing the city of Phoenix), and its residents have
access to eight offices. As for Maryland, every county contains one social service agency, except for
Baltimore City, which has nine offices. In a small number of cases, a locale does not include a social
service agency, so that its residents must travel to adjacent counties to apply for child care assistance.
For example, Pend Orielle county in Washington State does not have a social service agency.
Therefore, as stipulated by the Department of Social and Health Services, residents in this county
must travel to a branch office in Spokane county (located south of Pend Orielle) to apply for
assistance. Generally speaking, these agencies serve residents from multiple counties.
         Our database attempts to account for these complications. Agencies located in multiple-
agency-jurisdictions are each treated as separate entries in the database. Agencies that serve
residents from multiple jurisdictions (because their county-of-residence does not have one) are
repeated in the database, with each entry denoting the relevant county served by the office. In all, we
collected data on approximately 3,600 unique social service agencies.
         One concern is that our agency database captures the current address of each agency, while
our child care subsidy data come from surveys the conducted in the late-1990s and early-2000s. To
the extent that some of these agencies moved to their current address after these years, our distance
measure contains measurement error. However, as previously stated, we recorded the telephone
number of each agency in the database, and we asked two research assistants to make phone calls to
more than 10 percent of (randomly chosen) offices to inquire about their location history since 1998.
Fortunately, an overwhelming majority of these agencies have been at the same location during this
period, and we were able to identify the previous address in most cases for the small number of
movers. Of the 405 phone calls made to social service agencies, we were able to speak to a
representative in 228 cases. Of these cases, only 35 reported that they had moved at some point since
1997. The rest stated that they were either in the same location for sure or that they had ―probably‖
been in the same location.
         The next step in the process involved geocoding the location of social service offices by
assigning a latitude and longitude coordinate to each. We worked in collaboration with Geocoder
(www.geocoder.us) to generate the coordinates. Geocoder was able to provide these coordinates
using its own application programming interface (API) as well as that from Google, now considered
                                                   58
the gold standard for producing geocodes. Based on our discussions with Geocoder analysts, we
concluded that the Google-based geocodes were of higher-quality, so we use these as the basis for
making the distance calculations. Of the 3,659 social service agencies (unique or repeated) in our
database, 2,887 (approximately 80 percent) were able to be geocoded to its exact location (i.e.,
typically to 30 feet or less). Another 543 agencies (15 percent) were goecoded to roughly block- or
street-level accuracy. For 229 agencies (six percent), only the city or zip code was available to be
geocoded, decreasing locational precision to as many as a few miles. In sum, approximately 95
percent of social service agencies were geocoded with a level of precision at the block-level or better.
         A potential concern with the geocoding process is that the agency addresses would not match
those found in Geocoder’s database. For example, slight errors in spelling or formatting in a set of
agency addresses could cause a different set of addresses to be geocoded. Fortunately, Geocoder
provided us with a measure called the Levenshtein-Damerau, which calculates the ―edit distance‖ (or
level of textual discrepancy) between the addresses provided and the addresses actually assigned
geocodes. We used this measure to double-check the accuracy of agency addresses that were
assigned low scores, and we corrected any errors that were discovered. Generally speaking, we
found this measure to be quite sensitive to small inconsistencies between the provided and geocoded
addresses. Therefore, our data checks were extensive.
         In the final step, we calculated the distance between the location of social service agencies
and the residential location of each family in our analysis samples. Given that we plan to use this
distance measure with a number of datasets (e.g., Early Childhood Longitudinal Study—
Kindergarten cohort and Fragile Families and Child Well-Being Study), we utilized the following
approach. Users of the ECLS-K and FFCW contract data are able to observe families’ residential
locations at the census tract-level. Since child care subsidies are distributed by agencies organized at
the county-level, we use the county as the geographic boundary for calculating the distances. As a
result, we calculated the Euclidean (or as-the-crow-flies) distance (in miles) between the location of
social service agencies and every census tract centroid in the county in which each agency resides.
For example, La Paz County in Arizona has one social service agency and six census tracts.
Therefore, our database contains six sets of distances associated with this agency: one for each
census tract. In Maryland, Montgomery County also has one social serve agency but 176 census
tracts. Our database contains the distance from this agency to each census tract in the county.
Jurisdictions with multiple agencies have a set of distance calculations for each agency. For
example, Baltimore City has nine agencies and nearly 200 census tracts, leading to approximately
1,800 separate agency-tract calculations. In addition to calculating the distance, we produced the
census tract identification number associated with each agency-tract combination. We use the census
tract code to merge the distance measure with families in our analysis samples. Although this
process was extremely time-intensive, the results provide us with the flexibility to append the
distance measure to virtually any dataset with census tract codes.




                                                  59
