                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




INTERNATIONAL ASPECTS OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION AND THE CRISIS OF 2007:
              SIMILARITIES, DIFFERENCES, AND LESSONS

                                      Richard S. Grossman
                                     Christopher M. Meissner

                                       Working Paper 16269
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16269


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2010




We are grateful to our discussant, Forrest Capie, Nick Crafts, Peter Fearon, conference participants,
and two anonymous referees for helpful comments. Any remaining errors are the sole responsibility
of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Richard S. Grossman and Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Aspects of the Great Depression and the Crisis of 2007: Similarities, Differences,
and Lessons
Richard S. Grossman and Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 16269
August 2010
JEL No. E50,F15,F4,N10,N70

                                              ABSTRACT

We focus on two international aspects of the Great Depression—financial crises and international
trade— and try to discern lessons for the current economic crisis. Both downturns featured global
banking crises which were generated by boom-slump macroeconomic cycles. During both crises,
world trade collapsed faster than world incomes and the trade decline was highly synchronized across
countries. In the Depression, income losses and rises in trade barriers explain trade’s collapse. Due
to vertical specialization and more intense trade in durables, today’s trade collapse is due to uncertainty
and small shocks to trade costs hitting international supply chains. So far, the global economy has
avoided the global trade wars and banking collapses of the Depression perhaps due to improved policy.
Even so, the global economy remains susceptible to large shocks due to financial innovation and technological
change as recent events illustrate.


Richard S. Grossman
Department of Economics
Wesleyan University
Middletown, CT 06459
and Institute of Quantitative Social Science
Harvard University
rgrossman@wesleyan.edu

Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

       Despite the severe stagnation that has gripped the world’s economy in the aftermath

of the Subprime Crisis, the Great Depression remains, without question, the longest,

deepest, and broadest economic contraction that the industrialized world has ever known.

In all seventeen of the countries for which data are presented in Figure 1, real GDP per

capita growth during 1930-33 was far slower than during the pre-World War I period

(1871-1913), the interwar period as a whole (1919-39), the early post-World War II period

(1948-73), and the later post-World War II period (1974-2006). More than three quarters

of these countries experienced negative economic growth. Unemployment rates of above

20 percent were common (Table 1). Banking and financial crises were widespread (Table

2). Trade also declined substantially (Figure 3): exports in 27 leading countries declined by

over 50% between 1929 and 1932 while real GDP in these same countries fell some 15%

during those same years. Consequently the share of world exports in world GDP in 1933

was a little more than half the size of that in 1929.

       Prior to the 1980s, academic research on the Great Depression concentrated

disproportionately on the United States (Kindleberger, 1973 is a prominent exception),

focusing in particular on whether the downturn was the result of monetary forces

(Friedman and Schwartz, 1963) or a decline in some component of real expenditure (e.g.,

Temin, 1976). Starting in the 1980s, a growing literature, including Choudhuri and Kochin

(1980), Eichengreen and Sachs (1985), Temin (1989), Bernanke and James (1991),

Eichengreen (1992a), and James (2001), began to take a more global perspective

(Bernanke, 1995, Eichengreen, 2004). And although the argument that the Great

Depression originated in—and emanated from--the United States is still powerful (Romer,




                                               2
1993), the importance of international factors in driving the Great Depression is better

established than ever.

       In this article, we focus on two aspects of the Great Depression which had

important international dimensions: banking crises and international trade. We conclude

with a comparison between the Great Depression and today’s global downturn and some

observations on the path of economic policy and our understanding of how the global

economy is evolving.



II. BANKING CRISES

       Financial crises were a defining characteristic of the Great Depression, as they have

been of the Great Recession. Of course, the term “financial crisis” encompasses many

different classes of episodes, including banking crises, currency crises, debt defaults, and

securities market crises, to name but a few (Kindleberger, 1978: 21–2). We concentrate on

banking, rather than currency or securities market crises for two reasons. First, given that

the international gold standard regime collapsed during the 1930s, virtually every country

that had been on the gold standard experienced some sort of currency crisis. All seventeen

countries catalogued by Bordo et al. (2001: web appendix) underwent at least one currency

crisis during 1930-36. Second, although a number of stock market crashes took place

during the Great Depression, the scholarly consensus is that, with the possible exception of

the October 1929 crash on Wall Street (Romer, 1990), crises in securities markets were not

important in bringing about the Great Depression (Kindleberger, 1973: 108 and

Eichengreen, 1992b), but were most often a consequence of the collapse of the banking and

non-financial sectors of the economy.




                                              3
       By contrast, banking crises play a central role in many analyses of the causes of the

Great Depression (e.g., Friedman and Schwartz, 1963, Temin, 1976, Bernanke, 1983).

Bernanke and James (1991), for example, find that countries that experienced banking

crises had significantly worse depressions than those that did not. Table 2 classifies 26--

primarily European, but including Canada, Japan, and the United States--countries by

whether or not they had banking crises during the Great Depression.

       Although there is compelling evidence that banking crises played an important role

in the Great Depression, there is no consensus on the channel through which the crises

affected real economic activity. Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Cagan (1965) argue

that banking crises increased the public’s desired currency-to-deposit ratio, as depositors

strove to convert deposits into cash, which reduced the money supply and led to a decrease

in prices and output. Fisher (1932, 1933), Minsky (1982), and Kindleberger (1978) view

banking crises as a crucial link in the debt-deflation process: just as banks extended credit

to ever more marginal borrowers during the preceding economic expansion, the subsequent

downturn left these marginal borrowers unable to repay their debts, which led to a decline

in prices and an increasing number of debt defaults. Bernanke (1983) emphasizes the role

of banks in providing intermediation services, and argues that bank failures during the

Depression raised the cost of credit intermediation and worsened the economic downturn.

Eichengreen (1992a) and Temin (1993) highlight the role that banking crises played in the

international spread of the Great Depression.

       Financial crises have long transcended regional and national boundaries. Friedman

and Schwartz (1963) describe American banking crises as spreading through a “contagion

of fear,” as the failure of weak banks led to panic withdrawals by depositors in more sound

banks, causing them to fail too. Kindleberger (1978: 118) describes their international


                                                4
transmission as taking place through a variety of channels: “…psychological infection,

rising and falling prices of commodities and securities, short-term capital movements,

interest rates, the rise and fall of world commodity inventories.” He presents a table (p.

127) showing the total number of commercial and financial failures in different cities on a

monthly basis, nicely illustrating the geographic spread of a crisis outward from London, to

the rest of Britain, to British colonies, and to continental and American destinations

following the initial crisis August 1847. The international dimension of banking crises

became, if anything, more important during the subsequent crises during the decades of the

1870s, 1890s, and 1900s (Grossman, 2010).

       The interwar period saw two distinct waves of banking crises, both of which were

initiated by cyclical downturns. The first took place during the early 1920s and affected

Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. Although

international linkages did contribute to the spread of these crises, they were primarily the

result of the collapse of post-World War I booms that occurred in many countries

(Grossman, 2010). Further, because virtually no country had yet restored the gold

standard, the economic downturn of the early 1920s was relatively short-lived

(Eichengreen, 1992a: 100).

       The second wave of banking crises was initiated by a cyclical downturn that began

in 1929-30. Crises were centered both in the United States, which experienced banking

crises in October 1930, March 1931, and March 1933, and in Europe, where banking crises

began in earnest in 1931 with the May collapse of Austria’s Credit-Anstalt. The Credit-

Anstalt had been the largest bank in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and was by far the

dominant bank in post-World War I Austria: following its absorption of the failing

Bodencreditanstalt in 1929, it held 70 percent of total Austrian banking assets. The bank


                                              5
had been overextended for some time and the economic downturn that began in 1929-30

led to losses on the loan portfolio that exceeded the bank’s capital (Eichengreen, 1992a:

264ff. and Schubert, 1991).

       Revelations about the precarious state of the Credit-Anstalt—it was considered “too

big to fail” and was, in fact, rescued by the government and the Austrian National Bank--

led to bank runs in Poland and Hungary, the effective suspension of the Austrian gold

standard, and heightened concerns about Germany, which also had large outstanding short-

term foreign debts. The failure of a large German textile company, the Norddeutsche

Wollkämmerei und Kammgarnspinnerei (Nordwolle), in June led to a run on, and the

collapse of, the Darmstädter und Nationalbank (Danat-Bank) in July, which led to capital

flight, suspension of the gold standard, and a further spread of banking crises, particularly

to banks with German connections in eastern and central Europe and in the Middle East.

Britain, which had run persistent balance of payments deficits for several years, now found

itself under additional pressure, as the suspensions in Germany and Austria and the

freezing of British credit on the continent, called the British gold standard into question.

The mounting pressure on the pound forced Britain to leave the gold standard in September

1931 (Eichengreen and Jeanne, 2000), which led to further banking crises.

       The banking crises of the interwar period—not to mention those of the more recent

sub-prime crisis--were very much in the mold of the “boom-bust” crises described by

Fisher (1932, 1933), Minsky (1982), and Kindleberger (1978): rapid economic expansion,

accompanied by increasing indebtedness, resulting in heightened financial fragility which

leads to crises when the economic boom collapses. The collapse of the post-World War I

investment boom throughout Europe and the end of the roaring 20’s investment boom in




                                               6
the United States, as well as the collapse of the sub-prime mortgage boom more recently

each led to banking crises.

        We can assess a variety of factors which might have enabled—or prevented—

banking crises during the Great Depression by comparing the experiences of countries that

experienced crises with those that did not (Table 2). These include the extent of branching,

bank size, banking concentration, the amplitude of the macroeconomic cycle, and

regulatory differences (Grossman 1994).

        Banking systems where banks were, on average, more extensively branched

typically survived the Depression better than those which were characterized by

unbranched (i.e., unit) banks. Extensively branched banks should be less likely to fail than

unit banks for three reasons. First, banks with an extensive branch system are likely to

have a more diversified loan portfolio than unit banks, which make loans in one area only.

Second, branched banks may have a more diversified deposit base and therefore may be

less likely to fail due to purely local deposit runs. Finally, a branch system provides

seasonal diversification, easing the stringency in money centers caused by the flow of

funds to agricultural areas at harvest time.

        Banking systems characterized by larger banks were also less prone to crises than those

characterized by smaller banks. Large banks might be less prone to failure than smaller

institutions because they are better able to diversify their loan and investment portfolios and

thereby reduce the risk from any one nonperforming component. Additionally, if leading non-

financial firms require larger loans-which small banks do not have the resources to provide-and

are less likely to default than small firms, then the banks that make these loans may incur

smaller loan losses. Finally, banks with substantial resources may be in a better position to

acquire banks that are on the verge of failure and thus help to stabilize the system.



                                                7
        Banking systems that were characterized by a high degree of concentration were also

more stable than those that were not. High concentration might increase stability if it reflects

the existence of barriers to entry, suggesting that more concentrated banks will be more

profitable and, hence, better able to stave off failure during a period of crisis. Further, the

existence of a small number of banks suggests that cooperation, such as pooling reserves in

times of crisis, will be more feasible. Although formal banking regulation did not account for

important differences in financial stability during the Great Depression, having a smaller

number of institutions may have made it easier for government, central bank, and other

authorities to exert informal supervision over the banking system. Because bank branching,

size, and concentration are typically highly correlated, it is difficult to determine which of these

attributes was most responsible for banking stability.

        Banking systems which had been purged of many of their weak banks by a crisis

earlier in the interwar period also typically survived the Great Depression better than those

that were not. For example, the banking systems of both the Netherlands and Sweden

suffered crises during the post-World War I period, but were relatively stable during the

1930s, perhaps because many of the weaker banks had already exited.

        Finally, economies in general--and banking systems in particular—in countries

which abandoned the gold standard promptly typically fared better than those in countries

that clung to the gold standard. Decoupling from gold was liberating for countries that did

so, permitting them to undertake more expansionary monetary policy. The benefits of early

devaluation are illustrated in Figure 2, which replicates a figure presented by Eichengreen

and Sachs (1985: 936). The horizontal axis presents a measure of exchange rates in 1935

relative to 1929 levels. France did not devalue the franc until 1936, so its value in 1935

was equal to that in 1929; by contrast, the currencies of the Scandinavian countries and



                                                 8
Britain had fallen by 40 percent or more from their 1929 values. The vertical axis presents

an index of industrial production in a similar manner. The industrial production indices in

Finland, Sweden, and Denmark in 1935 were more than 120 percent of their 1929 levels;

those of France and Belgium were just over 70 percent of their 1929 values. The pattern,

illustrated by the trend line, is clear: countries that experienced more substantial

depreciations exhibited greater industrial recovery (Belgium is an outlier because it

devalued during 1935 and the positive effects of currency depreciation on industrial

production were not felt until later). Greater depreciation was also associated with

increased export volume, greater incentive to invest (Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985), and a

reduced likelihood of enduring a banking crisis (Grossman, 1994).

       Banking crises contributed crucially to the length, depth, and spread of the Great

Depression. The historical record suggests that banking systems characterized by more

extensively branched, larger, and more concentrated firms fared better than those that were

not. The record also suggests that “history mattered”: banking systems that had undergone

crises during the collapse of the post-World War I boom of the early 1920s often shed their

weakest members and emerged more resilient in the face of the economic downturn of the

Great Depression. Finally, the experience highlights the important role played by the gold

standard in propagating the banking crises of the Great Depression.



III. TRADE

III.A How big was the trade collapse?

       Between mid-1929 and mid-1932 the world witnessed an unprecedented peacetime

decline in international trade. Total exports as a percentage of GDP in a sample of 27




                                               9
leading countries whose data underlie Figure 3 fell from 9.0 in 1929 to 5.0 in 1932.4 Total

real exports for these nations fell by just over 50% and GDP fell by 15% on average

between the peak in 1929 and the trough of 1932. These declines are comparable to those

suffered during the recent trade collapse of 2008-09. In the first year of both crashes, trade

fell by roughly 20 percent.5 In the recent trade bust and during the first year of the

Depression the average GDP decline was four percent. Both trade busts also seem to have

been highly synchronous across nations. Between 1929 and 1930, 85 percent of these 27

nations had negative trade growth which is the same proportion reported by Baldwin

(2009) for 2008-2009.

        During the 1930s the trade collapse continued for another two years whereas it

appears that today, after only one year, world trade is rebounding strongly. Whatever

barriers put the brakes on trade seem to have dissipated rapidly, allowing for a quick

rebound. During the Depression a sequence of income declines, and tariff and competitive

exchange rate devaluations seem to have dragged trade down in successive rounds. This is

famously depicted in the contracting spiral of trade figure – one of the most reproduced

figures in all of economics according to Eichengreen and Irwin (1995) – originally

published in 1933 in Austria and then by the League of Nations Economic Survey. We

return to a comparison between the two episodes below.



4
  These countries are those used in the sample of Jacks, Meissner and Novy (2009a) and cover roughly 70%
of global GDP. They include: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, France,
Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the
Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United States, and
Uruguay.
5
  See for instance, Eichengreen and O’Rourke (2010). Their values for the “volume of world trade” during the
1930s from the League of Nations imply only about a 13 percent drop in the year after the peak in world
trade. The difference between our 20% decline and theirs could be due to the samples or method of deflation.
League of Nations statistics do not report the method of deflation. Figure 2 uses the US CPI to deflate the
dollar value of trade.



                                                    10
       A number of studies have highlighted the extent of disintegration of world trade

during the Depression. That is, the amount by which trade declined beyond that warranted

by autonomous income declines say due to increased barriers to trade. Assume as a

benchmark that both imports and domestic sales depend on local incomes with a unit

income elasticity. When international trade declines by more than consumption of domestic

tradeables, it implies that there has been an increase in barriers to international transactions.

If this not the case, domestic sales would decline one for one with goods shipped across

borders. In this case, although trade has collapsed, integration per se between markets is

left unaltered, if by integration we have in mind a measure of the barriers to international

relative to domestic trade.

        The above logic follows closely nearly all conventional international trade

literature that relies on the ‘gravity’ model to explain bilateral trade flows (more on this

below). Jacks, Meissner, and Novy (2009a) show that most trade models and their gravity

equations give rise to a unique metric that implicitly measures all barriers to international

trade in tariff equivalent terms. Essentially the gravity model tells us how far actual

bilateral trade is from where the model predicts it would be in the absence of all

international barriers to trade. This measure rose, on average, by 25 percent during 1929-

1933. In other words, after controlling for income losses, it was as if worldwide tariffs had

uniformly risen by 25 percent. Nevertheless, there was some variance in outcomes. In the

US between 1929 and 1933, exports declined by almost 60 percent while GDP fell by

roughly 30 percent. For the US, this implies the tariff equivalent measure of trade costs

rose was 26 percent. France and Germany saw declines in exports of 50 percent with falls

in GDP of 15 percent. The tariff equivalent rise in trade costs implied by these figures is

just under 20 percent.


                                               11
        Hynes, Jacks, and O’Rourke (2009) take a different approach, employing price data

from selected commodities to assess the extent of the disintegration of international

markets. Price gaps (i.e., the difference between the price in the exporting country and the

price in the importing country presumably reflecting barriers to trade) on agricultural

commodities stood 160 percent higher in 1933 than they were in the comparatively

“normal” year of 1913 (Hynes, Jacks, and O’Rourke, 2009). These rises imply an average

70 percent increase in the costs of international trade in commodities. The UK and its

trading partners within the British Empire saw rises of 62 percent. UK and non-empire

pairs posted rises of 135 percent. Non-empire country pairs witnessed rises of 200 percent.

The Depression put a large wedge between the prices paid for imports and the prices

exporters received.

        A slightly earlier literature focused on measuring the change in tariffs as a proxy for

changes in trade costs. Smoot-Hawley doubled tariff rates on a range of US imports. Irwin

(1998) calculates that in 1922 the average ad valorem tariff was 34.61% while after Smoot

Hawley in 1930 it was 42.28%. This translates into a rise in the ad valorem equivalent of

tariff rates of about 20%, or a rise in the relative price of imports of 4-6% (i.e.,    ). Since

many tariffs were specific, meaning that they were in terms of monetary units per physical

unit, the rise in tariffs reflected the global deflation that began in 1929 and involved more

than just active legislation to raise the ad valorem tariff. Due to these effects in the US, the

ad valorem equivalent average tariff (tariff revenue divided by dutiable imports) rose from

about 40 percent to 60 percent. Crucini and Khan (1996) found ad valorem tariff

equivalents nearly tripled, from eight to 22 percent in other countries. Madsen (2001)

reported a doubling of tariff revenues relative to total imports between 1929 and 1932 in a

slightly larger sample of countries.


                                               12
III. B What Caused the Trade Decline?

         How should we understand the decline in world international trade? According to

conventional modern trade theories, in general equilibrium the two main factors driving

international bilateral trade are terms related to output/income levels of both trade partners

and the barriers to foreign trade.6 Barriers to foreign trade, often referred to as ‘trade

costs,’ consist of all the costs that make foreign goods relatively more expensive than

domestic goods. They include, but are not limited to, tariffs, international shipping and

insurance costs, exchange rate volatility, and the availability of trade credit (Anderson and

van Wincoop, 2004). Can the world trade collapse be understood simply as a by-product of

declines in output/incomes? Or was it the result of restrictive trade policies and other

shocks to the barriers of trade? If the latter, these policy shocks could have acted as key

drivers of the global depression. Yet another possibility is that a vicious cycle was at work,

with causality running from income to trade, trade to trade barriers, trade barriers to trade,

and trade back again to income. We explore the record on trade, incomes and trade barriers

next.

         From the mid-1920s through 1929, exports grew by about 50 percent while

production increased by roughly 25 percent (Figure 3). Although some nations dismantled

quantitative controls imposed during the war period, tariffs remained high compared to

levels in 1913 (Findlay and O’Rourke, 2007). However, exchange rate volatility decreased

6
  It is not difficult to show that if a gravity model of trade governs bilateral international trade and domestic
trade as well then these are the two factors that matter. Models that give rise to such a gravity equation
include monopolistic competition with complete specialization of a range of goods by country with or without
increasing returns and consumers with homothetic preferences and a love of variety; the Ricardian model of
trade studied by Eaton and Kortum (2002), and models with heterogeneous firms and/or fixed costs to foreign
market entry (e.g., Chaney, 2008). Deardorff (1998) argues that in a Heckscher-Ohlin world with trade costs
a similar model holds too.



                                                      13
with the re-establishment of the gold standard, thereby reducing uncertainty for agents

involved in cross-border transactions. The League of Nations (1931) cites an increased

demand for industrial products and a re-organization of industry in Europe as providing

further stimulus to cross-border trade.

         The trade boom had stalled by early 1929. The initial cause is likely to have been

the tightening of US monetary policy. The rise in US interest rates led to sharper rises in

interest rates in deficit nations as they attempted to retain capital to finance their current

account deficits. Tightening abroad led to reduced demand for American imports and,

indeed, US exports begin to decline from 1928. This suggests that the primary impulse for

the decline in world trade was a real interest rate shock which lowered worldwide demand

(Eichengreen, 1992a).

         The next insult to international trade came with the enactment of the Smoot-Hawley

tariff by the United States during the summer of 1930. The impulse for the US tariff rise

was mainly political, reflecting a massive logrolling coalition covering a large spectrum of

domestic producers. It is incorrect to view Smoot-Hawley as a response to the global

downturn. The idea of tariff revision was sponsored as early as 1928 by the Republican

candidate Herbert Hoover during the presidential campaign (Irwin and Kroszner, 1996).

         Countries reacted to this dramatic rise in tariffs and the incipient depression with

their own protectionist measures. Germany, Italy and France preemptively raised tariffs on

agricultural goods prior to final approval of Smoot Hawley in 1930. During 1931 roughly

61 nations raised tariffs or imposed barriers in response to US policy (Jones, 1934).7


7
 Eichengreen and Irwin (2010) argue that Smoot Hawley itself had a relatively minor direct impact on
Europe and on the domestic economy. Instead they view the policy as setting a tone for further tariff
escalation in Europe. They also cite the financial crisis of 1931 in Europe and its economic impact as a
principal cause of further tariff rises



                                                      14
Although Great Britain had been the world’s cheerleader for free trade since the 1840s, it

soon responded with tariff hikes of its own. Because of its free trade heritage, internal

political debate on the issue was intense in 1931, but free trade ultimately lost.

       Jones (1934) argues that failure of the First and Second International Conferences

for Concerted Economic Action in 1930-31 meant that international cooperation could not

stop the avalanche of protectionism. Britain’s general election of 1931 resulted in a

National Government that acted on the public’s desire to stem the increasing trade deficit

and to stabilize sterling. The Tariff Act of 1931 and the Import Duties Act of 1932 meant

the loss of a major market for many important countries although members of the British

Empire were exempted by the Ottawa Agreements, which were concluded in the summer

of 1932. In France, a quota system was implemented between 1930 and early 1931.

Madsen (2001) reports that there were 50 such quotas in existence in 1931 and 1,100 by

1932. In Spain, the Wais tariff raised duties on US automobiles. Italy imposed duties on

US autos and other goods as well. Canada responded fiercely to Smoot-Hawley by

establishing retaliatory duties on agricultural items and enlarged British preference. There

is no doubt that the rampant rise in protectionist measures between 1930 and 1933 dealt a

major blow to world trade up to 1933.

       Retaliation against Smoot-Hawley was costly. If countries discriminated against

US goods, an extra duty was to be levied on their exports to the US. Many countries raised

tariffs across the board in response. Moreover, Most Favored Nation clauses extending

preference to US goods were not reciprocated, which led to the quick decline of such

treaties. With the enactment of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act in 1934, the US tariff

system began to make exceptions to high tariffs on a country by country basis and so

invited a more positive worldwide response generating a revival of trade.


                                              15
       What else besides retaliation to US tariffs drove countries to raise tariffs in the

1930s? Foreman-Peck, Hughes-Hallet, and Ma (2000) argue that countries raising tariffs

did so with three objectives in mind: to raise production levels to those of 1929; to increase

prices to 1929 levels; and to restore trade balance. Since the exchange rate and monetary

policy mattered for these outcomes, tariff policy seems to be related more fundamentally to

monetary and exchange rate policies. Countries clinging to gold while others devalued

gave themselves an overvalued exchange rate, thus widening their trade deficits. And, in

fact, nations with stronger exchange rates seem to have imposed larger increases in their

tariffs, ceteris paribus (Eichengreen and Irwin, 2010). France, which did not devalue until

1936, underwent a doubling of tariffs (as measured by tariff revenue divided by imports)

between 1928 and 1938. The Netherlands, Belgium, and Switzerland posted similar

increases and also devalued very late in the Depression. Meanwhile, countries that did

devalue, such as Sweden, Denmark, and Canada, saw only slight rises or even declines in

tariffs. In the exchange control countries tariff changes fell between these two extremes.

Nonetheless, Figure 2 in Eichengreen and Irwin (2010) reveals that Britain (early

devaluation), Germany (leading exchange control country) and France (gold bloc stalwart)

had the highest unconditional rises in tariffs. It would appear that other factors also

mattered.

       Despite the focus on trade policy in the literature, other forms of trade barriers also

arose. The surge in the barriers highlighted in the studies cited above also seems to be

attributable to non-tariff barriers, greater exchange rate volatility, rises in foreign shipping

costs relative to domestic shipping, and a lack of international trade credit. The demise of

the international gold standard raised exchange rate volatility and increased uncertainty in

international transactions, while the relative costs of shipping goods on ocean-going tramp


                                               16
shipping lines rose considerably from the mid-1920s (Estevadeordal, Frantz and Taylor,

2003). Opinions differ on the importance of the latter since the real freight rate series

presented in Shah Mohammed and Williamson (2004) do not show rises until the 1930s.

Different samples, compositional issues and methods of deflating probably explain these

factors. Jacks, Hynes and O’Rourke (2009) provide some preliminary evidence that trade

credit dried up also contributing to more limited international trade.



III.C Accounting for the Trade Decline: Trade costs versus Incomes



       Many would identify the sharp decline in international trade between 1929 and

1933 with the US tariff hike of 1930 and the alleged retaliation by other nations. Most

recent research however shows that income declines and trade barriers can explain the

decline in trade. The answer to the question which mattered more appears to depend on the

particular sample previous studies have worked with and their particular methodology.

What do we know?

       Three main methodologies have been used to account for the trade collapse between

1929 and 1933. Irwin (1998) and Madsen (2001) estimate aggregate import and export

demand equations. Imports are a function of domestic income and relative prices, and

exports are a function of foreign income and relative prices. Relative prices are affected by

supply and demand conditions, tariffs, exchange rate movements and other trade costs.

Crucini and Khan (1994) study a computable general equilibrium model and run simulated

counterfactuals using their model. An accounting exercise, similar in spirit to Baier and

Bergstrand (2001) and based on the gravity model of bilateral trade is employed by Jacks,

Meissner and Novy (2009a).


                                              17
        Madsen (2001) estimates reduced form regression equations for aggregate exports

and imports. Within his sample, which covers 17 countries between 1920 and 1938, trade

barriers account for 41 percent of the drop in trade between 1929-1932 while income

declines account for about 59 percent (figure 3, p. 865). Madsen argues tariffs could have

led to declines in incomes of up to 2 percent. If so, the role of tariffs is slightly higher.

Also, Madsen argues that tariff policy reduced demand during the depression along

inelastic supply curves. This led to deflation in the tradable sector which further raised the

real rate of tariff protection since many tariffs were specific and not ad valorem. In this

case, Madsen suggests that the impact of tariffs was as important as the output decline in

explaining the trade collapse. Irwin (1998) uses a similar partial equilibrium methodology

for the United States between 1929 and 1932 where higher tariffs contributed to about 1/5

of the 40 percent fall in imports. The majority of the 1/5 was due to higher specific duties

arising from deflation and not new legislation in the infamous Smoot Hawley tariff bill.

        Crucini and Khan (1994) calibrate a general equilibrium model to study the relation

between tariffs, imports and GDP. Their model assumes that foreign goods are used as

inputs to production. In this case, Crucini and Khan find that in the US tariffs account for

about 1/5 to 2/5 of the decline in imports.

        Jacks, Meissner, and Novy (2009a) calculate the relative role of trade frictions and

output declines using a gravity model of trade and reach a different conclusion. This

gravity model represents equilibrium bilateral trade levels in a general equilibrium model

of production and trade. Consumers typically are assumed to have homothetic preferences

(although this is not a necessary condition) and almost any plausible production structure

can be used. This approach yields the following equilibrium equation for bilateral trade




                                               18
                                                               1                .8



This shows that bilateral trade (the product of exports (x) from country i to j and j to i)

depends on the following two factors: the product of domestic absorption (                       or GDP-

Exports) and a term for trade frictions that encompasses tariffs and non-tariff barriers, real

international shipping costs, exchange rate volatility etc. In this equation                   is the tariff

equivalent of the costs of international trade relative to domestic trade for both county i and

j and σ is the time-invariant and constant-across-all-countries elasticity of substitution

between any two goods home or foreign.

         The gravity model suggests a unit elasticity on domestic absorption and point

estimates of this elasticity by Jacks, Meissner and Novy (2009a) are near unity. In the

sample of 27 countries and 130 unique country pairs mentioned above, the authors find that

at the average declines in incomes account for 15 percent of the fall in trade and trade costs

account for 93 percent of the fall. Multilateral forces (i.e. a term that accounts for third

market effects -- in essence a “price deflator” for bilateral effects) acted to keep trade

buoyant and trade would have been 0.133 log points lower had this factor not risen between

1929-1933.9 This could happen if tariffs or demand management policies had sufficiently



8
  The steps to derive gravity are straightforward as Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) show. Demand for
exports from country i to j depend on incomes in j and the prices of i’s goods relative to a consumer price
index. Using market clearing, it is obvious that world sales for country i (i.e., total income) equal total
exports- including domestic sales. Use this equation to solve for the domestic price for i , substitute back into
the demand equation and note that bilateral exports are a positive function of income in i and j (relative to
world income), price indexes for each country (i.e., multilateral resistance terms) and a negative function of
trade costs. To arrive at the above equation, which has eliminated the price index terms using the domestic
gravity equation see Jacks, Meissner and Novy (2009a).
9
  Note that the product of the domestic absorptions (GDP minus exports), the theoretically preferred measures
of size, is equal to             . This product fell on average by only 0.09 log points while the product of
bilateral trade fell on average by 1.41 log points. The remainder of the log point fall (93%) then has to be



                                                       19
stimulative effects and hence positive spillovers. To the extent that income and trade costs

are related, there can be biases in the accounting procedure. Madsen (2002) argued that

trade costs might have had a negative impact on incomes so that the share of trade costs

would be understated. If, however, declining incomes led to higher tariffs and other trade

barriers, and some evidence shows this to be the case, the role of trade costs may be

overstated.



III.D The Global Trade Slump and the Global Depression: Symptom, Cause or

Vicious Circle?

         Recent empirical contributions to the literature on the synchronization of business

cycles suggest that a doubling of trade intensity would raise the bilateral correlation in

output movements by roughly 0.06, relative to an average correlation of roughly 0.3

(Frankel and Rose, 1998). Greater trade integration in the 1930s would be expected to

raise countries’ exposure to the large economic shocks from abroad. Indeed the French

depression is often characterized as emanating in part from a major loss of export markets.

And Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) detected that the devaluations of the early 1930s were

partially ‘beggar-thy-neighbor’ policies.

         One simple dynamic story that also fits the facts is that the rise in real interest rates

in 1928-29 in the US led to a slowdown in capital exports from the US and a decline in US

exports (Eichengreen, 1992a: 227-228). As capital flows ceased, commodity exporters

liquidated stocks in an attempt to avoid debt default, then devalued in order to do the same.

Their incomes plummeted as supply rode down an inelastic demand curve. Next, US


attributable to rises in trade costs assuming that these barriers are not related to incomes and absorption and
that the elasticity of substitution is constant.



                                                       20
tariffs, imposed more for political than economic reasons, compounded the shock to

incomes by reducing exports further. Devaluations beginning in 1931 with sterling’s

departure from gold also inspired tariff retaliation and more loss of foreign demand. This

decline in demand and expected future reduced demand for domestic tradables led to even

larger drops in output due to the loss of foreign markets and the exit of producers. In this

story a vicious circle (i.e., a trade multiplier) is the main culprit in the sad story of the

interwar trade bust and a contributor to the Great Depression.

        Some back of the envelop calculations suggest the potential for explaining the

income losses due to trade declines. In the US, where exports fell by 60 percent between

1929 and 1933, even a high trade multiplier of 3 would have decreased overall income only

by 9 percent. The overall fall in income was 30 percent. The US had a comparatively small

export share near 5 percent in 1929, but in other small open economies the trade collapse

might have played a larger role. In Canada for instance, the export share of income was 17

percent. An export multiplier of three and the fall in exports of 45 percent could have led to

a 25 percent fall in GDP compared to a 30 percent actual decline.

        Several contributions add to our understanding of the microeconomic links between

trade and the Depression. Crucini and Khan (1996) and Irwin (1998) propose general

equilibrium models of trade in crucial intermediate goods for US final production. When

the US raised tariffs on intermediates, crucial to the production process, the marginal

productivity of the factors of production fell and incomes declined. Both Irwin and Crucini

and Khan suggest that the output losses from rising tariffs were very small relative to the

30 percent drop in overall GDP with a maximal effect of -2%. Perri and Quadrini (2002)

examine Italy-- a small open economy where output effects are likely to be larger--using a

dynamic general equilibrium model. Their key assumption is also that imports were key


                                                21
complements to domestically produced factors of production. Unlike the model studied in

Irwin, where labor and capital are fully employed, their model allows for changes in

utilization of such inputs. With higher tariffs in Italy, its exports became relatively more

expensive, reducing demand abroad and ultimately shifting resources into the non-tradable

sector or forcing lower employment of capital and labor partially due to sticky nominal

wages. Tariffs and sticky wages in their model explain roughly half to ¾ of the downturn

in Italy in the 1930s. In the Irwin model for the US, wage rigidity does not raise the

contribution of tariffs and trade losses to income losses since sectoral reallocation is so

small and since the model does not allow for unemployment of resources.

       More broadly, other authors have suggested important interactions between trade

policy, monetary forces, and international capital markets. Eichengreen (1989) argues that

tariffs might have been beneficial to the extent that they were domestically reflationary. In

this argument, tariffs helped avoid a rise in real wages due to sticky nominal wages and

limited real increases in the value of debt. This result holds even after taking into account

retaliation although there are some offsetting effects making the net effect unclear.

       Devaluations, long derided as competitive devaluations, were another means to

protectionism and recovery, but they too had a variety of side-effects. First and most

obviously they led to expenditure-switching and thus a beggar-thy neighbor effect

(Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985). Second, the impact of associated monetary loosening

might have been to stimulate the economy. A positive spillover via lower international

interest rates could have helped boost output abroad too. The positive effect of devaluation

and monetary expansion would have been the largest when all nations did it

simultaneously. The evidence from the academic literature to date suggests that




                                              22
devaluations stimulated production and exports (Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985 and Campa,

1990).

         One factor limiting the benefits of devaluation might have been foreign debt.

Devaluations can be contractionary when debt is denominated in foreign currency or a

fixed amount of gold- as indeed it was in the 1920s and 1930s (League of Nations 1931:

219). Whether devaluations are expansionary or contractionary in the presence of hard

currency indexed debt depends theoretically on several factors such as the openness to

trade, the level of capital market imperfections and overall indebtedness (Céspedes, Chang

and Velasco, 2004). Of course, default was an option often taken but the output effects of

such actions are unclear. To date, no study we are aware of has examined this important

issue so this remains fertile ground for further research.

         Overall, the collapse of global trade seems to have been as much a symptom as an

important cause in the global Great Depression. The precise impact on incomes of falling

trade seems to be sensitive to how trade patterns are modeled and how important trade was

for a particular country. In the US, a large relatively closed economy the bulk of the

evidence suggests that falling income and tariffs pushed trade down in equal proportions

and that trade’s impact on income was small. In smaller open economies it appears that

trade barriers might have played a bigger role than incomes in bringing trade down and

falling trade may have played a more important role in the collapse of incomes than in the

US.




                                              23
IV. LESSONS FROM THE GREAT DEPRESSION

IV.A Banking Crisis and Monetary Policy



        The banking crises of the Great Depression, like many of their predecessors,

originated with a boom-bust macroeconomic cycle. This was particularly true in the

United States, where the Roaring Twenties was followed by the Great Depression. As the

bust took hold, a contagion of fear led to large-scale short-term capital movements and

currency and banking crises in many countries.

        American macroeconomic policy makers during the early 2000s again seem to bear

substantial responsibility for encouraging—through loose monetary, fiscal, and regulatory

policies—the housing boom, excessive leverage, and, ultimately, the collapse of the sub-

prime bubble. Troubles were further compounded by an ostensible lack of regulation of

risk management procedures, which created the potential for contagion and financial panic

within the ‘shadow’ banking system and a also regulatory system that allowed institutions

to grow ‘too big to fail’ that ended in crisis (it should be added that the modern crisis has

not spared banking systems composed of large, extensively branched, or highly

concentrated banks). The proliferation of new—and largely unregulated--financial

derivatives allowed financial institutions all over the world to take part in the boom—and

bust.   Responding to crisis during the Great Depression was difficult because of the

absence of institutions with an explicit mandate to maintain financial stability. Regulation

and supervision, where it existed, was not especially effective. Deposit insurance systems

did not exist. Lenders of last resort were too timid to halt crises at home and were wary of

contributing to efforts to head them off abroad. Inadequate regulation and supervision bear

a large part of the blame for the financial crises associated with the Great Recession, much


                                              24
as they did during the Great Depression. Changes to the regulatory and supervisory

framework will certainly be a major topic of discussion for politicians in the months and

years ahead.

       On the other hand, some lessons of the Great Depression have been learned: policy

makers’ responses to the recent crisis have been far more forthcoming than those of their

predecessors. Extraordinary actions by governments and central banks once the panic

started arguably helped to avoid the total meltdown that occurred during the Great

Depression. Principal amongst these actions were concerted coordination and cooperation

amongst monetary authorities in Japan, Europe and the US, expansionary monetary policy

via orthodox and not-so-orthodox policies, and fiscal stimulus policies.

       The structural reforms that followed the Great Depression consisted of a set of

severe constraints on banks and other financial institutions--a sort of financial “lockdown”

(Grossman, 2010). This heavily regulated environment was extremely successful at

preventing a recurrence of Depression-style financial crises. For more than 25 years

following the end of World War II, the industrialized world’s financial system was

completely crisis-free! Of course, the financial lockdown was not costless: financial

system development was retarded during its duration. The lockdown was eased during the

wave of deregulation that began during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Perhaps not

surprisingly, this easing was followed by the reemergence of financial crises during the

1970s and 1980s.

       It is interesting to ask whether a return to a highly constrained financial system

would eliminate future crises like that which began in 2007. Although there has been

some tightening of regulation (e.g., on new financial products and on proprietary trading, as

well as more stringent capital requirements) given the modern consensus that liberalized


                                             25
financial markets are desirable (James 2001: 208), a return to financial lockdown is

unlikely. Further, the globalization in financial markets and improvements in

communications technology of the late 20th century means that a lockdown could not be

implemented without a coordinated international effort, which is demonstrably not

forthcoming at the moment, or a complete shutdown of cross-border financial flows, which

also seems to be a political non-starter. Nonetheless, the crises of the Great Depression and

the Great Recession provide some evidence that the lax regulatory structures of the 1920s

and the 2000s contributed to the magnitude of the Depression and the recent crisis..

       There is strong scholarly consensus that the gold standard contributed to the length

and depth of the Great Depression by imposing a deflationary bias, locking in

unsustainable imbalances, and tying the hands of monetary policy makers. Similar

concerns have been raised about the euro, especially given the recent situation among the

PIIGS (Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain), where the economic and downturn,

combined with fiscal mismanagement in some cases, has led to soaring budget deficits.

Since the escudo, lira, punt, drachma, and peseta have been subsumed by the euro,

countries cannot hope to run expansionary monetary policy on their own and benefit from

lower interest rates and a depreciated exchange rate.

       Does this mean that one of the lessons of the Great Depression is that abandoning

the euro would help avoid further recession? The economic consequences and legal basis

for countries to exit from the euro has been examined (Eichengreen 2007a, Athanassiou

2009) and, although such an exit may be feasible, it would likely be much more costly than

abandonment of the gold standard was in the 1930s, with Eichengreen (2007b) suggesting

that the breakup would trigger “the mother of all financial crises.” Eichengreen (2010),

Krugman (2010), and Gros and Mayer (2010) believe that the only way out is forward.


                                             26
They argue that short-term assistance from wealthier Eurozone countries (e.g., Germany)—

with conditions attached—would stabilize the PIIGS, allowing time for greater economic

integration (e.g., labor market integration) and fiscal federalism to generate a more stable

framework for Europe’s future. Such short-term assistance was half-hearted, at best,

during the Great Depression. Again, while policy makers have made advances in

understanding the role of the exchange rate and monetary policy, the new economic

environment has still proven challenging for economic policy makers.



IV.B Lessons From Two Trade Busts

         Loss of exports via trade linkages was a key factor in the internationalization of the

Great Depression for many countries. The global economy today is also characterized by

extensive global trade linkages. And indeed a trade collapse has accompanied the recent

financial crisis and global recession. The reported fall in real exports in both busts in the

first year of the downturn was on the order of 20 percent. Global output fell on average

four percent in both periods. Today’s trade bust stands out from other recent recessions in

that the trade collapse has been highly synchronized (Yi, 2009 and Baldwin, 2009).

Similarly, in the first year of the Depression, 85 percent of countries, just like today, had

negative export growth. There are many superficial commonalities between the two trade

busts.

         The difference between then and now appears to be that trade has already started to

rebound while it continued to spiral downwards for another two years during the Great

Depression. In the 1930s, nations’ incomes fell and trade multipliers magnified the impact.

Tit-for-tat commercial and exchange rate policy was not totally synchronized and led to a

succession of beggar-thy-neighbor policies with highly negative outcomes.


                                               27
        The fact that trade dropped equally as quickly and evenly across nations in both

busts does not mean that similar factors are to blame. Today it seems plausible that

uncertainty and changes to the structure of trade are responsible for the decline. In the

Depression, income declines, tariffs and other trade barriers mattered most as our review of

the literature has highlighted.

        A rapidly expanding literature analyzing the recent trade collapse supports our

conjecture regarding the recent collapse.10 Some evidence exists that world trade has

become more sensitive over time to output movements (Freund, 2009). One reason is that a

significant share of trade amongst the largest economies consists of consumer durables and

investment goods which are more volatile than total output (Engle and Wang, 2009). In

moments of uncertainty, consumers and producers put such purchases on hold.

International trade may therefore suffer disproportionately during recessions. Exporters of

these goods such as Germany and Japan have seen some of the sharpest falls in exports

which appears consistent with this observation. Today the share of such manufactures in

world trade is close to 65% whereas in 1929 it was roughly 35%. If both trade collapses

were due in part to a rise uncertainty then these statistics might imply the shock to

confidence was greater in 1929. Indeed manufacturing trade seems to have fallen much

more steeply than food and raw material trade in the Depression or today (Saint-Etienne,

1984). Still, the consensus on the Depression is that trade barriers mattered more than

uncertainty. The profound structural changes that have taken place in the last two decades

10
  Chor and Manova (2010) study trade credit. Alessandria, Kaboski and Midrigan (2010) study the
interaction between the credit crunch and inventories in US automobile imports. Levchenko, Lewis and Tesar
(2009) focus on compositional issues and to a lesser extent vertical specialization. Jacks, Meissner and Novy
(2009b) found evidence that trade fell faster relative to incomes when vertical specialization was more
important. Eaton, Kortum, Neiman and Romalis (2010) allow for composition, demand shocks, and trade
costs. They also find a role for the composition of trade arguing that the drop in demand for durables was
much larger and these are heavily traded. For a range of views see the chapters in Baldwin (2009).



                                                     28
in the international supply chain are also suspected to be a key difference. International

production sharing or vertical specialization makes trade increasingly sensitive to changes

in the costs of international trade (Yi, 2003). Intuitively, the more times a good crosses a

border on its way to becoming a final good, the more border costs each good faces. Today,

a small rise in all international trade costs could make such trade more costly and cut off a

large number of cross-border transactions. These costs are broadly defined and include

transportation costs, commercial policy variables, insurance costs, financing costs and a

range of other frictions. Incipient protectionism highlighted by the Global Trade Alert and

the drying up of trade credit (Chor and Manova, 2010) associated with the financial

meltdown could have triggered a magnified fall in trade even if they imply seemingly small

rises in the relative costs of trade. The latter explanation is appealing, since once trade

credit conditions went back to normal, trade would be expected to snap back sharply as it

seems to have done. The fact that trade is on a global rebound too makes the production

sharing story an attractive part of the explanation for the recent trade collapse.

       The production sharing hypothesis also suggests a reason for the sharp and

coordinated downturn and for an enhanced transmission of shocks. While there is evidence

that trade enhances the co-movement of output and income shocks in both periods, today’s

move to vertical specialization might be able to explain the greater synchronicity in the

world trade shock (Di Giovanni and Levchenko 2010). Surprisingly, a “decoupling”

argument made recently in the academic literature holds that nations’ business cycles are

increasingly less synchronized. Domestic demand from within large economies or regional

demand (Eurozone, East Asia) is more important than broader linkages between emerging

markets and industrialized nations (Kose, Otrok, and Prasad, 2008). The global recession

and trade decline of 2008-2009 would seem to provide evidence to the contrary. Evidence


                                               29
from the interwar period suggests that trade mattered in the Depression for output co-

movement (Foreman-Peck, Hughes Hallet, and Ma, 2000 and Mathy and Meissner, 2010),

but the channel is likely to be quite different from that today.

        Is it impossible to insulate an economy from international forces? Although trade is

still a major force for transmitting shocks, monetary policy in many countries is not as

tightly bound to other nations as it was in 1929 and 1930 when the gold standard was still

in operation, although the EMU is a notable exception. The evidence on whether of

monetary policy and fixed exchange rates heightens co-movement today is mixed in any

case in the recent period (compare Baxter and Kouparitsas, 2005, Clark and van Wincoop,

2001, and Artis and Zhang, 1997). Also, major advances in economics structure and

economic policy have changed the landscape from the 1930s. Counter-cyclical fiscal policy

and large shares of expenditure accounted for by national governments and the service

sector is now a fact of life.

        Co-movement is still an issue, although it is unclear how bad it could have been in

the absence of counter-cyclical fiscal policy that went into motion in 2008-09. It is still

unclear--and too early to know—to what extent monetary, fiscal and trade factors have

mattered in the current downturn for co-movement. Significant gaps in our knowledge due

to poor data on financial and trade linkages coupled with economic theories that lag behind

the rapidly changing structure of international trade and finance plague the real-time

assessment of these forces.

        Two other significant factors that helped the global economy to avoid a 1930s- style

trade collapse are floating exchange rates (within EMU issues notwithstanding) and the

World Trade Organization. Floating exchange rates between Japan, Europe, and the United

States have allowed for smoother adjustment and less reliance on an implicit exchange rate


                                              30
guarantee for producers. Moreover, less concern about exchange rate levels in the

advanced economies have liberated monetary policy makers (the European Monetary

Union is again an exception), allowing them to adopt simultaneous, if not fully

coordinated, expansionary monetary policies. If the gold standard ‘mentalité’ contributed

to tariffs, then we clearly no longer have this problem.

        The World Trade Organization has demonstrated itself quite capable of imposing

sanctions on protectionist policies: the WTO seems to work to stop global outbreaks of

protectionism. Although the Global Trade Alert has focused on a number of acts of ‘murky

protectionism’ there has been no return to near autarky levels of tariffs like that of the

1930s. Multilateralism has held strong on the trade front, especially for the EU, meaning

tariff rise in a significant bloc of nations have been limited.

        In terms of the structure of production and consumption, the global economy has

indeed changed radically. The recent trade collapse seems to be due to uncertainty and

small trade costs changes interacting with supply chains.11 During the Depression, income

losses, tariffs and other policy problems were most important in explaining the trade

decline. Despite having learned how to impede successive rounds of tariff rises and keep

income buoyant, today’s Great Recession has produced an almost equally impressive trade

decline in its first year. The fact that trade is rebounding quickly is cause for optimism and

a reminder that some lessons have been learned but challenges remain.




11
  Eaton, Kortum, Neiman and Romalis (2010) using a methodology related to that used in Jacks, Meissner
and Novy (2009a) suggest that the trade cost rise was much bigger during the Depression than it has been
during the recent recession.



                                                    31
V. Final Thoughts: Learning from the Past, Keeping Up, and Looking Forward.



       In classes on the Great Depression our students frequently ask, as Minsky (1982)

did: “Can ‘It’ Happen Again?” Implicit in that question is whether ‘we’ (i.e., economists,

policy makers, market participants, society) have learned anything. It also provokes us to

consider what sorts of new risks might set off another Great Depression.

       Economic history shows that policy makers do learn. The United States responded

to the crisis of 1907 by creating the National Monetary Commission, which conducted in-

depth historical and contemporary studies of the monetary and banking systems of the

United States and other leading nations; many other countries have responded to financial

crises with similar inquiries. The end result for the US was the establishment of a central

bank, now considered an indispensible player in promoting financial stability. The

financial havoc wreaked by the Great Depression led US policy makers to introduce a

number of regulations and limits on markets in the wake of the Great Depression. These

seem to have had the effect of promoting financial stability although, admittedly, there

were losers as well an winners. International policy makers introduced the Bretton Woods

institutions (i.e., IMF, World Bank and the GATT/WTO) in an effort to promote exchange

rate stability, avoid disruptive speculation in the global capital markets and prevent a

recurrence of the Depression’s decline into protectionism. That effort has been largely

successful on the latter front while somewhat less so on the first two. It remains to be seen

whether banking crises can be restrained as they were in the immediate post-World War II

period or whether the recent response has ‘sown the seeds’ of the next crisis.

       Like the IMF, World Bank, and GATT/WTO, the institutions of the European

Union were created to enhance international cooperation and the smooth functioning of the


                                              32
world economic system. Although recent events in Greece have cast a shadow on the

internationalism exemplified by the EU and the European Monetary Union, it is undeniable

that substantial progress towards international cooperation has been made during the half

century or so since the signing of the Treaty of Rome. Certainly, the repercussions of

financial crises in the leading nations under globalization have made it clear to most

politicians and electorates that nations’ economic destinies are closely entwined.




REFERENCES

Alessandria, G., Kaboski, J., and Midrigan, V., (2010), ‘The Great Trade Collapse of 2008-
09: An Inventory Adjustment?’, NBER working paper 16059.

Anderson, J.E. and van Wincoop, E. (2003), ‘Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
Border Puzzle.’, American Economic Review, 93(1), 170-192.

Anderson, J. and van Wincoop, E. (2004), ‘Trade Costs’, Journal of Economic Literature,
42, 691-751.

Artis, M.J., Zhang, W. (1997), ‘International business cycles and the ERM: is there a
European business cycle?’, International Journal of Finance and Economics, 2, 1–16.

Athanassiou, P. (2009), 'Withdrawal and Expulsion from the EU and the EMU: Some
Reflections', Legal Working Paper 10, Frankfurt, European Central Bank.

Baier, S.L. and Bergstrand, J. (2001), ‘The Growth of World Trade: Tariffs,
Transport Costs and Income Similarity.’ Journal of International Economics, 53(1), 1-27.

Baldwin, R. (2009), ‘The Great Trade Collapse: What caused it and what does it mean?’ in
Richard Baldwin (ed.), The Great Trade Collapse VOX EU 27 November 2009
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/430

Baxter, M., and Koupiritsas. M.A. (2005), ‘Determinants of business cycle co-movement: a
robust analysis.’ Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(1), 113-157

Bernanke, B. S. (1983), 'Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in Propagation of the
Great Depression', American Economic Review, 73 (3), 257-76.




                                             33
Bernanke, B. S. (1995), 'The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: A Comparative
Approach', Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 27 (1), 1-28.

Bernanke, B. S. and James, H. (1991), 'The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis
in the Great Depression: An International Comparison', in R. G. Hubbard (ed.), Financial
Markets and Financial Crises, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Bordo, M.D., Cavallo, A., and Meissner, C. M. (2010), ‘Sudden Stops: Determinants and
Output Effects in the First Era of Globalization, 1880-1913’, Journal of Development
Economics, 91 (2), 227-241.

Bordo, M. D., Eichengreen, B., Klingebiel, D. and Martinez-Peria, M. S. (2001), 'Is the
Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?', Economic Policy, 32, 53-82.

Cagan, P. (1965), Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money, 1875-1960,
New York, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cairncross, A. and Eichengreen, B. (1983), Sterling in Decline: The Devaluations of 1931,
1949, and 1967, Oxford, Blackwell.

Cairncross, A and Eichengreen, B. (2003), Sterling in Decline. 2nd edition., London,
Palgrave Macmillan.

Campa, J.M., (1990), ‘Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s: An Extension
to Latin America’, Journal of Economic History, 50 (3), 677-682.

Catão, L. A.V., and Solomou, S. N. (2005), 'Effective Exchange Rates and the Classical
Gold Standard Adjustment', American Economic Review, 95 (4), 1259–1275.

Céspedes, L.F., Chang, R. and Velasco, A. (2004), ‘Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate
Policy’. American Economic Review, 94 (4), 1183-1193.

Chaney, T. (2008), ‘Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of
International Trade’. American Economic Review, 98(4), 1707-1721.

Chor, D. and Manova, K. (2009), ‘Off the Cliff and Back? Credit Conditions and
International Trade during the Global Financial Crisis’, Stanford University mimeo.

Choudhri, E. U. and Kochin, L. A. (1980), 'The Exchange Rate and the International
Transmission of Business Cycle Disturbances: Some Evidence from the Great Depression',
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 12 (4), 565-574.

Clark, T. E., and van Wincoop, E. (2001) ‘Borders and Business Cycles.’ Journal of
International Economics, 55(1), 59-85.

Crucini, M. J. and Kahn, J. (1996), ‘Tariffs and aggregate economic activity: lessons from
the Great Depression’, Journal of Monetary Economics, 38, 427–67


                                            34
Di Giovanni, J. and Levchenko, A., ‘Putting the Parts Together: Trade, Vertical Linkages,
and Business Cycle Comovement’, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2 (2),
95-124.

Deardorff, A. V. (1998) ‘Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a
Neoclassical World?’ in Jeffrey A. Frankel (Ed.), The Regionalization of the World
Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Eaton, J and Kortum, S.S. 2002. ‘Technology, Geography, and Trade’. Econometrica,
70(4), 1741-1780.

Eaton, J., Kortum, S., Neiman, B. and Romalis, J. (2010), ‘Trade and the Global
Recession’, mimeo, Penn State University Economics Department.

Eichengreen, B. (1989), ‘The political economy of the Smoot-Hawley tariff.’ Research in
Economic History, 12, 1−43.

Eichengreen, B. (1992a), Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression,
1919-1939, New York, Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, B. (1992b), 'The Origins and Nature of the Great Slump Revisited', The
Economic History Review, 45 (2), 213-239.

Eichengreen, B. (1996), Globalizing Capital, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Eichengreen, B. (2004), 'Viewpoint: Understanding the Great Depression', The Canadian
Journal of Economics, 37 (1), 1-27.

Eichengreen, B. (2007a), 'The Breakup of the Euro Area', NBER Working Paper 13393,
Cambridge, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eichengreen, B. (2007b), 'The Euro: Love It or Leave It?', Vox EU, November 19, 2007,
http: www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/729, accessed February 25, 2010.

Eichengreen, B. (2010), 'Europe’s Trojan Horse', Project Syndicate, February 15, 2010,
http: www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/eichengreen14/English, accessed February
25, 2010.

Eichengreen, B. and Sachs, J. (1985), 'Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the
1930s', The Journal of Economic History, 45 (4), 925-946.

Eichengreen, B. and Hatton, T. J. (1988), Interwar Unemployment in International
Perspective, Dordrecht, The Netherlands; Boston, Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Eichengreen, B. and Jeanne, O. (2000), ‘Currency Crisis and Unemployment: Sterling in
1931.’ in P. Krugman (ed.), Currency Crises, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.


                                            35
Eichengreen, B. and Irwin, D. A. (2010), ‘The Slide to Protectionism in the Great
Depression: Who Succumbed and Why?’ working paper Economics Dept. Dartmouth
College.

Eichengreen, Barry and O’Rourke, K.H. (2010) “A Tale of Two Depressions” vox EU
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/3421.

Engel, C., and Wang, J. (2008), ‘International Trade In Durable Goods: Understanding
Volatility, Cyclicality, And Elasticities’ NBER working paper 13814.

Estevadeordal, A., and Frantz, B., and Taylor, A.M.T. (2003) ‘The Rise and Fall of World
Trade, 1870-193’ The Quarterly Journal of Economics¸118(2), 359-407.

Federico, G. (2005), ‘Not guilty? Agriculture in the 1920s and the Great Depression’,
Journal of Economic History, 65, 949–76.

Findlay, R. and O’Rourke, K.H. (2007), ‘Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World
Economy in the Second Millennium’, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Fisher, I. (1932), Booms and Depressions: Some First Principles, New York, Adelphi.

Fisher, I. (1933), 'The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions', Econometrica, 1 337-
357.

Foreman-Peck, J.,Hughes Hallett, A., and Ma, Y. (2000), ‘A monthly econometric model
of the transmission of the Great Depression between the principal industrial economies’,
Economic Modelling, 17, 515–44.

Frankel, J. A., Rose, A. K., (1998), ‘The endogeneity of the optimum currency area
criteria’, Economic Journal, 108, 1009–1025.

Freund, C., (2009), ‘Demystifying the Collapse in Trade’, VoxEU.org, 3 July, 2009.

Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A. J. (1963), A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-
1960, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Gorton, G., (2010), ‘Questions and Answers about the Financial Crisis’, NBER working
paper 15787.

Gros, D. and Mayer, T. (2010), 'How to Deal with Sovereign Default in Europe: Towards a
Euro(pean) Monetary Fund', CEPS Policy Brief 202, Brussels, Center for European Policy
Studies.

Grossman, R. S. (1994), 'The Shoe That Didn't Drop: Explaining Banking Stability During
the Great Depression', The Journal of Economic History, 54 (3), 654-82.



                                            36
Grossman, R. S. (2010), Unsettled Account: The Evolution of Banking in the Industrialized
World since 1800, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Hynes, W., Jacks, D. S. and O’Rourke, K. H. (2009). ‘Commodity Market Disintegration in
the Interwar Period’ NBER working paper 14767.

Irwin, D. A. and Kroszner, R. S. (1996), ‘Log-Rolling and Economic Interests in the
Passage of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff’, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, 45 173-200.

James, H. (2001), The End of Globalization: Lessons from the Great Depression,
Cambridge, Harvard University Press.

Jacks, D. S., Meissner, C. M. and Novy, D. (2009a), ‘Trade Booms, Trade Busts and Trade
Costs’ NBER working paper 15267.

Jacks, D. S., Meissner, C. M. and Novy, D., (2009b), ‘The role of trade costs in the great trade
collapse.” in Richard Baldwin (ed.), The Great Trade Collapse VOX EU 27 November 2009
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/430

Jacks, D. S., Meissner, C. M. and Novy, D., (2010), ‘Trade costs in the first wave of
globalization’, Explorations in Economic History, 47, 127-141.

Jones, J. M. Jr. (1934), Tariff Retaliation: Repercussions of the Hawley-Smoot Bill.
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press.

Keynes, J. M. (1925), The Economic Consequences of Sterling Parity, New York,
Harcourt, Brace and Company.

Kindleberger, C. P. (1973), The World in Depression, 1929-1939, Berkeley, University of
California Press.

Kindleberger, C. P. (1978), Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises,
New York, Basic Books.

Kose, M. A., Otrok, C. and Prasad, E. (2008), ‘Global Business Cycles: Convergence or
Decoupling?’, IZA discussion paper no. 3442.

Krugman, P. (2010), 'The Making of a Euromess', New York Times, February 14, 2010,
A21.

League of Nations. (1931), The Course and Phases of the World Economic Depression,
Boston, World Peace Foundation.

League of Nations (1938), Monetary Review, Geneva, League of Nations.




                                              37
League of Nations (1942), Commercial Policy in the Interwar Period: International
Proposals and National Policies, Geneva, League of Nations.

Levchenko, A. I., Lewis, L., and Tesar, L., (2009), ‘The Collapse of International Trade
During the 2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun’, Gerald R. Ford School of
Public Policy, University of Michigan discussion paper 592.

Maddison, Angus. 2003. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development.

Maddison, A. (2009), 'Statistics on World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP, 1-2006
AD', http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/Historical_Statistics/vertical-file_03-2009.xls,
accessed February 9, 2010.

Madsen, J. B. (2001), ‘Trade barriers and the collapse of world trade during the Great
Depression’, Southern Economic Journal, 67, pp. 848–68.

Mathy, G. and Meissner, C. M., (2010), ‘Trade, Exchange Rate Regimes and Co-
Movement: Evidence from the Interwar Period’, mimeo Department of Economics
University of California, Davis.

Minsky, H. P. (1982), Can 'It' Happen Again?, New York, M.E. Sharp.

Mitchell, B. R. (1978), European Historical Statistics, 1750-1970, New York, Columbia
University Press.

Moggridge, D. E. (1972), British Monetary Policy, 1924-1931: The Norman Conquest of
$4.86, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Perri, F. and Quadrini, V. (2002), ‘The Great Depression in Italy: Trade Restrictions and
Real Wage Rigidities’, Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(1), 128-151.

Romer, C. D. (1990), 'The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression', The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105 (3), 597-624.

Romer, C. D. (1993), 'The Nation in Depression', The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7
(2), 19-39.

Schubert, A. (1991), The Credit-Anstalt Crisis of 1931, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.

Shah Mohammed, S.I., Williamson, J.G., (2004), ‘Freight rates and productivity gains in
British tramp shipping 1869–1950’, Explorations in Economic History,
41 (3), 172–203.

Simmons, B. (1994), Who Adjusts? Domestic Sources of Foreign Economic Policy during
the Interwar Years, 1923–1939, Princeton, Princeton University Press.



                                            38
Temin, P. (1976), Did monetary forces cause the Great Depression?, New York, Norton.

Temin, P. (1989), Lessons from the Great Depression, Cambridge, MIT Press.

Temin, P. (1993), 'Transmission of the Great Depression', The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 7 (2), 87-102.
Wandschneider, K. (2008), ‘The Stability of the Interwar Gold Exchange Standard: Did
Politics Matter?’, Journal of Economic History, 68, 151-181.
Wicker, E., (1996), The Banking Panics of the Great Depression, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996.

Yi, K. M., (2003), ‘Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?’
Journal of Political Economy, 111(1), 52-102.

Yi, K.M. (2009), ‘The Collapse of Global trade: The Role of Vertical Specialization’, in
Baldwin, R. and Evenett, S. (eds.), The Collapse of Global Trade, Murky Protectionism,
and the Crisis: Recommendations for the G20, a VoxEU.org publication.




                                            39
Table 1:
Unemployment
in industry
(percent)

Country          Australia     Belgium       Canada    Denmark    France   Germany     Netherlands    Norway    Sweden    UK     US
Year
          1920           5.5                     4.6        6.1                  3.8            5.8       2.3       5.4    3.2    8.6
          1921          10.4           9.7       8.9       19.7      5.0         2.8            9.0      17.7      26.6   17.0   19.5
          1922           8.5           3.1       7.1       19.3      2.0         1.5           11.0      17.1      22.9   14.3   11.4
          1923           6.2           1.0       4.9       12.7      2.0        10.2           11.2      10.7      12.5   11.7    4.1
          1924           7.8           1.0       7.1       10.7      3.0        13.1            8.8       8.5      10.1   10.3    8.3
          1925           7.8           1.5       7.0       14.7      3.0         6.8            8.1      13.2      11.0   11.3    5.4
          1926           6.3           1.4       4.7       20.7      3.0        18.0            7.3      24.3      12.2   12.5    2.9
          1927           6.2           1.8       2.9       22.5     11.0         8.8            7.5      25.4      12.0    9.7    5.4
          1928          10.0           0.9       2.6       18.5      4.0         8.6            5.6      19.2      10.6   10.8    6.9
          1929          10.2           1.3       4.2       15.5      1.0        13.3            2.9      15.4      10.2   10.4    5.3
          1930          18.4           3.6      12.9       13.7      2.0        22.7            7.8      16.6      11.9   16.1   14.2
          1931          26.5          10.9      17.4       17.9      6.5        34.3           14.8      22.3      16.8   21.3   25.2
          1932          28.1          19.0      26.0       31.7     15.4        43.8           25.3      30.8      22.4   22.1   36.3
          1933          24.2          16.9      26.6       28.8     14.1        36.2           26.9      33.4      23.2   19.9   37.6
          1934          19.6          18.9      20.6       22.2     13.8        20.5           28.0      30.7      18.0   16.7   32.6
          1935          15.6          17.8      19.1       19.7     14.5        16.2           31.7      25.3      15.0   15.5   30.2
          1936          11.3          13.5      16.7       19.3     10.4        12.0           32.7      18.8      12.7   13.1   25.4
          1937           7.4          11.5      12.5       21.9      7.4         6.9           26.9      20.0      10.8   10.8   21.3
          1938           7.8          14.0      15.1       21.5      7.8         3.2           25.0      22.0      10.9   12.9   27.9
          1939           8.8          15.9      14.1       18.4      8.1         0.9           19.9      18.3       9.2   10.5   25.2

Eichengreen and Hatton (1988: 6-7).




                                                                           40
Table 2: Banking crises during the Great Depression



Crisis countries: Austria, Belgium, Estonia. Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Norway, Poland, Romania, Switzerland, United States, Yugoslavia.



Non-crisis countries: Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Greece, Japan, Lithuania, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom.




Source: Grossman (2010: 314-6).




                                                                              41
Figure 1 Average Growth Rates of GDP for 17 Countries by Period, 1870-2006




Source: Maddison (2009).




                                                              42
Figure 2: Exchange rates and industrial production, 1935




                                                           43
Figure 3 Exports and GDP for 27 Countries, 1920-1939




Notes: Total exports in real 1990 US Dollars for 27 countries are divided by real GDP in US dollars for the same set of countries. The countries included are:
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, the Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Uruguay. Data for GDP are from Maddison
(2003). Exports data come from various sources cited in Jacks, Meissner, and Novy (2009a).




                                                                              44
