                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               STOCK RETURNS AND THE TERM STRUCTURE



                         John Y. Campbell


                      Working Paper No. 1626




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1985




This paper is based on Chapter 5 of nr Yale PhD dissertation, "Asset
Duration and Time—Varying Risk Premia." I am grateful to Robert
Engle, Huston McCulloch, Frederic Mishkin, Robert Shiller, Kenneth
Singleton and James Tobin, and seminar participants at Columbia and
Princeton Universities and the National Bureau of Economic
Research, for helpful comments. I am responsible for any remaining
errors. The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                    NBER Working Paper 111626
                                    June 1985




           Stock Returns and the Term Structure



                         ABSTRACT



     It is well known that in the postwar period stock
returns have tended to be low when the short term nominal
interest rate is high. In this paper I show that more
generally the state of the term structure of interest rates
predicts stock returns. Risk premia on stocks appear to move
closely together with those on 20—year Treasury bonds, while
risk premia on Treasury bills move somewhat independently.
Average returns on 20—year bonds have been very low relative
to average returns on stocks.

     I use these observations to test some simple asset
pricing models. First I consider latent variable models in
which betas are constant and risk premia vary with expected
returns on a small number of unobservable hedge portfolios.
The data strongly reject a single—latent—variable model.
     The last part of the paper examines the relationship
between conditional means and variances of returns on bills,
bonds and stocks. Bill returns tend to be high when their
conditional variance is high, but there is a perverse
negative relationship between stock returns and their
conditional variance. A model is estimated which assumes
that asset returns are determined by their time—varying
betas with a fixed—weight "benchmark" portfolio of bills,
bonds and stocks, whose return is proportional to its
conditional variance. This portfolio is estimated to place
almost all its weight on bills, indicating that uncertainty
about nominal interest rates is important in pricing both
short— and long—term assets.




                                    John Y. Campbell
                                    Department of Economics
                                    Dickinson Hall
                                    Princeton University
                                    Princeton, NJ 08544
                                    (609) 452—4011
         In recent years a great deal of effort has been expended in test-

    ing rational expectations models of long-term asset prices. Such mod-

    els state that the rationally expected returns on some set of assets,

 measured over some time interval, differ across assets only by a con-

 stant. Typically one asset in the set has a (nominal) return which is

 known in advance, so the model implies that expected returns on all

 the other assets are equal to this known return, plus a constant. The

difference between two expected returns is often called a "risk premi-

um", and expectations models state that risk premia are constant

through time.'

        Two particularly well-known expectations models concern the term

structure of interest rates, and the relationship between stock re-

turns and interest rates. The expectations theory of the term struc-

ture states that expected returns on bonds and bills of all maturities

are equal except for a constant. The expectations theory for stock

returns and interest rates, as described informally by Fama and

Schwert [1977], states that expected nominal stock returns equal the

nominal Treasury bill rate, plus a constant.

        Fama and Schwert showed that in postwar U.S. data the expecta-

tions theory for stock returns and interest rates is strongly reject-

ed. When monthly stock returns are regressed on the 1-month Treasury

bill rate, the estimated coefficient is about -5 rather than +1 as

predicted by the theory. Fama and Schwert attributed their results to

a negative impact of inflation on stock returns.2



1
    Expectations models as defined here are less restrictive than the
    models considered by Cox, Ingersoll and Ross [1981] and LeRoy
     [l982a], which state that risk premia are constant at zero.


                                   —1-
       The expectations theory of the term structure has also been

rejected in recent empirical work. Shiller, Campbell and Schoenholtz

[1983], Campbell and Shiller [1984] and Mankiw and Summers [1984]

showed that the spread between the long bond yield and the short in-

terest rate predicts excess returns on long bonds. Campbell [1984a]

shows that the spread between 2- and 1-month bill rates, and the lag-

ged excess return on 2-month bills over 1-month bills, also have pre-

dictive power for excess returns in the term structure.

       These findings are not the result of data mining, but rather are

based on careful consideration of the properties of the expectations

theory of the term structure. Campbell [l984a] derives an expression

for the yield spread between long and short rates as a weighted sum of

the -expected change in the long rate, and the risk premium on the long

bond in the next period. Similarly, the spread between a 2-period and

1-period rate is a weighted sum of the expected change in the 1-period

rate and the expected excess return on a 2-period bond in the next

period. Thus if the expectations theory is false, and risk premia

vary through time, yield spreads will reflect these variations. The

lagged excess return on 2-month bills will be a good proxy for the ex-

pected excess return on 2-month bills if risk premia move through time

in a persistent manner, and will be a good proxy for excess returns on

bonds if in addition there is correlation of risk premia across matur-

ities.



2
    However the theoretical analysis in the literature explains a neg-
    ative impact of an inflation surprise on contemporaneous stock re-
    turns, rather than a negative relation between inflation and the
    risk premium on stock.

    Lagged excess bond returns are too volatile to be good proxies for

                                 -2-
       The first contribution of this paper is to show that the

variables which have been used as proxies for risk premia on 20-year

Treasury bonds, also predict excess stock returns.4 This fact is docu-

mented in section 1, and suggests an interpretation of the results of

Fama and Schwert: risk premia on bonds and stocks move together. Sec-

tion 1 also shows that the behavior of excess returns on 2-month

Treasury bills is strikingly different. Although excess returns on

2-month bills are highly predictable, the estimated risk premia are

only weakly correlated with estimated risk premia for the two long-

term assets.

       Despite their common movement, risk premia on bonds and stocks do

differ in some important respects. The estimated standard deviations

of stock risk premia are considerably larger than those of bond risk

premia, while the mean risk premia on these assets have opposite

signs. In the 1959-78 period, mean excess returns on bonds were neg-

ative at -1.605%, while mean excess returns on stocks were highly po-

sitive at 3.353%. 2-month bills fell in between with mean excess re-

turns of 0.234%. Updating to 1983, the means were -2.485%, 3.896% and

0.378% respectively.

       These observations offer an opportunity to test asset pricing

models in ways which are not possible when time variation in expected

returns is ignored. They also challenge a variety of informal macroe-

conomic explanations which have been proposed for risk premia.




    risk premia.
"
    Keim and Stambaugh [1984] independently noted this phenomenon, using
    a different set of information variables. See also Huizinga and
    Mishkin [1984].

                                  -3-
     Fama [1976] attributed time-varying risk premia in the term

structure of Treasury bill returns to time variation in uncertainty

about future nominal short rates (which he equated with future expect-

ed inflation rates). Excess returns on bills, bonds and stock all

tend to be low when there is a positive innovation in short rates, so

they all have "betas" on short rates of the same sign. Time variation

in uncertainty about short rates would cause risk premia to move to-

gether. The persistence of the stochastic process for short interest

rates gives long bonds a high beta on short rate innovations, and thus

explains chy estimated bond risk premia have a high standard deviation

relative to bill premia. The high beta of stock returns remains some-

thing of a mystery in this framework, although Fama [1981], Schwert

[1981], Geske and Roll [1983] and others have tried to explain it.

     One difficulty with this simple model is that it implies that

risk premia on bills and bonds should move together, and bonds should

have high average returns.   In Fama's words, when the short rate pro-

cess is persistent,



        "uncertainty about the change in the spot rate creates
         more uncertainty in a bill's premium the longer the
         maturity of the bill. If this source of uncertainty
         is positively associated with the types of risks that
         the market compensates, then expected premiums on
         bills will be an increasing function of maturity, and
         any changes through time in the degree of uncertainty
         about changes in spot rates will have a greater effect
         on a bill's expected premium the longer the maturity
         of the bill."

         [Fama, 1976, p. 436]




                                -4-
     Another explanation for risk premia, expounded for the stock mar-

ket by Pindyck [1984], is that there is time variation in uncertainty

about real output and thus about real interest rates and stock divi-

dends. It is natural to presume that stocks have a high positive beta

on output surprises, and thus that output uncertainty raises expected

excess stock returns. Campbell [1984b] shows that when output follows

a covariance stationary stochastic process, in a simple "representa-

tive agent" exchange model, output uncertainty also raises expected

excess returns on bonds of sufficiently long maturity.

     A closely related model is the traditional 1-period CAPM where

the market portfolio is taken to be the stock market.5 In this model,

the risk premium on any asset is just the product of the asset's beta

on stock returns, and the expected excess return on stocks.   If bills

and bonds have a positive beta on stocks, and the expected return on

the market varies as in Merton [19801, then expected bill, bond and

stock returns should move together. Here again, however, the low av-

erage returns on long bonds and the low correlation of expected bill

returns with the other assets remain a mystery.

     In the second half of this paper I use the observations of sec-

tion 1 to evaluate simple explanations of time-varying risk premia of

the sort just discussed. I do not relate risk premia to macroeconomic

variables such as real consumption, unemployment, inflation or indus-

trial production. This type of analysis is left for future research.

Instead, I develop and test the restrictions of simple asset pricing

models on the first and second moments of asset returns themselves.



  Constantinides [1980] discusses conditions under which the CAPM will
  hold even in an intertemporal setting.

                                -5-
     The theoretical framework for all the models tested is a discrete

time version of the intertemporal capital asset pricing model (ICAPM),

in which asset prices are derived from the first order conditions of

the intertemporal optimization problem of a representative consumer.

The framework is laid out in Appendix A.

     The analysis makes extensive use of the concept of the ttbenchmark

portfoliott. As defined by Hansen, Richard and Singleton, the bench-

mark portfolio is the portfolio whose return is the ratio of the dis-

counted marginal utility of consumption next period to the marginal

utility of consumption this period, divided by the conditional expec-

tation of the square of this ratio. Any portfolio return which is

perfectly conditionally correlated with the marginal utility of con-

sumption next period, is perfectly conditionally correlated with the

benchmark return. Under the ICAPM, any such return has the properties

that its conditional mean and variance move approximately in propor-

tion, and that conditional expectations of other returns can be deter-

mined from their ttbt "    with   such a return in the manner familiar

from the 1-period CAPM.

     In section 2 of the paper I assume that the underlying sources of

uncertainty are unobservable. In the context of the ICAPM, this is

equivalent to assuming that the benchmark return is unobservable.

Without observing the benchmark, one cannot test explanations of risk

premia unless one makes some strong auxiliary assumptions.     I assume

that the benchmark portfolio places time-varying weights on a small

number of Ithedge portfoliostt, which are also unobservable but on which

all assets have constant betas. Then changes in underlying uncertain-




                                  -6-
ties affect expected asset returns only by changing the expected re-

turns on these hedge portfolios.

     Models of this type seem to capture the spirit of the informal

accounts of risk prenlia discussed above, in that movements in a few

parameters drive expected returns on many assets at once. The data

are restricted in this framework so long as there are more assets than

hedge portfolios, and more information variables than hedge portfol-

ios. Econometrically, the expected returns on hedge portfolios are

"latent variablest' driving risk premia. I show that the data strongly

reject a single-latent-variable model with constant betas, and there

is weak evidence against a two-latent variable model with constant be-

tas. Thus changes in risk premia do not seem to be attributable sole-

ly to changes in a single variance parameter for interest rates, out-

put or stock returns.

     In section 3 I test the hypothesis that one of the assets studied

in the paper, or some fixed-weight combination of them, is perfectly

correlated with the benchmark return. This is an alternative way to

model informal explanations of risk premia, which does not require the

auxiliary assumption that betas are constant. The nominal interest

rate uncertainty model, for example, suggests that the benchmark is

perfectly correlated with the 2-month bill, since the unexpected re-

turn on this asset is just the innovation in the 1-month interest

rate. The output uncertainty model suggests that the benchmark port-

folio is perfectly correlated with the stock market.

     I begin section 3 of the paper by examining the relationship be-

tween conditional means and variances of returns on bills, bonds and




                                —7—
stocks. This is useful as a means of characterizing the data, and be-

cause if any one of these assets is perfectly correlated with the

benchmark portfolio for the economy, then its expected return should

move approximately in proportion with its conditional variance.      I

find that bill returns tend to be high when their conditional variance

is high, but that the reverse is true for stocks.6

     I go on to estimate and test a model which assumes that the

benchmark portfolio places unknown fixed weights on bills, bonds and

stocks. Expected returns on individual assets are assumed to be de-

termined by their betas with this portfolio, whose conditional expect-

ed return is proportional to its conditional variance. Both betas and

the conditional moments of the benchmark return are modelled as linear

functions of information variables.   The estimated portfolio places

almost all its weight on 2-month bills, indicating that interest rate

uncertainty is indeed important in pricing both short- and long-term

assets.




6 The result for bills confirms the finding of Engle, Lilien and Rob-
  ins [1985] who specify their model differently and use different
  data.

                               -8-
1.   Regression Tests of Expectations Theories


     In Tables lA through lC I present regressions which test the ex-

pectations theories for 2-month bills, 20-year bonds, and stocks.   In

the first half of each table the sample period is 1959:2 through

1978:9; in the second half the regressions are repeated for the 1959:2

through 1983:11 period. The shorter sample corresponds to a period

which is often thought of as a single "policy regime", and which has

been extensively used in recent empirical studies of interest rate be-

havior (e.g. Huizinga and Mishkin [1984]). The longer sample includes

recent data; in comparison with the earlier period, these are charac-

terized principally by greater volatility in long bond yields. For a

detailed explanation of data sources and transformations, see Appendix

B.

     In each table the excess return on 2-month bills, 20-year bonds

or stock over 1-month bills is regressed on five sets of variables: a

constant and the short interest rate in each row, alone (row 1), with

the spread of the 2-month rate over the 1-month rate (row 2), with the

spread of the 20-year bond rate over the 1-month rate (row 3), with

the lagged excess return on 2-month over 1-month bills (row 4), and

with all the above (row 5).

     The short rate is retained as an explanatory variable throughout,

for two main reasons. First, the results of the paper can easily be

compared with those of Fama and Schwert, and the question can be an-

swered: is the predictive power of the short rate for stock returns

robust, or is the short rate acting merely as a proxy for other term

structure variables?   Fama and Schwert's dependent variable is the



                                -9-
holding return rather than the excess return on stock -   that   is, they

do not subtract the 1-month bill rate from the stock return -    but the
inclusion of the 1-month bill rate in the regressions of this paper

makes the results directly comparable. Secondly, with the short rate

included the independent variables can be interpreted as elements of a

vector of interest rates, minimally restricted. The 1-month, 2-month

and 20-year rates are included without restrictions, and the first

lags of the 1-month and 2-month rates are included with a single coef-

ficient restriction by including the lagged excess return on 2-month

bills.

     One possible problem with the use of the short rate as an expla-

natory variable is that it may be nonstationary in the sample period;

if this is the case, then the asymptotic theory which underlies the

statistical inference of the paper may be invalidated. However the

regressions reported in Tables 1 were repeated excluding the short

rate, and yielded essentially the same results.

     Below each coefficient in the tables, two standard errors are re-

ported. These do not rely on the assumption of the classical linear

model that the equation error is homoskedastic, for this is not an im-

plication of the expectations theory. The theory does not suggest

that heteroskedasticity should take any particular form. Accordingly

the first standard error presented in the tables is that of White

[1980, 1984], which is based on an estimator of the covariance matrix

of coefficient estimates which is consistent in the presence of heter-

oskedasticity of unknown form.7



  I follow the ruling of McCulloch [1985] in my spelling of the word
  "heterosedasticity". The consistency of White's covariance matrix
                                  -   10 -
     White's standard error is larger than the ordinary standard

error, in a simple OLS regression, when the equation error variance is

positively correlated with the square of the explanatory variable.

Thus in row 4 of Table lA, the explanatory variable is just the depen-

dent variable lagged once; its variance is persistent through time, so

White's standard error is about twice the ordinary standard error.

For most other variables, White's standard error is close to the ordi-

nary standard error and makes little difference to the significance

level at which the expectations model is rejected.

     MacKinnon and White [1984] and Chesher and Jewitt [1984] have re-

cently examined the small-sample properties of White's covariance ma-

trix estimator. MacKinnon and White propose an alternative estimator,

based on a "jackknife" resampling scheme (Efron [1982]), which is as-

ymptotically equivalent to White's estimator but which has superior

finite-sample properties. This is the second standard error presented

in Tables 1.

     The jackknife standard error is always greater than White's stan-

dard error, but the difference is never greater than 7% of White's

standard error. This relatively small difference suggests that al-

though small sample problems are present, they are not very serious

for these data. Accordingly sections 2 and 3 of the paper rely exclu-

sively on asymptotic inference.




 estimator depends on the assumption that the regressors and equation
 errors are jointly stationary or can be expressed as a joint mixing
 process, and on certain technical moment restrictions which I assume
 are satisfied.

                                  —   11   —
     A related indicator of small sample problems is the "maximum hat

value". This is computed as Max [h.], where h. .
                                                 1]
                                                      is   the i'th diagonal

element of H =   X(XtXY1XI.   It is bounded above by one, and approaches

zero asymptotically. Belsley, Kuh and Welsch [1980] discuss the maxi-

mum hat value as a diagnostic statistic for the presence of a single

particularly influential observation in a regression, and Chesher and

Jewitt [1984] show that large maximum hat values are associated with

large biases in White's standard errors.

     The maximum hat value is reported in each regression of Tables 1

as the first number in the last column. The regressions with a larger

maximum hat value typically also display a greater difference between

White's and the jackknife standard errors. Below the maximum hat val-

ue are significance levels, based on the White and jackknife covari-

ance matrices respectively, for a test of the hypothesis that all

coefficients except the constant are zero. The R2 and Durbin-Watson

statistics are also reported for each regression.

     In Table lA excess returns on 2-month bills are regressed on the

various information variables. The main result for the sample period

1959-1978 (rows 1-5) is that the spread between 2- and 1-month bill

rates, measured at the beginning of a month, has strong explanatory

power for the excess return on 2-month bills over the month.° Over the

full 1959-1983 sample, the short rate and the lagged excess return on




8 The coefficient of the spread in row 2 is 1.351. Ignoring the pres-
  ence of the short rate in the regression, it can be shown that the
  coefficient in a regression of the change in short rates on the
  change predicted by the term structure would be l-(1.35l/2) =       0.325.
  Fama [1984a] obtains a similar coefficient, and argues that this
  shows that the term structure has some ability to forecast changes
  in interest rates, even though the expectations theory is rejected.

                                 -   12   -
2-month bills also have explanatory power.

     In Table lB the dependent variable is the excess return on

20-year bonds. The explanatory power of the information variables is

far less impressive in this table. The spread between the 20-year

bond rate and the 1-month bill rate is significant at the 5% level in

both sample periods; this result was obtained earlier by Shiller,

Campbell and Schoenholtz [1983] and Campbell and Shiller [1984J. The

lagged excess return on 2-month bills is significant at the 5% level

for the 1959-78 period, and the hypothesis that the information vari-

ables are jointly insignificant can be rejected using the White and

jackknife standard errors at the 3.5% and 5.3% levels respectively.

However when the sample is updated these results become much weaker.

     In Table 1C the dependent variable is the excess return on common

stock. The first row is the regression performed by Fama and Schwert

[1977], and as in their paper the coefficient on the short rate is es-

timated significant at the 1% level and negative.9 In row 2 the

2-month spread is added; it has a positive coefficient but very weak

explanatory power, and the short rate remains significant and neg-

ative. In rows 3 and 4 however, the 20-year spread and the lagged ex-

cess bill return have significant positive coefficients and render the

short rate insignificant. The lagged excess bill return on its own

explains 11% of the variation of stock returns in this period and has

a jackknife t statistic of almost 3. The statistical significance of

these explanatory variables is even stronger when the sample is updat-



 Fama and Schwert did not subtract the 1-month bill rate from their
 dependent variable. Therefore in their regression the expectations
 theory implied a coefficient of +1, whereas here it implies a zero
  coefficient.

                               - 13 -
ed to 1959-83, although for this sample the short rate retains its

significance at the 5% level when all other variables are included.

In general the R2 values for stock returns are about twice those for

20-year bond returns.

       It is of interest to consider Tables 1A, lB and 1C as a group.

The pattern of significant coefficients in Table 1A is quite different

from the pattern in Tables lB or 1C: predictable excess returns on

2-month bills appear to move somewhat independently from risk premia

on bonds or stocks. However the pattern of coefficients is similar in

Tables lB and lC, suggesting that risk premia on bonds and stocks move

together. In Table 2 I report the correlations of the fitted values

from rows 5 of Tables 1A, lB and lC.          In the 1959-78 period, estimated

risk premia on bills and bonds have a positive correlation of 0.551;

bill and stock risk premia have a correlation of 0.285; but bond and

stock risk premia have an extremely high correlation of 0.864. The

estimated standard deviations of risk premia on bills, bonds and stock

are 0.231, 5.938 and 17.024 respectively.           In 1959-83, the correla-

tions are measured at 0.029, 0.321 and 0.778, while the standard devi-

ations are 0.465, 8.904 and 16.143.

       Of course, there may be other variables known to the market which

explain excess returns on bills, bonds and stock and which are omitted

from the regressions of Table 1. The effects of these variables could

reduce the estimated correlations of risk premia. However they could

only do so by increasing the estimated standard deviations of risk

premia, which are already quite striking.'0



'°
     Consider adding ttomitted information't terms to the estimated risk
     premia on bonds and stock. Suppose these are perfectly negatively

                                 -   14   -
     Table 2 also presents summary statistics for ex post returns on

bills, bonds and stock. The main points to note are that ex post

bill, bond and stock returns have rather low correlations,'' and that

the variance of ex post bond returns increases dramatically when

1979-83 is added to the sample. This may help to explain the weak re-

suits for the full sample period in Table lB.

     In conclusion, this section has presented evidence that there are

predictable movements through time in excess returns on bills, bonds

and stock. These movements are partially captured by a variety of

term structure variables, which add considerably to the predictive

power of the short interest rate alone. The evidence for predictabil-

ity of bill and stock returns is very strong, while the results for

bonds are much weaker. However, predictable movements in bond and

stock returns are highly correlated, while risk premia on bills move

somewhat independently. Mean bond returns are low compared to mean

bill and stock returns. In the remainder of the paper, these observa-

tions are used to test some simple asset pricing models.




  correlated, and have variances proportional to the variances of the
  estimated risk premia. To eliminate the correlation of risk pre-
  mia, the ratio of the variance of the omitted terms to the variance
  of the estimated risk premia would have to equal the estimated cor-
  relation of risk premia. Thus in the case of bonds and stock in
  1959-78, the variance of risk premia would have to be at least
  1.864 times as large as estimated if the risk premia were in fact
  uncorrelated.

  This observation for bills and bonds contradicts a popular impres-
  sion that short and long term interest rates "move together" over
  short intervals.

                              - 15   -
2.     Latent Variable Models for Predictable Asset Returns


       In this section I test the hypothesis that the predictable excess

returns uncovered in section 1 are driven by a small number of unob-

servable latent variables. This hypothesis can be interpreted atheor-

etically, as a way of characterizing the extent to which predictable

asset returns "move togethertt; or it can be interpreted as a speciali-

zation of the intertemporal capital asset pricing model (ICAPM) in

which assets have constant betas on a small number of unobservable

hedge portfolios. A more extensive discussion of the theoretical in-

terpretation is given in Appendix A of the paper.

       The ICAPM with K hedge portfolios, on which assets have constant

betas, places the following restriction on the excess return on a par-

ticular asset i, eh. •12
                     it



(2.1) E[eh.tx] =
                     k=l ikktIXtj

here ik is the "beta't of excess return i with the k'th hedge portfo-

lio,                                 and x is the vector of information

variables x1, ...
                     x.    E{ehklx] may be written as OklXlt + ... +

          The returns on the K hedge portfolios are assumed to be unob-
OkJXJt
servable in both their expected and unexpected components; that is,

they are treated as latent variables.




12 This excess return need not be the excess over the risk-free rate.
   Without loss of generality, the K hedge portfolio returns are as-
   sumed to be orthogonal. See Appendix A for further details.

                                 —   16   -
     Following Hansen and Hodrick [1983] and Gibbons and Ferson

[1983], I consider the implications of (2.1) for the system of I re-

gression equations



(2.2) eh =      Ax +       v
where eh't =               ...
                [ehit             eh1]
         x' =   {xi        .
                               .. x]
         vt =   [vi        ...
                                  v1]
         A      =[cx..]
                      1]

The model (2.1) implies


                 K
(2.3) a,, =      Z    .ikB kj
                k=l



where ik and 0kj are not observable directly. K2                  coefficients may

be normalized: for asset 1, the betas may be assumed to be ll =

l2   =
             •' lK =           0, for asset 2, 21 =    o 22   =
                                                                    'S'' 2K    O3

and so on through asset K for which KK = 1.                There are 1K - K2 re-

maining free Ts, and JK free OTs.                 There are IJ coefficients alto-

gether in the matrix A, so (I-K)(J-K) coefficients are restricted.

Thus as stated in the introduction to the paper, the model places

over-identifying restrictions on the data so long as the number of la-

tent variables K is strictly less than the number of assets I and the

number of information variables J.

     The implications of the model are particularly clear in the case

of a single latent variable. Here K = 1, we can drop the k subscript

and write a.. =      .0.,      and the system (2.2) can be written as

                                         - 17 -
           eh1              162                  x1        v1
                                                       +
(2.4) 2t                    202            20J             vt

           ehi        JOl                  I8J


   is   normalized to equal unity, so the first row of A estimates the U

coefficients, the first column estimates the other     coefficients, and

the lower right-hand block is restricted. The single-latent-variable

model restricts the data with as few as 2 asset returns and 2 informa-

tion variables. It states that expected excess returns on all assets

move in proportion with one another: that is, they are perfectly cor-

related (positively or negatively); the absolute values of their means

are proportional to their standard deviations; and if two expected ex-

cess returns are positively correlated, their means have the same

sign.

        In Table 2 we have-already displayed summary statistics for meas-

ures of expected excess returns (the projections of excess returns on

a subset of the marketts information). Table 2 suggests that a sin-

gle-factor model is far from an adequate description of expected re-

turns on bills, bonds and stock. The correlations of the ex ante bill

return with the ex ante bond and stock returns are only 0.551 and

0.285 respectively in the 1959-78 period, and 0.029 and 0.321 respec-

tively in the 1959-83 period. The ex ante bond and stock returns are

highly positively correlated, but the mean bond return is negative

while the mean stock return is positive.

                                  - 18 -
     Of course, the statistics in Table 2 do not take any account of

uncertainty in the underlying estimates in Table 1.     In Table 3 I

present formal test statistics for the hypothesis that restrictions

(2.3) with K1 apply to the system of regression equations (2.2),

where all explanatory variables from Table 1 are included in the test.

The restricted system of equations was estimated by the Generalized

Method of Moments (GMM) procedure (Hansen [1982], Hansen and Singleton

[1982]), which allows for the presence of conditional heteroskedastic-

ity.13 Hansen's Chi-square statistic was used to test the nonlinear

cross-equation restrictions (2.3).

     The Chi-square statistics, degrees of freedom and associated sig-

nificance levels are displayed in Table 3 for both sample periods and

all combinations of assets (bills-bonds-stock, bills-bonds, bills-

stock and bonds-stock). In both sample periods the single latent

variable model can be rejected at the 1% level when all three assets

are included in the test. In the longer period, bond returns contain

no information which contributes to this rejection, since the tests

which use bonds and bills or bonds and stocks alone do not reject.

For the shorter period, there is some information in bond returns: the

single latent variable model can be rejected at the 2.1% level using

bills and bonds alone, and at the 7.9% level using bonds and stocks

alone.




  This is important since in the ICAPM variations in expected returns
  on hedge portfolios will generally be associated with variations in
  the conditional covariance matrix of asset returns.

                               - 19   -
     Given these results, a natural further step is to estimate and

test a model with two unobservable latent variables.       (K=2 is the

largest number of latent variables for which data on three asset re-

turns are restricted). For the shorter sample period in Table 3,

there is weak evidence against such a model; it is rejected at the

8.0% level. For the longer period, the significance of the Chi-square

statistic is only 36.6%. This is unsurprising since we have already

noted that there is little information in bond returns for the longer

period and the two other asset returns just suffice to identify two

latent variables. Coefficient estimates and standard errors for the

two latent variable model are also presented in Table 3.




                              - 20 -
3.     Predictable Asset Returns With     an   Observable Benchmark Portfolio


       In this section I ask whether the predictable movements of excess

returns uncovered in section 1 are associated with changes in the co-

variance matrix of ex post returns on bills, bonds and stock. As in

the previous section, the results can be interpreted atheoretically,

as an exploratory analysis of the second moments of returns in rela-

tion to information variables; or they can be interpreted as testing a

particular specialization of the ICAPM.

       The specialization I consider here relies on two strong assump-

tions. First, I assume either that a portfolio perfectly correlated

with the benchmark, along with a riskfree interest rate, is known and

observable; or that it places fixed weights on a known and observable

set of assets, but that these weights must be estimated from the data.

Secondly, I replace the assumption of the previous section that as-

sets' betas are constant with the somewhat weaker assumption that be-

tas are exact linear functions of a known set of information vari-

ables. That is, no other variables in the market's information set

and no nonlinear functions of the information variables appear in the

expressions for betas. Under these two assumptions, a particularly

simple test of the ICAPN is possible and can be conducted using data

on one or multiple assets.

       As shown in more detail in Appendix A, the ICAPM implies that the

conditional expectation of the excess return eh, on a portfolio per-

fectly conditionally correlated with the benchmark, is approximately

proportional to its conditional variance.' That is, we have the two-



14
     The approximation arises from the use of a discrete time rather
                                 -   21   -
equation system


                                 J
(3.1) ehzt =                     Z        a.x.         + u
                                           3                     zt
                                j=l


                       2             J                   2                 J
                            = [                                  + f{ Z a.x. ]
              eh
                zt
                                     . j jt
                                      X        cz.x. J
                                                                                   3 jt
                                                                                           + v
                                                                                              zt




Here the conditional expectation of eh                                                  is written as a linear func-
                                                                                   zt

tion of the information variables x. (as in the previous section).

The a. coefficients define the conditional expected return, and f is

the coefficient of proportionality relating conditional first and sec-

ond moments. f is determined by the relation between eht and ehb,

the benchmark itself: we have eht =
                                                                                   (-l/f)ehb.      One expects to find

f positive for the assets studied in this paper, since their returns

seem likely to be positively correlated with consumption and thus neg-

atively correlated with its marginal utility and the benchmark return.

The errors u and v are orthogonal to the vector x                                                        and are relat-
                           zt                  zt                                                   t,
ed by


      2            J                                             J
u
 zt
          =   f[ jl
                  Z a.x. j
                     j jt
                                                + 2u
                                                     zt      [    E  ax. J + vzt
                                                                 jl .3 jt


          The system (3.1) suggests a way to evaluate the simple ideas out-

lined in the introduction, which stressed output variability or inter-

est rate variability as sources of time-varying risk premia on bills,

bonds and stock. These explanations of risk premia can be treated as




    than a continuous time formulation of the ICAPM.

                                                                      -   22   -
statements that certain portfolios are perfectly conditionally

correlated with the benchmark portfolio. Thus the output variability

model suggests a version of (3.1) in which the stock market has this

property (as in tests of the 1-period CAPM in which the stock market

is taken to be the market portfolio). The interest rate variability

model suggests a version in which the 2-month bill is perfectly condi-

tionally correlated with the benchmark (since the unexpected component

of the 1-month return on a 2-month bill is just the innovation in the

1-month nominal interest rate).        The 20-year bond might also be a

plausible benchmark, since the unexpected component of its return con-

tains a discounted sum of innovations in expected future nominal in-

terest rates (Campbell [1984a]). If any of these individual assets is

indeed the economyts benchmark portfolio, then the variables which

predict movements in its excess return should predict proportional

movements in its conditional variance.15

      In Table 4 I present GNM estimates of a system like (3.1), for

each of the three assets and two sample periods of the paper. The

vector x provides J instruments, so 2J orthogonality conditions can

be used in estimation. The system is slightly modified from (3.1), in

that it includes a constant term in the equation describing the van-




'   Merton [1980] argues that the expected return on the stock market
    can be estimated more precisely from the variance of the return
    than from sample average returns. However he does not consider
    conditional expected returns and does not directly test the hy-
    pothesis of proportionality across the first and second moments of
    returns. Engle, Lilien and Robins [l985J adopt an approach which
    is closer to that taken here, but specify that returns follow an
    ARCH process rather than having moments which are exact linear
    functions of information variables. They apply their model to the
    term structure and find as here that there is a positive relation-
    ship between bill returns and their conditional variance.

                                - 23   -
ance.'6 If (3.1) holds, then the constant should be zero. Estimates

of J+2 coefficients -     a.,   f and the constant - are presented with

standard errors. Probability values are reported for Chi-square tests

of the cross-equation restrictions imposed by the estimated system,

and of the hypothesis that a. are zero except for a constant (below,

in parentheses).

        The results in Table 4 are quite mixed. The constant term in the

variance equation is always significantly different from zero, except

in row 4 (bill returns 1959-83). This may reflect the fact that the

coefficients in Tables 1 were large enough to predict negative excess

returns in some periods; if this is not to imply negative conditional

variances in Table 4, there must be a constant in the variance equa-

tion.     In any event, significant constants suffice to reject (3.1)

against the more general alternative estimated.

        On the other hand, the coefficient f is also significantly dif-

ferent from zero in rows 3, 4 and 6 (bill returns 1959-83 and stock

returns in both sample periods). This indicates that there is some

common movement in conditional first and second moments of returns.

Curiously, the estimated f coefficient for stocks is negative, sug-

gesting that stocks have a higher expected return when their condi-

tional variance is low.'7



16 Non-negativity of the variance is not imposed in estimation. The
   errors u and v have a deterministic nonlinear relationship given
   the parameters, and v must be highly nonnormal, but error-instru-
   ment orthogonality can still be used to estimate and test the sys-
  tem.

17 This is perhaps not as surprising as it seems at first. Experiment
   with a separate coefficient for the 1-month bill rate in the stock
   variance equation confirmed that the conditional variance of stock
   returns is low when the bill rate is low; but at such a time stocks

                                  - 24 -
       Further evidence of dynamic behavior of the conditional variance

comes from the test statistics for the estimated system. If this sys-

tem is rejected (as it is for bills, and bonds 1959-78), then this is

evidence of correlation of the conditional variance with information

variables, which does not obey the proportionality restriction.

       Table 4 uses only the behavior of own returns, in evaluating the

hypothesis that a particular asset is the economy's benchmark portfo-

lio. An alternative approach is to test the restrictions imposed by

that hypothesis on other assets' returns. As shown in more detail in

Appendix A, a further implication of the ICAPM is that for each excess

return eh.t, the following holds:




(3.2) eh.
        it
           =     .izt
                   ehzt + u.           it



where eh.      is the excess return on the i'th asset over the riskfree
          it

rate, .     t=Covt(eh.t,              )/Var(eh ), and u is an unexpected return

which is orthogonal not only to the benchmark portfolio return but to

any variables which are known at t. The assumption that betas are ex-

act linear functions of information variables means that we can write

        6.  x + ... + 6. x                       Substituting
                       LJ Jt                                    this expression into equa-
                                            .
 izt     ii it
tion (3.2), we obtain


                      J
(3.3) eh.  =      {    Z   6. .x. ]             eh     + u.
        it
                      j=i 1J          jt         zt       it




  have high expected returns.

                                                 -   25 -
          Since eh is assumed to be observable, (3.3) can be estimated as

a regression of eh. on the cross-products of information variables

       and the excess return eht. If the model is correctly specified,

the error term u. is orthogonal not only to these cross-products, but

to all elements of the market's information set; in particular, it is

orthogonal to the vector                       This implication of the model can be

tested by running a regression of eh. on the set of cross-products of

information variables with eh                   and on the information variables in-
                                        zt ,

cluded separately:


                        J                               J
(3.4) eh.
        it
           =        [   E   6. .x. J   ehzt     + X . .x.            + u.
                                                                              it
                        j=l ii jt                            ii jt
                                                    j=l


If the coefficients s'.. on the information variables are jointly sig-

nificant, the model is rejected. Such a test can be conducted for a

single asset, or for several assets in a system of regression equa-

tions.

          The coefficients on the cross-products can be interpreted inde-

pendently of the asset pricing model test methodology. A significant

coefficient on the cross-product of the j'th information variable and

eh        indicates a significant correlation between the information van-
     zt
able x. and the cross-product of eh. with eh                              .        The existence of
           Jt                                           it           zt
such a correlation is of interest whatever the outcome of a particular

asset pricing model test.




18
      This test may be interpreted as an extension to a particular dynam-
      ic setting of Gibbons' [1982] multivariate approach to testing the
      static CAPM.

                                          -    26   -
        There are several possible reasons for a rejection of the re-

 strictions in (3.3). The benchmark portfolio or the riskfree rate may

be misspecified or measured with error. Alternatively, the specifica-

tion of the betas may be incorrect. To see how this could lead to a

rejection of the model, consider the case where the benchmark portfo-

ho and riskfree returns are correctly measured. However the beta of

asset i is modelled as ,
                           izt = 5.iO       + 6. x when in fact it is .
                                               il lt                  izt
                                                                          =

6i0 +           + S.2x2., where x2. = V
                                                x1.   Equation (3.4) will now
have an error 5. x eh
                 i22t zt   + u.
                              it
                                   .    In general eh will be a function of
                                                    zt

the information variables; thus the equation error contains a term in

the square of x2, that is a term in x1. This will cause                to be

estimated nonzero, and the proposed test will reject the model.

     I now apply this test to the data on bill, bond and stock re-

turns. Since the analysis is exploratory, I maintain a single-equa-

tion regression approach, testing (3.3) on one asset at a time.

     In Table 5, each asset in turn is regressed on the cross-products

of information variables with each other asset, and on the information

variables included separately. As before, all the information vari-

ables which appear in Tables 1 are included in the test. Heteroske-

dasticity-consistent significance levels, derived from White's covari-

ance matrix estimator, are reported for the cross-products and for the

information variables included separately. Separate test statistics

are reported for the coefficients including and excluding the constant

term. Thus the first column of significance levels in Table 5 is for

the hypothesis that the coefficients in equation (3.4) on cross-prod-

ucts of all information variables, including the constant, with
                                                                        eh

                                   -   27   -
are zero: 6k = 0,          j=l. .   .J,   kl. The second column is for the hy-

pothesis that the coefficients on all cross-products except that of

the constant with the hedge portfolio return are zero: 6k =

j2.. .J,       kl. The third column is for the hypothesis that all infor-

mation variables, included separately, have zero coefficients: Z.. =

0,   j=l. .   .J.   The fourth column is for the hypothesis that all except

the constant have zero coefficients: ..                = 0,   j2. .   .J.   We may inter-

pret the second column as testing whether changes in the covariance

matrix of asset returns are associated with movements in information

variables, the third column as testing the full set of restrictions

(3.3), and the fourth column as testing whether movements in asset re-

turns (ignoring average levels) are explained by the model (3.3).

       The first six rows of Table 5 are for the short sample period

1959-78, and the last six rows are for the 1959-83 period. The sig-

nificance levels of information variables, when these are included in

a regression without cross-products (as in Tables 1) are reported in

brackets underneath each element of columns 3 and 4.

       Summarizing the results of the table, there is little evidence

that movements in information variables are associated with changes in

covariances of asset returns, except for the covariance of bond and

stock returns (rows 4, 6, 10 and 12). The specification (3.3) with

bonds as the dependent variable and stocks as the hedge portfolio is

not rejected for either sample period (rows 4 and 10); however for the

long sample period the information variables do not explain bond re-

turns even when cross-products are excluded (row 10). The stock hedge

portfolio model does not explain bill returns in either sample period.




                                          -   28   -
       These results are discouraging for the simple models described in

 the introduction to the paper. However I now test a slightly more

 general specification, and obtain more encouraging results.                       I now as-

 sume that some fixed-weight combination of observable asset returns is

perfectly correlated with the benchmark portfolio:



            I
       =
eh
  zt
           1=1
                  1  it
                 w.eh.


The weights w. are parameters which must be estimated. The equation

system (3.3) now becomes


                          J                  I
(3.5) eh.
        it
           =
                       .
                          E   6. .x. ]
                           13 Jt         [E       w.eh.
                                                   1    ])it   +   u.it   i1. .   .1
                       j=l               .
                                         1=1



       To identify the system, I normalize Zwl. The restriction re-

lating the conditional mean and variance of eh, which was stated in

equation (3.1), can also be tested in conjunction with (3.5) as part

of an (I+2)-equation system. The errors u± are orthogonal to the in-

formation variables x, j=l. . .J, and their cross-products with the

benchmark portfolio return. Thus there are 2IJ orthogonality condi-

tions from these equations. The errors u and v are orthogonal to

the x and contribute 2J more orthogonality conditions for a total of

2(I+l)J. There are IJ               parameters, 1-1 w. parameters, J . parame-

ters, and a proportionality parameter f, along with a constant if this

is included in the benchmark portfolio variance equation. Thus there

are (I+l)(J+1)-1 or (I+l)(J+l) parameters to be estimated. The system




                                         -       29   -
is identified for any positive J, with overidentifying restrictions

whose number grows with J.

     In Table 6 I present GMM estimates and test statistics for a com-

bined system of equations (3.1) and (3.5) with a fixed-weight estimat-

ed portfolio. In the 1959-78 sample period, the estimated portfolio

places unit weight (to 3 significant digits) on 2-month bills; it is

short on 20-year bonds and long on stocks, with 0.3% weight on each of

these assets. Despite the very low portfolio shares of the long-term

assets, the variance of their returns is sufficiently high relative to

the variance of bill returns that they contribute 2% and 8% respec-

tively of the total variance of the portfolio return.

     Within the framework of the model, one cannot reject the hypothe-

sis that the conditional variance of the excess return eh is propor-

tional to its conditional mean. The constant term in the variance

equation is estimated at less than one tenth of its standard error,

while the proportional term has the plausible value of 0.448.      Thus

the model estimates eh = -2.23 eh
                      zt          bt
     The excess return eh   moves in a similar manner to the 2-month
                         zt
bill excess return; in particular, it is high when the 2-month spread

is high. However it is also high when the lagged excess return on

2-month bills is high, reflecting the stock component of the portfo-

ho. Movements in the excess return on 2-month bills are partly at-

tributed to movements in the beta of the 2-month bill with eh     ; this
                                                             zt
is low when the lagged excess return on 2-month bills is high, offset-

ting the positive effect of the lagged excess return on eh. There

are also significant movements in the betas of the other assets with




                               - 30 -
 the benchmark portfolio. Although the estimates and standard errors

 appear sensible, the Chi-square test of the model's cross-equation re-

 strictions rejects the model at the 0.4% level.

      In the 1959-83 period, the results are qualitatively similar.

 Once again the portfolio with excess return eht is estimated to con-

 sist almost entirely of 2-month bills.   It is short 0.8% bonds, and

 long 0.1% stocks; bonds and stocks account for 14% and less than 1%

respectively of the variance of the portfolio return. The conditional

first and second moments of eht are again close to proportional. and

there are significant movements in all assets' betas with the bench-

mark. The Chi-square test of the model now fails to reject at the 40%

level.

     The results of Tables 4-6, taken together, suggest that there is

some truth to the idea that movements in uncertainty about nominal in-

terest rates explain movements in expected asset returns. The excess

return on 2-month bills over 1-month bills does tend to be high when

its conditional variance is high, and in the 1959-83 period one cannot

reject the hypothesis that the relationship is proportional. Although

a direct regression test shows that predictable stock and bond returns

are not entirely explained by time varying betas with a 2-month bill

portfolio, the system estimated in Table 6 chooses a benchmark portfo-

lio in which 2-month bills dominate. For the 1959-83 period, that

system is not rejected by a Chi-square test, and in both periods the

conditional first and second moments of the estimated excess return

eh move in proportion.




                              -   31 -
4.   Conclusion


     In this paper I have documented that the expectations theories

for bills, bonds and stocks can be rejected at high levels of confi-

dence. When realized excess returns on these assets are regressed on

information variables which measure the state of the term structure,

the fitted values are far from constant.       Instead, they vary with a

standard deviation for the 1959-1978 period of almost 1/4% per month

on an annualized basis for bills, 6% for bonds and 17% for stocks.

Over the same period average bond returns were 1 1/2% a year less than

bill returns and 5% less than stock returns.

     These observations can be used to test simple asset pricing mod-

els, and to guide the formulation of more elaborate models. In this

paper I have confined my attention to models which can be tested using

only data on asset returns and information variables.     I show in sec-

tion 2 that the data strongly reject models in which betas are con-

stant and risk premia are driven by time variation in a single latent

variable. There is weak evidence against even a more general two-la-

tent-variable model in the 1959-1978 period.

     In section 3 I test models in which one of the assets studied, or

some fixed linear combination of them, has an excess return over the

riskfree rate which is perfectly conditionally correlated with the

marginal utility of consumption. The conditional first and second mo-

ments of such an excess return move approximately in proportion, and

predictability of excess returns on other assets can be explained by

their covariance with this return. Popular explanations of risk pre-

mia which stress output or interest rate uncertainty can be interpret-



                               -   32   -
ed as saying that returns on stock or 2-month bills have these proper-

ties. The traditional 1-period CAPM in which the market portfolio is

taken to be the stock market also makes this claim for stocks.

      I find that expected stock returns have a negative relationship

with the conditional variance of stock returns, but that 2-month bill

returns move positively with their conditional variance. When I esti-

mate a system which allows free but fixed weights on bills, bonds and

stocks in the benchmark portfolio, it places almost all the weight on

2-month bills and does not reject the restriction that the first and

second conditional moments of the benchmark return move in proportion.

The coefficient estimates in the fixed-weight model are plausible, al-

though the system is rejected at the 1/2% level for the 1959-78 peri-

od.

      In summary, it appears that time variation in the conditional co-

variance matrix of bill, bond and stock returns is an important part

of the explanation for time-varying risk premia on these assets. The

results of the paper suggest that uncertainty about short-term nominal

interest rates, as measured by the conditional variance of 2-month

bill returns, is important in pricing both Treasury bills and long-

term assets. Uncertainty about stock returns, by contrast, seems to

have a negative relationship with expected stock returns and does not

help to explain returns in the term structure.

      Clearly it would be desirable to relate the time-varying expected

returns documented in this paper to developments in the real economy.

The preliminary exploration of asset return data in this paper is a

prelude to an account of the macroeconomic sources of time-varying

risk premia.


                               - 33 -
Appendix A: Relation of Empirical Asset Pricing Models

             to the Intertemporal CAPM


       In this Appendix I relate the models of sections 2 and 3 to the

intertemporal CAPM of Merton [1973], Breeden [1979], Hansen, Richard

and Singleton [1981] and others. Formulated in discrete time with a

representative agent with time-separable utility u defined over con-

sumption c, this model implies that for any asset i, the one-period

return from time t to time t+l, h., must satisfy the first-order con-

dition



(A.l) E[d(u'(c+i)/u'(c))(l+h.t)] = 1



Here     denotes expectation conditional on the full information set of

the representative agent at time t. d is a discount factor.

       (A.1) is testable directly if consumption is observable and the

form of the utility function is known. Hansen and Singleton [1982]

have developed econometric techniques for testing (A.l), and Campbell

[l984a] applies them to the data of this paper assuming constant rela-

tive risk aversion utility.

       An indirect approach to testing the model is as follows. Define

m+1 to be the discounted ratio of the marginal utility of consump-

tion at time t+l to the marginal utility at time t,

Then (A.l) can be rewritten as



Et[mtt+1(l+ht)1 =    1        for all assets i




                                 - 34 -
where as before Et denotes the expectation conditional on the full

information set of the market.

       Now consider the portfolio b with return


                       2
(l4hbt) =



Hansen, Richard and Singleton [1981] call this portfolio the "bench-

mark portfolio". Its return is perfectly correlated with        m+1, con-
ditional on information available at time t.           It is trivial to show

that


                                       2
(A.2) Et[(l+hbt)(l+hit)] =
                                 l/E[mtt+1}

for all assets or portfolios i, including i =     b.
       Now consider the riskfree rate of return


(l+ho) =    lIEm÷1
From (A.2),




Et[(l+hbt)(l+hjt)] =   (l+ho)E(l+hb)

and expanding the mean     of   the product into the sum of the covariance

and the product of the means,



(A.3) Eh1t_ho = _Covt[hit,hbt]/Et(l+hbt)


Since this holds for all i, including i=b, we have


                                    - 35 -
(A.4) Ethbt_hot =   -Varhb/E(l+hb)

Solving for Et(l+hbt) and substituting into (A.3), we obtain



(A.5) Eth.-ho =     it[Ethbtot]

where it =

     Equation (A.5) is a linear relationship, holding at any point in

time, between the conditional expected return on any asset       and the

conditional expected return on the benchmark portfolio. Unfortunate-

ly, in general hbt is unobservable and        the slope of this rela-

tionship, varies through time. However under additional assumptions

(A.5) may be testable.     I now discuss the assumptions necessary to

generate a) the models of section 2, and b) the models of section 3,

from equations (A.4) and (A.5). These assumptions are arbitrary and

not derived from underlying assumptions about tastes and technology.

     a) Assume (i) the benchmark portfolio is a time-varying weighted

combination of the riskless asset with return hot and K risky portfol-

ios indexed by kl. . .K with orthogonal returns hit, ...,
                                                            h:    hbt =

        + within + ... +                                    are scalars
wohot                      wKthKt, where w0, w1, ..., WKt
summing to unity.   Further assume (ii) that individual assets have

constant conditional betas with the portfolios kl.. .K.     This would

follow from but is weaker than the assumption of Gibbons and Ferson

[1983] that the conditional covariance matrix of asset returns is con-

stant; Gibbons and Ferson's assumption is unappealing in a setting in




                                -   36   -
which expected asset returns are moving through time. For example, in

the 1-period CAPM changing expected returns and constant betas can be

obtained simply by allowing the variances and covariances of all asset

returns to move in proportion. This is allowed by assumption (ii) but

not by Gibbons and Ferson's assumption.

     Then



(A.6) it =
             k=l wkt(Var(hk)/Var(hb)).k

where ik is the constant beta of asset i with portfolio k.

     Since (A.6) holds for all assets and portfolios, including port-

folio k, and this portfolio by construction has a zero beta with all

other portfolio returns h1,        ...,
                                           hkl,   hk+l, ...,    hK, we have
                                      =                 and
                                           Ethkt_hot,


(A.7) Eth. - hot             ik [Ethkt_hot]
                       k=l



(A.7) for equation j   can   be subtracted from (A.7) for equation i, so

it is not essential to be able to measure the risk-free rate if the

[Ethkt_hot] are already taken to be unobservable.              Then equations

(A.7) are just the K-factor model of section 2.

    b) Drop (ii) above, but assume that some excess return h_ho,

perfectly correlated with hbt_hot is observable. (This is a weaker

assumption than assuming that ht itself is observable, since it al-

lows one to measure returns in nominal rather than real terms.) We

can write h_hot =                          for some positive or negative f.
                       (_l/f)(hbt_hot)

                                  - 37 -
Then (A.4) states that Eh-ho             f Varhb/E(l+hb). This rela-
tionship is the foundation of the assertion in section 3 of the text

that first and second conditional moments of the benchmark return are

approximately proportional. The approximation arises from the fact

that the conditional variance is divided by Et(l+hbt). However Ethbt

is always very small relative to one; it shrinks as the unit time in-

terval shrinks, so in the continuous limit the proportionality rela-

tionship is exact. For the monthly data of this paper, the standard

deviation of Ethbt is unlikely to be higher than the standard devia-

tion of the ex ante returns reported in Table 2.      For example, the

2-standard deviation band for excess stock returns in 1959-78 is 34%

on an annual basis, or from -0.025 to 0.028 in natural units on a

monthly basis. Thus the approximation involved in testing the propor-

tionality restriction in section 3 should be small.

        The cross-asset restrictions of section 3 follow directly from

equation (A.5).    Section 3 equates eh. with hit_hot, so it relies on

the assumption that the real return on 1-month Treasury bills is risk-

less.




                                - 38 -
Appendix B: Data Sources and Transformations




       Data were obtained and transformed as follows:

       1) Until November 1982, discount rates on Treasury bills were

quoted in the U.S. Treasury Bulletin, for a trading date at the end

of the previous month. The source for these rates was the first issue

of the Wall Street Journal for each month,and this original source was

used for the November 1982-November 1983 period. The rates were con-

verted from discount basis to bond-equivalent yield basis using the

formula r =    D/(l-D/lOOn), where n       12/rn, m =   maturity of bill in
months.

       The 1-month holding return on a 2-month Treasury bill was comput-

ed as 2R2_Ri,t+i, which is a linear approximation analogous to the

one employed for long bond yields.

       2) Salomon Brothers' Analytical Record of Yields and Yield

Spreads [19831 gives point sampled bond yields monthly from 1950:1 to

the present. Rates are quoted at the beginning of each month from

1959:1 onwards.

       Monthly holding returns on long bonds were calculated using the

linearized approximate formula of Shiller, Campbell and Schoenholtz

[1983]. The point of linearization was the average 20-year bond rate

in the period 1959:1 to 1978:9, 0.058712 or 0.00489 on a monthly ba-

sis.

       The formula expresses the monthly holding return on a long bond

as a linear function of the yield on the bond at the beginning and end

of the month. The formula is h. = D.R.
                             it    1 it
                                               -
                                                   (D.-1)R.
                                                     1          ,
                                                          i-l,t+1
                                                                  where   h.
                                                                           it



                                -   39 -
is the 1-month holding return at time t on an i-period bond, R.t is

the yield at time t on an i-period bond, and D. is the "duration" of

an i-period bond.     D. is calculated as (l_O**i)/(l_8), where U =

l/(1+Y),   and Y   0.00489 as above. D240 = 141.73 months, or just un-

der 12 years.

     Campbell [1984c] investigates the accuracy in practice of the

linear approximations used in this paper.

     3) Stock returns are measured by the value-weighted return on the

New York Stock Exchange, including dividend return, obtained from the

CRSP data tape (Center for Research in Securities Prices, Graduate

School of Business, University of Chicago).

     4) OLS regressions and standard error corrections were performed

using the mainframe software package FEC (Program for Econometric Com-

putation); GMM estimation was carried out on an IBM PC/XT using the

software package GAUSS. The objective function was minimized by a

Gauss-Newton algorithm with modified step size, operating on analytic

formulae for derivatives.




                               - 40 -
                                      TABLE 1A


                              Excess Bill Returns

 Row     Constant   1-Month      2-Month         20-Year   Lagged    R-Squared Max Rat
                     Rate        Spread          Spread    Excess      (DW)    (P-Value)
                                                           2-Month
                                                           Return

     1    0.338     -0.023                                             0.006    0.039
          (0.117)   (0.028)                                           (1.707) (43.3%)
          (0.120)   (0.029)                                                    (44.5%)
 2        0.004      0.012        1.351                                0.216    0.136
          (0.108)   (0.027)      (0.141)                              (2.064) (<0.05%)
          (0.111)   (0.027)      (0.145)                                       (<0.05%)
 3        0.373     -0.027                       -0.015               0.007      0.042
         (0.113)    (0.026)                      (0.030)             (1.697)   (51.3%)
         (0.115)    (0.027)                      (0.031)                       (52.6%)
 4        0.248     -0.011                                  0.154     0.028    0.146
         (0.109)    (0.027)                                (0.114)   (2.029) (39.1%)
         (0.114)    (0.028)                                (0.124)             (45.4%)
 5        0.081      0.004        1.340          -0.047     0.065     0.227      0.151
         (0.100)    (0.024)      (0.140)         (0.026)   (0.105)   (2.144) (<0.05%)
         (0.105)    (0.025)      (0.146)         (0.026)   (0.115)             (<0.05%)



 6       -0.133      0.088                                            0.098      0.042
         (0.130)    (0.028)                                          (1.284)    (0.2%)
         (0.134)    (0.028)                                                     (0.2%)
 7       -0.183      0.057        1.159                               0.254    0.151
         (0.131)    (0.028)      (0.237)                             (1.673) (<0.05%)
         (0.136)    (0.029)      (0.248)                                       (<0.05%)
 8       -0.270      0.098                        0.068               0.108      0.063
         (0.148)    (0.027)                      (0.058)             (1.341)    (0.1%)
         (0.152)    (0.028)                      (0.060)                        (0.2%)
 9       -0.194      0.076                                 0.348      0.217    0.175
         (0.133)    (0.029)                                (0.096)   (1.962) (<0.05%)
         (0.138)    (0.030)                                (0.106)             (<0.05%)
10       -0.083      0.045       0.929           -0.066    0.239      0.296    0.195
         (0.125)    (0.026)      (0.226)         (0.049)   (0.102)   (1.954) (<0.05%)
         (0.131)    (0.027)      (0.241)         (0.052)   (0.114)             (<0.05%)

Sample period: rows 1 to 5, 1959:2-1978:9, rows 6 to 10, 1959:2-1983:11.


                                  -    41   -
                                 TABLE lB

                            Excess Bond Returns

Row   Constant    1-Month      2-Month      20-Year   Lagged    R-Squared Max Hat
                   Rate        Spread       Spread    Excess      (DW)     (P-Value)
                                                      2-Month
                                                      Return

 1      2.980     -0.999                                         0.004      0.039
       (3.996)    (1.010)                                        (2.019) (32.5%)
       (4.055)    (1.026)                                                  (33.3%)

 2     -1.875     -0.494       19.659                             0.020    0.136
       (4.631)    (1.043)     (10.634)                           (2.034) (10.5%)
       (4.749)    (1.064)     (11.517)                                     (14.3%)

 3     -6.080      0.015                     3.832                0.024    0.042
       (4.925)    (1.012)                   (1.850)              (2.025) (10.3%)
       (4.996)    (1.030)                   (1.882)                        (11.2%)

 4     -2.587     -0.281                               9.559      0.034     0.146
       (4.373)    (1.033)                             (3.952)    (2.128)    (3.8%)
       (4.536)    (1.066)                             (4.188)               (5.3%)

 5    -11.585      0.681       12.997        2.941     7.558      0.053     0.151
       (5.352)    (1.039)     (10.382)      (1.851)   (4.033)    (2.111)    (3.5%)
       (5.525)    (1.077)     (11.320)      (1.899)   (4.322)               (5.3%)



 6      2.017     -0.776                                          0.003    0.042
       (6.854)    (1.459)                                        (1.775) (60.2%)
       (7.031)    (1.497)                                                  (61.1%)

 7      1.769     -0.933        5.818                             0.004     0.151
       (6.904)    (1.489)     (17.171)                           (1.770) (80.6%)
       (7.157)    (1.540)     (18.935)                                     (82.0%)

 8    -11.301      0.200                     6.677                0.038     0.063
       (7.990)    (1.446)                   (3.173)              (1.832) (10.8%)
       (8.227)    (1.493)                   (3.292)                        (12.6%)

 9      1.037     -0.972                               5.597      0.015     0.175
       (7.066)    (1.470)                             (5.516)    (1.871) (48.7%)
       (7.323)    (1.522)                             (5.863)              (52.4%)

10    -10.942      0.235       -6.871        6.376     3.040      0.041    0.195
       (7.389)    (1.444)     (18.048)      (2.964)   (5.750)    (1.891) (29.7%)
       (7.784)    (1.524)     (20.230)      (3.149)   (6.282)              (35.7%)

Sample period: rows 1 to 5, 1959:2-1978:9, rows 6 to 10, 1959:2-1983:11.



                                 -   42
                                  TABLE 1C

                            Excess Stock Returns

Row   Constant    1-Month       2-Month      20-Year   Lagged     R-Squared P-Value
                   Rate         Spread       Spread    Excess       (DW)     (Max Hat)
                                                       2-Month
                                                       Return

 1     29.423     -5.682                                           0.038       0.039
       (9.428)    (2.199)                                          (1.907)    (1.0%)
       (9.569)    (2.234)                                                     (1.1%)

 2     25.096     -5.232        17.518                             0.041       0.136
      (10.723)    (2.292)      (18.936)                            (1.913)    (1.9%)
      (11.013)    (2.348)      (19.797)                                       (2.2%)

 3     12.920     -3.834                      6.980                0.055       0.042
      (12.101)    (2.348)                    (3.298)               (1.926)    (0.4%)
      (12.264)    (2.387)                    (3.352)                          (0.5%)

 4     12.739     -3.528                               28.647       0.110    0.146
      (10.989)    (2.274)                               (9.514)    (1.928) (<0.05%)
      (11.537)    (2.371)                              (10.446)              (<0.05%)

 5      2.954     -2.442       —2.724         4.763    27.267      0.118       0.151
      (12.729)    (2.330)      (19.431)      (3.144)    (9.625)   (1.946) (<0.05%)
      (13.311)    (2.441)      (20.688)      (3.232) (10.614)                 (0.1%)



 6     16.859     -2.234                                           0.018       0.042
       (5.706)    (0.990)                                         (1.900)     (2.3%)
       (5.776)    (1.006)                                                     (2.6%)

 7     15.662     -2.992       28.111                              0.043      0.151
       (5.813)    (1.006)      (9.184)                            (1.946)     (0.1%)
       (5.915)    (1.027)      (9.488)                                        (0.1%)

 8      1.137     -1.082                      7.881                0.054       0.063
       (7.358)    (1.035)                    (2.448)              (1.948)     (0.1%)
       (7.488)    (1.059)                    (2.505)                          (0.1%)

 9     14.003     -2.805                               16.298      0.091      0.175
       (5.580)    (0.998)                              (3.925)    (2.002) (<0.05%)
       (5.674)    (1.021)                              (4.124)               (<0.05%)

10      6.478     -2.261        5.098        3.931     13.251      0.100      0.195
       (7.259)    (1.073)     (11.757)       (2.443)   (4.536)    (2.011) (<0.05%)
       (7.447)    (1.107)     (12.392)       (2.527)   (4.775)               (<0.05%)

Sample period: rows 1 to 5, 1959:2-1978:9, rows 6 to 10, 1959:2-1983:11.



                                 - 43 -
                                  TABLE 2


    Summary Statistics for Excess Bill, Bond and Stock Returns


    1959:2-1978:9           Bills             Bonds         Stock

Ex Post Excess Returns:

Means                       0.234             -1.605        3.353

Standard deviations         0.484             25.738       49.631

Correlations  Bills         1.000              0.354        0.149
(Covariances) Bonds
              Stock
                           (4.410)
                           J.)/)
                           ( _7r\ ()
                                  .JJL.LJ
                                               1.000
                                                     1      0.260
                                                             .




Ex Ante Excess Returns (fitted values from Row 5, Table 1):

Means                       0.234             -1.605        3.353

Standard deviations         0.231              5.938       17.024

Correlations  Bills         1.000           0.551           0.285
(Covariances) Bonds        (0.756)          1.000           0.864
              Stock        (1.121)        (87.340)          1.000



    1959:2-1983:11         Bills              Bonds         Stock

Ex Post Excess Returns

Means                      0.378              -2.485        3.896

Standard deviations        0.855              43. 749      51.032

Correlations  Bills         1.000              0.425        0.159
(Covariances) Bonds       (15.897)             1. 000       0.300
              Stock        (6.938)       (669.780)          1.000

Ex Ante Excess Returns (fitted values from Row 5, Table 1):

Means                      0.378              -2.485        3.896

Standard deviations        0.465               8.904       16. 143

Correlations  Bills        1 .   000           0.029        0.321
(Covariances) Bonds        (0.120)             1 .   000    0. 778
              Stock        (2.410)       (111.828)          1.000




                                       - 44    -
                              TABLE 3


    Latent Variable Models for Excess Bill, Bond and Stock Returns


    Chi-square statistics, degrees of freedom and significance levels:

                                   1959:2-1978:9                  1959:2-1983:11

1 latent variable
    bills, bonds and stock
    bills and bonds                11.533, 4,         2.1%         3.787, 4, 43.6%
    bills and stock                10.630, 4,         3.1%        16.181, 4,  0.3%
    bonds and stock                 8.364, 4,         7.9%         6.339, 4, 17.5%
2 latent variables
    bills, bonds and stock             6.749, 3,      8.0%         3.173, 3, 36.6%



    Coefficient estimates for models with 2 latent variables:

Dependent    Constant    1-Month            2-Month     20-Year    Lagged
Variable                  Rate              Spread      Spread     Excess
                                                                   2-Month
                                                                   Return

 1959:2-1978:9

 Bills           0.122   -0.007              1.276      -0.046      0.119
              (0.097)    (0.022)            (0.134)     (0.025)     (0.102)

 Bonds        -5.961     -0.073             -1.544       2.655      9.626
              (4.312)    (0.802)            (8.216)     (1.431)     (3.832)

Stock = 18.985 x fitted Bills +             2.252 x fitted Bonds
         (13.887)            (0.956)


 1959:2-1983:11

Bills          0.040     0.028               0.915      -0.096      0.225
              (0.103)    (0.022)            (0.198)     (0.043)     (0.076)

Bonds          1.370     -1.297         -10.783          3.080      0.993
              (3.067)    (0.913)            (7.202)     (2.070)    (3.475)

Stock = 40.912 x fitted Bills + 2.639 x fitted Bonds
       (30.760)           (2.529)




                                   -   45    -
                                TABLE 5


       Single-Beta Models for Excess Returns: Observable Benchmark Portfolio


Row    Dependent    Benchmark                     Joint Significance of
       Excess       Portfolio              Cross-Products        Information
       Return                                                     Variables
                                         with C without C with C without C

 1     Bill          Bond                    0.1%   19.6%     0.0%      0.0%
                                                             (0.0%)    (0.0%)
 2     Bill          Stock               26.7%      93.8%     0.0%      0.0%
                                                             (0.0%)    (0.0%)

 3     Bond          Bill                    0.0%   90.2%     0.4%     10.0%
                                                             (2.8%)    (3.5%)

 4     Bond          Stock                   0.6%    7.1%    12.9%     27.4%
                                                             (2.8%)    (3.5%)

 5     Stock         Bill                56.9%      80.3%     0.6%      0.3%
                                                             (0.0%)    (0.0%)

 6     Stock         Bond                    0.0%    0.3%    0.1%       0.1%
                                                             (0.0%)    (0.0%)



 7     Bill          Bond                    0.0%    3.3%    0.0%       0.0%
                                                             (0.0%)    (0.0%)

 8     Bill          Stock               61.0%      57.6%    0.0%       0.0%
                                                             (0.0%)    (0.0%)

 9     Bond          Bill                    0.0%   90.2%    0.0%       0.0%
                                                            (16.8%)   (29.7%)

10     Bond          Stock                   0.0%    0.0%   17.9%     27.3%
                                                            (16.8%)   (29.7%)

11     Stock        Bill                 11.5%      55.7%    1.1%      0.6%
                                                             (0.0%)    (0.0%)

12     Stock        Bond                     0.0%    0.3%    0.0%      0.1%
                                                            (0.0%)     (0.0%)

Sample period: rows 1 to 6, 1959:2-1978:9, rows 7 to 12, 1959:2-1983:11.




                                -   48   -
                                        TABLE 6


           Single-Beta Models for Excess Returns: Estimated Benchmark Portfolio


Dependent        Constant          1-Month            2-Month   20-Year   Lagged      P-Value
Variable                            Rate              Spread    Spread    Excess
                                                                           2 -Month
                                                                          Return



 1959:2-1978:9


Bills                 0.889         0.023             0.062     -0.025     -0.101     <0.05%
Beta                 (0.097)       (0.013)            (0.061)   (0.023)    (0.029)

Bonds            -19.643            2.193          12.216        4.917    21.410      <0.05%
Beta             (15.767)          (2.250)        (11.849)      (4.626)   (5.468)

Stock                31.409        -5.031         -95.457       13.043    61.849      <0.05%
Beta             (28.885)          (3.824)        (22.987)      (7.029)   (10.284)

eh                    0.009        0.040              1.021     -0.041     0.169
     zt                                                                               <0.05%
                     (0.092)       (0.018)         (0.119)      (0.022)   (0.073)


eh        = 1.000 x Bills      -   0.003 x Bonds + 0.003 x Stocks
     zt
           (0.0002)                (0.0004)


eh
     zt
          Variance      -0.005 +       0.448 x Expected eh
                                                                zt
                         (0.057)      (0.193)


Chi-square statistic 35.385, 16 degrees of freedom, significance level 0.4%




                                        -    49   -
                                   TABLE 6 (CONTINUED)


Dependent        Constant          1-Month         2-Month    20-Year   Lagged    P-Value
Variable                            Rate           Spread     Spread    Excess
                                                                        2-Month
                                                                        Return



 1959:2-1983:11


 Bills             0.825           0.003           -0.123      0.080     0.049     <0.05%
 Beta             (0.065)          (0.007)         (0.087)    (0.023)   (0.017)

 Bonds           -17.412           0.524          -19.195      9.094     6.585    <0.05%
 Beta             (8.619)          (1.094)         (8.429)    (2.699)   (1.690)

 Stock            25.639           -3.117          -1.692     5.058     4.970     <0.05%
 Beta            (12.038)          (0.955)         (8.617)    (2.343)   (3.048)

 eh                   0.060        0.034              0.828   -0.104    0.257     <0.05%
     zt
                  (0.092)          (0.015)         (0.183)    (0.028)   (0.069)


ehzt =      1.007 x Bills -        0.008 x Bonds + 0.001 x Stocks
           (0.0005)                (0.0004)


eh
  zt
          Variance =     -0.007    +   0.524 x Expected eh
                                                           zt
                         (0.081)       (0.273)


Chi-square statistic 16.717, 16 degrees of freedom, significance level 40.4%




                                         -   50   -
                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

     Belsley, David A, Edwin Kuh and Roy E. Welsch, Regression
nostics, Wiley 1980.

     Breeden, Douglas, "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Sto-
chastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities", Journal, of
cial Economics Vol. 7 pp. 265-296, 1979.

     Campbell, John Y. [1984aJ, Asset Duration and Time-Varying Risk
Premia, PhD dissertation, Yale University, 1984.

     Campbell, John Y. [l984b], "Bond and Stock Returns in a Simple
Exchange Model", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 1509, 1984.

     Campbell, John Y. [l984c}, "A Defense of Traditional ypotheses
about the Term Structure of Interest Rates", National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research Working Paper No. 1508, 1984.

     Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, "A Simple Account of the
Behavior of Long-Term Interest Rates", American Economic Review Vol.
74 No. 2, Papers and Proceedings, pp. 44-48, May 1984.

        Chesher, Andrew and Ian Jewitt, "Finite Sample Properties of
Least Squares Covariance Matrix Estimators", unpublished paper, Uni-
versity of Bristol, November 1984.

     Constantinides, George M., "Admissible Uncertainty in the Inter-
temporal Asset Pricing Model", Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 8
pp. 71-86, 1980.

     Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll Jr. and Stephen A. Ross, "A
Re-examination of Traditional Hypotheses about the Term Structure of
Interest Rates", Journal of Finance Vol. 36 No. 4, pp. 769-799, 1981.

        Efron, B., The Jackknife, The Bootstrap and Other Resampling
Plans, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia,
1982.

     Engle, Robert F., David M. Lilien and Russell P. Robins, "Esti-
mating Time-Varying Risk Premia in the Term Structure: the ARCH-M Mod-
el", unpublished paper, University of California at San Diego, March
1985.

     Fama, Eugene F., "Inflation Uncertainty and Expected Returns on
Treasury Bills", Journal of Political Economy Vol. 84 pp. 427-448,
June 1976.

        Fama, Eugene F., "Stock Returns, Real Activity, Inflation and
Money", American Economic Review Vol. 71 pp. 545-565, September 1981.




                                -   51   -
     Fama, Eugene F. [1984a], "The Information in the Term Structure",
Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 13 PP. 509-528, 1984.

     Fama, Eugene F. [1984b], "Term Premiums in Bond Returns", Journal
of Financial Economics Vol. 13 pp. 529-546, 1984.

     Fama, Eugene F. and G. William Schwert, "Asset Returns and Infla-
tiontt, Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 5 pp. 115-146, November
1977.

     Geske, Robert and Richard Roll, "The Fiscal and Monetary Linkage
between Stock Returns and Inflation", Journal of Finance Vol. 38 pp.
1-33, March 1983.

     Gibbons, Michael R., "Multivariate Tests of Financial Models: A
New Approach", Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 10 pp. 3-27, 1980.

     Gibbons, Michael R. and Wayne Ferson, "Testing Asset Pricing Mod-
els with Changing Expectations and an Unobservable Market Portfolio",
unpublished paper, January 1983.

     Hansen, Lars Peter, "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Meth-
od of Moments Estimators", Econometrica Vol. 50 No. 4 pp. 1029-1054,
July 1982.

     Hansen, Lars Peter and Robert J. Hodrick, "Risk Averse Specula-
tion in the Forward Foreign Exchange Market: An Econometric Analysis
of Linear Models", in Jacob A. Frenkel ed. Exchange Rates and
national Macroeconomics, University of Chicago Press, 1983.

     Hansen, Lars Peter, Scott F. Richard and Kenneth J. Singleton,
"Econometric Implications of the Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing
Model", unpublished paper, November 1981.

     Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, "Generalized Instru-
mental Variables Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Mod-
els", Econometrica Vol. 50 No. 5 Pp. 1269-1286, September 1982.

     Huizinga, John and Frederick S. Mishkin, "The Measurement of Ex-
Ante Real Interest Rates on Assets with Different Risk Characteris-
tics", unpublished paper, University of Chicago, 1984.

     Keim, Donald B. and Robert F. Stambaugh, "Predicting Returns in
the Stock and Bond Markets", unpublished paper, Wharton School, 1984.

     LeRoy, Stephen F. [1982a], "Expectations Models of Asset Prices:
A Survey of Theory", Journal of Finance Vol. 37 No. 1 Pp. 185-217,
March 1982.

        LeRoy, Stephen F. [1982b], "Risk-Aversion and the Term Structure
of Real Interest Rates", Economics Letters Vol. 10 No. 3-4 pp.
355-362, 1982.



                                 -   52
     MacKinnon, James G. and Halbert White, "Some Heteroskedasticity
Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimators with Improved Finite Sample
Properties", unpublished paper, Queen's University, December 1984.

     Mankiw, N. Gregory and Lawrence H. Summers, "Do Long-Term Inter-
est Rates Overreact to Short-Term Interest Rates?", Brookings
on Economic Activity 1984:1 pp. 223-242, 1984.
                                                                   Pap
     Merton, Robert C., "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Mod-
el", Econometrica Vol. 44 pp. 867-887, September 1973.

     Merton, Robert C., "On Estimating the Expected Return on the Mar-
ket", Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 8 pp. 323-361, 1980.

     Pindyck, Robert S., "Risk, Inflation and the Stock Market",
ican Economic Review Vol. 74 No. 3 pp. 335-351, June 1984.

        Salomon Brothers Inc., An Analytical Record of Yields and Yield
Spreads, New York, 1983.

     Schwert, G. William, "The Adjustment of Stock Prices to Informa-
tion about Inflation", Journal of Finance Vol. 36 pp. 15-29, March
1981.

     Shiller, Robert J., John Y. Campbell and Kermit L. Schoenholtz,
"Forward Rates and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure of
Interest Rates", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1983:1 pp.
173-217, 1983.

     Startz, Richard, "Do Forecast Errors or Term Premia Really Make
the Difference Between Long and Short Rates?", Journal of Financial
Economics Vol. 10 pp. 323-330, November 1982.

     White, Halbert, "A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Ma-
trix Estimator and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity", Econometrica
Vol. 48 No. 4 pp. 817-838, May 1980.

     White, Halbert, Asymptotic Theory for Econometricians, Academic
Press, 1984.




                                -   53   -
