NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXES, PERMITS, AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Louis Kaplow
Working Paper 16268
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16268

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2010

I am grateful to the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard University
for financial support. This essay was prepared for the American Tax Policy Institute conference volume,
U.S. Energy Taxation, edited by Gilbert Metcalf. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Louis Kaplow. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Taxes, Permits, and Climate Change
Louis Kaplow
NBER Working Paper No. 16268
August 2010
JEL No. D61,D62,H21,H23,K32,Q52,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
This essay revisits the question of instrument choice for the regulation of externalities in the context
of climate change. The central point is that the Pigouvian prescription to equate marginal control costs
with the expected marginal benefits of damage reduction should guide the design of both carbon taxes
and permit schemes. Because expected marginal damage rises nonlinearly, a corresponding nonlinear
tax – or an equivalent price implemented through a quantity-adjusted permit scheme – is second best.
Also considered are political factors, distinctive features of regulating a stock pollutant, and ex ante
distortions due to the anticipation of transition relief (such as by receiving more free permits for greater
emissions). Finally, distributive concerns are examined, with emphasis on the conceptual and practical
benefits of addressing distributive issues with the tax and transfer system rather through adjustments
to regulatory schemes that usually render them less effective.

Louis Kaplow
Harvard University
Hauser 322
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
meskridge@law.harvard.edu

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

1. Introduction
Kaplow and Shavell (2002) offer a systematic critique of the view associated with
Weitzman (1974) that the choice between corrective taxes and quantity targets is highly
contingent in a world of uncertainty.1 They emphasize that this conventional understanding,
heavily represented in texts and surveys on environmental economics as well as in more general
textbooks, rests on a poorly appreciated and dubious set of assumptions.
First, in the Weitzman story, taxes are constrained to be linear even though marginal
harm is taken to be nonlinear (typically, rising in the quantity of emissions), so the Weitzman tax
instrument violates the basic Pigouvian prescription that the marginal tax rate equal marginal
harm. Second, taxes are taken to be fixed for all time, even though any error in setting the
(constrained-to-be-linear) tax rate would become immediately apparent to the government.
Relaxing either assumption restores the superiority of taxes over quantity regulation. Moreover,
neither assumption was well motivated by Weitzman or in the subsequent literature. Nonlinear
taxes are simple to state in many settings, and tax rates (really prices) of all sorts – whether set
by government or the market – are routinely adjusted in response to changed circumstances.
Second, Kaplow and Shavell (2002) extend their analysis to permit schemes. On one
hand, this instrument has the familiar and important advantage over command-and-control
quantity regulation that a given quantity target is achieved at minimum cost.2 On the other hand,
like familiar schemes, the quantity is set by fiat, once and for all. Kaplow and Shavell
emphasize, however, that this latter defect is not inherent in permit schemes because, unlike
command-and-control regulation, permit markets generate a price. Hence, the government
learns whether firms’ marginal costs (which in equilibrium equal the market price for permits)
exceed or fall short of the marginal benefit of emissions reductions at the current targets.
Drawing on prior literature, they describe a number of ways that the permit quantity could be
adjusted to achieve the (same) second-best optimum produced by taxes (that are either explicitly
nonlinear or adjustable). Relatedly, they point out that there is an underlying duality between
properly designed tax and permit schemes: the former constitutes a quantity-dependent price,
whereas the latter is a price-dependent quantity. In both cases, firms’ information about their
control costs is harnessed, so that each firm’s marginal cost is equated to marginal benefits.
Weisbach (2010) devotes the first half of his fine paper to applying and elaborating
Kaplow and Shavell’s (2002) critique of Weitzman (1974) in the context of controlling
greenhouse gas emissions. His motivation is that, sadly, just as the limitations of Weitzman
were underappreciated a decade ago, the same holds true today, and such misunderstanding may
lead to the design of regulatory schemes that are substantially and needlessly inefficient. Given

1

In addition to Weitzman (1974), see also Adar and Griffin (1976), Fishelson (1976), Roberts and Spence
(1976), and Rose-Ackerman (1973).
2
This traditional advantage of permits (or taxes) is, unfortunately, getting far too little attention, notably, in
the United States, where aggressive fuel economy standards, biofuels mandates, and other requirements may well be
imposing huge costs relative to potential benefits, a waste in itself and a phenomenon that may reduce the political
will to pursue further control through taxes or permit schemes.

-1-

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

the high stakes, such an outcome would be unfortunate for the United States and the rest of the
world. In addition to economic waste, on a potentially vast scale, there is also the concern that
one may control too little despite possibly catastrophic consequences.
This essay seeks mainly to reinforce and further extend the argument that the standard
Weitzman assumptions should carry far less if any significant weight in instrument choice and
design, particularly in the context of combating greenhouse gases. Section 2, by way of
background, articulates Weitzman’s (1974) assumptions and why they matter and then relates
that framework to optimal policy. Section 3 analyzes nonlinear taxes, section 4 considers permit
schemes, and section 5 brings the analysis of the two side by side to consider the underlying
similarities, political appeal, and also some important complications in the climate control
context. Section 6 notes two important additional considerations: the impact of uncertainty
about future “prices” (whether tax rates or permit prices) on innovation and the importance of
transition issues (notably, grandfathering based on prior emissions). Finally, section 7 addresses
concerns about distribution, which are central in a number of the other papers in this volume as
well.
2. Background
2.1. Weitzman Framework. – Weitzman (1974) compares quantity regulation and
taxation in a world of uncertainty. Firms’ marginal control costs are taken to be known by firms
themselves but not observable by the government.3 Realistically, we can think of this gap as
capturing the government’s residual uncertainty: that is, the government may have significant
knowledge of control costs, but not as much as do individual firms. Regarding the control of
greenhouse gas emissions, where the magnitude of marginal control costs in the future is of
central importance, we are also concerned about the quality of firms’ projections relative to those
of the government.4
Marginal harm is likewise subject to uncertainty, a point of undoubted significance in the
present setting. A further point, also quite pertinent, is that total marginal harm is not taken to be
constant, but rather rising with the level of emissions, an uncontroversial and important factor
with regard to climate change.

3

Strictly speaking, the Weitzman scenario envisions a single firm, and Kaplow and Shavell (2002) devote
considerable attention to differences that may arise in considering settings with multiple firms. Given the nature of
the climate change problem, the focus throughout this essay is on the case in which there are a large number of
firms.
4
One view would be that, at any point in time, the government’s knowledge of the economy-wide marginal
control cost would be as good as firms’ knowledge. In this case, both linear taxes and permit schemes could hit the
second-best price target perfectly, without any further adjustment. However, since marginal control costs (especially
in the future) can depend on technological change, learning curve effects, and other subtle phenomena, significant
asymmetric information may remain. Following the standard approach, the remainder of the discussion here
assumes that the government is at an informational disadvantage, although it should be noted that much of what is
stated would be applicable if the government’s knowledge of private control costs was as good as firms’. (Note that
with both taxes and permit schemes, all that is relevant is the economy-wide marginal control cost in equilibrium,
not any particular firm’s marginal control cost schedule.)

-2-

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

Weitzman’s instruments are quite simple: a quantity regulation specifies the quantity of
emissions that firms may produce, whereas a tax instrument (which he calls a price) specifies a
single, fixed price per unit of emissions.
Given that the government is uncertain about both marginal control costs and marginal
harm, it is easy to see that neither instrument will hit the optimum except by chance. The
optimal quantity is that for which marginal control costs equal the marginal benefits of limiting
emissions. If the government picks quantity, it may choose one that is too high or too low.
Similarly, if it picks a tax rate, the quantity thereby induced (by firms that each equate their
marginal costs to the tax rate) may be too high or too low. A priori, either approach might do
better, and Weitzman shows that, under some particular assumptions, taxes are better when
marginal control cost curves are steeper than the marginal harm schedule, and quantity
regulation is preferable in the converse case.5
2.2. Optimal Policy. – It is generally understood that the Pigouvian ideal can be achieved
by setting an emissions tax equal to marginal harm. Crucially, even if the government does not
know firms’ marginal control costs, this instrument is sufficient. Faced with a tax (price) equal
to marginal external harm, the externality is internalized and firms’ quantity decisions will be
optimal. The fact that a tax instrument harnesses firms’ information about control costs is their
central virtue, as economists have long appreciated.
One complication is that the government may have uncertainty about marginal harm, a
point that is of obvious relevance to climate change. Although many economists seem to believe
(or act as if they believe) that uncertainty about harm tends to favor a quantity instrument, this
view is mistaken. Another section of Kaplow and Shavell (2002) offers a simple proof that the
second-best optimal scheme involves setting the tax rate equal to the expected marginal harm,
and this result holds for all manner of distributions of uncertainty about marginal harm.6
It is worth noting, moreover, that this logic extends to any shape of the marginal harm
schedule, including the possibility of thresholds or tipping points. If there was a tipping point at
a known quantity level, the tax rate would jump infinitely at that point. More relevant for the
present setting, consider the case of a stock pollutant and significant uncertainty about the

5

To suggest the intuition, suppose first that marginal harm was constant (so the marginal harm curve is
horizontal); then a single, linear, fixed-for-all-time tax would achieve the second-best optimum. If instead the
marginal harm curve is vertical (marginal harm goes from zero to infinity at a threshold quantity), then it is obvious
that a quantity regime (setting the quantity at the threshold) would achieve the second-best optimum.
6
As shown in Weitzman (1974) and Stavins (1996) in the setting with Weitzman’s assumptions, correlation
between marginal control costs and marginal harm affects optimal instrument choice. With a nonlinear tax, it
remains true that it dominates quantity regulation, but the optimal nonlinear tax would no longer equal marginal
harm. (Firms’ quantity choices given a tax rate convey information on control costs, which, since they are now
taken to be correlated with marginal harm, bear on the optimal marginal tax rate.) However, in many settings, this
complication seems essentially irrelevant. Uncertainty about marginal harm derives from uncertainty in climate
models, the effects of warming on agriculture, and myriad other factors that for the most part have little to do with
control costs (e.g., the future cost of alternative energy sources or of carbon capture). For an important qualification,
see the discussion of the second further complication in section 5.3.

-3-

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

location of any such tipping point – to which, one might add, no one really believes that there is
a literal tipping point, at which another molecule will trigger catastrophe. In this scenario,
marginal harm may be thought to rise more steeply as the size of the stock passes some given
point. However, that point is uncertain and, moreover, there is uncertainty about the likelihood
that an additional unit today will lead the stock to cross such a threshold at a distant future time.
Taken together, the expected marginal harm schedule will be a probability-weighted sum
(integral) over myriad possible scenarios. Even with fairly sharp thresholds in some or many
scenarios, the expected value of all such schedules will undoubtedly be a smooth expected
marginal harm schedule.
Therefore, with uncertainty about harm and firms’ control costs, the optimal scheme is a
tax that imposes a charge on firms equal to the expected marginal harm from emissions.
Because marginal harm is taken to be rising with the level of emissions, the optimal tax schedule
is nonlinear, likewise increasing with quantity. As Weisbach properly emphasizes, with a stock
pollutant as in the present context, this schedule is nevertheless locally pretty flat: a few
percentage points more or less of emissions in a given month or year will (relatively) have a far
smaller effect on the size of the present and future level of the stock and thus little effect on
marginal harm and, accordingly, on the optimal marginal tax rate.
By contrast, charging a significantly wrong tax rate for extended periods of time will
have high social costs. If the tax rate is much too low for a decade, there will be substantial
buildup of greenhouse gases that will cause long-lasting harm. Even if one could control more
later (and to a degree one can and should), the cost of doing so will be greater than it would have
been if the proper tax rate had been charged earlier, inducing firms to undertake reductions for
which the marginal control cost was below expected harm. Likewise, if the price is much to high
for an extended period, costs significantly in excess of any marginal benefit will be incurred.
3. Nonlinear and Adjustable Taxes
The basic Pigouvian principle is that, ideally, the tax rate at any moment in time should
equal the current best estimate of the expected marginal harm from emissions. With a slowly
evolving stock pollutant like greenhouse gases, as just explained, the expected marginal harm
from incremental emissions is not a rapidly moving target. Even if, say, emissions were to jump
by many percentage points above expectation in a given year, the long-run impact on the level of
the stock would be a very small fraction of the short-run change in the flow. Accordingly, even
in the original formulation in Weitzman (1974), a single, constant, fixed tax rate will be nearly
optimal over short time horizons (where short should be interpreted as a few years, not a few
days).
However, the evolution of the stock over longer time periods exhibits considerably more
uncertainty, due primarily to uncertainty in control costs. Current control costs may not be well
understood; imposing a new regime designed to reduce emissions below the baseline path will
move actors (both firms and consumers) to new portions of their control schedules, about which
even less may be known; and technological change further contributes to uncertainty over longer
periods. Accordingly, the degree of control in the future, in response to a given tax rate, could

-4-

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

be substantially more or less than may have been anticipated. In turn, the marginal benefits of
control could be less or more (respectively) than predicted, so the future optimal tax rate would
be lower or higher, to a degree determined by the then-existing stock level and, of course, the
marginal damage schedule. This is the reason that an optimal tax regime consists of a nonlinear
schedule rather than a single tax rate, fixed for all time.
Weitzman (1974), as mentioned, restricts the tax regime to be linear, that is, for there to
be a single, quantity-independent tax rate, and he does not allow adjustment of the tax rate in
light of the observed quantities. (Note that the quantities must be observed to apply even a
constant tax rate.) That is, the tax schedule is stipulated to be nonoptimal and to be immune
from correction in light of the information that inevitably flows in. Kaplow and Shavell ( 2002)
as well as Weisbach (2010) emphasize that Weitzman offers minimal practical justification for
these assumptions and that subsequent literature does little more and, worse, fails to emphasize
or sometimes even to mention the role that these restrictive assumptions play. This state of
affairs is all the more surprising since most expositions purport to be generic, institutionindependent analyses of the regulation of externalities. (Finally, it should be mentioned that it is
hardly clear that Weitzman himself has a strong, broad belief in the applicability of the
assumptions in his 1974 paper. Indeed, in a subsequent publication, Weitzman (1978), he
unapologetically assumes that the pertinent tax is nonlinear, and proceeds to examine its
implications in a different model.)
In the present context, a nonlinear schedule – itself an instrument less complicated than is
sometimes supposed – would take an even simpler form. As explained, the need for a nonlinear
schedule is to allow the marginal tax rate that firms’ face in a given time period to reflect the
level of marginal harm implied by the current level of the stock of greenhouse gases.
Accordingly, it would not even be necessary for individual firms to face a nonlinear schedule.
All that is required is for the current period’s (fixed, linear) tax rate to be read off the previously
announced marginal harm schedule.7
By analogy, consider the fact that some tax rates (or nonlinear tax schedules, such as with
an income tax) may have predetermined paths: for example, a scheduled rate increase may be
phased in over a number of years, according to a stated formula or table promulgated at the
outset. Likewise, it is not uncommon for some taxes (again, notably, income taxes) to have
automatic inflation adjustments of tax brackets. A given inflation index level from one year may
mechanically determine the bracket (or exemption or other) levels for the next. What these
examples have in common is that features of a tax system can change over time in essentially
automatic ways based on predetermined intentions. Furthermore, these adjustments can be made

7

Actually, nonlinear taxes with more complexity are themselves quite straightforward. The personal
income tax in the United States and in many other jurisdictions applies a nonlinear schedule to each individual
taxpayer, even individuals of highly limited sophistication. They might look up their tax obligations on a simple
table (which does the computations for them) or go to the expense of purchasing tax preparation software or paying a
tax preparer. Even if it were thought to be helpful, therefore, to employ nonlinear schedules for greenhouse gas
emissions on a firm by firm basis, within a single period, it is hard to see why this challenge is thought to be other
than trivial, much less prohibitive.

-5-

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

a function of conditions as they unfold over time.
It is obvious that the described scheme – one with carbon tax rates, say, in a given year to
be set based on stock levels observed as of the preceding year – is exceedingly simple
administratively. Nor is it the case that nonlinear taxes would strike citizens and politicians as
odd. Many have lived with nonlinear income taxes for their entire lives. There are other,
familiar uses of nonlinear pricing as well. Quantity discounts (prices that fall with quantity) are
commonplace in numerous settings, some utilities charge nonlinear rates, and the legal system
sometimes employs nonlinear sanctions (sentencing guidelines determine fines and prison terms
in sometimes complex ways that may depend nonlinearity on, say, the magnitude of a theft or
fraud, and speeding tickets sometimes involve nonlinear charges depending on the extent by
which the driver exceeded the stated limit).
Furthermore, nonlinear taxes make intuitive sense in the context of regulating greenhouse
gases. Consider the nonlinear schedule for tax rates that is stated in advance, but with a fixed
(linear) tax imposed on all emissions in a given time period. Suppose it turns out that, in the
previous period, the stock rose more quickly than the implicit benchmark rate. All would readily
appreciate that there was some need to catch up. Hence, the imposition, according to the
predetermined nonlinear tax schedule, of a correspondingly higher tax rate in the subsequent
period would seem entirely natural. Indeed, the failure to undertake any self-correction would
seem strange. Note that this simpleminded intuition is roughly in accord with the core logic of
optimal Pigouvian taxation. Being behind in control of the stock means that the expected
marginal damage caused by incremental subsequent emissions is higher than otherwise, making
a higher tax optimal. The higher tax, in turn, induces firms to be willing to spend more at the
margin to curtail emissions – up to the point that their marginal control costs are equated to the
now-higher tax rate.
Likewise, if it turned out that the stock was below the expected level – the prior taxes
resulted in more reductions than anticipated – we would be ahead of the game and it would seem
natural to ease off somewhat. And, of course, in this scenario, emissions are less costly at the
margin, so a lower tax rate, leading to somewhat less effort at control, is optimal. In sum, in
both situations, the nonlinear prescription is not only quite simple administratively, but it also is
not at all difficult to rationalize, even to the uninitiated.
In the foregoing analysis, no interim political decisions or international renegotiations are
required at any point. All that has been described follows from an initial determination, which
needs to set a marginal tax rate schedule – which is identical to the expected marginal harm
schedule – as a function of the level of the stock at various future time periods. This schedule is
automatically responsive to control costs being higher or lower than expected. As Kaplow and
Shavell (2002) explain, there is built-in feedback with tax schemes. Levels must be observed in
order to impose the tax in the first place (and, note, this information requirement is no different
from what is required under a quantity scheme, like permits). And those levels provide exactly
the feedback that is necessary to implement the nonlinear schedule. Accordingly, so-called
“regulatory stickiness” is beside the point.

-6-

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

One can take the analogy to inflation adjustments in an income tax or welfare programs.
If the adjustment is made on a discretionary basis, requiring new legislation, we might imagine
all manner of political complications that could lead to something other than smooth
adjustments. On the other hand, if we (as is now done in many settings) state an adjustment rule,
the changes are made annually and almost effortlessly. There is no agency engaging in elaborate
deliberations and no lobbying. A statistical agency publishes the index, and it is automatically
used by low-level bureaucrats to compute the new schedules, which are then published. The
notion that employing nonlinear schemes, or regularly adjusting linear tax rates, is subject to all
sorts of political problems so as to render it highly impracticable or unreliable seems to be
without foundation.
There is, however, another important channel that would require some sort of deliberative
process: new information about expected marginal harm. As explained in section 2.1, the
optimal nonlinear tax schedule is one that is set equal to the expected marginal harm schedule.
This approach achieves the second best. However, in the case of climate change, we anticipate
that our knowledge of expected marginal harm will evolve, possibly quite significantly, over
time as a result of new information and better models. It follows, therefore, that it would be
optimal to change the schedule itself. For example, if we learn that warming is occurring more
rapidly, it is optimal to impose higher taxes, whereas if ways to mitigate harm develop more
quickly than anticipated, the tax schedule optimally would be lowered.
How this challenge should best be met is an important problem, and one worth more
thought up front. Short of a full global renegotiation, it might be possible to delegate the task to
an agency. In any case, when the control instrument is a tax schedule, the nature of the required
adjustments are transparent and straightforward (that is, given the highly complex new
information on marginal harm). Furthermore, it might be possible to build even some of this
flexibility into an original schedule. For example, there could be a formula for how the schedule
should be adjusted based on new findings about, say, how much warming is associated with
various levels of greenhouse gas concentrations, so all the agency or negotiating group would
have to determine would be that new relationship. Of course, such reassessments would
naturally become the occasion for attempts to renegotiate a previous deal, a problem that seems
inevitable under any approach to the problem of climate change.
4. Permits and Quantity Adjustment
As explained in section 2, it has long been understood that setting quantity targets tends
to be inefficient when the regulator is uncertain about firms’ control costs. Except by chance,
the quantity will be set too high – when marginal control costs are less than expected marginal
harm, the externality will be excessive relative to its optimal level – or it will be set too low – in
which case non-cost-justified control will be undertaken. Moreover, as mentioned above, there
may exist substantial uncertainty about firms’ control costs, especially when setting quantity
targets well into the future. If technological progress in reducing costs is more rapid than
anticipated, valuable control opportunities will be forgone under a quantity target, whereas if
projected breakthroughs do not occur, huge costs may be inefficiently borne.

-7-

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

This deficiency of quantity targets was traditionally associated with command-andcontrol regulation but is equally applicable to permit schemes set to meet hard targets. This
point is equally true if those targets are changing over time, such as by becoming stricter over
time in anticipation of cost reductions. It remains true that the target is determined by
regulators’ preconceived estimates of what firms’ costs will be over time rather than being based
on what those costs actually turn out to be.
Ever since Roberts and Spence’s (1976) important paper, however, it has been
appreciated by some theorists of environmental regulation that this need not be so. As Kaplow
and Shavell (2002) explore more broadly, permit schemes have a highly attractive feature – in
addition to their well-known ability to minimize control costs across firms for a given quantity
target. The key point is that the market price of permits not only coordinates control efforts
efficiently, wherein each firm equates its marginal cost to the common market price, thus
ensuring that all firms’ marginal control costs are equated to each others’, the condition for costminimization. As well, this price signals to the public regulatory authority the value of the
current level of firms’ marginal control costs. And this is precisely the piece of information that
the regulator initially lacked, making it have to guess at the optimal quantity. (Note that
command-and-control regulation, by contrast, does not yield such a price, and thus no matter
how badly off is the quantity target, the regulator will not learn the magnitude or even the
direction of its error from firms’ behavior.)
Armed with knowledge of the permit price, the regulator can adjust the quantity of
permits so as to achieve the second best, under which firms’ marginal control costs are equated
to expected marginal harm – just as is true under the nonlinear tax. Doing this is, in principle,
straightforward: The regulator merely looks up the current quantity on the marginal harm
schedule and sees what is the marginal harm at that quantity. With the nonlinear tax scheme, the
regulator then announced that figure as the tax rate. With a permit scheme, the regulator merely
has to compare this figure to the current permit price. If the price is below the tax rate, it
optimally would be raised – and this is accomplished by reducing the quantity of permits. If the
price is above the desired tax rate, it optimally would be lowered – by increasing the number of
permits. Although the regulator may not hit the target precisely and immediately – i.e., the point
at which the permit market price equals the ideal tax rate at the given quantity (here, the level of
the stock) – it seems plausible that the regulator could come close fairly quickly.8
There are many methods of permit quantity adjustment, a number of which are described
in prior theoretical papers (many of which are discussed in Kaplow and Shavell (2002) as well as
in Weisbach (2010)). If permits were perpetual, one could sell additional ones or buy some back
if the quantity was too low or too high (i.e., if the market equilibrium permit price was too high

8

Note further that permit schemes that adjust quantities to maintain target permit market prices are like
nonlinear taxes in most other respects. For example, the central result of Strand (2010), in this volume, that
exporters behave strategically differently, to importers’ disadvantage, under permits compared to under taxes
presumes that the permit regime has hard quantity targets. If instead price targets were employed, this difference
(and disadvantage of permit schemes) would vanish.

-8-

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

or too low).9 More likely, permits would be issued and reissued annually or over some other
period of moderate duration. In that case, the next period’s issuance would be determined, as it
would in any case, by some preexisting schedule or mechanism, and the foregoing analysis
indicates that such a scheme optimally would adjust the number of permits in light of the
previous equilibrium permit price so that the quantity going forward will more closely equate the
market permit price with the expected marginal harm at the appropriate quantity.10
Reflecting on such permit schemes with quantities that are adjusted in one manner or
another over time, it seems clear that one can accomplish essentially the same outcome as with a
second-best nonlinear tax schedule that equates the tax rate to expected marginal harm at the
stated quantity. The up-front requirements are the same: This harm schedule must be
determined, as best as can be done. Then, each period, instead of using the schedule to
determine that period’s tax rate, as a function of the observed quantity (projected forward to the
next period), one would attempt to induce a market equilibrium permit price at the same level by
selecting an appropriate quantity of permits.
Such adjustments could be largely automatic and formulaic, rather than the product of
discretionary, regular reconsideration. Also as with nonlinear taxes, if new information comes in
regarding the expected marginal harm schedule, some reanalysis (such as by an agency delegated
to perform such a process) or renegotiation would be required.
Furthermore, note that these permit quantity adjustments should appear entirely natural to
unsophisticated onlookers. If permit prices are much lower than expected, it will be clear that
control costs are lower than anticipated, so it is sensible to lower the target quantity (that is, to
aim for stronger emissions control), which is precisely what the permit quantity adjustment does
in this situation. Likewise, unexpectedly high prices signal that costs are greater than imagined,
calling for some relaxation of the target.

9

Alternatively, one could redesignate the units of existing permits. For example, instead of selling
additional permits to raise the total by two percent, one might make prior permits worth (in terms of emissions or
units of carbon) 1.02 times as much as before. A benefit (compared to sales and repurchases) is that, by leaving
undiluted or uninflated the value of prior permits, permit prices would not be as directly influenced by the
anticipation of subsequent expected permit purchases or issues. All perpetual schemes (and some others) face the
challenges that firms with market power may have incentives to seek to manipulate permit prices to influence
subsequent government policy. However, if permits are widely dispersed, as inevitably they may need to be, this
problem may not arise. (A further complication is that a firm may seek to accumulate a large market share of
permits, leasing their use to firms that actually need them; this practice might accordingly be prohibited or limited.)
10
Another clever variation – first suggested by Roberts and Spence (1976, appendix) and also examined by
Collinge and Oates (1982) and Laffont and Tirole (1996) – is to issue permits with different exercise prices, with
those prices set to simulate the marginal damages schedule. The exercise price of the ith permit would be the
marginal harm of the ith unit of emissions. In that way, the lowest numbered permits would be used first, permits
would be used until the marginal permit in use had an exercise price just equal to firms’ marginal costs in
equilibrium, and each permit would trade for the exercise price of that marginal permit minus the particular permit’s
exercise price.

-9-

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

5. On the Comparison of Taxes and Permits
5.1. Tax and Permit Duality. – One of the important observations in Kaplow and Shavell
(2002) is that nonlinear taxes and adjustable-quantity permit schemes can be viewed as duals to
each other. A nonlinear tax of the sort described in section 3 is one in which the price (tax rate)
depends on the quantity. An adjustable permit scheme as described in section 4 is one in which
the quantity depends on the price (in the permit market). Moreover, it is not simply that one is a
quantity-dependant price and the other is a price-dependant quantity. It is further true that the
second function is simply the inverse of the first function. It’s the same curve, just flipping the x
and y axes.
In addition, this theoretical equivalence is borne out by the particular analysis of practical
mechanics in sections 3 and 4. Nearly every feature examined in section 3, for nonlinear taxes,
has a close analogue in section 4, for permits, and conversely. That is, the close conceptual
linkage is also reflected to a great degree in administrative aspects of implementation. There are
obviously limits to this latter claim, some of which are explored in Weisbach (2010), but the
central point, in harmony with Weisbach’s theme, is that there is far more in common than meets
the eye. Indeed, for purposes of analysis, it is a good starting hypothesis that properly
constructed tax and permit schemes are equivalent; differences need to be demonstrated, with an
explanation of why features deemed unique to one of the approaches are not or cannot be
replicated in the other. On reflection, given the underlying, abstract similarities – one might say
near identity – this conclusion should not be surprising.
5.2. Political Appeal. – This essay and this author’s expertise do not extend to political
considerations. However, some brief observations are in order. First, as already explained with
regard to both nonlinear taxes and adjustable-quantity permit schemes, the nature of the price or
quantity adjustments over time is in strong accord with common sense. Hence, there is not an
obvious problem with technical economics producing a complex, subtle, or counter-intuitive
policy prescription that must be somehow explained or snuck past legislators and citizens.
Second, there seems to exist some direct appeal to certain factions in the climate control
debate, and these sorts of control schemes may actually facilitate compromise in light of actual
(or feigned) disagreements on important facts. For example, strong environmentalists often
advance the view that control costs – especially in the long run, once a serious regime becomes a
reality, making technological advance highly profitable – will become much lower than fearmongers assert. If these proponents really believe this to be true, then nonlinear taxes or
adjustable-quantity permit schemes should be highly attractive. If costs indeed will be low, the
resulting level of control will be high – in particular, higher than would result from preestablished quantity targets that reflected a compromise between differing views (rather than the
environmentalists’ views being vindicated).
Likewise, to those worried about the effect of stringent controls on the standard of living
– either for rich or for developing countries – both nonlinear taxes and adjustable-quantity permit
schemes have a built-in safety valve. If control costs do remain high, the stringency of the
controls automatically loosens.

- 10 -

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

Notice that there is a close connection between these observations and the original
theoretical justification for using (nonlinear) taxes rather than hard quantity targets (originally
understood to be implemented by command-and-control regulation). The problem with the latter
is that the government learns nothing about firms’ control costs and thus is unable to adjust
targets accordingly over time. The beauty of taxes is that they harness firms’ information about
control costs. Permit schemes, through the market equilibrium permit price, do the same. Both
types of systems – nonlinear taxes and adjustable-quantity permit schemes – use this
information, implicitly or explicitly, to adjust quantity targets in light of the information thereby
revealed, producing the second-best optimum (or a reasonable approximation thereof).
Uncertainty about control costs, which becomes greater the longer one projects into the
future, is not only a problem for a benevolent, all-powerful regulator, but also serves as an
obstacle to reaching political consensus. It appears that the magic of nonlinear pricing, through
taxes or adjustable-quantity permit schemes, may allow us to elide some of the political problem
as well. Opponents in the debate about the likely levels of future control costs can agree to
disagree. All that needs to be set is the expected marginal harm schedule, and the market does
the rest. Of course, there is also substantial disagreement (to say the least) about future harm.
Accordingly, these schemes are no political panacea. However, given the huge magnitude of the
political challenges in achieving consensus, the process can use all the help it can get.
5.3. Complications.11 – One complication, the largest political challenge, concerns the
inevitably international scope of the climate change problem. The coordination (free-rider)
problem is massive. As a consequence, the task is even more complex and of more doubtful
efficacy if constant renegotiation is required. This difficulty is one reason why it is thought to be
important to strike a deal that reaches far into the future. However, a major challenge in so
doing is that the future is highly uncertain, so any long-term deal is likely to become
substantially suboptimal as time unfolds, above and beyond sacrifices to political expediency.
Nonlinear taxes and adjustable-quantity permit schemes address this problem in part. A
central need for adjustment concerns ex ante uncertainty about future control costs, where more
information will be revealed by marketplace activity over time. As already explained, these
schemes have built-in, automatically adjusting flexibility in this regard. Thus, their efficiency
advantage may also be a political advantage in yet another respect. However, as noted, this
benefit does not extend to new information about marginal expected harm. To some extent, one
might build some such information, perhaps as interpreted by a pre-designated expert agency,
into the nonlinear tax or permit price schedule, but there are probably political limits on the
extent to which this can be done.
A second complication concerns the stock nature of the greenhouse gas problem. As
already noted, this is in one important respect an advantage: Because the stock changes very

11

Obviously, there are myriad additional complications, some of which are addressed in Weisbach (2010).
This essay examines two that are closely related to the foregoing discussion.

- 11 -

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

slowly relative to possibly unexpected short-term fluctuations in the flow, the optimal tax rate or
permit price also changes very slowly, so there is little efficiency loss in a regime that adjusts
taxes or permit quantities even with a substantial lag. (Fairly rapid adjustment would be
feasible; the point is that, in the present setting, it does not seem to be very important.)
One problem, however, is that the stock nature of the pollutant greatly complicates the
problem of estimating the marginal harm from a given current unit of emissions. In addition to
all of the problems of climate change modeling and other aspects of ascertaining marginal
damages, there is the point that the marginal harm of a current unit of emissions depends in
significant part on estimates of future marginal control costs (an interdependency that is absent
with a flow pollutant). For example, if future costs turn out to be lower than anticipated, the
self-adjusting system will generate a lower future stock, and this in turn will reduce the expected
marginal harm of current emissions. Therefore, estimates of contemporaneous expected
marginal harm will in part reflect expectations about future control costs. Despite this
complication, it remains true that the optimal present tax rate or permit price equals the best
estimate of expected marginal harm (taking this interdependency into account). The current
point is that determining this magnitude will be even harder than the daunting task one envisions
considering only the harm side of the calculus.
6. Additional Considerations
6.1. Future Price Uncertainty and Innovation. – It is sometimes feared that uncertainty
about future prices, whether future tax rates under a nonlinear tax scheme or future permit prices
under an adjustable-quantity permit system, will inhibit innovation (and otherwise impose social
costs). As a first approximation, it seems that this is a non-issue in the following sense. Markets
generate investments based on expected future payoffs. If there is genuine future risk – climate
change has a substantial enough magnitude to contribute to systematic risk, which even in theory
cannot be fully diversified – ex ante investments will take this uncertainty into account.
However, that investments reflect future uncertainty tends to be socially optimal. Market risks
are real. They cannot be wished away by government or anyone else. And, given their presence,
decisions should be optimized in light thereof.12
The situation with regard to investments pertaining to climate change seems like that for
all manner of investments in a market economy.13 Especially in recent decades, where massive
investments have been undertaken in technology sectors – computer chips, communications, the
Internet, software – it is clear that the market operates tolerably well in light of massive
uncertainty. The market is hardly perfect. One particular concern is innovation spillovers,
which cannot be fully captured and thus lead to inadequate investment, particularly in basic

12

There will inevitably be mechanisms to allocate risks to some degree – investors hold diversified
portfolios; futures markets may allow some risks to be hedged – but whatever is the residual risk, it reflects real
uncertainty about economic activity and hence should be taken into account by private actors.
13
The analysis is closely related to the core argument against transition relief (considered in the next
subsection) that its anticipation distorts ex ante investment incentives. See, for example, Kaplow (1986, 1992) and
Shaviro (2000).

- 12 -

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

research. Even optimal and well-enforced intellectual property rights regimes involve distortion,
and determining the optimal regime is no easy task. Accordingly, there may be a substantial role
for government support of basic research and for international cooperation along this dimension
as well. However, just as it probably would have been a poor (if not disastrous) alternative to
have the government pick winning and losing technologies in high-tech industries – and
substantially problematic for the government, say, to peg computer chip or broadband prices in
the distant future – so too government optimally would not interfere with permit market prices,
that is, except to equate them to best estimates of expected marginal harm. Likewise, tax rates
optimally would be set with regard to the estimated magnitude of the externality, not tinkered
with in order to provide a more stable investment environment.
The importance of this point can be made more concrete by considering the actual impact
of future price uncertainty. Suppose, for example, that there is a ten percent probability that
future prices will be much higher than standard estimates, perhaps because it is possible that
certain cost-reducing technologies will confront unanticipated hurdles. In that case, it is
important for investors to be unsheltered from this risk. The prospect of such high prices will
induce greater ex ante efforts toward alternative means of reducing emissions, whether through
the development of alternative technologies or more aggressive conservation. Similarly, if there
is a serious prospect that prices might be much lower than consensus predictions, perhaps due to
the possibility of major breakthroughs, then the dampening effect of this prospect, which is to
reduce the incentive to pursue other means of emissions control, is optimal to that extent.
Granted, there can be bubbles and other phenomena that render markets (sometimes highly)
imperfect guides, and it is desirable to minimize such pricing defects where possible. However,
a general policy of arbitrarily dampening the range of tax or permit price movement is a blunt
instrument that would likely cause avoidable inefficiencies. Even worse would be to move more
toward command-and-control alternatives that eschew the benefits of the price mechanism to an
even greater degree in the misguided pursuit of predictability.
6.2. Transition, Grandfathering, and Ex Ante Incentives. – The transition problem is
substantial for the regulation of greenhouse gases, and this issue, viewed generally, has received
sustained attention in some of my own prior work (e.g., Kaplow 1986, 1992, 2003, 2008b) and
that of other scholars (e.g., Shaviro 2000). For the present, it is useful to emphasize one
teaching: the importance of accounting for ex ante investment incentives, particularly when a
substantial transition is anticipated for a long period of time. With climate change, it is likely
that major agreements still may be many years off. And the prospect of a substantial, global
regulatory regime has been under serious consideration for an extended period of time.
Moreover, whatever national legislation may be enacted in the immediate future or global
agreement may be ratified in the near term, it seems likely that significant alterations will be ever
on the horizon, making ex ante concerns relevant well into the future.
If firms (and countries) anticipate substantial grandfathering, great inefficiency can arise.
One particular concern is misdirected investment that is counterproductive in combating climate
change. One form of grandfathering would involve distributing free permits based on preenactment emissions. Another would be granting analogous preferences under a tax scheme (for

- 13 -

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

example, exemptions for pre-enactment quantities of emissions might be provided).14 To the
extent that any such relief is based on prior investment, firms and countries have inadequate ex
ante incentives to begin bringing their investments and policies into line with the anticipated new
regime, and they may even behave counterproductively in order to secure greater preferences
upon enactment. As just one illustration, if such grandfathering is long anticipated, China may
build thousands more dirty coal plants than they would if their permit allotment had to be
purchased or was distributed, say, based on their population or some other factors – that is,
factors independent of how much annual greenhouse gases they manage to be pumping into the
atmosphere before a deal is struck.
Granting free permits or otherwise providing relief to costly, pre-existing sources is often
viewed as a tradeoff between equity and political feasibility. However, the world may well be
currently incurring a tremendous cost by following a course in which firms and countries expect
to be rewarded for increasing rather than reducing emissions in the interim – and this process has
been going on for over a decade and may continue for quite some time. Likewise, if subsequent
renegotiations are expected to favor those who have done the worst job complying with a new
regime, any agreement is much less likely to be successful going forward. Accordingly, any
moves that can be made now to signal credibly that such transition relief will not be provided (or
will be less generous than currently anticipated) could have a substantial social payoff – the
more, the sooner, the better.
7. Distribution
Both tax and permit schemes raise serious concerns – normative and political – about
their impact on the overall distribution of income.15 The subject comes up in Weisbach (2010),
receives greater attention in a number of other papers in this volume, notably Burtraw et al.
(2010) and Rausch et al. (2010), and plays an important implicit role in de Gorter and Just
(2010) and Parry (2010). A number of powerful lessons are important to keep in mind.
First, it is often supposed that one must design the climate change interventions
themselves to meet distributive objectives. For example, free permits or other leeway might be
14

A difference would arise if the free permits were tradeable whereas the tax preferences were not (i.e.,
firms could not directly or indirectly transfer their units of exempt emissions to other firms with greater control
costs). On one hand, free transferability ex post is more efficient since those receiving the relief may have lower
marginal control costs than do other firms. On the other hand, the prospect of transferability, by raising the value of
relief, worsens the ex ante incentives discussed in the text.
15
There are other dimensions of distribution, such as geographic incidence, that may have political
relevance but are set to the side here. See Burtraw et al. (2010). Note, however, that protecting the preexisting
distribution on such dimensions based on pre-enactment emissions patterns can both produce the sorts of
inefficiencies discussed in section 6.2 and also (if design provides long-term, ongoing compensation) perpetuate or
even increase inefficiencies in subsequent behavior. For example, if energy usage is much higher in some climates,
and in light of the greenhouse gas problem the true total social cost of energy is much higher than previously
thought, then a part of long-run efficient adjustment involves a different geographic distribution of the population.
Over the pertinent time horizons in climate change debates (covering decades, or even a century or more), margins
of this sort can be quite significant: Population distribution will be much different in 2050 than it is today, and it is
important that the incentives guiding such movement reflect the true social costs of living in different regions.

- 14 -

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

given to the poor or to people who drive in order to mitigate the regressive distributive incidence
of gasoline price increases. This view, however, is fundamentally mistaken and tends to confuse
analysis and generate policies that are less efficient than available alternatives. The most
straightforward and (approximately) best approach is to design an optimal environmental control
scheme, fully allowing price increases, such as in the price of gasoline, to occur in order to
induce all manner of efficient behavior (driving less, purchasing more fuel-efficient vehicles),
and then achieve distributive objectives through the income tax and transfer system. That is,
rather than contorting environmental policy, we can implement it efficiently and adjust the
general distributive apparatus of the economy to provide any desired offsets.
One particular means of doing so, which is a central focus of my recent book, Kaplow
(2008a), as well as of my writing on optimal environmental policy and regulation specifically
(Kaplow 2004, 2006), is to adjust the income tax and transfer system so that the combined
scheme is distribution neutral. For example, if a carbon tax or permit scheme raises the price of
gasoline, consumed disproportionately by the poor, one might lower taxes (or raise an earned
income tax credit and/or adjust other transfer programs) to make up the difference. If
environmental benefits are disproportionately concentrated on the rich, their income taxes might
be raised in an offsetting manner.
This simple prescription follows from familiar economic principles: It is generally best to
use a separate instrument to address each distinct problem; moreover, for each problem, it tends
to be desirable to employ that instrument which addresses it most directly. Use emissions taxes
or permit schemes to get the carbon price right (which will induce efficient behavior on all
margins related to the environmental challenge) and use the income tax and transfer scheme to
produce the desired distribution. (The distribution-neutral approach need not be optimal, of
course, since the pre-existing distribution need not be optimal, but its availability suggests the
ability to separate the two problems.)
Another often overlooked feature of distribution-neutral implementation is that it not
only neutralizes distributive effects (by definition) but also, as a crude first approximation, is
neutral with regard to labor supply. (The assumption that generates this result is that labor is
weakly separable in utility from other features of the problem, notably, different forms of
consumption and environmental effects.16) The basic intuition is that, with distribution-neutral
implementation, there is the same marginal return to earning more income after the reform as
there was before, all things considered, so individuals would be induced to choose the same level
of labor effort.
These ideas are also pertinent to the common practice of comparing the implications of
different means of implementation regarding the collection and distribution of revenues.
Auctioned permits raise revenues compared to free distribution; likewise, tax schemes add funds
16

For formal analysis, see Kaplow (2006). If, instead, gasoline is, say, a leisure complement, as indicated
by West and Williams (2007), then it is optimal to set the corrective tax wedge on gasoline above the Pigouvian
level (because doing so will further reduce gasoline use, which under the maintained assumption will also reduce
leisure, which is distorted upward by the income tax and transfer system).

- 15 -

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

to the treasury. Differences in revenue raised are thus seen by some to be important distinctions
among permit schemes and between permits and taxes. Moreover, it is common for economic
analyses to compare different means of distributing these collections: Revenue might be rebated
lump sum (equal per capita), by proportionally reducing labor income taxes, or otherwise.
Indeed, some of the aforementioned papers in this volume devote substantial attention to these
comparisons.
However, in light of the foregoing discussion, one can see that such analyses are often
incomplete and, as a consequence, misleading. Sometimes different revenue treatments (on the
collection and the disbursement side) are compared in terms of their efficiency costs, without
regard to distribution. However, the differential efficiency cost of different revenue treatments is
largely or fully a consequence of differences in redistribution, as emphasized in Kaplow (2004,
2006, 2008a). Should we be surprised that distributing funds lump sum has a higher efficiency
cost than using them to reduce marginal tax rates? After all, comparing these two approaches,
the environmental intervention is held constant, and the only difference is that the former, by
comparison to the latter, has higher marginal tax rates to finance a more generous lump-sum
transfer. This is a quintessential increase in redistribution through the tax system which really
has nothing to do with regulating greenhouse gases. And should we be surprised that this
redistributive difference is associated with greater overall distortion? As explained, a
distribution-neutral implementation would wash out this efficiency consequence (the
distortionary effect of redistribution on labor supply) and the distributive difference, leaving just
the intrinsic effects of the environmental regulation under consideration.
Some other analyses do attend to distributive effects but, as mentioned, tend to see them
as tied to particular means of deploying various regulatory instruments. Since, as explained, one
can adjust the tax and transfer system so as to achieve distribution neutrality – or any other
desired distribution, for that matter – distribution (and labor supply distortion associated
therewith) should be seen as a largely separable problem from that of addressing climate change.
Moreover, if academic analysis is to usefully and clearly guide the political process, which is
concerned with distributive matters, it seems best to present versions of implementation that are
explicitly distribution neutral – to which analysts might append other distributive scenarios,
clearly described, with accompanying distributional tables or diagrams. The distribution-neutral
case is a useful analytical and political benchmark that facilitates communication and clarifies
thinking.
Observe further that there is a potentially important political advantage of distributionneutral policy packages. Part of the difficulty of reaching agreement, whether within a single
country’s legislature or in an international multilateral bargain, concerns such distributive
effects.17 Indeed, they may be one of the greatest obstacles. Note, however, that a feature of an

17

In the domestic context, the income tax and transfer programs are the core instruments to adjust
distribution. Internationally, using similar logic, it tends to be best to use explicit transfer payments precisely
because indirect means tend to involve additional, avoidable inefficiencies. In the present setting, it is familiar that
one of the greatest sources of efficiency from an optimal international agreement is the potential to achieve costminimization across countries, with more control taking place in often poorer countries where opportunities for

- 16 -

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

efficient policy change that is implemented in a distribution-neutral fashion is that it tends to
result in a Pareto improvement. Enhanced efficiency means a larger pie, and distributionneutrality means that this expanded pie is divided among parties the same way that it was before.
Therefore, everyone’s slice is larger. Although this depiction of political deal-making is highly
oversimplified, it seems plausible that this factor should carry some weight.
8. Conclusion
The principal conclusion of this essay is that there exists a strong duality between
nonlinear tax schemes and adjustable-quantity permit schemes. Moreover, both possess a
significant advantage over fixed-quantity permit schemes because the level of control of
greenhouse gases under the latter could readily be much too great or too lenient, especially in the
long run. The Pigouvian dictum that polluters should face a tax or price equal to the marginal
expected damage that they cause is the appropriate benchmark for thinking about policies that
regulate externalities, including greenhouse gas emissions.
Weitzman’s (1974) framework, which compares a fixed quantity regulation to a fixed,
linear tax scheme is substantially misleading and inapt with regard to climate control. In
regulating a stock pollutant, the level of which evolves quite slowly, the second-best optimal
nonlinear tax can be very closely approximated in administratively straightforward ways using
both taxes and permits. Moreover, the adjustments over time that are necessary in light of the
resolution of uncertainty about control costs – which is substantial when considering projections
decades into the future – can be done in an essentially automatic, nondiscretionary manner.
Unfortunately, any type of scheme will need discretionary adjustment, and possibly political
renegotiation, as more is learned about the level of expected social harm due to greenhouse
gases.
Furthermore, the built-in adjustment process in a nonlinear scheme, whether
implemented through taxes or permits, is fairly intuitive and thus does not in itself present an
obvious political barrier. Indeed, as explained, these adjustments seem so natural that it actually
may appear more surprising not to make them (such as would be the case under fixed-rate tax or
hard-target quantity schemes).
Some additional considerations were also addressed. One often overlooked problem
concerns transition, in particular that giving away permits or providing tax exclusions on the
basis of existing emission levels provides perverse incentives for control prior to enactment.
This problem is likely to be substantial in light of the fact that truly tough limitations are unlikely
to become binding for quite some time, making it far more attractive for both individual sources
within countries and many nations to expand activities that will cause additional interim damage
and make more daunting the achievement of future emissions reductions.
Another dimension – addressed by many of the papers in this volume, but often analyzed

cheap reductions may be large, which effort may be induced by appropriate side-payments.

- 17 -

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

incompletely and misleadingly – concerns distributive effects, particularly with regard to the
overall distribution of income within and between countries. The central point to keep in mind is
that the tax and transfer system (including transfers between countries) typically offers the most
efficient means of addressing distributive concerns. In particular, distribution-neutral
implementation – combining an efficient greenhouse gas regulatory scheme with tax and transfer
adjustments that, taken together, keep the overall distribution constant – is quite appealing as an
analytical construct. It clarifies thinking, for example by distinguishing distortions due to
increased redistribution from distortions related to externality regulation. Furthermore,
distribution-neutral systems may be easier to communicate to policy-makers (who could also
have non-distribution-neutral proposals compared side-by-side to clarify distributive effects),
and they also have some pragmatic appeal, for efficient (pie-expanding) regulatory schemes that
are also distribution-neutral will make all groups better off.
In closing, it is useful to emphasize that basic economic principles – like setting prices
for externalities that equal marginal harm, and carefully distinguishing the task of externality
correction from that of redistribution – are important to keep in mind and to disseminate, even
amidst ongoing, intense political debate and negotiation about practical problems. In the short
run, better policies can be designed and implemented, whether they take the form of taxes or
permit schemes.
Also important is the long run, especially since the greenhouse gas problem,
unfortunately, is likely to be with us for generations, and further regulation and modification are
inevitable in the mid and distant future. Many will recall that, only a few decades ago,
economists’ advocacy of permit schemes as superior to command-and-control regulation was
often viewed as evil because such an approach entailed approval of paying to kill people. Had
proponents of permits given up the battle then, existing environmental regulation would almost
certainly be more costly and less effective, and the prospects for addressing climate change
would be even more grim.18
Pushing the point that optimal control is cost-effective control, which entails not only
cost minimization in achieving a given target but the choice (and modification) of targets that
reflect an equation of marginal control costs and marginal benefits, both of which may change
substantially over time from current estimates, is of first-order importance. No final, definitive,
international regime for addressing greenhouse gases will be in place any time soon, and
whatever arrangements are adopted, there will be continuing pressure to modify them. Hence,
even ideas that cannot fully and persuasively be presented in the short run are worth advancing
for the long run.

18

Even after the introduction of the first SO2 trading system in the early 1990s, media responses (including a
prominent cartoon) portrayed permits as legalized certificates to kill people.

- 18 -

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

References
Adar, Zvi, and James M. Griffin. 1976. “Uncertainty and the Choice of Pollution Control
Instruments,” 3 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 178–88.
Burtraw, Dallas, Margaret Walls, and Joshua Blonz. 2010. “Distributional Impacts of Carbon
Pricing Policies in the Electricity Sector.” In Gilbert E. Metcalf, ed., U.S. Energy Taxes.
Collinge, Robert A., and Wallace E. Oates. 1982. “Efficiency in Pollution Control in the Short
and Long Runs: A System of Rental Emission Permits,” 15 Canadian Journal of Economics
346–54.
de Gorter, Harry, and David R. Just. 2010. “The Social Costs and Benefits of U.S. Biofuel
Policies with Pre-existing Distortions.” In Gilbert E. Metcalf, ed., U.S. Energy Taxes.
Fishelson, Gideon. 1976. “Emission Control Policies under Uncertainty,” 3 Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 189–98.
Kaplow, Louis. 1992. “Government Relief for Risk Associated with Government Action,” 94
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 525–41.
__________. 2003. “Transition Policy: A Conceptual Framework,” 13 Journal of
Contemporary Legal Issues 161–209.
__________. 2004. “On the (Ir)relevance of Distribution and Labor Supply Distortion to
Government Policy,” 18(4) Journal of Economic Perspectives 159–75.
__________. 2006. “Optimal Control of Externalities in the Presence of Income Taxation,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12339.
__________. 2008a. The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
__________. 2008b. “Capital Levies and Transition to a Consumption Tax.” In Alan Auerbach
and Daniel Shaviro, eds., Institutional Foundations of Public Finance: Economic and Legal
Perspectives, pp. 112–46. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
__________, and Steven Shavell. 2002. “On the Superiority of Corrective Taxes to Quantity
Regulation,” 4 American Law and Economics Review 1–17.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques, and Jean Tirole. 1996. “Pollution Permits and Environmental
Innovation,” 62 Journal of Public Economics 127–40.
Parry, Ian W.H. 2010. “Tine to Raise Gasoline and Direct Taxes?” In Gilbert E. Metcalf, ed.,
U.S. Energy Taxes.
Rausch, Sebastian, Gilbert E. Metcalf, John M. Reilly, and Sergey Paltsev. 2010.
“Distributional Impacts of a U.S. Greenhouse Gas Policy: A General Equilibrium Analysis of
Carbon Pricing.” In Gilbert E. Metcalf, ed., U.S. Energy Taxes.
Roberts, Marc J., and Michael Spence. 1976. “Effluent Charges and Licenses Under
Uncertainty,” 5 Journal of Public Economics 193–208.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan. 1973. “Effluent Charges: A Critique,” 6 Canadian Journal of
Economics 512–27.
Shaviro, Daniel. 2000. When Rules Change: An Economic and Political Analysis of Transition
Relief and Retroactivity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Stavins, Robert N. 1996. “Correlated Uncertainty and Policy Instrument Choice,” 30 Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 218–32.
Strand, Jon. 2010. “Tax Caps as Climate Policy Instruments with Domestic and Imported
Fuels.” In Gilbert E. Metcalf, ed., U.S. Energy Taxes.

- 19 -

ATPI3.WorkingPaper.wpd

August 2, 2010

Weisbach, David. 2010. “Instrument Choice Is Instrument Design.” In Gilbert E. Metcalf, ed.,
U.S. Energy Taxes.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1974. “Prices vs. Quantities,” 41 Review of Economic Studies 477–91.
__________. 1978. “Optimal Rewards for Economic Regulation,” 68 American Economic
Review 683–91.
West, Sarah, and Roberton C. Williams. 2007. “Optimal Taxation and Cross-Price Effects on
labor Supply: Estimates of the Optimal Gas Tax,” 91 Journal of Public Economics 593–617.

- 20 -

