                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE EVOLUTION OF BRAND PREFERENCES:
                         EVIDENCE FROM CONSUMER MIGRATION

                                         Bart J. Bronnenberg
                                         Jean-Pierre H. Dube
                                         Matthew Gentzkow

                                        Working Paper 16267
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16267


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2010




We thank Aimee Drolet, Jon Guryan, Emir Kamenica, Kevin Murphy, Fiona Scott Morton, Jesse Shapiro,
Chad Syverson, and participants at the INFORMS Marketing Science Conference, in Ann Arbor, Michigan,
the 2nd Workshop on the Economics of Advertising and Marketing in Paris, France, and the NBER
Summer Institute (IO) for helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge feedback from seminar participants
at the Erasmus University Rotterdam, Goethe University Frankfurt, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, London Business School, Stanford University, Tel-Aviv University, University of
California, Los Angeles, the University of Chicago, and Universidade Nova Lissabon. We thank Grace
Hyatt and Todd Kaiser at Nielsen for their assistance with the collection of the data, and the Marketing
Science Institute, the Neubauer Family Foundation, and the Initiative on Global Markets at the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Bart J. Bronnenberg, Jean-Pierre H. Dube, and Matthew Gentzkow. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of Brand Preferences: Evidence from Consumer Migration
Bart J. Bronnenberg, Jean-Pierre H. Dube, and Matthew Gentzkow
NBER Working Paper No. 16267
August 2010
JEL No. D12,L1

                                             ABSTRACT

We study the long-run evolution of brand preferences, using new data on consumers' life histories
and purchases of consumer packaged goods. Variation in where consumers have lived in the past allows
us to isolate the causal effect of past experiences on current purchases, holding constant contemporaneous
supply-side factors such as availability, prices, and advertising. Heterogeneity in brand preferences
explains 40 percent of geographic variation in market shares. These preferences develop endogenously
as a function of consumers' life histories and are highly persistent once formed, with experiences 50
years in the past still exerting a significant effect on current consumption. Counterfactuals suggest
that brand preferences create large entry barriers and durable advantages for incumbent firms, and
can explain persistence of early-mover advantage over long periods. Variation across product categories
shows that the persistence of brand preferences is related in an intuitive way to both advertising levels
and the social visibility of consumption.


Bart J. Bronnenberg                                 Matthew Gentzkow
Tilburg University and CentER                       University of Chicago
Warandelaan 2, Koopmans K-1003                      Booth School of Business
5037 AB Tilburg                                     5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
The Netherlands                                     Chicago, IL 60637
bart.bronnenberg@uvt.nl                             and NBER
                                                    gentzkow@chicagobooth.edu
Jean-Pierre H. Dube
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jdube@gsb.uchicago.edu
       If an intelligent being from a remote planet was presented with certain facts about the trivial
       physical differences in brands and identical prices which exist in many product categories here
       on earth and asked to develop a model of consumer choice behavior for these conditions, he
       might assert with little hesitation that: consumers would be indifferent with respect to the avail-
       able brands, choice would be a random process, and the market shares for the brands would be
       equal. (Bass 1974)



1    Introduction

Consumers appear to have high willingness to pay for particular brands, even when the alternatives are

objectively similar. The majority of consumers typically buy a single brand of beer, cola, or margarine

(Dekimpe et al. 1997), even though relative prices vary significantly over time, and consumers often cannot

distinguish their preferred brand in blind “taste tests” (Thumin 1962, Allison and Uhl 1964). Consumers

pay large premia to buy homogeneous goods like books and CDs from branded online retailers, even when

they are using a “shopbot” that eliminates search costs (Smith and Brynjolfsson 2001). A large fraction of

consumers buy branded medications, even though chemically equivalent generic substitutes are available at

the same stores for much lower prices (Ling et al. 2002).

    Theorists have long speculated that willingness to pay for brands today could depend on consumers’

experiences in the past. Willingness to pay could be a function of past consumption, which could enter

expected utility directly (Becker and Murphy 1988), through switching costs (Klemperer 1987), or through

beliefs about quality (Schmalensee 1982). It could depend on past exposure to advertising (Schmalensee

1983, Doraszelski and Markovich 2007), or on past observations of the behavior of others, as in Ellison

and Fudenberg (1995). At the extreme, brand preferences could be entirely determined by experiences in

childhood (Berkman et al. 1997). Under these assumptions, consumers’ accumulated stock of “preference

capital” could be a valuable asset for incumbent firms and a source of long-term economic rents.1 In Bain’s

(1956) view, “the advantage to established sellers accruing from buyer preferences for their products as

opposed to potential entrant products is on average larger and more frequent in occurrence at large values

than any other barrier to entry” (p. 216).

    Existing empirical evidence provides little support for the view that past experiences have a long-lasting


    1 Throughout  the paper, we use “brand preferences” as a shorthand for willingness to pay. We intend this term to encompass
channels such as learning that do not work through the utility function per se.


                                                              2
impact on brand preferences. Large literatures have measured the effects of advertising, but these studies

often find no effects (e.g., Lodish et al. 1995), and the effects they do measure are estimated to dissipate

over a horizon ranging from a few weeks to at most five or six months (Assmus, Farley, and Lehmann 1984,

Bagwell 2007). Empirical studies of habit formation and consumer switching costs have been limited to

estimating short-run effects using panel data spanning no more than 1 or 2 years (e.g., Erdem 1996, Keane

1997, Dubé, Hitsch and Rossi 2010).

    In this paper, we study the long-run evolution of brand preferences, using a new dataset that combines

Nielsen Homescan data on purchases of consumer packaged goods with details of consumers’ life histo-

ries. Building on Bronnenberg, Dhar, and Dubé’s (2007) finding that market shares of these goods vary

significantly across regions of the US, we ask how consumers’ current purchases depend on both where they

live currently, and where they lived in the past. This approach allows us to hold constant contemporane-

ous supply-side factors such as quality, availability, and advertising, and to isolate the causal effect of past

experience on current purchases.

    Our data include current and past states of residence for 38,000 households, which we match to 2006-

2008 purchases in 238 consumer packaged goods product categories. Our primary dependent variable con-

sists of the purchases of the top brand as a share of purchases of either of the top two brands in a category.

Consistent with Bronnenberg, Dhar, and Dubé (2007), we show that this share varies significantly across

space, with a mean of 0.63 and a cross-state standard deviation of 0.15 in the average product category.

    We find strong evidence that past experiences are an important driver of current consumption. We

first examine the way consumption patterns change when consumers move across state lines. Both cross-

sectional and panel evidence suggest that approximately 60 percent of the gap in purchases between the

origin and destination state closes immediately when a consumer moves. So, for example, a consumer who

moves from a state where the market share of the top brand among lifetime residents is X% to one where

the market share is Y % jumps from consuming X% to consuming (.4X + .6Y )%. Since the stock of past

experiences has remained constant across the move, while the supply-side environment has changed, we

infer that approximately 40 percent of the geographic variation in market shares is attributable to persistent

brand preferences, with the rest driven by contemporaneous supply-side variables. We next look at how

consumption evolves over time following a move. The remaining 40 percent gap between recent migrants



                                                       3
and lifetime residents closes steadily, but slowly. It takes more than 20 years for half of the gap to close,

and even 50 years after moving the gap remains statistically significant. Finally, we show that our data also

strongly reject the hypothesis that all that matters is where consumers lived in childhood: consumers who

move after age 25 still eventually converge to the consumption patterns of their new state of residence.

    As a lens through which to interpret these results, we introduce a simple model of consumer demand

with habit formation (Becker and Murphy 1988). Consumers in the model are myopic. Their choices in

each period depend on the contemporaneous prices, availability, and other characteristics of the brands in

their market, and on their stock of past consumption experiences, or “brand capital.” The model has two key

parameters: the weight on current product characteristics relative to the stock of past consumption (α), and

the year-to-year persistence of brand capital (δ ).

    We next present evidence for two key identifying assumptions. The first is that a consumer’s migration

status is orthogonal to stable determinants of brand preferences. Panel evidence shows directly that migrants

look similar to non-migrants in their birth state before moving, and that age of migration is uncorrelated with

purchases prior to moving. As additional evidence, we consider a subset of brands that were introduced late

in our sample, and show that where a consumer lived before a brand pair was available does not predict her

current consumption. The second assumption is that a brand’s past market share in a given market is equal

in expectation to the share today. We introduce historical data on market shares and show that, despite large

changes over time in shares, the identifying assumption is approximately satisfied.

    Under these two assumptions, we estimate that the weight on current characteristics in utility is α = .62

and that the effect of a given year’s consumption experiences depreciates at a rate of 1 − δ = .026 per year.

    To shed more light on the economic implications of our findings, we simulate two counterfactual sce-

narios. First, we imagine that two brands enter a market sequentially, and ask how difficult it will be for the

second brand to equalize the market share advantage of the first. We show that a head start of even a few

years creates a formidable barrier, with a second entrant needing to maintain a large advantage in supply-side

variables (lower prices, more promotions, etc.) to catch up in the subsequent decade. Second, we introduce

a simple model of endogenous firm choices, and use it to study the persistence of brand advantages in the

face of idiosyncratic shocks. We show that even with significant noise in the environment, our estimates can

easily rationalize persistence of market shares over many decades, as observed in Bronnenberg, Dhar, and



                                                      4
Dubé (2009).

    In the final section, we present evidence on the specific mechanisms that underlie our results. We show

that the relative importance of brand capital is higher in categories with high levels of advertising and high

levels of social visibility. Although we cannot interpret these relationships as causal, they are consistent with

a model in which both advertising and observed consumption of peers make the the stock of brand capital

more important. At the same time, we observe substantial persistence even in categories where advertising

and visibility are low, suggesting that some element of habit formation is likely necessary to rationalize the

data. We also assess how much of the geographic variation in shares not explained by brand capital can be

attributed to variation in prices, display advertising, and feature advertising.

    Our empirical strategy is closely related to work that uses migration patterns to study the formation of

culture and preferences. Logan and Rhode (2010) show that nineteenth-century immigrants’ expenditure

shares for different types of food are predicted by past relative prices in their countries of origin. Luttmer

and Singhal (2010) link immigrants’ preferences for redistribution of wealth to the average preference for

redistribution in their birth countries. Atkin (2010) shows that migrants within India are willing to pay higher

prices to consume foods that are common in their state of origin. Our results also relate to the literature on

the formation of preferences more broadly (Bowles 1998). Our work further relates to the broader literature

on sources of entry barriers and incumbent advantages (e.g., Bain 1950, Williamson 1963). In particular,

Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2010) show that the demand curves of manufacturing plants shift out

over time, and that a model of endogenous demand-side capital formation similar to the one we develop

herein can explain a significant share of older plants’ size advantage relative to newer plants. Finally, our

work relates to the conceptual literature on the long term effects of brand equity in marketing (e.g., Aaker

1991, Keller 1993).

    Section 2 introduces our data. Section 3 presents descriptive evidence on the evolution of brand pref-

erences. Section 4 introduces our model and estimation strategy. Section 5 presents evidence supporting

our key identifying assumptions. Section 6 presents estimates of the model parameters, and derives impli-

cations for first-mover advantage and share stability. Section 7 presents evidence on mechanisms. Section 8

concludes.




                                                        5
2      Data

2.1     Purchases and demographics

We use data from the Nielsen Homescan Panel on the purchases and demographic characteristics of 48,501

households. The panel is drawn from 50 regional markets throughout the United States and covers purchases

made between October 2006 and October 2008, inclusive. Each household receives an optical scanner and

is directed to scan the barcodes of all consumer packaged goods they purchase, regardless of outlet. The

data thus include purchases not only from supermarkets, but also from convenience stores, drug stores, and

so on. The data cover food, beverages, and many non-food items commonly found in supermarkets. See

Einav et al. (2010) for a recent validation study of the Homescan Panel.

      The most granular notion of a product in the data is a UPC code. Nielsen groups UPCs into categories

they call modules. Examples include “canned soup,” “regular cola,” “cough drops,” and “bar soap.” Nielsen

also groups UPCs by brand, with Coca-Cola 12-ounce cans and Coca-Cola 2-liter bottles both grouped under

the brand “Coca-Cola.” A single brand may span multiple modules. Our raw data include 382 modules and

51,316 brands.

      We define the total number of purchases by a household of a particular module-brand combination to be

the number of observed shopping trips on which the household purchased at least one UPC in that module-

brand. A trip counts as a single purchase regardless of the size, number of units bought, or price paid. In

Appendix B we show that our results are robust to alternative quantity measures.

      We rank brands within each module by the total number of purchases across all households in the sample.

Our main analysis focuses on the top two brands in each module. We refer to the best-selling brand in a

module as brand 1 and to the second-best-selling brand as brand 2, respectively.

      For each household, we observe a vector of demographics that includes household income, whether the

household’s residence is rented or owned, and the household head’s race and Hispanic status.


2.2     Consumer life histories

We supplement the purchase and demographic data with a survey of Homescan panelists’ life histories,

which we administered in cooperation with AC Nielsen. The survey was sent electronically to households



                                                      6
in the panel, and we requested that each adult in the household complete the survey separately. The ques-

tionnaire asked individuals their country and state of birth, and their current state of residence. For those not

currently living in their state of birth, we asked the age at which they left their state of birth, and the number

of years that they have lived in their current state. Respondents also reported their gender, their date of birth,

their highest level of educational attainment, whether they are currently employed, whether they personally

make the majority of the household’s purchase decisions (whether they are the “primary shopper”), and

whether they are the “head of household.”

    The survey was sent to 75,221 households. From these, 80,077 individuals in 48,951 households re-

sponded for a response rate of 65 percent. The surveys were completed between September 13, 2008, and

October 1, 2008.

    From each household, we select a single individual whose characteristics we match to the purchase data.

We first focus on individuals born in the United States. For the set of households with multiple respondents,

we then apply the following criteria in order, stopping at the point when only a single individual is left: (i)

keep only primary shopper(s) if at least one exists; (ii) keep only household head(s) if at least one exists; (iii)

keep only the female household head if both a female and a male head exist; (iv) keep the oldest individual;

(v) drop responses that appear to be duplicate responses by the same individual; (vi) select one respondent

randomly.

    We define a household to be a non-migrant if the selected individual’s current and birth state are the

same and a migrant otherwise.

    We use the reported birth date to define a respondent’s age, assuming all surveys were completed on

September 22, 2008. We define the “gap” in a consumer’s reported history to be the difference between her

age and the sum of the number of years she lived in her birth state and the number of years she has lived in

her current state. In cases where the sum of a respondent’s reported years living in her birth state and current

state exceeds her age (i.e., the gap is negative), we either recode the number of years lived in her birth state

to be the difference between her age and the reported years in her current state (if the difference is only one

or two years), or drop the household from the data (if the difference is more than two years).




                                                        7
2.3     Additional data sources

We supplement our core dataset with data on the historical market shares of a subset of the brands in our

data from Consolidated Consumer Analysis (CCA). These volumes are published jointly by a group of

participating newspapers from 1948 to 1968.2 They aggregate results from consumer surveys conducted by

the newspapers in their respective markets. For each product category and market, the surveys give the share

of consumers who report purchasing each brand.3 We match these brand-category pairs to brand-module

pairs in the Nielsen data. We collapse to the state level, averaging each brand’s share purchasing across

years from 1948 to 1968 and across markets within states. We then define each brand’s average share to be

the share of consumers purchasing divided by the sum of this share across brands within the category.

      To interpret our counterfactuals in terms of equivalent price changes, we use aggregate store-level data

on 2001-2005 purchases and prices, spanning 30 product categories from the IRI Marketing Data Set (Bron-

nenberg, Kruger, and Mela 2008).

      To measure module-level advertising intensity, we use data on 2008 advertising expenditures for each

module from the TNS Media Intelligence Ad$pender database. We download total expenditures for each

top-two Homescan brand in our sample, treating cases where no TNS data exist for the brand in question

as zeros. We then sum expenditures by module, and code the top 25 percent of modules by advertising

expenditure as “high advertising.”


2.4     Final sample definition and sample characteristics

We exclude modules from the main analysis in which we do not observe at least 5,000 households making

purchases. We also exclude a small number of modules in which the top two brands as defined by Nielsen

are in fact two varieties of a single brand (e.g., “Philadelphia” and “Philadelphia Light” in the Cream Cheese

module). We exclude migrant households for which the gap as defined above is greater than 5 years. For

households with a gap greater than zero and less than five years, we set the gap to zero. That is, we assume

the age at which the shopper left her birth state was her current age minus the number of years she reports
    2 From 1948-1950, the Milwaukee Journal is listed as publisher. In 1948, the title is Thirteen Market Comparison of Consumer

Preferences. In 1949 and 1950, the title is Fourteen Market Comparison of Consumer Preferences. From 1951 to 1968, all of
the participating newspapers are listed as publisher (the exact set of newspapers varies by year). In 1951 and 1952 the title is
Consolidated Consumer Analysis Information, and from 1953 to 1968 the title is Consolidated Consumer Analysis.
    3 Until 1958, consumers were asked to report the brand they “usually buy” in each category. From 1959 on, they were asked to

report the brand they “bought last.”


                                                               8
living in her current state. We also exclude individuals with a reported age less than 18 or greater than 99.

Our final sample consists of 38,098 households and 238 modules. See Appendix Table 2 for a list of these

modules.

      Table 1 summarizes the migration patterns in our final sample. Approximately 16% of respondents are

born in a different census region than the one in which they currently live. The most common moves have

been out of the Northeast and Midwest and into the South and West regions of the United States.

      Figure 1 shows the distribution of age of respondents in our final sample, along with the distributions of

the age at which respondents moved out of their state of birth, the number of years respondents have lived

in their current state of residence, and the gap between the year when they moved out of their state of birth

and the year when they moved into their current state of residence. The figure shows that there is substantial

variation in all of these measures, and that the majority of sample households have no gap between leaving

their state of birth and arriving in their state of residence.



3      Descriptive Evidence

3.1     Measurement Approach

Index consumers by i, modules by j, and states by s. We focus on the top two brands in each category as

defined above. Let i’s observed purchase share in category j, ŷi j , be the number of purchases of brand 1 in

category j divided by the total purchases of brands 1 and 2. Let µ̂s j be the mean of ŷi j across all non-migrant

households in state s.

      For each migrant consumer i, we define the relative share in category j to be i’s purchase share, scaled

relative to the average purchase share of non-migrants in her current and birth states:


                                                             ŷi j − µ̂s j
                                                   βi j =                  ,                                  (1)
                                                            µ̂s0 j − µ̂s j


where s0 is i’s current state and s is i’s birth state.

      We take βi j as a summary of the way migrants’ purchases compare to those of non-migrants. If purchases

depend only on contemporaneous supply-side variables like prices, availability, and advertising, migrants

should behave identically to non-migrants in their current state and βi j should equal one on average. If


                                                              9
purchases depend only on experiences early in life, migrants should behave identically to non-migrants in

their birth state and βi j should equal zero on average. If preferences evolve endogenously throughout the life

cycle, βi j should fall between zero and one, on average, and should depend on the age at which a migrant

moved and the number of years they have lived in their current state.

      To look at these patterns in the data, we estimate regressions of the form


                                              βi j = f (ai ,ti ) + ηi j ,                                    (2)


where ai is the age at which i moved and ti is the number of years i has lived in her current state. The exact

form of f () will vary depending on the specification. Assuming ηi j mainly captures sampling variability

in ŷi j , its standard deviation will vary inversely with the denominator of equation (1). We therefore weight
                                                2
observations in equation (2) by µ̂s0 j − µ̂s j .


3.2     Cross-Section

Table 2 summarizes variation in purchase shares. The average of the purchase share ŷi j across all consumers

and modules in our sample is 0.63. Conditional on purchasing at least one of the top two brands, consumers

in the typical category make 3.0 purchases of the top brand and 1.7 purchases of the second-place brand.

The cross-state standard deviation of the purchase share is 0.15. The absolute value of the gap between the

purchase share in a migrant’s current state and in her birth state is 0.11 on average. These geographic differ-

ences are broadly consistent with the patterns reported in Bronnenberg, Dhar and Dubé (2007). Appendix

Table 2 reports the average purchase share and cross-state standard deviation for each module individually.

      Figure 2 plots the key information in our data: how the relative share, βi j , varies with a migrant’s age

at move (ai ) and years since move (ti ). We plot estimates of equation (2), parameterizing f (ai ,ti ) with

dummies for each combination of ai and ti , pooled in ten-year bins. The figure shows that βi j is clearly less

than one on average, rejecting the view that purchases are entirely driven by contemporaneous supply-side

variables. It shows that βi j is clearly greater than zero, rejecting the view that purchases are entirely driven

by childhood experiences. The figure also suggests that the purchases of migrants converge gradually toward

those of non-migrants in their destination states.

      To illustrate the patterns of convergence more clearly, Figures 3 and 4 show the same information as

                                                         10
Figure 2 collapsed to two dimensions. Figure 3 shows variation with respect to years since move, pooling

across the age-at-move categories. Notice, first, that even very recent movers have relative shares far from

zero. This fact suggests that there is a discrete “on-impact” change in purchases at the time an individual

moves, equal to approximately 60 percent of the gap between the two states. Referring back to Figure 2,

we see that this jump is of similar magnitude regardless of the age at which a consumer moves. Second,

note that migrant purchases converge slowly toward those of non-migrants in the years following a move. It

takes 25 years for half of the remaining gap in relative shares to close (reaching βi j = 0.8), and even after

50 years the difference between migrants and non-migrants remains statistically significant.

    Figure 4 shows variation with respect to age at move, pooling across the years-since-move categories.

Migrants who moved during childhood have relative shares close to those of non-migrants in their current

states, while those who move later look closer to non-migrants in their birth states. This pattern is consistent

with the brand capital model we introduce below, which predicts that the preferences of a consumer who

has spent more time in her birth state will converge less quickly following a move. It is also consistent

with results in marketing that show older consumers consider fewer brands when making a choice and are

less likely to switch brands (Lambert-Pandraud and Laurent 2010, Drolet et al. 2008). Interestingly, even

consumers who moved before age 5 have relative shares slightly below 1, possibly reflecting the influence

of parental preferences on childhood consumption.

    Note that the mechanical correlation between age at move and years since move means that Figures 3

and 4 partly repeat the same information. To separate the effect of age and years, Table 3 presents estimates

of equation (2) where we include linear terms in ai , ti , and ti squared. To make the coefficients easier to read,

we divide both ai and ti by ten. For reference, the first column shows the regression analogue of Figure 3

where we only condition on years since move. The constant in this regression gives the “on-impact” effect of

moving, which we estimate to be 0.62. Relative shares start out converging at a rate of 10 percentage points

per decade. The quadratic term is significantly negative, suggesting the rate of convergence slows over

time. The second column adds age at move, ai , which we find is significantly negative, showing that the

preferences of older migrants indeed converge less quickly to those of their new state even after controlling

for time since moving. The third and fourth columns control flexibly for time since move and age at move

respectively. The linear and quadratic terms remain strongly significant and similar in magnitude in these



                                                        11
regressions, confirming that time since move and age at move have independent effects.

      The final column repeats the regression of column (2) with the sample restricted to those moving at age

25 or later. We present this regression as a further test of the hypothesis that childhood experiences are

decisive in shaping preferences. Both the jump on moving and convergence over time remain similar in

magnitude and highly significant. So preferences do change, even for those who move late. This result pro-

vides some evidence against the common assertion that parental influence is dominant in shaping children’s

preferences (e.g., Moore, Wilkie, and Lutz 2002).4


3.3     Panel

Under assumptions we discuss in more detail in section 5 below, the cross-sectional variation in relative

shares shown in Figure 2 is informative about how a given migrant’s purchases evolve over time. In this

section, we look at within-consumer variation in purchases more directly. The panel dimension of our data

is limited, but we do observe a small number of consumers who move during the two years of our sample.

For these consumers, we can follow purchases before and after their move, and ask whether the panel lines

up with our inferences from the cross-section.

      Restricting attention to those for whom the gap between leaving their state of birth and arriving in their

current state is zero, we observe 115 consumers who report moving in the past year and 111 consumers who

report moving between one and two years ago. Given that our survey was fielded in September 2008, we

expect the first group to have moved between October 2007 and September 2008, and the second group to

have moved between October 2006 and September 2007.

      Figure 5 shows relative shares by month for those who report moving in the past year. Their relative

shares for the months up to October 2007 are close to zero, indicating that their purchases before they move

are similar to those of non-migrants in their states of birth. If moves are distributed uniformly within the

October 2007 to September 2008 period, and if an individual’s relative share jumps to 0.62 on moving, we

should expect the points to increase linearly from zero to 0.62 in the second half of the figure. This pattern

is exactly what we observe.


      4 Consumer  behavior textbooks cite examples of parental influence. For instance, Berkman, Lindquist, and Sirgy (1997) state
that “[i]f Tide laundry detergent is the family favorite, this preference is easily passed on to the next generation. The same can be
said for brands of toothpaste, running shoes, golf clubs, preferred restaurants, and favorite stores” (pp. 422-3).


                                                                12
      Figure 6 shows relative shares by month for those who report moving between one and two years ago.

As we would expect based on the cross-sectional evidence, relative shares increase roughly linearly from

October 2006 to September 2007 and then are flat at 0.62 or slightly increasing thereafter.



4      Model and Estimation

As a lens through which to interpret these results, we introduce a simple model of consumer demand with

habit formation (Becker and Murphy 1988). The model serves two purposes. First, it allows us to quantify

the preference persistence we observe in terms of an economically meaningful structural parameter: the

rate at which the stock of preference “capital” derived from past experience decays. Second, it lets us

consider the implications of our results for firms’ short-run and long-run demand curves, the importance of

first-mover advantage, and the stability of market shares over time.


4.1     Setup

We model a consumer deciding which of the top two brands to purchase in a particular module. We treat

states as the relevant product market, assuming that supply-side characteristics of all brands are constant

within state. We add subscripts for consumers, modules, and states when we turn to estimation in section

4.3 below.

      The difference between the consumer’s indirect utility from the top brand and the second brand is


                                       U = α µ (X, ξ ) + (1 − α) k − ν.                                      (3)


Here, µ (X, ξ ) ∈ (0, 1) is the consumer’s baseline utility, X is an observed vector of consumer characteristics,

ξ is an unobserved vector of product characteristics, k ∈ [0, 1] is the consumer’s stock of brand capital,

α ∈ (0, 1] is a parameter governing the relative importance of past consumption in current preferences, and

ν ∼ Uniform (0, 1) is a utility shock drawn independently across purchase occasions.

      We assume the consumer prefers the top brand to the second brand if and only if U ≥ 0. The probability

that the consumer chooses the top brand (conditional on purchasing one of the top two) is therefore:




                                                       13
                                           y = α µ (X, ξ ) + (1 − α) k.                                    (4)


Equation (4) is a version of the standard linear probability model of demand (Heckman and Snyder 1997).

    The baseline utility, µ (X, ξ ), captures the influence of all demand factors other than past consumption.

X includes consumer characteristics such as age and income. ξ includes all relevant state-level characteris-

tics of the top two brands, including their prices, availability, advertising levels, and qualities.

    The stock of brand capital summarizes the consumer’s past consumption experiences. We define the

stock of brand capital to be the discounted average of past purchase shares:


                                                      ∑A−1
                                                       a=1 δ
                                                             A−a ŷ
                                                                    a
                                                k=      A−1 A−a
                                                                                                           (5)
                                                       ∑a=1 δ

where A ≥ 1 is the consumer’s age and ŷa is the consumer’s actual purchase share across all purchase

occasions at age a. The parameter δ ∈ [0, 1] governs the persistence of capital over time.

    We assume that equation (3) describes the consumer’s purchases at all earlier ages. We also assume that

α and X are constant; but that the capital stock, k, and the product characteristics, ξ , may have changed

over time (for example, because the consumer moved from one state to another). When A = 1, and thus k is

undefined, we assume U = µ (X, ξ ) − ν. We can thus think of µ (X, ξ ) as the expected utility of a consumer

who has never before purchased either of the top brands in module j, and so has acquired no brand capital.

    It is straightforward to show that the linear recursive structure of equations (4) and (5) means we can

write y as a weighted average of past µ (X, ξ ) plus a mean zero shock:

                                                  A
                                           yA =   ∑ wAa µ (X, ξa ) + εA                                    (6)
                                                  a=1


where ξa is the vector of product characteristics the consumer faced at age a, Eν (εA ) = 0, wa ∈ [0, 1], and

∑Aa=1 wa = 1.

    Consider, now, the special case in which product characteristics, ξ , vary across states but are constant

over time. It is immediate that if the consumer has lived in the same state throughout her life, her expected

purchase share is simply y = µ (X, ξ ) + ε, where ξ are the product characteristics in her current state.

Suppose instead that the consumer has moved exactly once: she lived in a state with characteristics ξ until

                                                         14
age a∗ and then moved to a state with characteristics ξ 0 . It is immediate from equation (6) that


                                    yA = β µ X, ξ 0 + (1 − β ) µ (X, ξ ) + εA .
                                                   
                                                                                                             (7)


where β = ∑Aa=a∗ +1 wAa and, hence, β ∈ (0, 1).

      It is straightforward to derive an explicit expression for β as a function of the age at which the consumer

left her birth state (a∗ ) and the number of years she has lived in her current state (t ∗ = A − a∗ ):

                                                    "∗                            !#
                                                      t −1
                                                                         α
                                  β = 1 − (1 − α)     ∏       1−     ∗ +r−1 k
                                                                                       ,                     (8)
                                                      r=1          ∑ak=0   δ

if t ∗ > 1, and β = α if t ∗ = 1. See Appendix A for the derivation of equation (8). Note that limt ∗ →∞ β = 1,

and that β is increasing in t ∗ . Note also that β is decreasing in a∗ for t ∗ > 1.


4.2     Discussion

The weight, β , in equation (7) is the model analogue of the relative share defined in section 3: µ (X, ξ ) is

the average purchase share among non-migrants in a migrant’s birth state, µ (X, ξ 0 ) is the average purchase
                                                                 y−µ(X,ξ )
share among non-migrants in her current state, and β =        µ(X,ξ 0 )−µ(X,ξ )
                                                                                  .

      The predictions of the model are consistent with the facts documented in section 3. A migrant’s expected

purchase share falls between the share among non-migrants in her market of current residence and non-

migrants in her market of birth (0 < β < 1). When an individual moves, a fraction α of the market share

gap between the two markets is closed immediately, as the product characteristics the consumer faces change

from ξ to ξ 0 (β = α at t ∗ = 1). The parameter α therefore captures the “on-impact” effect of moving. The

on-impact effect is the same regardless of the age at which the consumer moved. The remaining 1 − α

portion of the share gap closes gradually over time as her stock of brand capital adjusts. The adjustment

is slower if δ is close to one, and if the consumer was older when she moved (since in this case she has

accumulated a larger stock of past brand experiences).

      The model is restrictive in several important ways. First, we only model the relative utilities of the top

two brands. We do not model the extensive margin of whether or not to make a purchase in a module at all,

and we suppress substitution with other brands.


                                                         15
      Second, we assume that the capital stock, k, and the current demand characteristics, µ (X, ξ ) , are sepa-

rable in the indirect utility function. The influence of prices or advertising on indirect utility, and hence on

demand, will be the same regardless of a consumer’s past experiences. The separability assumption delivers

the prediction that the jump in relative share on moving (or “on-impact” effect) is the same regardless of the

age at which a consumer moves. We make this assumption for tractability, and because it is consistent with

the observed data, as seen in Figure 2.

      Third, consumers in our model are myopic. We assume the consumer prefers the top brand to the

second brand if and only if U ≥ 0. A sophisticated, forward-looking consumer would take account of

the way purchases today will affect her capital stock, and thus her expected utility, tomorrow. Demand

would therefore depend not only on current product characteristics, but also on expected future product

characteristics.

      Finally, we assume that the capital stock is a weighted average of past consumption. As discussed

above, past experiences could affect present demand through other channels. Past consumption might matter

because of learning, and so enter current demand through beliefs rather than preferences. Past exposure to

advertising or past observation of peers might matter independently of the level of past consumption. We

see our evidence as potentially consistent with all of these stories and our data do not allow us to distinguish

them completely. We specialize to a habit model mainly because it is a simple way to capture the key facts.

We consider evidence for advertising and peer effects in section 7 below.


4.3     Estimation

Index consumers by i, modules by j, and states by s as in section 3. Index years by t. For each consumer i,

we observe a vector of purchase shares with typical element ŷi j , a vector of observables Xi , and a vector Mi

which encodes i’s history of migration—her current and birth state, the age at which she moved (a∗i ), and

the number of years she has lived in her current state (ti∗ ). We use ŷ, X, and M to denote the matrices which

pool these vectors across i.

      We parametrize baseline demand µ() as:


                                            µ (Xi , ξ jst ) = γ jst + Xi λ j ,                               (9)



                                                           16
where λ is a vector of parameters and γ jst is shorthand for the value γ (ξ jst ) of a function mapping the vector

of product characteristics ξ jst to a scalar. The vector Xi includes log income, as well as dummies for age,

Hispanic identity, race, educational attainment, and employment status.

    Our first identifying assumption is that there are no unobserved consumer characteristics correlated with

both purchases and the exogenous variables Mi and Xi : E (ŷi j − yi j |X, M) = 0.

    Our second identifying assumption is that, conditional on observables, the expectation of baseline de-

mand in a given module-state pair in a past period is equal to the expectation in the current period. Denoting

the value of γ jst in the current period by γ js , we assume: E (γ jst − γ js |X, M) = 0 ∀t.

    For a consumer born in state s and currently living in s0 , we then have:

                               
                                                                                                                if s = s0
                               
                               γ js + Xi λ j
                               
           E (ŷi j |X, M) =                                                                                                 (10)
                               
                               β (a∗ ,t ∗ ; α, δ ) γ js0 + Xi λ j + [1 − β (a∗ ,t ∗ ; α, δ )] [γ js + Xi λ j ] if s 6= s0
                                                                
                                    i i                                       i i



where γ js denotes the current value of γ jst , and β (a∗i ,ti∗ ; α, δ ) is given by equation (8). Note that we now

allow ξ jst to vary over time within a market. It is straightforward to show that β (a∗i ,ti∗ ; α, δ ) is the same as

in equation (8) , where we assumed that ξ was constant over time within a market.

     We estimate the parameters of this model using a two-step, non-linear least squares estimator. In the
                                      
first step, we estimate the parameters γ js ∀s and λ j for each module j by running an OLS regression of ŷi j

on Xi and a vector of state dummies using only the non-migrant consumers (for whom s = s0 ). In the second

step, we estimate the remaining parameters, α and δ , by minimizing [ŷi j − E (ŷi j |X, M)]2 , holding γ js ∀ j,s
                                                                                                        

and λ j ∀ j constant at their estimated first-step values.5
    

    We compute bootstrap standard errors, clustered by module. That is, we sample J modules with replace-

ment at each iteration, and include all households in each selected module. Our standard error estimates

are therefore robust to within-module correlation induced by, for example, variation over time in γ jst or

household-module-level unobservables.




    5 Weweight observations equally in our main specification. In Appendix B we show that our estimates are similar if we give
more weight to households for which the observed number of purchases is large.


                                                               17
5      Evidence on Identifying Assumptions

5.1     No Selection on Unobservables

Our first identifying assumption is that there are no unobserved consumer characteristics correlated with

both purchase shares, ŷi j , and the observables, Mi and Xi .

      Of particular concern is the possibility that migrants are selected to have unobserved brand preferences

intermediate between the typical non-migrant in their state of birth and their current state of residence. It

could also be the case that migrants who stay in a state for many years after moving have characteristics

more similar to lifetime residents of that state than migrants who only stay for a few years.

      The first test of our identifying assumption is the within-consumer analysis presented in Figures 5 and 6

and discussed in section 3 above. We see that the migrants look similar to non-migrants in their birth states

in the months before they move. The mean relative share pooling months 10/06 to 9/07 for migrants living

in their current state less than a year is 0.093, the 95 percent confidence interval is (−0.025, 0.211), and

we fail to reject β = 0 at the 10 percent level (p = 0.12). The data are also consistent with a discrete jump

in migrant purchases on moving. Moreover, purchase shares for these consumers prior to moving are not

significantly related to the age at which they moved (p = 0.37), providing no support for the hypothesis that

the correlation between relative shares and age at move or years since moving in Figure 2 is primarily driven

by selection on unobservables.

      As a second test of our identifying assumption, we consider a sub-sample of brands that were introduced

relatively recently. Under the assumptions of our model, a migrant who moved before either of two brands

was introduced should have an expected purchase share no different from non-migrants in her current state

of residence. If the identifying assumption was violated, where a consumer lived before the brands were

introduced would be predictive of her characteristics, and so migrants who moved before a brand pair was

introduced would look significantly different from non-migrants.

      To execute this test, we select pairs of brands that we have confirmed were introduced in 1955 or later.

To maximize the power of the test, we do not restrict attention to top-two brands, but include all brand pairs

we could identify that were introduced late and have a significant number of purchases in our data. Our final

sample includes 52 brand pairs. We compute relative shares, βiw , for each pair w as in equation (1), and



                                                        18
estimate the regression


                          βiw = (ω0 + ω1ti∗ ) I (ti∗ ≤ Tw ) + [ω2 + ω3ti∗ ] I (ti∗ > Tw ) + εiw ,          (11)


where Tw is the number of years at least one brand in pair w has been available, ti∗ is the number of years
                                                                                          2
since i moved, and I() is the indicator function. We weight observations by µ̂s0 j − µ̂s j as in equation (2)

above. Under our identifying assumption, we expect ω1 > 0, ω2 = 1, and ω3 = 0.

      Table 4 presents the results. Consistent with our assumption, the coefficient on decades since moving is

highly significant for those moving after the pair in question was introduced (ω1 > 0), but insignificant for

those moving before the pair was introduced (ω3 ≈ 0). Moreover, we cannot reject that the average shares of

migrants who moved before the pair was introduced have the same average shares as non-migrants in their

current state of residence (ω2 ≈ 1). The results are robust to focusing on the complete set of pairs introduced

since 1955, pairs introduced after 1975, and pairs introduced after 1985.


5.2     Expected Past Shares Equal Present Shares

Our second identifying assumption is that, conditional on observables, the expectation of baseline demand

in a given module-state pair in any past year is equal to the expectation in the current year.

      To test this assumption, we study the 27 modules for which we observe purchases of both current top-two

brands in the historical CCA data. For each module-state pair, we compute the current purchase share in the

Homescan data across both migrants and non-migrants. We then compare this share to the analogous share

in the CCA data for the years 1948-1968, computed as described in section 2.3 above. Under our identifying

assumption, we expect that the regression of past shares on current shares should have an intercept of zero

and a slope of one.

      Note that this prediction would only hold exactly if we compared past and current purchases of non-

migrants. We cannot perform this test, because the CCA data do not report shares by migration status. The

regression of past on current shares will still be informative, however, so long as migrants are a relatively

small share of the population and/or migration patterns have been relatively stable over time.

      Figure 7 presents a scatterplot of current versus past purchase shares. Each observation is a state-module

pair. The diameters of the circles are proportional to the number of years of CCA data we have for the

                                                            19
observation. The current and past shares are clearly not equal, possibly reflecting real changes in market

structure over time as well as sampling variability. However, the fitted values, indicated by the dotted line,

are very close to the 45-degree line.

      Table 5 presents the corresponding regression of past shares on current shares, weighting by the number

of years of CCA data, and clustering by module. The estimated constant is 0.084 and the estimated slope is

0.822. We cannot reject the joint hypothesis that the constant equals zero and the slope equals one (p = 0.30).

      A possible concern is that the coefficient in this regression may be attenuated by measurement error in

the current shares. Consistent with this hypothesis, restricting the regression to state-module pairs where

we observe at least 200 households making purchases in the Homescan data increases the estimated slope

to 0.926 and reduces the estimated constant to 0.027. Restricting the sample to state-module pairs with at

least 500 households increases the estimated slope to 1.039 and reduces the estimated constant to 0.001.

      Together, this evidence supports the assumption that the best predictor of a past purchase share given the

data we observe is the present purchase share.



6      Results

6.1     Parameter Estimates

Table 6 presents estimates of the brand-stock model described by equations (4) and (5). The first parameter

of interest is α, which represents the “on-impact” effect of moving to a different state. We estimate α =

0.623, which is consistent with our descriptive analysis above and confirms that about 60% of the preference

gap between territories is crossed on-impact when moving. Under the assumptions of our model, it also

implies that 60% of the observed cross-state dispersion can be attributed to variation in supply-side factors

ξ . The remainder, about 40% of regional share variation, can be attributed to consumers’ stock of brand

capital.

      The estimate of the persistence parameter, δ , is 0.974. This magnitude is consistent with the earlier

evidence that preferences appear highly persistent. The estimates suggest that it takes 26.5 years for half of

a given year’s contribution to the capital stock to decay.

      Figure 8 shows the analogue of Figure 2 predicted from the model at the estimated parameters. Figure



                                                       20
9 shows the residuals. The residuals do not show any strong systematic patterns, suggesting the model

successfully matches the qualitative features of the data.


6.2      Demand Dynamics

To see what these estimates imply for long-run and short-run price responses, consider a hypothetical market

in which the top two brands, A and B, have equal market shares (µ (X, ξ ) = 0.5). Assume that the market

has the same age distribution as the one observed in our Homescan sample, and that the current capital stock

is k = 0.5 for all consumers.

      Suppose, now, that brand A cuts its price to a level that increases baseline demand, µ (X, ξ ), from 0.5 to

0.6.6 This change causes an immediate increase in brand A’s purchase share from 0.5 to α0.6+(1 − α) 0.5 =

0.56.

      For a permanent price cut, the model implies that the purchase share will eventually rise to 0.6. These

long-run payoffs will take many years to materialize, however. The dynamics of the purchase share follow-

ing a permanent price cut will, by assumption, be the same as the dynamics of a migrant’s share following a

move, and so will have a path very similar to that shown in Figure 3.

      Our model also implies that the price cut will have long-run effects even if it is temporary. Given the

estimated parameters, however, these effects will typically be very small. If brand A reverts to its original

price after one year, its purchase share falls from 0.562 to 0.501. The long-run effect of the price cut

is thus 1.6 percent of the on-impact effect (although the slight increase will last for a long time). This

observation may explain why studies of temporary changes in advertising intensity have generally failed to

detect significant long-run effects beyond a horizon of a few months (Assmus, Farley, and Lehmann 1984,

Bagwell 2007). It also suggests that the long-run preference formation we are studying here is a distinct

phenomenon from the habit effects documented by Dubé, Hitsch and Rossi (2010), where brief price cuts

lasting days or weeks have large effects on subsequent purchase behavior.




      6 In   Appendix C, we show that for a typical category this would amount to a discount of approximately 15 percent.


                                                                   21
6.3     Early entry and catching up by the later entrant

In this section, we consider the implications of our findings for first-mover advantage. We simulate a hypo-

thetical market in which two ex-ante symmetric brands, A and B, enter sequentially. For a given head start

by brand A, we ask how much and for how long brand B would have to invest to achieve parity in purchase

shares.

      Let equation (4) be stated in terms of relative demand for brand B, so that y = 0 corresponds to all

consumers buying from A and y = 1 corresponds to all consumers buying from B.

      For simplicity, we consider a stylized setting in which the only brand characteristic that enters baseline

demand is the allocation of shelf space in retailers. Firms A and B can make payments to retailers to give

their brands more or less space. The brand characteristic ξ is the share of space devoted to B. Since the

brands are otherwise symmetric, we assume an inexperienced consumer’s probability of purchasing B will

be equal to its share of space, so that µ (X, ξ ) = ξ .

      In Appendix C, we present auxiliary estimates using store-level price and quantity data from IRI that

allow us to give an alternative interpretation of our shelf-space counterfactuals in terms of relative price
                                                                                                              y
                                                                                                      ∂ log( yA )
changes. Pooling across 30 categories, we estimate an average demand elasticity of substitution of             B
                                                                                                            price      =
                                                                                                     ∂ log( priceA )
                                                                                                                 B

−1.54.

      Suppose that A has a head start of 5 years. During this period, y = 0 as all consumers buy brand A. The

accumulated capital stock at the end of those 5 years is k = 0. Brand B then enters and the two firms play

a game that determines shelf space allocations. Abstracting from the details of this game, we know that if

space allocations are equal (ξ = 0.5), we will have y < 0.5, and y will converge toward 0.5 but never reach it.

Brand B will, thus, never achieve parity in the purchase share. If B has the majority of shelf space (ξ > 0.5),

both y and k will reach 0.5 in some finite number of years. The larger is ξ , the faster the convergence. We

can therefore ask how many years B would need to maintain a certain share of shelf space, ξ , to achieve

purchase share parity.

      More generally, we assume brand A’s head start is t ∈ {1, 5, 10, 15, 25} years and ask how fast the sec-

ond firm achieves convergence using a level of ξ ∈ {0.55, 0.60, 0.65, 0.70, 0.75}. From the estimates in Ap-

pendix C, these shelf-space allocations are equivalent to price discounts of 1− pB /pA ∈ {0.08, 0.15, 0.22, 0.28, 0.34} .

Over sufficiently long horizons, it is important to account for the fact that some consumers will die (destroy-


                                                          22
ing some of A’s capital) and others will be born (with much less of A’s capital). We run the simulations

assuming that the age distribution is stable over time and matches the empirical distribution we observe in

our Homescan sample.

      Table 7 shows the required number of years to catch up. The results show that at the estimated α and

δ , equalizing shares in a reasonable amount of time requires significant investment. If A’s head start is 5

years, B would need to hold 60 percent of shelf space (or discount its price by 15 percent) to reach market

share parity in just more than a decade. To catch up in only 2 years, B would need to hold three quarters of

shelf space or discount its price by more than 30 percent. If A’s head start were 15 years, B would require

23 years at 60 percent of shelf space, or 3 years at 75 percent of shelf space, to reach market share parity.


6.4     Persistence under market shocks

Bronnenberg, Dhar, and Dubé (2009) show that regional share differences in consumer packaged goods

industries persist over remarkably long periods of time. Current local shares are strongly predicted by

who was the first entrant in a market, even when that entry happened a century ago, few consumers alive

remember a time when both brands were not widely available, and the intervening years have seen large

shocks to the economic environment such as the growth of supermarkets, changes in real income, wars,

depression, and so on.

      Our model does not predict how much persistence we should expect to see because it does not endoge-

nize firm choices. The previous section showed that a second entrant would have to make large investments

to catch up to the first entrant; it does not say anything about whether or not we will see those investments

in equilibrium. In this section, we consider a specific assumption under which our model does have strong

implications about persistence: complementarity between the stock of capital (k) and current investments in

gaining market share (ξ ).

      In particular, extend the example of the previous section and suppose that supermarkets allocate shelf

space in proportion to expected market share. That is, the shelf space allocation in period t is


                                                       1
                                                ξt =        ∑ yit ,                                        (12)
                                                       Nt    i


where Nt is the number of consumers in the market. Allocating shelf space proportional to market share

                                                       23
is in fact a common rule of thumb for retailers, and one that some argue will be approximately optimal.7

Such a rule will lead intuitively to persistence in shares because a brand that has a lead in the capital stock

of experienced consumers will have a larger share of shelf space and consequently be purchased more often

even by inexperienced consumers.

    We ask how much persistence this dynamic can explain in the presence of shocks to the two brands’

shares in each period. As above, we assume µ (X, ξ ) = ξ , where ξ is the share of shelf space allocated to

brand B and is given by equation (12). Expected purchase shares are:


                                                  yit = αξt + (1 − α) kit + κt ,                                                  (13)


where κt is an i.i.d. shock distributed uniformly on [−κ, κ]. Because of transmission through the capital

stock, kit , yit depends on both past and present shocks.

    We assume an existing market share for the leading brand of 0.75, which has been in place for as long

as consumers live. We fix α = 0.623 (our empirical estimate), and simulate the evolution of market shares

for different values of δ , from 0.974 (our empirical estimate) in steps of 0.25 down to 0.224. We assume

that the parameter governing the shock process is κ = 0.05, a number we choose because it is at the upper

end of typical annual share movements in consumer packaged goods.8 We then forward simulate 100 years

of evolution for our hypothetical market.

    Figure 10 plots the distribution of the market shares in the final year of the simulation across 1000

replications. The first panel shows that when we fix δ at its estimated value (0.974), long-run market

shares remain closely concentrated around their initial value of 0.75, even after 100 years of shocks. The

probabilities that market shares are within 10 or 20 share points of their initial value after 100 years are

72 percent and 100 percent respectively. The mechanism generating the persistence is the recency-weighted

window of past experiences in the consumer’s brand capital stock. Within this window, shocks tend to cancel

out over time. It is, thus, the stock of brand capital that buffers against the reinforcement of demand and

supply shocks. The weaker the brand stock, the more market shares are subject to exogenous shocks that

    7 See,e.g., references in Bultez and Naert (1988).
    8 Under  the allocation in Equation (12), observe that equation (13) can be aggregated to yt =
                                                                                                                         R
                                                                                                      αyt + (1 − α) i kit f (i)di + κt ,
                                                                                                   R
where f (i) is the age distribution in the population. Rearranging this aggregation, we obtain yt = i kit f (i)di + κt / (1 − α). Hence,
taking into account the allocation rule, the shocks on market shares are uniformly distributed on [−κ/ (1 − α) , κ/ (1 − α)] ≈
[−0.12, +0.12] at our estimated value for α.


                                                                  24
accumulate across time. Accordingly, the persistence weakens when we consider lower values for δ and,

effectively, shorten the relevant window of past experiences. The probability that market shares are within

10 share points of the initial values drops from 72% with δ = 0.974, to 22% with δ = 0.224, which is barely

above the 20 percent one would expect if shares after 100 years attain a uniform distribution. As δ decreases

towards 0, historical advantages are all but erased.

      From this simple simulation, we conclude that our estimates of preference persistence, combined with

complementarity between current investment and brand capital, can rationalize stable market shares over

long periods of time even in the presence of large shocks.



7      Mechanisms

7.1     Brand Capital

We estimate that 40 percent of current geographic variation in purchase shares is explained by variation in

consumers’ brand capital stocks. For tractability and ease of exposition, we have modeled brand capital

formation in a habit framework, assuming the current capital stock is a function only of past consumption.

As mentioned in the introduction, however, the brand capital stock may be partly a function of other vari-

ables, such as past exposure to advertising (Schmalensee 1983, Doraszelski and Markovich 2007), or past

observations of consumption by peers (Ellison and Fudenberg 1995).

      To provide a first look at the mechanism behind brand capital, we ask how our parameter estimates

depend on whether a category has high or low levels of advertising. Recall that we define a category to

have high advertising if total expenditure by the top two brands is greater than the 75th percentile among all

categories in our dataset. We re-estimate our main model allowing both the weight on brand capital (1 − α)

and the rate of persistence in brand capital δ to differ by advertising intensity.

      We also divide categories by the extent to which their consumption is socially visible. We code this

measure subjectively. We judge products to be socially visible if (i) they are frequently consumed together

with others in social situations, and (ii) they are frequently consumed or served directly from a package with

the brand name visible. Products such as beer, soda, chips, ketchup, and cigarettes are therefore coded as

socially visible. Products such as baby food, toothpaste, and cold remedies are not socially visible because



                                                       25
they fail criterion (i). Products such as gravy mixes, frozen pasta, and shredded cheese are not socially

visible because they fail criterion (ii). See Appendix Table 2 for the module-by-module coding.

      As with advertising, we allow both (1 − α) and δ to differ by social visibility. Note that the correlation

between the dummy for high advertising and the dummy for high visibility is low, so the sample splits by

advertising and visibility should capture independent variation.

      Table 8 presents the results. We find that advertising-intense categories have a significantly lower value

of α, and thus a significantly larger weight on the brand capital stock in utility. We cannot interpret this

difference as causal, but it is consistent with the stock of past advertising exposure influencing current

willingness to pay above and beyond the effect of past consumption. We find no significant differences in

δ , consistent with the influence of past consumption and past advertising decaying at a similar rate.

      We see a similar pattern with social visibility. We find that categories with a high degree of social

visibility have a smaller estimated α, implying greater weight on brand capital. This finding is consistent

with past observations of peer consumption exerting an independent influence on current willingness to pay.

We again find no significant difference in δ .


7.2     Baseline Demand

The remaining 60 percent of geographic variation in purchase shares is driven by differences in baseline

demand µ (X, ξ ). Recall that the source of this result is the observation that when migrants move, their

consumption shifts immediately toward the dominant brand in the destination market, closing 60 percent of

the gap in purchase shares. It must be that migrants encounter some combination of lower prices, higher

advertising, widespread availability, or other advantages of the dominant brand that lead to this jump in

consumption. The results above do not speak to the role of specific supply-side variables, however.

      We can use the aggregate IRI data to get some feel for the role of prices, display advertising, and feature

advertising. Details of this exercise are provided in Appendix D. First, for each category, we compute

the share of cross-market variation in the log difference in purchase shares explained by the following

independent variables: (i) log relative prices, (ii) relative display intensity, (iii) relative feature intensity,

and (iv) log relative prices, display intensity, and feature intensity together. We then compute the mean and

standard deviation of these shares across categories.



                                                        26
    We find that the cross-market correlation between relative shares and prices is −0.50 in the average

category. The average share of variance explained by prices is 32 percent. Clearly, one reason migrants

adjust their purchases immediately on moving is that they encounter lower prices. We find that the cross-

market correlation of relative shares with feature and display advertising is 0.44 and 0.42 respectively,

explaining 28 percent and 24 percent of cross-market variation on average. Migrants also encounter more

features and displays for the dominant brand. Together, prices, feature, and display explain 49 percent of

the cross-market variation in the average category.

    If prices, feature, and display are correlated with other market-level product characteristics such as shelf

space allocations, however, these regressions will overstate the share of variation explained. To address this

issue, we exploit the panel structure of our data. For each category, we regress the log difference in pur-

chase shares at the category-market-week level on market and week dummies, plus each of the independent

variables above. From each of these regressions, we compute predicted values by multiplying the indepen-

dent variable(s) of interest by their estimated coefficient(s). We estimate the share of variance explained by

dividing the variance of the predicted value by the variance of the dependent variable. Finally, we compute

the mean and standard deviation of the estimated shares across categories.

    From these specifications, we estimate that variation in relative prices explains 20 percent of cross-

market variation (std.dev. = 13 percentage points). Variation in relative feature intensity explains 7 percent

(std.dev. = 5 percentage points), variation in relative display intensity explains 11 percent (std.dev. = 9.8

percentage points), and all three marketing variables together explain 21 percent (std.dev. = 12 percentage

points).

    A candidate variable we are unable to measure is shelf space allocation, or availability more broadly.

Marketing models used in practice to determine shelf space allocations often recommend that they be pro-

portional to market share (Bultez and Naert 1988). To the extent that shelf space exerts a significant effect

on consumption, shelf space could explain a significant share of the remaining variation.

    Finally, it is possible that baseline demand depends in part on the observed consumption of others. This

role for peer effects differs from the contribution to the brand capital stock discussed above. It would imply

we might expect to see faster adjustment (higher α) for highly visible categories. As already discussed,

Table 8 shows the opposite is true. This could mean that peer effects are not an important contributor to



                                                      27
baseline demand, or that this effect is outweighed by their contribution to brand capital.



8    Conclusions

Our results suggest that much of consumers’ observed willingness to pay for brands may reflect the influ-

ence of past experiences. We estimate that heterogeneity in brand capital explains a substantial share of

geographic variation in purchases. Brand capital evolves endogenously as a function of consumers’ life his-

tories, and decays slowly once formed. Brand capital can explain large and long-lasting advantages to first

movers. Finally, our results suggest that brand preferences play an especially important role in categories

with high levels of advertising and social visibility.




                                                         28
References


 [1] Aaker, David A. (1991), Managing Brand Equity, The Free Press, New York, NY.

 [2] Allison, Ralph I., and Kenneth P. Uhl (1964), “Influence of Beer Brand Identification on Taste Percep-
     tion,” Journal of Marketing Research, 1(3), 33-39.

 [3] Assmus, Gert, John U. Farley, and Donald R. Lehmann (1984), “How Advertising Affects Sales: Meta-
     Analysis of Econometric Results,” Journal of Marketing Research, 21(1), 65-74.

 [4] Atkin, David (2010), “Trade, Tastes and Nutrition in India,” Economics Department Working Paper
     No. 80, Yale University.

 [5] Bagwell, Kyle (2007), “The Economic Analysis of Advertising,” Handbook of Industrial Organization,
     3, 1701-1844.

 [6] Bain, Joe S. (1950), “Workable Competition in Oligopoly: Theoretical Considerations and Some Em-
     pirical Evidence,” American Economic Review, 40(2), 35-47.

 [7] —- (1956), Barriers to New Competition: Their Character and Consequences in Manufacturing Indus-
     tries, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

 [8] Bass, Frank M. (1974), “The Theory of Stochastic Preference and Brand Switching,” Journal of Mar-
     keting Research, 11(1), 1-20.

 [9] Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy (1988), “A Theory of Rational Addiction,” Journal of Political
     Economy, 96(4), 675-700.

[10] Berkman, Harold W., Jay D. Lindquist, and M. Joseph Sirgy (1997), Consumer Behavior: Concepts
     and Marketing Strategy, NTC Business Books, Lincolnwood, IL.

[11] Bowles, Samuel (1998), “Endogenous Preferences: The Cultural Consequences of Markets and Other
     Economic Institutions,” Journal of Economic Literature, 36(1), 75-111.

[12] Bronnenberg, Bart J., Sanjay K. Dhar, and Jean-Pierre H. Dubé (2007), “Consumer Packaged Goods
     in the United States: National Brands, Local Branding,” Journal of Marketing Research, 44(1), 4-13.

[13] —- (2009), “Brand History, Geography, and the Persistence of Brand Shares,” Journal of Political
     Economy, 117(1), 87-115.

[14] Bronnenberg, Bart J., Michael W. Kruger, and Carl F. Mela (2008), “The IRI Marketing Data Set,”
     Marketing Science, 27(4), 745-48.

[15] Bultez, Alain, and Philippe Naert (1988), “SH.A.R.P.: Shelf Allocation for Retailers’ Profit,” Market-
     ing Science, 7(3), 211-231.

[16] Dekimpe, Marnik G., Jan-Benedict E. M. Steenkamp, Martin Mellens, and Piet Vanden Abeele (1997),
     “Decline and Variability in Brand Loyalty,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 14(5),
     405-420.

[17] Doraszelski, Ulrich, and Sarit Markovich (2007), “Advertising Dynamics and Competitive Advantage,”
     Rand Journal of Economics, 38(3), 557-92.

                                                    29
[18] Drolet, Aimee, Patrick Suppes, and Anand V. Bodapati (2008), “Habits and Free Associations: Free
     Your Mind but Mind Your Habits,” Working Paper, University of California, Los Angeles.

[19] Dubé, Jean-Pierre H., Günter J. Hitsch, and Peter E. Rossi (2010), “State Dependence and Alternative
     Explanations for Consumer Inertia,” forthcoming in the RAND Journal of Economics.

[20] Einav, Liran, Ephraim Leibtag, and Aviv Nevo (2010), “Recording Discrepancies in Nielsen Homescan
     Data: Are They Present and Do They Matter?,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 8(2), 207-239.

[21] Ellison, Glenn, and Drew Fudenberg (1995), “Word-of-Mouth Communication and Social Learning,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1), 93-125.

[22] Erdem, Tülin (1996), “A Dynamic Analysis of Market Structure Based on Panel Data,” Marketing
     Science, 15(4), 359-378.

[23] Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson (2010), “The Slow Growth of New Plants: Learn-
     ing about Demand?,” working paper, the University of Chicago.

[24] Heckman, James J., and James M. Snyder, Jr. (1997), “Linear Probability Models of the Demand for
     Attributes with an Empirical Application to Estimating the Preferences of Legislators,” Rand Journal
     of Economics, 28(0), S142-S189.

[25] Keane, Michael P. (1997), “Modeling Heterogeneity and State Dependence in Consumer Choice Be-
     havior,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 15(3), 310-327.

[26] Keller, K. L. (1993), “Conceptualizing, Measuring, and Managing Customer-Based Brand Equity,”
     Journal of Marketing, 57 (January), 1-22.

[27] Klemperer, Paul (1987), “Markets with Consumer Switching Costs,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     102(2), 375-394.

[28] Lambert-Pandraud, Raphaëlle, and Gilles Laurent (2010), “Impact of Age on Brand Choice,” in The
     Aging Consumer: Perspectives from Psychology and Economics, Aimee Drolet, Carolyn Yoon, and
     Norbert Schwarz (eds.), Routledge Academic.

[29] Ling, Davina C., Ernst R. Berndt, and Margaret K. Kyle (2002), “Deregulating Direct-to-Consumer
     Marketing of Prescription Drugs: Effects on Prescription and Over-the-Counter Product Sales,” Journal
     of Law and Economics, 45(2), 691-723.

[30] Lodish, Leonard M., Magid Abraham, Stuart Kalmenson, Jeanne Livelsberger, Beth Lubetkin, Bruce
     Richardson, and Mary Ellen Stevens (1995), “How T.V. Advertising Works: A Meta-Analysis of 389
     Real World Split Cable T.V. Advertising Experiments,” Journal of Marketing Research, 32(2), 125-
     139.

[31] Logan, Trevor D. and Paul W. Rhode (2010), “Moveable Feasts: A New Approach to Endogenizing
     Tastes,” working paper, Ohio State University.

[32] Luttmer, Erzo F. P., and Monica Singhal (2010), “Culture, Context, and the Taste for Redistribution,”
     forthcoming in the American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

[33] Moore, Elizabeth S., William L. Wilkie, and Richard J. Lutz (2002), “Passing the Torch: Intergenera-
     tional Influences as a Source of Brand Equity,” Journal of Marketing, 66(2), 17-37.



                                                   30
[34] Schmalensee, Richard (1982), “Product Differentiation Advantages of Pioneering Brands,” American
     Economic Review, 72(3), 349-365.

[35] —- (1983), “Advertising and Entry Deterrence: An Exploratory Model,” Journal of Political Economy,
     91(4), 636-653.

[36] Smith, Michael D., and Erik Brynjolfsson (2001), “Consumer Decision-Making at an Internet Shopbot:
     Brand Still Matters,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 49(4), 541-558.

[37] Thumin, Frederick J. (1962), “Identification of Cola Beverages,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 36(5),
     358-360.

[38] Williamson, Oliver E. (1963), “Selling Expense as a Barrier to Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     77(1), 112-128.




                                                    31
Appendix

A       Derivation of Equation (8)
We first write yA+1 recursively as a function of yA . Define ζa = ŷa − ya . For any A > a∗ , we can expand
equation (4) as:
                                                                    A−1
                                                                          δ A−a (ya +ζa )
                                   yA = α µ (X, ξ 0 ) + (1 − α) ∑a=1        A−1 a
                                                                                δ
                                                                                                             (A.1)
                                                                          ∑a=1

Combining equation (A.1) with the analogous expression for yA+1 we can show that :
                                                               
                    yA+1 = α µ (X, ξ 0 ) A δ δ a + 1 − α A δ δ a yA + (1−α)
                                                                        A
                                                                          δa
                                                                             δ ζA                            (A.2)
                                                 ∑a=1             ∑a=1                 ∑a=1

       Next, we write β (a∗ ,t ∗ + 1) as a function of β (a∗ ,t ∗ ). We know from equation (7) that for each a∗ and
t∗   there exists β (a∗ ,t ∗ ) such that

                               yA = β (a∗ ,t ∗ ) µ X, ξ 0 + (1 − β (a∗ ,t ∗ )) µ (X, ξ ) + εA .
                                                         


Using this fact along with equation (A.2), we can show that:
                                                                   
                                              α                 α
                               ∗ ∗
                           β (a ,t + 1) = a∗ +t ∗ a + 1 − a∗ +t ∗ a β (a∗ ,t ∗ )
                                           ∑a=0 δ            ∑a=0 δ

      Starting from the fact that β (a∗ , 1) = α, it is then straightforward to show that
                                                                                      !
                                                                  t∗
                                  ∗ ∗                                          α
                              β (a ,t + 1) = 1 − (1 − α) ∏ 1 − a∗ + j−1                 .
                                                                 j=1      ∑i=0     δi

B       Robustness Checks
Appendix Table 1 reports the results of several robustness checks. We re-estimate the brand-stock model
described by equations (4) and (5) using alternative dependent variables. The top row in this table reports
estimates using shares based on the number of purchases made. This is the case that is also reported in table
6 and serves as the benchmark. As alternatives, we use market shares based on three additional quantity
variables: equivalent units, expenditures, and units. The variable “equivalent units” expresses a purchase
in terms of weight, volume, or other measurement unit that allows for aggregation across different package
sizes. The variable “expenditures” equals the amount of money that is spent on the brands under study.
Finally, the variable “units” simply measures the number of discrete units bought. Appendix Table 1 shows
that our results are not sensitive to our choice of quantity variable in computing brand shares.
     Finally, denote the share of the top brand in module j by y j and the total number of purchases of the
top 2 brands for household i by ni j . The last row of estimates is obtained with brand shares defined by the
number of purchases made by a household (as with the benchmark), but where each observation is weighted
by the inverse of our estimate of the sample variance in household-level purchase shares y j 1 − y j /ni j . The
results show that the estimated values of α and δ fall slightly, but the overall picture remains very similar.




                                                         32
C     Estimation of Elasticity of Substitution using IRI Data
We use aggregate store-level data on 2001-2005 purchases and prices from the IRI Marketing Data Set
(Bronnenberg, Kruger, and Mela 2008) to estimate the average elasticity of substitution between the top two
brands in a typical consumer packaged goods category. These data cover sales in 30 consumer packaged
goods categories for 260 weeks across 47 markets. We use total volume by brand-market-week as our
measure of purchases. We compute prices by dividing expenditure for each brand-market-week by volume.
We focus on the top two brands in each category by total volume across all markets and weeks. For the
top two brands in category j, P1 jmt and P2 jmt are prices, F1 jmt and F2 jmt are the feature advertising intensity
levels, D1 jmt and D2 jmt are the display advertising intensity levels, and y jmt is the top brand’s purchase share
(as a fraction of all purchases of the top two brands). We define a brand’s promotional intensity as the
fraction of total volume sold in market m during week t under a given promotional advertising type.
    We estimate the following reduced-form regression:
                                                         
                          y jmt         jm           P1 jmt
                 log               = β̃0 − β̃1 log            + β̃2 ∆Feat jmt + β̃3 ∆Disp jmt + ζ jmt ,
                       1 − y jmt                     P2 jmt

where j indexes IRI product categories, m indexes markets, and t now indexes weeks. The constant β̃0jm is a
category-market fixed effect. We assume the error term ζ jmt is conditionally mean zero, and cluster standard
errors by category.                                                                            
                                                                                   y
    Our estimate of the parameter β̃1 , the elasticity of substitution −∂ log 1−y       /∂ log PP12 across these
categories, is 1.54 with a standard error of 0.052.
    Consider a hypothetical category where P1 = P2 , the initial purchase share y is 0.5, and initial baseline de-
mand µ is also 0.5. We ask what change in relative prices would be equivalent to increasing
                                                                                                 baseline demand
                                                                                                             
                                                                                         α µ 0 +(1 − α)0.5
                                                   
    0                                                y
to µ > µ. Note, first, that by equation (4) log 1−y increases from zero to log                                . To
                                                                                       α(1−µ 0 )+(1 − α)0.5
                                         0
produce this increase by cutting P1 to P1 (holding P2 constant), we must have
                                                                             0
                                                                               !
                                       α µ 0 + (1 − α)0.5
                                                             
                                                                            P1
                              log                               = −β̃1 log       .
                                    α (1 − µ 0 ) + (1 − α)0.5               P2
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                             P
Solving this equation for µ 0 ∈ {0.55, 0.60, 0.65, 0.70, 0.75} yields price discounts of 1− P12 ∈ {0.08, 0.15, 0.22, 0.28, 0.34}.


D     Estimation of Correlations Between Shares and Marketing Variables us-
      ing IRI Data
We use the same IRI data as in Appendix C to assess the extent to which point-of-purchase marketing
variables drive the geographic variation in market shares. We focus on relative prices, feature advertising
intensity, and display advertising intensity.
    Following the analysis
                                in
                                  Appendix C we define the dependent variable of interest to be the log ratio of
                         y jmt
purchase shares log 1−y jmt , and we define log relative prices, relative feature intensity, and relative display
                           
                     P jmt
intensity to be log P21 jmt    , ∆Feat jmt , and ∆Disp jmt respectively.
    We first collapse the data to the category-market level by taking means across weeks of each variable.
We then estimate the raw cross-market correlation in each category between the log ratio of shares and each
marketing variable. We also run a regression in each category of the log ratio of shares on all three marketing



                                                        33
variables jointly and compute the R2 . We report the mean and standard deviation of the correlation and R2
across categories.
    To address spurrious correlation between these marketing variables and time-constant unobservables,
we also estimate panel regressions with market and week fixed effects for each category. From each of these
regressions, we compute predicted values by multiplying the independent variable(s) of interest by their
estimated coefficient. We estimate the share of variance explained by dividing the share of the predicted
value by the total variance of the dependent variable. Finally, we compute the mean and standard deviation
of the estimated shares across categories.




                                                    34
                             Age                                         Age Leaving State of Birth




   .3




                                                          .3
    .2




                                                          .2
Share




                                                      Share
   .1




                                                          .1
   0




                                                          0
         0        20        40     60       80                   0           20      40       60      80
                             Years                                                 Years


                 Years Living in Current State                                     Gap
   .2




                                                          .8.6
Share




                                                      Share
.1




                                                      .4  .2
   0




                                                          0
             0         20    40      60     80                       0       1     2     3      4     5
                             Years                                                 Years



                             Figure 1: Summary Statistics for Migrants




                                                 35
                                              βij − average




 1


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


 0

      10
           20
                                                                                                80
                30                                                                         70
                     40                                                             60
                          50                                                  50
                                                                         40
                               60                                  30
                                    70                        20
                                                       10
           age at move                   80
                                                                        years since move

                Figure 2: Relative Shares by Age at Move and Years Since Move




                                                  36
                                     1
                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                             Relative Share (β ij)
                                     0
                                                     0−4

                                                           5−9

                                                                   10−14

                                                                           15−19

                                                                                   20−24

                                                                                            25−29

                                                                                                         30−34

                                                                                                                 35−39

                                                                                                                         40−44

                                                                                                                                 45−49

                                                                                                                                         50−54

                                                                                                                                                 55−59

                                                                                                                                                         60+
                                                                                           Years Since Move


                                                           Figure 3: Relative Shares by Years Since Move
Notes: Whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors clustered by module.
                                     1
                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                             Relative Share (β ij)
                                     0
                                                     0−4

                                                           5−9

                                                                   10−14

                                                                           15−19

                                                                                   20−24

                                                                                            25−29

                                                                                                         30−34

                                                                                                                 35−39

                                                                                                                         40−44

                                                                                                                                 45−49

                                                                                                                                         50−54

                                                                                                                                                 55−59

                                                                                                                                                         60+




                                                                                             Age at Move


                                                                 Figure 4: Relative Shares by Age at Move
Notes: Whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors clustered by module.




                                                                                                    37
                        0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                          Relative Share (β ij)

                                                         10/06
                                                         11/06
                                                         12/06
                                                          1/07
                                                          2/07
                                                          3/07
                                                          4/07
                                                          5/07
                                                          6/07
                                                          7/07
                                                          8/07
                                                          9/07
                                                         10/07
                                                         11/07
                                                         12/07
                                                          1/08
                                                          2/08
                                                          3/08
                                                          4/08
                                                          5/08
                                                          6/08
                                                          7/08
                                                          8/08
                                                          9/08
                                                                                                      Month/Year
                                                         years living in current state: less than 1



                                                         Figure 5: Relative Shares by Month (Moved 10/07-9/08)
Notes: Whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered by module. The sample consists of migrants
who report having lived in their current state less than 1 year. The dotted line at 0.62 indicates the relative share of recent migrants
predicted from the cross-section.
                        0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                             Relative Share (β ij)

                                                         10/06
                                                         11/06
                                                         12/06
                                                          1/07
                                                          2/07
                                                          3/07
                                                          4/07
                                                          5/07
                                                          6/07
                                                          7/07
                                                          8/07
                                                          9/07
                                                         10/07
                                                         11/07
                                                         12/07
                                                          1/08
                                                          2/08
                                                          3/08
                                                          4/08
                                                          5/08
                                                          6/08
                                                          7/08
                                                          8/08
                                                          9/08




                                                                                                      Month/Year
                                                         Years Living in Current State: 1



                                                         Figure 6: Relative Shares by Month (Moved 10/06-9/07)
Notes: Whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered by module. The sample consists of migrants
who report having lived in their current state between 1 and 2 years. The dotted line at 0.62 indicates the relative share of recent
migrants predicted from the cross-section.




                                                                                                      38
                             1
             Purchase Share 1948−1968 (CCA)
               .2      .4    0 .6      .8




                                              0       .2             .4           .6           .8                    1
                                                           Purchase Share 2006−2008 (Homescan)

                                                                          Fitted values


                                                  Figure 7: Historical and Current Purchase Shares
Notes: Each observation is a state-module pair. The y axis is average purchase share between 1948 and 1968, calculated using
Consolidated Consumer Analysis. The x axis is the average purchase share in the 2006-2008 Homescan sample. The size of the
circles indicates the number of years of CCA data used to calculate the historical purchase share. See section 5.2 for details.




                                                                        39
                                                            β (a,t)




 1


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


 0

      10
                     20
                                                                                                                 80
                          30                                                                                70
                               40                                                                  60
                                     50                                                     50
                                                                                       40
                                          60                                     30
                                               70                          20
                                                                      10
                     age at move                    80
                                                                                      years since move

                                    Figure 8: Relative Shares (Fitted Values)



                     10



                                                                                                        0.2
                     20


                                                                                                        0.15
                     30


                                                                                                        0.1
                     40
       age at move




                                                                                                        0.05
                     50

                                                                                                        0

                     60

                                                                                                        −0.05

                     70
                                                                                                        −0.1

                     80
                                                                                                        −0.15
                          10         20        30       40         50       60        70      80
                                                    years since move


                                     Figure 9: Relative Shares (Residuals)



                                                             40
                                      delta=0.974                                         delta=0.724

                    0.5                                                 0.5


                    0.4                                                 0.4


                    0.3                                                 0.3


                    0.2                                                 0.2


                    0.1                                                 0.1


                      0                                                  0
                          0    0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8     1                 0    0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8     1
                                         Share                                               Share


                                      delta=0.474                                         delta=0.224

                    0.5                                                 0.5


                    0.4                                                 0.4


                    0.3                                                 0.3


                    0.2                                                 0.2


                    0.1                                                 0.1


                      0                                                  0
                          0    0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8     1                 0    0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8     1
                                         Share                                               Share


                          Figure 10: Persistence of Market Shares under Exogenous Shocks
Notes: Each panel contains the distribution of the long run predictions of market shares, yt , at t = 100. To initialize the stock of
brand capital in each age cohort, market shares are assumed to have a life-time history of yt = 0.75 for −100 < t < 1, so that the
stock of brand capital has formed at 0.75 properly in each age cohort in our empirical sample. Distributions are computed across
1000 draws of the random shocks κt , [t = 1, ..., 100]. Comparisons across panels show the effect of the degree of persistence, δ , in
brand capital on long run stability of market shares subject to demand and supply shocks.




                                                                  41
                            Table 1: Migration Patterns
Region of          Region of residence
birth              North East            Midwest    South            West
North East         6765                  269        1539             448

Midwest            165                   10654      1377             885

South              193                   435        9725             292

West               56                    214        341              4740

Notes: Table shows the number of households in the Nielsen Homescan sample by census
region of birth and current residence.




                                               42
            Table 2: Summary Statistics for Final Sample
 # Categories                                                    238
 # Households
        Non-migrant                                              27686
        Migrant                                                  10412

 Mean across categories:
       Avg. purchases of #1 brand                                3.0
       Avg. purchases of #2 brand                                1.7

          Avg. purchase share (ŷi j )                           0.63

          Cross-state standard deviation
          of avg. purchase share for non-migrants                0.15

          Avg. absolute difference between
          purchase share in birth and
          current state for migrants                             0.11
Notes: #1 and #2 brand in each module defined by total purchases. Purchase
share ŷi j is purchases of #1 brand / (purchases of #1 brand + purchases of #2
brand). Cross-state standard deviation is computed by averaging ŷi j within each
state-module pair, taking the standard deviation across states within each
module, and then taking the mean of this standard deviation across modules.




                                       43
               Table 3: The Evolution of Brand Preferences for Migrants

Dependent variable: Relative share (βi j )
                      (1)          (2)                       (3)             (4)             (5)
Decades since move          0.098           0.079            0.075           -               0.092
                            (0.009)         (0.009)          (0.010)         -               (0.016)
Decades since move          -0.009          -0.008           -0.007          -               -0.010
squared                     (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)         -               (0.004)
Age (in decades)            -               -0.018           -               -0.019          -0.013
when moved                  -               (0.005)          -               (0.005)         (0.008)
Constant                    0.624           0.705            -               -               0.668
                            (0.029)         (0.026)          -               -               (0.037)


Decades since move          no              no               no              yes             no
fixed effects
Age when moved              no              no               yes             no              no
fixed effects
Sample                      all             all              all             all             age
                                                                                             moved
                                                                                             ≥ 25
# modules                   238             238              238             238             238
# HH-module                 528621          528621           528621          528621          212957
observations

Notes: The dependent variable βi j is the share of a migrant’s top-two brand purchases going to the
top brand, scaled relative to non-migrants in her current and birth states. βi j = 1 implies her
purchase share matches non-migrants in her current state. βi j = 0 implies her purchase share
matches non-migrants in her birth state. See section 3 for details.




                                                  44
                        Table 4: Brand Pairs Introduced after 1954

Dependent variable: Relative share (βi j )
                                        (1)                          (2)                (3)
Moved after brand introduced:
 Decades since move (ω1 )                         0.007              0.007              0.018
                                                  (0.002)            (0.003)            (0.005)
  Constant (ω0 )                                  0.657              0.701              0.693
                                                  (0.055)            (0.075)            (0.090)
Moved before brand introduced:
  Decades since move (ω3 )                        0.001              0.001              0.001
                                                  (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.002)
  Constant (ω2 )                                  0.854              0.852              0.880
                                                  (0.100)            (0.101)            (0.101)


Only brand pairs
introduced after                                  1954               1975               1985
# brand pairs                                     52                 24                 11
# HH-pair observations                            86805              43083              22088

Notes: The dependent variable βi j is the share of a migrant’s top-two brand purchases going to the
top brand, scaled relative to non-migrants in her current and birth states. βi j = 1 implies her
purchase share matches non-migrants in her current state. βi j = 0 implies her purchase share
matches non-migrants in her birth state. The sample includes purchases of brand pairs introduced in
1955 or later. The coefficients in the first two rows apply to migrants who moved after the first brand
in the pair in question was introduced. The coefficients in the following two rows apply to migrants
who moved before the first brand in the pair was introduced. See section 5.1 for details.




                                                  45
                    Table 5: Current and Historical Purchase Shares

       Dependent variable: Purchase share 1948-1968
                                 (1)           (2)                            (3)
       Current purchase share            0.822              0.926             1.039
                                         (0.119)            (0.105)           (0.089)
       Constant                          0.084              0.027             0.001
                                         (0.082)            (0.077)           (0.080)


       Only include obs. if #            ≥0                 ≥ 200             ≥ 500
       Homescan HHs
       p-value for
       (coeff=1) & (cons=0)              0.300              0.746             0.793
       # Modules                         27                 25                21
       # State-module obs.               325                188               115

Notes: Each observation is a state-module pair. The dependent variable is the estimated average
purchase share in the state-module between 1948 and 1968, calculated using Consolidated
Consumer Analysis. The right-hand side variable is the average purchase share in the 2006-2008
Homescan sample. All regressions weighted by the number of years of CCA data used to calculate
the historical purchase share. The second column excludes observations where the number of
observations used to compute the current purchase share is less than 200. The third column excludes
observations where the number of observations is less than 500. See section 5.2 for details.




                                                 46
      Table 6: Structural Parameters

                    α                 0.623
                                     (0.025)
                    δ                 0.974
                                     (0.006)
              Mean of
             γ js + Xi λ j            0.636
                                     (0.013)
          Half-life of
      brand capital (years)           26.5
             fval   (106 )            0.089
Notes: Table reports two-stage NLLS estimates of
model parameters as defined in section 4.1.




                        47
                                    Table 7: First Mover Advantage

                                   Investment years to equate shares
                                                Shelf Space Investment (ξ ) by Second Entrant
  First Entrant’s Head Start (t)           0.55        0.60       0.65           0.70         0.75
             1 year                         10           4          2              1            1

                 5 years                    27              12             6                3                2

               10 years                     34              19            10                5                2

               15 years                     36              23            13                7                3

               25 years                     38              26            17                9                4
    Price Discount by Second
    Entrant Equivalent to this
   Shelf Space Investment (ξ )             8%             15%            22%              28%              34%
Notes: An entry in the table is the number of years that a second entrant would need to maintain a certain
share of shelf space in order to achieve parity in brand shares, under the assumption that baseline demand
µ (X, ξ )is equal to the share of shelf space. Rows indicate the assumed number of years that the first entrant
was in the market alone. Columns indicate the investment level of the second entrant. See section 6.3 for
details. Equivalent price discounts are estimated from aggregate IRI data on prices and quantities as described
in Appendix C.




                                                       48
Table 8: Structural Parameters by Advertising Intensity and Social Visibility

                     Advertising                                  Visibility
             low       high      diff                   low       high            diff
  α         0.652        0.492        0.160            0.669     0.544           0.125
           (0.028)      (0.030)      (0.042)          (0.035)   (0.027)         (0.046)
  δ         0.976        0.965        0.011            0.981     0.964           0.017
           (0.007)      (0.012)      (0.014)          (0.008)   (0.011)         (0.014)
 Notes: The first through third columns report parameter estimates from a specification in
 which α and δ are allowed to differ for “low advertising” and “high advertising”
 categories. The fourth through sixth columns report parameter estimates from a
 specification in which α and δ are allowed to differ for “low social visibility” and “high
 social visibility” categories. See section 7 for details.




                                               49
          Appendix Table 1: Robustness of Structural Parameters

   Dependent Variable          Weights        α       (s.e. α)       δ       (s.e. δ )
   purchases                     no         0.623     (0.025)      0.974     (0.006)
   equivalent units              no         0.623     (0.027)      0.974     (0.008)
   expenditures                  no         0.622     (0.025)      0.974     (0.006)
   unit sales                    no         0.623     (0.025)      0.974     (0.006)
   purchases                    yes         0.607     (0.040)      0.948     (0.008)
Notes: The table reports our estimates for α and δ using different dependent variables and
weights. Weights are defined in appendix B. Standard errors (s.e.) appear in parentheses
and were computed using the bootstrap, drawing the purchases of a random set of
modules with replacement across 25 replications.




                                           50
               Appendix Table 2: Modules, Top Two Brands, and Selected Module Characteristics

Module                  Brand 1              Brand 2                 Aggregate     Cross-      Ad      Socially
                                                                    Purch Share   State SD   Intense   Visible
Abrasive Clnsr-Liq      Soft Scrub           Comet                      .90         .07         0         0
Abrasive Clnsr-Pwdr     Comet                Ajax                       .78         .08         0         0
Adult Incont. Prod      Poise                Tena Serenity              .68         .15         0         0
Analgesic/Chest Rubs    Icy Hot              Vicks Vaporub              .55         .12         0         0
Antacids                Prilosec             Rolaids                    .71         .08         1         0
Anti-Gas Products       Beano                Gas-X                      .52         .13         0         0
Auto. Dishwshr Cmpnd    Cascade              Electrasol Jet-Dry         .73         .08         0         0
Baby Food-Strained      Gerber               Beechnut Stages            .70         .17         0         0
Bakery Bagels           Thomas’              Sara Lee                   .74         .29         0         0
Bakery Bfast Rolls      Little Debbie        Entenmann’s                .64         .24         0         0
Bakery Bread            Nature’s Own         Sara Lee Soft & Smth       .50         .32         0         0
Bakery Buns             Sara Lee             Wonder                     .61         .32         0         0
Bakery Cakes            Little Debbie        Hostess                    .91         .07         0         0
Bakery Cheesecake       The Father’s Table   Cheesecake Factory         .59         .24         0         0
Bakery Doughnuts        Hostess              Entenmann’s                .52         .27         0         0
Bakery Misc.            Homestyle            Flatout                    .51         .26         0         0
Bakery Pies             Little Debbie        JJ’s                       .52         .29         0         0
Bakery Rolls            King’s Hawaiian      Martin’s                   .51         .36         0         0
Baking Cups & Liners    Reynolds             Wilton                     .78         .07         0         0
Bath Additive-Liq       Lander               Mr. Bubble                 .73         .20         0         0
Beer                    Budweiser            Miller High Life           .64         .19         1         1
Bouillon                Wyler’s              Knorr                      .61         .25         0         0
Breath Sweetener        Tic Tac              Breath Savers              .72         .07         0         1
Butter                  Land O Lakes         Challenge                  .86         .27         0         0
Candy-Choc Minis        M&M Mars Snickers    Reese’s Pnt Bttr Cup       .51         .07         0         1
Candy-Chocolate         M&M Mars M&M Plain   Reese’s Pnt Bttr Cup       .52         .06         1         1
Candy-Diet. Non Choc    Life Savers          Baskin-Robbins             .68         .14         0         1
Candy-Dietetic Choc     Russell Stover       Whitman’s Wgt Wtchrs       .81         .14         0         1
Candy-Hard Rolled       Pez                  Smarties                   .52         .11         0         1
Candy-Lollipops         Tootsie Roll Pops    Spangler Dum Dum Pop       .67         .11         0         1
Candy-Non Choc Minis    Tootsie Roll         M&M Mars Skittles          .76         .08         0         1
Candy-Non Chocolate     Y&S Twizzlers        Just Born                  .51         .13         0         1
Candy-Special Choc      Hershey’s Kisses     Russell Stover             .54         .07         0         1
Caramel Corn            Crunch ’n Munch      Cracker Jack               .71         .09         0         1
Cat Food-Dry            Meow Mix             Purina Cat Chow            .50         .07         0         0
Catsup                  Heinz                Hunt’s                     .66         .13         0         1
Cereal-Dry              G M Cheerios         Post Hny Bnchs Oats        .54         .07         1         0
Cereal-Granola          Sunbelt              Nature Valley              .55         .16         0         0
Cheese-Amrcn Cheddar    Kraft                Cracker Barrel             .66         .33         0         0
Cheese-Amrcn Colby      Kraft                Crystal Farms              .81         .23         0         0
Cheese-Grated           Kraft                4C                         .92         .06         0         0
Cheese-Misc.            Kraft                Sargento                   .66         .12         0         0
Cheese-Mozzarella       Frigo Cheese Heads   Kraft Snkbls Polly-O       .68         .18         0         0
Cheese-Muenster         Sargento             Finlandia                  .79         .22         0         0
Cheese-Shredded         Kraft                Sargento                   .72         .15         0         0

                                                            51
Module                 Brand 1               Brand 2                 Aggregate     Cross-      Ad      Socially
                                                                    Purch Share   State SD   Intense   Visible
Cheese-Specialty       Athenos               Sargento                   .52         .16         0         0
Cheese-Swiss           Sargento              Kraft Deli Deluxe          .61         .15         0         0
Cigarettes             Marlboro              Doral                      .83         .11         0         1
Cleaner-Bathroom       Scrubbing Bubbles     Arm & Hammer Cn Shwr       .81         .05         1         0
Cleaner-Disinfectant   Clorox                Lysol                      .52         .11         1         0
Cleaner-Metal          Jet-Dry               Dishwasher Magic           .58         .21         0         0
Cleaner-Non Disnfct    Pine-Sol              Mr. Clean                  .51         .16         0         0
Cleaner-Window         Windex                Sprayway                   .92         .07         0         0
Coffee & Tea Filters   Melitta               Brew Rite                  .60         .13         0         0
Coffee-Grnd/Bean       Maxwell House         Folgers                    .50         .17         1         0
Coffee-Soluble         Folgers               Nescafe Taster’s Chc       .54         .11         0         0
Coffee-Soluble Flv     General Foods Int’l   Hills Bros                 .74         .15         0         0
Cola-Diet              Diet Coca-Cola        Diet Pepsi                 .55         .11         1         1
Cola-Regular           Coca-Cola Classic     Pepsi                      .52         .12         1         1
Cold Remedies-Adult    Benadryl              Vicks Nyquil               .55         .10         1         0
Cold Remedies-Child    Tylenol Plus          Benadryl                   .50         .21         0         0
Conditioner            Pantene Pro-V         Suave Naturals             .51         .09         1         0
Contact Lens Soln      Alcon Opti-Free Rpl   B&L Renu Multiplus         .62         .17         0         0
Cookies                Little Debbie         Nabisco Oreo               .55         .12         1         1
Corn Chips             Fritos                Wise Dipsy Doodles         .99         .02         0         1
Corn Dogs              State Fair            Foster Farms               .69         .21         0         0
Cough Drops            Halls                 Ricola                     .91         .08         0         0
Cough Syrups/Tablets   Mucinex DM            Delsym                     .66         .13         1         0
Crackers-Butter        Nabisco Ritz          Keebler Townhouse          .76         .09         1         0
Crackers-Cheese        Sunshine Cheez-It     Pepprdge Fm Goldfish       .65         .06         1         0
Crackers-Flake         Keebler Club          Lance                      .97         .04         0         0
Crackers-Oyster        Nabisco Dandy         Vista                      .76         .15         0         0
Crackers-Sandwich      Austin                Lance                      .55         .22         0         1
Crackers-Soda          Nabisco Premium       Keebler Zesta              .76         .19         0         0
Dental Floss           J&J Reach             Crest Glide                .59         .08         0         0
Denture Cleanser       Polident              Efferdent                  .56         .15         0         0
Deodorant-Misc.        Secret                Mitchum                    .58         .15         0         0
Deodorant-Solid        Degree                Secret                     .54         .07         1         0
Depilatories-Women’s   Nair                  Sally Hansen               .54         .16         0         0
Detergent-Heavy Duty   Tide                  Purex                      .56         .05         1         0
Detergent-Light Duty   Dawn                  Palmolive                  .56         .09         1         0
Detergent-Packaged     Tide                  Gain                       .60         .21         0         0
Dip Mix                Hidden Valley Ranch   Concord Foods              .78         .11         0         0
Dip-Canned             Frito-Lay             Tostitos                   .65         .14         0         1
Dishwshr Rinsing Aid   Jet-Dry               Cascade Crystal Clr        .80         .07         0         0
Disinfectants          Lysol                 Clorox                     .80         .06         0         0
Disposable Cups        Dixie                 Dart                       .77         .16         0         0
Disposable Diapers     Pampers               Huggies                    .53         .13         1         0
Disposable Dishes      Dixie                 Hefty                      .68         .16         0         0
Dog & Cat Treats       Whiskas Temptations   Milk-Bone                  .60         .12         0         0
Dog Food-Dry           Purina Beneful        Iams                       .52         .14         1         0
Dog Food-Wet           Purina Alpo           Pedigree                   .53         .13         0         0

                                                              52
Module                 Brand 1                Brand 2                 Aggregate     Cross-      Ad      Socially
                                                                     Purch Share   State SD   Intense   Visible
Eye Drops & Lotions    Visine                 Alcon Systane              .53         .16         0         0
Facial Tissue          Kleenex                Puffs                      .63         .07         1         0
Floor Care Cleaner     Swiffer Wet Jet        Clorox Ready Mop           .87         .11         1         0
Foot Cmfrt Products    Gold Bond              Dr Scholl’s                .63         .18         0         0
Foot Prepn-Athlts Ft   Lamisil AT             Tinactin                   .54         .21         0         0
Foot Prepn-Misc.       Dr Scholl’s            Pro Foot                   .85         .07         0         0
Frozen Dinners         Banquet                Healthy Chc Cmpt Slc       .67         .09         1         0
Frozen Pot Pies        Banquet                Marie Callender’s          .52         .11         0         0
Frozen Snacks          Totino’s               Superpretzel               .76         .12         0         0
Fruit Drinks-Misc.     Minute Maid            Tropicana                  .65         .18         0         1
Fruit Juice-Misc.      Dole                   Tropicana                  .78         .14         0         1
Fruit Juice-Orange     Tropicana              Minute Maid                .67         .16         0         1
Fruit Spread           Smucker’s Simply Frt   Polaner                    .52         .27         0         1
Frzn Asian Entrees-1   Weight Watchers        Tai Pei                    .59         .17         0         0
Frzn Asian Entrees-2   Lean Csn Cafe Clsscs   Banquet                    .56         .13         0         0
Frzn Italn Entrees-1   Weight Watchers        Bertolli                   .63         .08         1         0
Frzn Italn Entrees-2   Weight Watchers        Healthy Chc Simp Slc       .51         .17         1         0
Frzn Meat Entrees-1    Banquet                On-Cor                     .56         .22         0         0
Frzn Meat Entrees-2    Lean Csn Cafe Clsscs   Boston Market              .51         .13         0         0
Frzn Mexcn Entrees-1   El Monterey            Jose Ole                   .67         .16         0         0
Frzn Mexcn Entrees-2   Weight Watchers        Banquet                    .60         .18         0         0
Frzn Misc. Entrees-1   Stouffer’s             Mrs. T’s                   .57         .18         1         0
Frzn Pltry Entrees-1   Tyson                  Banquet                    .68         .10         0         0
Frzn Pltry Entrees-2   Weight Watchers        Boston Market              .62         .15         0         0
Frzn Seafd Entrees-1   Gorton’s               Weight Watchers            .64         .16         0         0
Gelatin Salad-Refrig   Jell-O Ref             Winky Ref                  .89         .09         0         0
Gravy Mix              McCormick              Pioneer                    .74         .15         0         0
Gravy-Canned           Heinz Homestyle        Campbell’s                 .56         .12         0         0
Gum-Bubble             Dubble Bubble          Adams Bubblicious          .73         .11         0         1
Hair Color-Women’s     Clairol Nice ’n Easy   Revlon Colorsilk           .55         .08         1         0
Hair Prepn-Women’s     Sunsilk                Pantene Pro-V              .54         .18         0         0
Hair Spray-Women’s     Suave                  White Rain                 .55         .10         0         0
Hand Sanitizer         Germ-X                 Purell                     .52         .13         0         0
Health Bars/Sticks     Zone Perfect           Clif                       .52         .20         0         1
Hominy Grits           Quaker                 Jim Dandy                  .88         .11         0         0
Honey                  Sue Bee                Golden Nectar              .68         .24         0         1
Horseradish            Silver Spring          Gold’s                     .59         .38         0         0
Ice Cream Cones        Joy                    Keebler                    .53         .13         0         1
Ice Cream-Bulk         Breyers                Dreyer/Edy’s Slw Chn       .64         .12         0         1
Ice Milk & Sherbet     Dreyer’s/Edy’s         Blue Bell                  .66         .36         0         1
Insoles                Dr Scholl’s            Pro Foot                   .77         .10         1         0
Jam                    Smucker’s              Welch’s                    .76         .10         0         1
Jelly                  Welch’s                Smucker’s                  .59         .12         0         1
Laxatives              Metamucil              Benefiber                  .56         .18         1         0
Lemon/Lime-Diet        Sprite Zero            Diet Seven Up              .51         .16         0         1
Lemon/Lime-Regular     Sprite                 Seven Up                   .66         .14         1         1
Light Beer             Bud Light              Miller Lite                .56         .17         1         1

                                                              53
Module                 Brand 1                Brand 2                 Aggregate     Cross-      Ad      Socially
                                                                     Purch Share   State SD   Intense   Visible
Lighters               Bic                    Scripto                    .78         .07         0         1
Lip Remedies-Misc.     Carmex                 Blistex                    .70         .16         0         0
Lip Remedies-Solid     Chap Stick             Blistex                    .76         .05         0         0
Lunches-Refrig         Osc Mayer Lunchables   Armour Lunch Makers        .85         .09         1         0
Margarine & Spreads    Shedd’s                Blue Bonnet                .51         .12         0         0
Marshmallows           Kraft Jet Puffed       Campfire                   .94         .05         0         1
Mayonnaise             Hellmann’s             Kraft                      .55         .25         0         1
Meat Snacks            Jack Link’s            Slim Jim                   .55         .15         0         1
Medical Accsry-Misc.   Ezy-Dose               Apex                       .53         .17         0         0
Medical Wrap/Brace     Mueller Sport Care     Ace                        .66         .14         0         0
Minerals               Nature Made            Caltrate 600 + D           .60         .13         0         0
Misc. Carb. Bev-Diet   Diet Dr Pepper         Diet Mountain Dew          .51         .13         1         1
Misc. Carb. Bev-Reg    Mountain Dew           Dr Pepper                  .53         .14         1         1
Mustard                French’s               Gulden’s                   .86         .10         0         1
Nasal Product          Afrin                  Zicam                      .62         .13         0         0
Nutritional Supplmt    Nature Made            Rexall                     .56         .16         0         0
Oral Rnse/Antiseptic   Listerine              Crest Pro-Health           .74         .05         1         0
Pain Remedy-Chld Liq   Children’s Motrin      Chldrn’s Tylenol Liq       .63         .12         0         0
Pain Remedy-Headache   Tylenol                Aleve                      .52         .07         1         0
Paper Napkins          Mardi Gras             Vanity Fair                .57         .11         0         0
Paper Towels           Bounty                 Kleenex Viva               .70         .06         1         0
Pasta-Frzn             Rosetto                Celentano                  .60         .36         0         0
Pasta-Refrig           Buitoni                Monterey Pasta Co.         .85         .10         0         0
Peanut Butter          Jif                    Skippy                     .64         .19         0         1
Pet Care-Bird Food     Pennington             Morning Song               .58         .31         0         0
Pet Care-Pet Food      Wardley                Kaytee                     .58         .12         0         0
Petroleum Jelly        Vaseline               Personal Care              .72         .14         0         0
Pizza-Frozen           DiGiorno               Red Baron                  .51         .07         1         0
Pizza-Refrig           Mama Rosa’s            Uno                        .85         .20         0         0
Popcorn-Popped         Smartfood              O-Ke-Doke                  .65         .35         0         1
Popcorn-Unpopped       Orville Rdnbacher’s    Act II                     .63         .09         0         0
Pork Rinds             Baken-Ets              Mac’s                      .74         .23         0         1
Potato Chips           Lay’s                  Pringles                   .54         .07         0         1
Pre-Moistened Towels   Kleenex Cttnlle Frsh   Huggies                    .61         .09         0         0
Precut Salad Mix       Fresh Express          Dole Fresh Favorites       .70         .21         0         0
Preserves              Smucker’s              Polaner                    .89         .09         0         1
Pretzels               Snyder’s of Hanover    Rold Gold                  .60         .17         0         1
Proc. Cheese Slices    Kraft Singles          Borden                     .67         .22         0         0
Proc. Cheese Snacks    The Laughing Cow       Kraft Easy Cheese          .57         .15         0         0
Proc. Cheese-Amrcn     Kraft Singles          Borden                     .76         .11         0         0
Razor-Disposable       Schick Xtrme 3 Cmft+   Bic Comfort 3              .54         .16         0         0
Razor-Non Disposable   Bic Soleil             Gillette Venus Embrc       .52         .21         1         0
Rectal Medication      Preparation H          Tucks                      .77         .13         0         0
Refrig Entrees         Tyson                  Perdue                     .57         .30         0         0
Rug Cleaner            Resolve                Bissell                    .53         .14         0         0
Salad Dressing Mix     Hidden Valley Ranch    Good Seasons               .50         .21         0         0
Salad Dressing-Light   Kraft Free             Wish-Bone Sld Sprtzr       .67         .10         0         1

                                                              54
Module                 Brand 1          Brand 2                  Aggregate     Cross-      Ad      Socially
                                                                Purch Share   State SD   Intense   Visible
Salad Dressing-Liq     Kraft            Ken’s Steak House           .64         .17         0         1
Salad Dressing-Refrg   Marie’s          Marzetti                    .56         .31         0         1
Salad Toppings-Dry     Hormel           Oscar Mayer                 .67         .13         0         1
Salads-Misc.           Reser’s          Ready Pac Bistro Sld        .63         .24         0         0
Sandwiches-Frzn/Ref    Lean Pockets     Hot Pockets                 .52         .07         0         0
Sauce Mix-Taco         Old El Paso      McCormick                   .54         .21         0         0
Sauce-Asian            Kikkoman         La Choy                     .70         .11         0         1
Sauce-Barbecue         Kraft            Sweet Baby Ray’s            .61         .17         0         1
Sauce-Chili            Heinz            Tuong Ot Sriracha           .81         .18         0         0
Sauce-Cocktail         Kraft            McCormick                   .64         .26         0         1
Sauce-Cooking          Hunt’s Manwich   Del Monte                   .92         .06         0         0
Sauce-Dipping          Marzetti         Litehouse                   .81         .28         0         1
Sauce-Hot              Louisiana        Texas Pete                  .59         .34         0         1
Sauce-Marinara         Prego            Hunt’s                      .52         .08         0         0
Sauce-Meat             A.1.             Heinz 57                    .80         .15         0         0
Sauce-Mexican          Pace             Tostitos                    .53         .19         1         1
Sauce-Misc.            Prego            Kraft                       .59         .20         0         1
Sauce-Pepper           Tabasco          Frank’s Redhot              .57         .19         0         1
Sauce-Pizza            Ragu             Contadina                   .70         .18         0         0
Sauce-Worcestershire   Lea & Perrins    French’s                    .69         .15         0         1
Sauces & Gravies       Buitoni          Garden Fresh Gourmet        .61         .26         0         0
Seasoning Mix-Chili    McCormick        Carroll Shelby’s            .84         .12         0         0
Seasoning Mix-Misc.    McCormick        Sun Bird                    .54         .13         0         0
Shampoo                Suave Naturals   Pantene Pro-V               .53         .07         1         0
Shave Cream-Men’s      Edge Advanced    Barbasol                    .51         .10         0         0
Shave Cream-Women’s    Skintimate       Gillette Satin Care         .65         .07         0         0
Sinus Remedies         Tylenol Sinus    Sudafed PE                  .66         .14         0         0
Snacks-Misc.           SunChips         GM Chex Mix                 .52         .05         0         1
Snacks-Variety Pk      Frito-Lay        Wise                        .98         .04         0         1
Soap-Bar               Dove             Dial                        .53         .09         0         0
Soap-Liq               Softsoap         Dial                        .77         .06         0         0
Soap-Specialty         Suave Naturals   Dove                        .52         .11         1         0
Soda Straws            Forster          Glad                        .75         .19         0         0
Soup Mix-Dry/Bases     Maruchan         Lipton                      .61         .11         0         0
Soup-Canned            Campbell’s       Progresso                   .80         .06         1         0
Soup-Frzn/Refrig       Tabatchnick      Skyline                     .57         .32         0         0
Throat Lozenges        Ricola           Halls Breezers              .64         .12         0         0
Toast/Breadsticks      Old London       Wasa                        .51         .16         0         0
Toilet Bowl Cleaner    Lysol            Clorox                      .52         .06         0         0
Toilet Tissue          Charmin          Angel Soft                  .54         .07         1         0
Toothbrushes           Colgate 360      Oral-B Indicator            .55         .11         1         0
Tortilla Chips         Doritos          Tostitos                    .64         .06         0         1
Trail Mix              Planters         GM Chex Mix                 .79         .13         0         1
Vinegar                Heinz            Pompeian                    .73         .15         0         0
Vitamins-Children      Flintstones      L’il Crttrs Gummy Vt        .71         .13         0         0
Vitamins-Misc.         Nature Made      Nature’s Bounty             .71         .13         0         0
Vitamins-Multi         One A Day        Centrum Silver              .60         .08         1         0

                                                           55
   Module                 Brand 1                Brand 2                Aggregate          Cross-         Ad        Socially
                                                                       Purch Share        State SD      Intense     Visible
   Water-Sparkling        Vintage                Perrier                      .62             .30           0            1
   Water-Still            Glaceau Vitmn Water    Nestle Pure Life             .52             .13           1            1
   Wave Setting Product   Garnier Fructis Styl   Pantene Pro-V Style          .66             .11           0            0
   Yogurt-Frozen          Turkey Hill            Wells Blue Bunny             .57             .37           0            1
   Yogurt-Refrig          Yoplait                Dannon                       .62             .10           1            0



Notes: Brand 1 and brand 2 in each module defined by total purchases. Aggregate purchase share for a given module is total
purchases of brand 1 / (total purchases of brand 1 + total purchases of brand 2), and is calculated using all households in the
Nielsen Homescan data. Cross-state standard deviation of the average purchase share for non-migrants is computed by averaging
purchase share within each state-module pair, and then taking the mean of the standard deviation across states for each module.
Cross-state standard deviation is calculated using the final sample as described in section 2.4.




                                                                56
