NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO SOCIAL CONNECTIONS REDUCE MORAL HAZARD? EVIDENCE FROM
THE NEW YORK CITY TAXI INDUSTRY
C. Kirabo Jackson
Henry S. Schneider
Working Paper 16279
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16279

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2010

We would like to thank Andrew Salkin at the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission for
helpful discussions and data, Jonathan Peterson, Lan Shi, Michael Waldman, and various seminar
participants for valuable comments, and James Cowan and Jonathan Peterson for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by C. Kirabo Jackson and Henry S. Schneider. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Do Social Connections Reduce Moral Hazard? Evidence from the New York City Taxi Industry
C. Kirabo Jackson and Henry S. Schneider
NBER Working Paper No. 16279
August 2010
JEL No. D52,D62,D64,D82,J01,J41
ABSTRACT
This study investigates the role of social networks in aligning the incentives of economic agents in
settings with incomplete contracts. We study the New York City taxi industry where taxis are often
leased and lessee-drivers have worse driving outcomes than owner-drivers as a result of a moral hazard
associated with incomplete leasing contracts. Using instrumental variables and fixed-effects analyses,
we find that: (1) drivers leasing from members of their country-of-birth community exhibit significantly
reduced effects of moral hazard; (2) network effects appear to operate primarily via social sanctions;
and (3) network benefits can help to explain the organization of the industry in terms of which drivers
and owners form business relationships.

C. Kirabo Jackson
Cornell University, ILR School
Department of Labor Economics
Ives Hall East
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
and NBER
ckj5@cornell.edu
Henry S. Schneider
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
326 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
henry.schneider@cornell.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
When an economic agent does not bear the full cost or full fruit of her actions, a moral
hazard may arise in which the agent, through doing what is personally optimal, behaves in ways
that are sub-optimal from a social standpoint (Holmstrom 1979). Moral hazard plays a central
role in our understanding of numerous contractual relationships and researchers have found
evidence consistent with moral hazard in many contexts.1 The standard approach to alleviating
moral hazard is to use contracts that align the incentives of the agent and principal; for example,
paying workers in stock options to induce them to care about the welfare of the company or
requiring collateral to reduce borrowers' incentives to default. However, in many settings, such
as those with poor access to collateral, such options are not available.
The use of contracts that exploit social ties, within which monitoring costs are low and
members can apply social sanctions on each other, has been proposed as a way to enhance the
willingness of individuals to act in the interest of the broader society (Stiglitz 1990). However,
Banerjee, Besley, and Guinnane (1994), Besley and Coate (1995), and Wydick (1996) argue that
a sufficient strong and credible threat of social sanctions against a defaulting group member may
be necessary to deter moral hazard in a credit contract, suggesting that it is the strength of group
pressure against potential defaulters that matters rather than social ties per se. Karlan, Mobius,
Rosenblat, and Szeidl (2009) model network connections between individuals as generating
"social collateral" that facilitates secure informal borrowing and they document that network
strength predicts informal borrowing in Peru. In their model, the possibility of losing valuable
friendships secures informal transactions the same way that the possibility of losing physical

1

For example, worker effort and productivity are higher when workers are paid by a piece rate versus an hourly
wage (Foster and Rosenzweig 1994, Lazear 2000), farm field work may be mechanized when supervisory
monitoring costs of workers are high (Smith 1986), and make-versus-buy patterns in the trucking industry may
reflect an inability of firms to ensure the efficient use of their resources (Baker and Hubbard 2003, 2004).

2

collateral can secure formal lending. Altruism between group members has also been identified
as a nonmarket channel through which incentives are aligned (Portes and Sensenbrenner 1993).
Virtually all the empirical evidence that social ties might mitigate moral hazard is in the
group-lending context in developing countries (where markets are not well defined, credit is
constrained, and property rights are not well enforced). Moreover this evidence is mixed.2,3
Given the central role that moral hazard plays in explaining the structure of contracts in various
domains, and a theoretical literature highlighting that contractual arrangements that exploit social
ties might mitigate moral hazard, it is important to provide empirical evidence on these issues in
a developed nation context, in a well defined market, and outside of the microcredit context. As
such, we aim to extend the scope of the empirical literature on the importance of social ties in
mitigating moral hazard by presenting the first clean evidence that social ties reduce moral
hazard in a labor market setting in the United States. Specifically, we analyze the outcomes of
New York City taxi drivers who lease (as opposed to own) their taxis and compare the outcomes
of those who lease from an owner from the same country of birth to the outcomes of those who
lease from an owner from a different country of birth.
The taxi leasing market is a prime candidate for studying moral hazard because lesseedrivers pay less or none of many of the variable costs they generate, including vehicle

2

To our knowledge, the only empirical studies on the ability of social networks to reduce moral hazard outside of
group lending are Greif (1993), who finds that community enforcement was effective at limiting moral hazard in
11th-century Mediterranean trade; and Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2005, 2009), who find that social connections
lead to a misallocation of effort and hence lower productivity among college student fruit pickers. Gil and Hartmann
(2011) provide evidence on market organization through social networks in response to moral hazard, which we
discuss later in the section.
3
This ability of social ties to reduce moral hazard is argued to be largely responsible for the success of grouplending banks such as the Grameen Bank of Bangladesh (Pitt and Khandker 1998 and Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster,
and Kinnan 2009). Kandori (1992) and Ellison (1994) study theoretically how community enforcement may operate,
while Sharma and Zeller (1997), Karlan (2007), and Ahlin and Townsend (2007) provide additional empirical
evidence about how social ties operate in group-lending, though Giné and Karlan (2006, 2009) find no benefit to
group versus individual lending. Social interactions have been identified as determinants of economic actions in
other contexts as well (for example, Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan 2000, Glaeser, Liabson, Scheinkman, and
Soutter 2000, Duflo and Saez 2003, Karlan 2005, Mas and Moretti 2009, and Jackson and Bruegmann 2009).

3

maintenance, repair, replacement, and insurance, and hence have incentives to choose inefficient
levels of vehicle usage, care, and risk. The heart of the problem is that a lessee-driver’s driving
style cannot be monitored at reasonable cost, and hence the ability to specify in the leasing
contract the driver’s level of vehicle care is limited.4
As a result of these contracting limitations, Schneider (2010) finds significantly higher
rates of accidents and driving violations for lessee-drivers versus drivers who own their taxis due
to moral hazard. The NYC taxi driver labor market is also uniquely well suited for the study of
social ties because most NYC taxi owners and drivers are immigrants to the United States, with
owners representing 112 countries and drivers representing 146 countries, which allows us to
compare outcomes both within and across numerous country-of-birth social networks.
To present some of the first evidence that social ties can mitigate the effects of moral
hazard in a labor market and developed country setting we compare the driving outcomes of
drivers who lease from owners from the same country of birth (in-network) to the driving
outcomes of drivers who lease from owners from a different country of birth (out-of-network).
We use country of birth as our measure of social connectedness because this has been found to
be an important social connection in other contexts. For example, country-of-birth networks have
been found to be important for immigrant assimilation (Borjas 2000) and job seeking (Munshi
2003, Edin, Fredriksson, and Aslund 2003).5
To guide the interpretation of the empirical results, we lay out the theoretical reasons why
the outcomes of in-network versus out-of-network drivers may vary: first, owners may be better
positioned to identify and hire high ability drivers when they are in-network; second, in-network

4

Drivers however keep all fare revenue so effort to generate fares for the owner is not relevant in this context.
Granoveter (1974), Montgomery (1991), Fernandez and Weinberg (1997), and Pellizzari (2004) are other studies
on the role of social networks in employment search.
5

4

drivers may exert more effort in their driving style to limit the costs borne by the owner. These
effort effects could be due to several factors, including social sanctions, social collateral, social
preferences, or a better ability of owners to monitor drivers. To formalize these notions, we
present a search model connecting owners to drivers that gives the following empirical
predictions: (a) in the presence of either better screening or higher effort for in-network drivers,
in-network driving may be prevalent; (b) there is positive/negative selection of drivers into innetwork driving based on their ability if the results are driven by screening/effort effects; and (c)
in the presence/absence of effort effects there exists a positive/no relationship between innetwork driving and driving outcomes (after taking selection on ability into account).6
The empirical difficulty in isolating the causal (effort) effect of in-network driving is that
in-network drivers may differ from out-of-network drivers in important unobserved ways.
Because this paper is not based on experimental variation our approach is not to provide one
single estimate of the causal effect from a single research design, but to present a compelling
body of evidence based on three credible but imperfect research designs that rely on distinct
sources of variation and rely on different identifying assumptions.
Our first approach is to aggregate the data to the country-of-birth level to compare the
outcomes of drivers from countries with high rates of in-network driving to drivers from
countries with low rates of in-network driving ─ removing any bias due to selection within a
network; that is, selection that leads one driver to lease in-network and another to lease out-ofnetwork from the same country of birth. Our second strategy exploits longitudinal data to
compare the change in outcomes of drivers who switch from driving in-network to out-of
network (and vice versa) over time to the outcomes of drivers who always drive in-network or

6

Note that we use the term ability broadly to indicate intrinsic driver characteristics that affect the driving outcomes
of interest. These characteristics include motor skills and also factors such as conscientiousness.

5

never drive in-network over the same time period ─ removing any bias due to high ability drivers
being more or less likely to lease in-network. Our third strategy exploits cross-sectional variation
in the residential locations of drivers relative to owners from the same country of birth. Under the
assumption that the distance from a driver’s residence to the nearest same-country owner’s
residence is unrelated to underlying driver ability (an assumption for which we present empirical
support), we use this distance measure as an exogenous instrument for driving in-network while
also conditioning on the place-of birth-network. That is, we compare the outcomes of drivers
who lease in-network because they live close to an in-network owner to those of drivers who
lease out-of-network because they do not live close to an in-network owner.
Although none of these research designs is dispositive, the combination of evidence is
compelling because these estimation strategies control for and are subject to different sources of
bias. Specifically, if our effects are driven by selection within a place-of-birth network, they
would disappear once we aggregate to the place-of-birth level to rely exclusively on variation
across place-of-birth networks. However, if the results are driven by selection across place-ofbirth networks (which would bias our aggregate results), then they would disappear in models
that condition on the place-of-birth network of the driver. Also, if the results are driven by
sample selection or survivorship bias (which would bias the aggregate results) then they would
disappear in models that use within-driver variation. Finally, if the results are driven by changes
in driver ability that co-vary with changes in in-network driving status (which would bias the
within-driver estimates), then the results would disappear in the instrumental variables and the
country-level models. As such, while each strategy individually may be subject to some form of
selection bias, it is highly implausible that all three sources of variation are. Therefore, consistent

6

results across these methodologies would indicate a real causal effect. We additionally provide
supporting robustness checks related to all of these approaches.
We first find that, consistent with there being an important benefit to driving in-network,
in-network driving is much more common than would be expected by random chance, and
cannot be explained by residential clustering by country of birth. That is, the patterns are
consistent with the taxi industry organizing around social networks to mitigate agency problems.
We then find that across all three strategies that account for selection, drivers have better
outcomes when driving in-network versus out-of-network ─ indicative of a real causal effort
effect. Our naive OLS estimates are smaller than in all three models that account for selection,
indicating negative selection into in-network driving as predicted by the theoretical model under
effort effects and inconsistent with the model under screening. To provide further evidence that
our effects operate through the mitigation of moral hazard, we split out in-network effects by
summons type and find the largest effects for types directly affecting owners’ costs (as opposed
to drivers' costs which would be internalized by the driver).This provides further support that
selection is not driving our results.
Finally, given the large apparent effort effects, we investigate the likely mechanisms at
play. We use as a measure of owner/driver network strength the density of residents in the
owner’s/driver’s immediate neighborhood from the same country of birth, and find that the
marginal effects of driving in-network increase with the strength of the owner’s network but not
the driver’s network, and that in-network effects are weak when the owner’s network strength is
weak. These patterns are consistent with the presence of social sanctions in the form of
community-enforced punishments, which would likely emanate from the owner’s and not the
driver’s network, but inconsistent with altruism, which should operate independently of the

7

owner’s network.
Our results support the findings in Gil and Hartmann (2011) who also show that markets
may organize around common-origin communities to mitigate agency problems. Our study
improves upon Gil and Hartmann by examining richer data for identifying market organization,
and also by providing evidence directly that social networks reduce moral hazard. That is, we
actually observe important benefits to organizing around social networks.
More generally, this paper adds breadth to the literature on social networks and moral
hazard by being the first study (to our knowledge) to show directly the potential of social
networks to reduce moral hazard in a labor market context and in a developed nation. Also given
that the micro-credit literature is mixed, this study contributes to this literature by providing
compelling evidence that social networks can reduce moral hazard. The current results are
particularly interesting because the New York City taxi industry offers a practical alternative to
taxi leasing that alleviates most of the moral hazard problem: An active credit market exists in
which specialized lenders specifically market loans to taxi drivers to buy their own vehicles.
Thus, even in a setting in which credit is available, transactions are commonplace among
members of the same country network, indicating that social networks significantly reduce the
cost of using the market. We can infer that social networks would be even more valuable if
contracting alternatives were not available.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 gives background on the New York
City taxi industry. Section 3 describes the data. Sections 4 and 5 provide the theoretical and
empirical frameworks that underlie our analysis. Section 6 describes the main results. Section 7
examines how social ties may operate in the current context. Section 8 concludes.

8

2. THE NEW YORK CITY TAXI INDUSTRY
Licenses and driving arrangements
To operate a taxi in New York City, a driver must possess a taxi license (often called a
medallion).7 There are two types of taxi licenses: An "owner-must-drive" license, which requires
the license owner to be a full-time driver (specifically, to drive at least 210 shifts of at least nine
hours per year); and a corporate license, which is free of owner-driving requirements and
typically is owned by corporations that lease the licenses (often with vehicles) to drivers. The
two license type are immutable. Except in rare instances, new licenses have not been issued since
the 1930s, leading to an active trade in the existing licenses between private parties for hundreds
of thousands of dollars each.
Under this licensing structure, drivers can operate in three ways: Owner-driving, in which
the driver owns the license and vehicle; driver-owned-vehicle-driving (DOV-driving), in which
the driver leases the license but owns the vehicle; and lessee-driving, in which the driver leases
both the license and vehicle. Lessee-drivers can operate under either long-term leases, which
typically extend for six months at a time, or short-term leases, which are twelve hours long.
Taxis are typically operated by two drivers for two shifts per day (a day and night shift). Thus, a
taxi is typically operated by two lessee-drivers, two owner-drivers who co-own the taxi, or one
owner-driver and one lessee-driver who leases from this owner-driver.
For reasons explained below, the drivers we examine are primarily lessee-drivers
operating under this third type of driving arrangement, where the owner-driver operates the taxi
for one shift twelve-hour shift per day and a lessee-driver who leases the taxi (both the license
and vehicle) from the owner-driver operates the taxis for the second twelve-hour shift per day.

7

Much of the information in this section comes from personal discussions with industry participants, TLC Rules
documents made available by the TLC, and Urbanomics (2004).

9

Discussions with industry participants indicate that owner-drivers often find lessees through
family-members, neighbors, and friends, though anonymous matches are also common.
The costs and revenues of operation are split between the lessee-driver and the ownerdriver as follows. The owner is required by the TLC to pay for no-fault and liability insurance
($7,000 to $13,000 per year) and workers’ compensation for the lessee-driver ($1,400 to $3,000
per year), licensing fees (approximately $1,000 per year), vehicle inspections ($50), and fines for
improper usage of the taxi, some of which may be due to the lessee’s actions. Owners also pay
for all vehicle maintenance and repair ($4,000 to $10,000 per year) and for vehicle replacement
(approximately $28,000).8 Repairs are typically conducted at garages chosen by the owner-driver
that specialize in servicing taxis but are also sometimes conducted at other garages.
Lessees pay for their own gas usage ($5,000 to $10,000 per year), tolls, parking tickets,
fines for DMV and TLC violations, and TLC fees (approximately $100 per year) that they
themselves generated. Lessees also pay a flat lease fee to the owner. The lease fee is capped by
the TLC at a maximum amount that owners can charge lessees per lease period, which industry
participants indicate is respected in practice and nearly always binds (TLC (2006)). Lessees often
provide a modest deposit, which is sometimes forfeited to the owner if the lessee has an at-fault
accident. During the sample period, the deposit amount was capped by the TLC at $500 for longterm lessees.9 Lessee-drivers keep all fares and tips that they generate.
Measures of owners’ costs that are generated by drivers
As described above, lessee-drivers generate three types of costs that are borne by taxi

8

Note that is the vehicle owner who pays all repair costs. Since we are primarily examining drivers who lease from
owner-drivers, it is these owner-drivers who pay repair costs.
9
There exist industry programs that could provide incentives for better driving outcomes (they stipulate license
suspension and revocation for repeated violations), but they have typically not been enforced. Another program
reduces insurance premium if all lessees of the medallion have a good driving record.

10

owners, which we discuss in detail now. The first is repair costs associated with vehicle
mechanical failures and other maintenance work. Given that New York City taxis are operated in
heavily congested urban conditions for an average of 175 miles per day, the driver’s level of
vehicle care can quickly show up in vehicle condition.10 The second type of cost is from
accidents. Approximately one-third of taxis are involved in a serious accident per year (defined
as having over $1000 in damage or involves injuries). Again, driver aggressiveness such as
speeding or cutting across traffic to pick up a hailing passenger (a common site in Manhattan)
increases the likelihood of accidents. The third type of cost is for fines to owners stemming from
driver behavior. Owners receive fines ranging from $25 to $100 per instance when drivers do not
adequately record information on passenger trips they provide, when the vehicle is not in
satisfactory condition, either regarding cleanliness or safety, and when items such as the driver’s
taxi license are not properly displayed.11
Drivers typically pay little or none of the repair and maintenance costs, a fraction or none
of the costs of an accident, and only a fraction of the costs of fines from violations given they do
not pay the owner’s portion (drivers may receive a fine themselves for failing to adequately
record trip information, keep the taxi in good condition, or properly display all required
information). However, drivers keep all the fare revenues they generate. Given that revenues and
costs are increasing in driver aggressiveness, we can see that drivers face a moral hazard.

3. THE DATA

10

For example, in conversations with taxi owners, some indicated to us that the brakes must be replaced every few
weeks. Whether the driver is aggressively accelerating and braking, taking care to avoid potholes and curbs, and so
on can have an important effect on an owner’s repair costs.
11
New York City police has jurisdiction over enforcing many New York City taxi regulations, and the violations are
typically assigned during police stops of the taxi during regular taxi operation.

11

A.

Description of the TLC data
Data were provided by the TLC under a proprietary data-sharing agreement and contain

information about all drivers of New York City yellow taxis during two time periods: the spring
of 2005 and fall of 2007. The 2005 data contain driver-level records on three types of driving
outcomes: Accidents, convictions, and summonses. The accident records describe all accidents
involving taxis with injuries or property damage exceeding $1000 to any vehicle involved. The
violations records describe all drivers’ convictions for driving violations during taxi operation for
which points are issued against a DMV driver’s license. The summons records describe all
summonses, which are issued for TLC violations (as opposed to DMV driving violations) such
as passenger service refusals, using the taxi for unlawful purpose, and missing required items
from the taxi such as the display of the driver’s taxi-driving license.
The 2007 data only contain records for the summons outcomes and not the accident and
violations outcomes (the latter outcomes originate from the New York City police department,
and were not available for 2007).12 In addition to being available only for 2005, the accidents and
convictions records also have more limited variation than the summons records. Approximately
24 percent of drivers receive at least one summons during a six-month period versus 14 percent
having a conviction and 4 percent having an accident. Because of the added power for tests, and
its panel nature, we focus our analysis on summonses. However, we are careful to show that our
results are robust for accidents and convictions.
Summonses are given for a range of TLC violations. Some of these driver violations
generate costs for owners directly: owners receive fines for missing items, missing trip records,
and vehicle condition violations stemming from the actions of drivers to whom they lease. Some

12

We top-code outcomes to three to limit the impact of outliers, though less than one percent of drivers are affected.

12

of these driver violations generate costs for owners indirectly: using the taxi for an unlawful
purpose may risk the taxi (for example, temporary impounding), hazardous moving violations,
and possibly shift violations, in particular smoking in the taxi. Some driver violation may not
affect owner costs directly, but may reflect general driving style and also level of vehicle usage.
Since violations frequency likely increases monotonically with usage, and lessee-drivers may
operate their taxis for longer than owner-drivers because they do not pay the full cost of
operation, higher usage may also reflect moral hazard.
The driver-level data also record each driver’s country of birth and 2005 address, and for
drivers entering after 1997, whether the driver passed an English-language test and his score on a
written driving test, both of which the driver must pass to obtain a taxi-driving license.13 We
calculate a driver’s New York City taxi-driving experience from the number of months
registered as an active New York City taxi driver, which we derive from his taxi driver’s license
numbers.14 Driver-level records are available for both lessee-drivers and owner-drivers.
Two driver-of-record files identify the taxi each long-term lessee-driver and owner-driver
was registered to operate on April 2, 2005 and October 21, 2007, which we use to merge the
driver and owner data.15 Owners receive a significant discount on insurance premiums when they
register specific “named-drivers” with the TLC and the insurance provider. These named-drivers
are then the exclusive operators of that taxi (including the owner himself when he drives), and

13

The English-language test is aimed to ensure that drivers can communicate with passengers, while the written
driving test is on New York City geography and DMV and TLC regulations.
14
Taxi-driving license numbers are issued sequentially, which allows us to identify when a license was issued. We
thank Bruce Schaller for providing this algorithm.
15
Taxis not in the driver-of-record file have “unspecified” drivers, and TLC officials and industry participants
indicate they are nearly always short-term lessees. Since short-term lessees operate different taxis every day, they
cannot be matched in the data to specific taxis and hence owner countries, and are excluded from the analysis.

13

these matches constitute the driver-of-record file.16 Taxis with such named-drivers represent
9,535 of the 12,779 taxis in 2005 and 9,025 of the 12,953 taxis in 2007. Since we only know the
driver-taxi match on these two dates, we restrict the majority of the analysis to the periods
surrounding these dates.
For the long-term lessees, the driver-of-record files record the current lease period, which
typically are six months intervals (50 percent are between 177 and 183 days long, and 95 percent
are between 147 and 189 days long). We match the dates of offense for the summons,
convictions, and accidents to these lease periods to identify the drivers’ outcomes associated with
particular taxis. To make the driving outcomes comparable across drivers with different lease
period lengths, we use the recorded lengths to normalize the number of incidences to 182 days.
We supplement the TLC data with Census data on driver/owner neighborhood
characteristics, most importantly the fraction of residents in the driver/owner Census tract from
the same country of birth (resident country of birth is only reported at the tract level), which we
match to drivers/owners using their addresses.17
Table 1 reports summary statistics for the primary variables of interest for our sample. It
shows that drivers have 11 years of NYC taxi-driving experience on average, that almost half of
drivers lease in-network, and that approximately one in three drivers receives a summons, one in
six has a conviction, and one in twenty has a serious accident per six month period.
B.

Discussion of driving outcome measures

16

Because of the large financial incentives to accurately report named-drivers, we believe these records are accurate.
Furthermore, summonses for inaccurate named-driver records are very infrequent.
17
The country of birth recorded in the TLC data is occasionally more precise than the country of birth in the Census
data. For example, the Census and TLC data both record the European countries, England, Ireland, Sweden, Austria,
France, Germany, Netherlands, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Czech Republic or Slovakia, Hungary, Poland,
Romania, Belarus, Russia, Ukraine, and Yugoslavia. However, the TLC data record the additional European
countries, Belgium, Switzerland, Monaco, Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania, and Moldova. These additional countries are
assigned to the Census categories, “Other western Europe,” “Other southern Europe,” and “Other eastern Europe.”

14

Our data do not contain measures of vehicle maintenance, repair, and replacement costs
borne by the owner.18 Instead as mentioned above we examine three measures that either directly
or indirectly reflect costs generated by the driver but that are borne by the owner. One measure is
accidents, which, unlike maintenance and repairs, can be attributed directly to individual drivers.
The second measure is convictions for driving violations, such as speeding or disobeying other
traffic laws, which are enforced and processed in the same way as ordinary motorists’ driving
violations. Both accidents and convictions directly reflect driver ability and aggressiveness, and
hence are likely to reflect on average risk for owners from unsafe driving. In fact, Gebers (2003)
finds that prior violations more accurately predict future accidents than prior accidents
themselves (which is also a strong predictor of future accidents).
Our third measure is summons, which are issued for TLC violations (as opposed to DMV
driving violations) based on a driver’s action for which owners receive fines directly, such as
when a required item is missing from the taxi like the driver’s taxi-driving license (as mentioned
above), and also for actions for which the owner does not directly receive a fine, for example for
failing to satisfy a reasonable passenger request or smoking in the taxi, which reflects a general
tendency regarding conscientious versus careless driving. We believe some types of summons
better reflect a driver’s driving style and conscientiousness than others. However, we have no
way to identify precisely which summons types are most reflective, and hence we aggregate all
summonses for the primary analysis. However we also provide results broken out by summons
type to show that individual types indeed conform to our expectations of which are more likely
to be susceptible to moral hazard.
C.

Availability of country-of-birth data

18

This data would not reveal directly the costs generated by the lessee-driver anyway since attributing repair costs to
the owner-driver versus the lessee-driver would be challenging given both operate the taxi nearly every day.

15

Our primary analysis relies on country-of-birth data being available for both the lesseedriver and also the owner from whom he leases. Country data for both parties must be present to
identify whether the driver is leasing from a same-country owner. Table 2 reports the numbers of
drivers with available country data for both the driver and owner, along with mean New York
City taxi driving experience of these drivers.19
The table shows that country data for both the lessee and owner are available for 1,955
and 2,053 lessees in the 2005 and 2007 data respectively, and that lessees with country data have
only slightly more experience than lessees without data. Drivers with country data also have a
similar distribution over race than drivers without country data (not shown in the table),
suggesting that the distribution over countries is similar for drivers with and without country
data.20 Drivers with and without country data also have similar English-language and driving-test
results (also not shown). Therefore, based on the observable driver characteristics that are
available to us, we have no reason to believe that the drivers that we analyze are systematically
different than the drivers for which country data are missing.
Most lessee-drivers with available country data for both the driver and the owner share a
taxi with an owner-driver (that is, they operate owner-driver taxis, as opposed to non-ownerdriver taxis).21 Thus, the sample we analyze consists primarily of lessee-drivers who lease from
owner-drivers. This sample is attractive for studying social networks because owner-drivers are
most likely to be invested in the condition of their vehicle (since they drive most days) and

19

Note that Table 1 reports slightly fewer observations than Table 2 because Table 1 reports summary statistics only
for observations for which country-level data are available and data are non-missing for all other variables used in
the regression analysis, while Table 2 only examines the number of drivers for which country data are available
regardless of the availability of other variables.
20
Fifty-four, 23, and 13 percent of drivers with country data were Asian (including South Asian), Black, and White,
respectively, while 58, 22, and 8 percent of drivers without country data were Asian, Black and White.
21
The reason country data are available primarily only for lessee-drivers on owner-driver taxis is because country
data are available for most drivers, including owner-drivers, but not for non-driving owners.

16

interact with the lessee regularly, thereby facilitating a social connection, as opposed to nondriving owners, who often own many hundreds of taxis, and hence likely have more anonymous
relationships with drivers regardless of whether they share a common country of birth. Table 2
shows that a small fraction of lessee-drivers that have country-level data available lease from
non-driving owners and hence are included in our sample. The results throughout are similar and
modestly stronger when they are excluded.22

4. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
There are two important potential benefits of in-network driving. The first is better
screening such that owners can better assess the ability of drivers from the same country and as
such are more likely to hire drivers from the same country. The second is that drivers from the
same country exert higher levels of effort than drivers who lease from owners from a different
country (we explain reasons for this in greater detail below).
A.

Potential benefits of in-network leasing
Even in the case where in-network drivers do not exert more effort than out-of-network

drivers, one might observe high rates of in-network leasing and different driving outcomes on
average for in-network drivers versus out-of-network drivers. This would be due to screening.
i. The screening technology may be better in network. Specifically, due to information flows
about prospective drivers via the country-of-birth network, owners may be better able to
determine the ability of same-country drivers versus different-country drivers, and therefore
select different ability drivers for in-network versus out-of-network.

22

Note that we do not examine owner-driver outcomes in the main text of this study because we are interested in
comparing in-network versus out-of-network lessee-drivers. However, owner-driver results are available in
Schneider (2010) as well as the online appendix.

17

There are a few reasons why all else equal drivers who lease from an owner from the same
country of birth might exert higher levels of effort than drivers who do not.
ii. Social preferences on the part of drivers may lead drivers to exhibit more altruistic behavior
toward owners from the same country versus owners from a different country. It is well
documented that people tend to be willing to give up some of their own material self-interest
in order to improve the welfare of others with whom they have close social ties.23
iii. Social ties may create social collateral (Karlan, Mobius, Rosenblat, and Szeidl 2009) such
that individuals derive positive utility from ties and have a disincentive to behave in ways
that harm them. Benefits may be non-pecuniary, such as enjoying a friendship or gaining
spousal prospects, or arrive in the future, such as having a resource for job information or a
loan in times of need. Persons from the same country are much more likely to have a strong
social tie and hence have significant social collateral than persons from different countries.
iv. Individuals are better able to impose social sanctions on others from the same group versus a
different group. For the same reasons that social collateral creates a disincentive to behave in
ways that harm a relationship, group membership creates disincentives to behave in ways that
lead others to exclude one from the benefits of membership. In the current context, owners
have more leverage over drivers from the same country versus a different country, leading
drivers to exert more effort toward the objectives of same-country owners, all else equal.
v. Owners’ costs of monitoring the behavior of drivers might be lower for drivers from the
same country versus a different country given the more frequent interactions between driver

23

For example, Fong and Luttmer (2009) find in a charitable-giving experiment that respondents who report feeling
close to their racial or ethnic group give substantially more when victims are of the same race and Hungerman
(forthcoming) finds that the charitable activity of all-white religious congregations decreases in the fraction of
blacks in the community. It has even been documented that food giving is much more common in the animal
kingdom among kin (Stevens and Gilby (2003)), suggesting that affinity for group members is a basic instinct.

18

and owner through network ties. Specifically, drivers may have a higher chance of being
caught driving with insufficient care when they lease in network versus out-of-network,
giving in-network drivers greater disincentive to exert insufficient care, all else equal.24
B.

Theoretical model
We now present a simple theoretical model of how owners choose which drivers to hire.

The model provides testable implications that will help us disentangle the effort effects versus
the screening effects.
Using a modified version of a standard job search model, we consider the owner’s
decision of whether to lease to a potential driver to whom he has come in contact. This is a
discrete time, infinite-horizon model, where, for simplicity, the owners are infinitely lived and
have discount factor . As long as the owner has not hired a driver, the owner comes in contact
with one potential driver per period. The potential driver’s ability, α, is drawn i.i.d. from a
continuous distribution F with mean α+>0 and support A, and represents the innate attributes of
the driver that may limit the owner’s costs.25
If the owner hires a driver with ability α, he gets a payoff of α+e each period forever,
where e 0 represents the level of effort exerted by the driver to limit the owner’s costs. If the
owner rejects the driver, the owner receives a payoff of 0 this period and draws again next
period. We also assume that the probability of drawing an ability α<

+

is greater than zero.

This condition guarantees that some drivers will be rejected in equilibrium.

24

We list this possibility because it has been used in the micro-credit loan market to argue that individuals may be
able to monitor borrowers from the same group better than a large bank can monitor borrowers (for example, Stiglitz
(1990)). However, later we will argue that this channel is unlikely to be important in the taxi market.
25
To keep the model simple, we assume a new pool of potential drivers enters each period such that we have a
stationary distribution over the abilities of potential drivers. This implies that if a driver is rejected, he does not come
in contact with another owner-driver from whom he could lease (although of course he may remain in the industry
and lease from a non-driving owner).

19

Owners and drivers belong to one of at least two networks. Each period, the probability
that the potential driver being considered by an owner from network j is from the same network
is

j

(again, the distribution over ability within network is the common distribution F).

Effort effects
We now solve the model in the case that owners fully observe the abilities of both innetwork and out-of-network drivers. The importance of the network in this case comes from the
additional effort that driving in-network induces. We normalize in-network effort to be e=e’>0
and out-of-network effort to be e=0. To solve for an equilibrium, we set up the standard Bellman
equation,
Vj(α+e) = max{((α+e)/(1-β)), βδj∫AVj(α’+e’)f(α’)dα’ + β(1-δj)∫AVj(α’)f(α’)dα’}
The value function, V( ), which is bounded and weakly increasing, has a unique solution.26
The decision rule for an owner is simple. The owner will hire the potential driver if his
ability plus effort is greater than the expected payoff of waiting for another potential driver.
Thus, the owner uses a minimum cutoff level of his payoff α+e in deciding whether to hire a
potential driver. The expected payoff of waiting will be the same regardless of whether the
potential driver is in-network or not. However, conditional on ability level, in-network drivers
generate a higher payoff for the owner due to the positive in-network effort effects. Therefore,
the owner will use a lower cutoff for ability for in-network drivers relative to out-of-network
drivers in the hiring decision. The opportunity cost of searching for another driver, and this lower
ability cutoff, generates a lower average ability of in-network relative to out-of-network drivers.

26

The transformation TVj( +e) = max{(( +e)/(1-β)), βδj∫AVj( ’+e’)f( ’)d ’ + β(1-δj)∫AVj( ’)f( ’)d ’}
satisfies Blackwell’s (1965) sufficient conditions to be a contraction mapping. Therefore the value function has a
unique solution.

20

Proposition 1: Under effort effects, the average ability of in-network drivers is lower than the
average ability of out-of-network drivers.

Proof: The lowest ability driver that an owner will hire will be K(1-β)-e, where
K=βδj∫AV(α+e’)f(α)dα+β(1-δj)∫AV(α)f(α)dα. This cutoff value is smaller for in-network drivers
since in-network drivers exert higher effort. Therefore the average ability of in-network drivers
will be lower that the average ability out-of-network drivers.

Screening effects
We now consider the effect of screening. For simplicity, we assume that effort is the
same for both in-network and out-of-network drivers and normalized to e=0 (however, it will be
straightforward to see that the prediction also holds under in-network effort effects). Under
screening, owners can still observe the ability of potential in-network drivers (which he learns
about through contacts within the network), but now cannot observe the ability of potential outof-network drivers. Thus, if the owner comes in contact with an out-of-network driver in some
period, the owner treats the driver as if he has the average ability for the population, α+. The
Bellman equation representing the owner’s problem is now,
Vj(α) = max{(α/(1-β)), βδj∫AVj(α’)f(α’)dα’ + β(1-δj)Vj(α+)}
which again satisfies the conditions for a unique solution.
As before, an owner will hire a potential driver if the driver’s ability is above some
threshold. This threshold may lie above or below the average ability of out-of-network drivers.
This implies that, depending on the parameter values, owners hire either all out-of-networks or
no out-of-network drivers that they encounter. The owner’s knowledge about the ability of

21

drivers in their network allows the owner to be more selective regarding drivers in their network.

Proposition 2: If out-of-network drivers are hired, they will have the same average ability as the
population of potential drivers. The average ability of in-network drivers who are hired,
however, will be higher than the average ability of the population of potential drivers.

Proof: To show this we need only to show that some in-network drivers will be rejected. Let us
show this by contradiction. Suppose that all applicants are hired. This implies that Vj(α)=(α/(1β)) for all α. Therefore it is better to hire the lowest ability type αL than to reject and draw again.
Accepting every applicant implies ((αL /(1-β))≥ β(α+/(1-β)). But this contradicts the earlier
assumption that there are some possible ability types that lie below β

+

. There must be some

ability types low enough that they are rejected in equilibrium. The average ability of in-network
drivers accepted must be above the average ability of population of potential drivers.

As before, information about a driver’s ability is useful to the owner. Some in-network drivers
have sufficiently low ability that in-network owners reject them. Thus, the average ability of innetwork drivers that are accepted is higher than the average ability of potential drivers. Since
out-of-network drivers appear to the owner to have average ability, owners hire all out-ofnetwork drivers they encounter if his hiring cutoff level is below the average ability in the
population, and rejects all out-of-network if his cutoff level is above the average ability in the
population. Thus, if there is an owner who accepts out-of-network drivers, the average ability of
such drivers will be lower than in-network drivers.
Finally, note that we have not specified the arrival rate of in-network versus out-of-

22

network drivers. However, it is apparent that proportionally more in-network owners arrive
versus out-of-network owners compared to their ratio in the population, as we might expect, then
many or most hired drivers will be in-network, in particular under effort effects. We also expect
that networks with higher ratios of drivers to owners have a higher arrival rate of in-network
drivers. As Table 3 shows, these ratios vary considerably across countries, and the fraction of
drivers who are in-network appears to be closely related to these ratios.
C.

Disentangling screening versus effort effects
From the model it is clear that the high rate of in-network leasing could be due to either

effort effects or to screening, depending on the arrival rate of in-network versus out-of-network
drivers and the parameter values. However, we also know that better in-network outcomes
conditional on ability can only be due to effort effects. From Propositions 1 and 2, we now also
know that in-network drivers will have higher average ability than out-of-network drivers under
screening (assuming out-of-network driving occurs at all, and regardless of effort effects) but
lower average ability than out-of-network drivers under effort effects but no screening. Thus, the
outcomes of in-network drivers conditional on ability should be better than the outcomes of innetwork drivers unconditional on ability under no screening but worse than the outcomes of innetwork drivers unconditional on ability under screening. In summary, the effect of in-network
driving on outcomes conditional on ability provides a test of effort effects, while the effect of
conditioning the outcomes on ability provides a test of screening.

5. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
Among the aims of this paper are (1) to document the degree and direction of any
selection on driver ability into driving a taxi owned by someone from the same country, and (2)

23

to remove any selection bias to uncover the causal effect (the effort effect) of driving a taxi
owned by someone from the same country. To identify the casual effect of in-network driving,
we use three distinct sources of arguably exogenous variation in in-network driving. Results
from these separate sources of variation provide a robustness check on each other.
A.

Baseline model
Our basic empirical strategy is to compare the driving outcomes of drivers who lease

from an owner from the same country of birth to the driving outcomes of drivers who lease from
an owner from a different country of birth. Specifically, we estimate the following model by
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS),
[1]

Yit =

Sameit + ln(Expit) +

i

+

it

In [1], Yit is the outcome of driver i at time t, which is the number of accidents, convictions, or
summons, Sameit is an indicator variable denoting whether driver i leases from an owner from
the same country of birth at time t, Expit is the experience level of driver i at time t, αi is the
unobserved time invariant ability level of driver i, and εit is the idiosyncratic error term. Because
driver ability is not observed, the total error term is αi+εit.
OLS estimates of [1] are unlikely to yield the causal effect of in-network driving because
owners may select the drivers to which they lease based on unobserved driver ability. As such,
OLS estimates of β may be biased depending on the nature of the selection. In the presence of
screening, where owners can better observe ability for same-country drivers such that samecountry drivers are higher ability, there would be positive selection and the OLS estimates of β
would be biased downward (more negative). Alternatively, if owners know that same-country
drivers will exert more effort, making owners more willing to hire same-country drivers of lower
ability, there would be negative selection and the OLS estimates of β would be biased upward

24

(less negative). As such, comparing the OLS estimates to estimates obtained from a model that
isolates the casual effect of being a same-country driver will be informative about the selection
process. We propose three strategies to remove the effects of selection, which we describe now.
B.

Cross-country identification strategy
The first strategy to isolate the effort effect is to aggregate driving outcomes to the

country level and to use cross-country variation in leasing rates to test whether countries with
relatively higher in-network lease rates have relatively better driving outcomes. Aggregating
driving outcomes to the country level controls for any selection on ability into in-network leasing
that occurs within groups of individuals from the same country of birth. This strategy will
uncover a causal effect so long as differences in in-network driving across countries are not
systematically related to differences in unobserved driver ability across countries. To implement
this strategy we estimate the following model by OLS,
[2]

Yct =

Samect + (ln(Expt))c +

ct

where the c subscript indicates a country-level mean. Since the model assumes that mean driver
ability by country ( c) is uncorrelated with in-network lease rate by country (Samect ) after
conditioning on mean experience by country ((ln(Expt))c), the estimate of the network effect
isolates the effort effect.
C.

Within-driver identification strategy
The second strategy to isolate the effort effect is to use within-driver variation in same

versus different-country leasing. Specifically, with two observations per driver over time, in
2005 and 2007, we can compare the outcomes of drivers who leased from a same-country owner
in one period and a different-country owner in another period. By comparing the outcomes of the
same drivers over time we effectively remove the contribution of time-invariant ability on

25

driving outcomes (the contribution due to selection), thus isolating the effort effect. Specifically,
we estimate the following differenced (within-driver) model by OLS,
[3]

Yi =

Samei + ln(Expi) +

i

All variables are defined as before, but now the time-invariant ability component is differenced
away, so that the error term Δεi does not reflect the effects of selection. Identification of the
effort effect β comes from drivers who switch from leasing from a same-country owner to a
different-country owner (and vice versa). The identifying assumption is that any changes in
unobserved characteristics that affect driving outcomes are orthogonal to changes in samecountry driving status over time. It is worth noting that this model estimates a local treatment
effect for switchers who make up only 3.2 percent of the sample (58 drivers), so while the effect
may be well identified it does not necessarily generalize to all drivers (note that this limitation
applies to all within-entity models). This is one motivation for our use of two other completely
different sources of variation to identify effort effects.27
D.

Cross-sectional instrumental variables strategy
Finally, we exploit the variation in leasing from a same-country owner that is due to the

residential locations of drivers versus same-country owners. The idea is that drivers may be more
likely to lease from an owner who lives nearby versus far away all else equal. Thus a driver who
happens to live near a same-country owner should be more likely to lease from a same-country
owner simply because he lives close to that owner. Using the 2005 addresses of drivers and
owners, we compute the minimum distance of each driver to a same-country owner in the data.

27

Nevertheless, the observed characteristics of switchers are unremarkable. On average, switchers have 10.9 years
of experience and are 44.4 years old versus 11.1 years of experience and 44.5 years old for non-switchers. Sixteen,
12, 11, 9, and 9 switchers are from Bangladesh, Pakistan, India, Haiti, and other countries, respectively, which is
proportionally similar to non-switcher countries of birth. Twenty-five drivers switched to in-network leasing
between 2005 and 2007 while 33 drivers switched away from in-network leasing between 2005 and 2007.

26

We then use this distance as an exogenous instrument for in-network leasing to isolate the causal
effect of in-network driving.
To be a valid instrument, this distance measure must (a) be correlated with in-network
driving, (b) not be correlated with unobserved ability, (c) have a monotonic relationship with
being a same-country driver. Figure 1 shows clearly that distance to the closest same-country
owner predicts leasing from a same-country owner. The effect however is most pronounced for
distances of less than two-tenths of a mile, and for this reason we specify our instrument as an
indicator for whether the driver lives in the same Census block as a same-country owner.28
Figure 1 also shows that distance to a same-country owner is unrelated to driving experience,
which is the best measure of driver ability in our data. It is also clear from the figure that the
relationship between distance to a same-country owner and being a same-country driver is
monotonic. We present formal econometric tests of the validity of the instrument in Section 6. 29
In summary, we exploit this variation in residential locations of drivers vis-à-vis owners
to predict network status, and then use these predicted values in a regression on driving
outcomes. Specifically we estimate the following system of equations by 2SLS,
[4]

Samei = Disti

[5]

Yi =

1+

ln(Expi)

2

+ θ1c +

Samei + ln(Expi) + θ2c +

1i

2i

In [4] and [5] all variables are defined as before (but there is no longer any time variation), θc is a
country of birth fixed effect, and the error term ν includes both the idiosyncratic variation and

28

Using same Census tract or log of distance to the nearest same-country owner gives similar though modestly
weaker results due to a weaker first stage.
29
A slightly different interpretation of the instrumental variable estimate is that leasing from a same-country owner
who also lives nearby facilitates stronger network effects, for example, because an owner can better enforce social
sanctions. However, the OLS estimates of the network effect are similar for drivers living nearby the owner versus
far away from the owner, indicating that the existence of network effects is not predicated on geographic proximity.
Regardless, the alternate interpretation would still indicate the presence of network effects.

27

driver ability. This model exploits variation in residential locations of drivers who come from the
same country of birth to remove selection to in-network driving.
To present evidence that our instrumental variables model is valid, we tests whether our
distance measure is correlated with both our observed measures of driver ability and an estimate
of the unobserved component of driver ability. In most situations where instrumental variables
are used, authors cannot directly test the identifying assumption of their model (that is, that the
instrument is uncorrelated with the unobserved error term). In our context, because we have
longitudinal data but our instrument relies on cross-sectional variation, we can identify driver
ability and then test whether our estimates of unobserved ability are correlated with our
instrument. Specifically, we can obtain estimates of driver ability (αi) from our driver fixed
effects model and then see if these estimates are correlated with the instrument.30

6. RESULTS
A.

Determinants of in-network driving
One of the principal predictions of the model is that where there are screening effects or

effort effects there will be much more in-network driving observed in the data than would be
predicted by random chance or by residential sorting alone. In this sub-section, before
presenting evidence on the effects of in-network driving on outcomes, we provide compelling
evidence that this central prediction of our model holds in the data.

30

We also use a mixed effects estimator to obtain the Best Linear Unbiased Predictors (BLUPs) of driver ability and
find that these are also not correlated with our instrument. This mixed effects method for identifying BLUPs is used
in Jackson (2010) and Woodcock (2009). See Woodcock (2009) for detailed discussion of their properties.

28

Table 3 reports the number of lessees by lessee country broken out by the corresponding
owner country.31 The patterns suggest that owners lease to drivers within their network when
they can. For countries with more drivers than owners, owners mostly lease to drivers from the
same country, but many drivers do not lease from same-country owners. For example, there are
291 Bangladeshi drivers but Bangladeshi owners lease to only 148 total drivers total, and
consequently only 133 of 291 Bangladeshi drivers lease from Bangladeshi owners, while 133 of
148 drivers leasing from Bangladeshi owners were Bangladeshi. For countries with fewer drivers
than owners, owners often lease to different-country drivers, while most drivers lease from samecountry owners. For example, there are 12 Greek lessees but Greek owners lease to 52 drivers,
and 10 of 12 Greek drivers lease from Greek owners, while only 10 of the 52 drivers to whom
Greek owners lease are Greek.
These patterns are consistent with drivers being more likely to lease in-network than
would be predicted by random chance, and with there being a benefit to in-network driving.
However, this is not a conclusive test. Given that many drivers may live in ethnic enclaves, a
preference for proximity would also generate more in-network leasing than random chance.
Given that 24 percent of drivers in our data lease from an owner who lives in the same Census
block, it is plausible that the patterns are picking up a "proximity" effect rather than an "innetwork" effect. As such, showing that the pattern of in-network driving is not determined by
proximity alone is key to showing that all else equal the likelihood of leasing is higher innetwork than out-of-network.
To show this we test the hypothesis that the patterns observed in the data are driven by
proximity alone and that the leasing decisions are not affected by the network status of the

31

The table reports 2005 data, but 2007 patterns are similar.

29

drivers and owners. To do this we create an indicator variable equal to one if a driver leases from
an owner who lives in the same Census block as themselves and zero otherwise. Under the null
hypothesis that the countries of birth of the owners and drivers have no effect on the decision of
from whom to lease, then conditional on having any owners in the same Census block, the
country of birth of the owners should have no effect on the likelihood of leasing from an owner
who lives in the same block.
Table 4 shows results from a regression where the dependent variable is an indicator for
whether the driver leases from an owner in the same block and the explanatory variables are
indicators for having any owners in the same block and any in-network owners in the same
block. The results show that the likelihood of leasing from a neighbor is 32 percentage points
higher (p < .01) when there is an owner from the same country in the block. Also, conditional on
whether there is an owner from the same country in the same block, having any owner in the
block has a relatively small effect on leasing from that owner. The results provide a clear
indication that the prevalence of in-network driving cannot be explained by proximity alone ─
indicative of there being benefits to leasing in-network. Having established the high prevalence
of in-network driving (a central prediction of our model), we now turn to our estimates of driving
in-network on outcomes.
B.

Baseline analysis
Table 5 provides regression evidence regarding the effect of in-network driving on

driving outcomes. Column (1) shows OLS results for a driver’s number of summonses. Drivers
leasing in-network have 0.09 fewer summonses (p < .01), which is a moderate-size effect relative
to the standard deviation of the number of summonses per driver of 0.72. Driver country-of-birth
fixed effects are included in column (2) to address the possibility that drivers from some

30

countries are systematically better or worse in ways that are correlated with the probability of innetwork leasing and the results are similar.32 In the OLS and all other specifications, when driver
age is included, the estimate of the age effect is small in magnitude and not statistically
significant after controlling for experience, nor does it affect the estimate of in-network driving
effect. Including Census neighborhood characteristics, such as median income and education
level, also does not affect the estimate of the in-network driving effect (although Census data are
only available for 2005 outcomes due to address data being available only for this year). We
therefore use the more parsimonious specification that includes only experience.
C.

Country-level analysis
We begin by showing in Figure 2 the relationship between the mean numbers of

summonses per driver by country versus the fraction of drivers from that country leasing from an
owner from the same country.33 The figure shows clearly that driving outcomes are better for
drivers from countries with more in-network leasing, with a switch of all drivers from out-ofnetwork to in-network leasing corresponding to 0.35 fewer summonses per driver.
We can investigate the relationship more formally however by estimating equation [2] in
order to control for the effect of any differences in average driver experience across countries.
Column (3) of Table 5 provides these results, showing that the in-network leasing effect is
substantially larger than in columns (1) and (2) and is statistically significant (p=.01). As
discussed in Section 5, the country-level estimates identify the true causal effect of social ties on
driver effort (separate from selection on ability) by eliminating any within-country correlation

32

Results are similar when the models are estimate with 2005 and 2007 data separately, and with Poisson and the
more flexible negative binomial regression models, and are available in an online appendix.
33
Data for countries with at least five drivers are included (55 countries) with the area of the bubble being
proportional the number of drivers. Country labels for the points in the figure are not included because the TLC
requested that country-level driving outcomes not be reported.

31

between unobserved driver ability and in-network leasing. The identifying assumption is that any
country-level differences in ability are uncorrelated with country-level in-network lease rates
after controlling for country-level differences in driving experience. The estimate indicates that a
country with all in-network driving will have 0.35 fewer summonses per driver than a country
with no in-network driving.
D.

Within-driver analysis
Column (4) exploits the panel nature of the data to include driver fixed effects. The effect

is substantially larger than the OLS estimate and is statistically significant (p < .01). As
discussed in Section 5, this estimate is likely to isolate the true causal effect of social ties on
driver effort as it controls for time-invariant driver ability, and hence removes any bias due to (a)
selection across countries into in-network driving, and (b) selection within countries but across
drivers into in-network driving.
As a check of the identifying assumption that changes in in-network status between 2005
and 2007 are not associated with unobserved changes in factors that may affect driving
outcomes, we break out the effect separately for drivers switching from in-network to out-ofnetwork leasing between 2005 and 2007 versus from out-of-network to in-network leasing
between 2005 and 2007. If the switching process is endogenous (for example, drivers tend to
switch taxis after an accident but subsequently have safe driving outcomes), then the effect of
switching into versus away from in-network driving might be different. Column (5) breaks out
the effect for drivers switching away from in-network driving between 2005 and 2007 (“Lease in
network”) versus switching into in-network leasing between 2005 and 2007 (“Lease in network x
lease out of network in 2005,” which is additive to the “Lease in network” estimate). While
drivers switching away from in-network driving show a larger effect, the estimates for both types

32

of switchers are much larger than the OLS estimates, and the two types are not statistically
different (p=.18).34
E.

Instrumental-variables analysis
Column (6) and (7) contains the instrumental variables results, where the instrument for

in-network driving is an indicator for whether the driver lives in the same Census block as an
owner from the same country. The first-stage F-statistic for the excluded instrument is 131 and
41 depending on whether driver country fixed effects are included, indicating a strong
instrument. Again the estimate of the effect of in-network leasing is statistically significant and
substantially larger than the OLS estimates (p=0.05). When driver country fixed effects are
included, the estimate is very similar, though not surprisingly is less precise given the weaker
first stage F-statistic.35,36
In Table 6, we provide evidence from falsification tests that the instrument is
uncorrelated with driver ability. In columns (1)-(6) we find no evidence of a systematic
relationship between the instrument and observed measures we expect to reflect driver ability.
Columns (1) and (2) show in a regression of experience, the strongest predictor of driving
outcomes in our data, versus the instrument, that the instrument has approximately zero effect on
experience. Columns (3)-(6) show that the instrument also has essentially no effect on driver test
outcomes we might expect to predict driver ability, which is whether the driver passed an
English language test and the driver’s score on a driving test (these tests are described in Section
3). Finally, we examine a direct measure of unobserved driver ability, the estimate of

i

from the

34

Note that even though all drivers in the panel have two additional years of experience in 2007 versus 2005, the
effect of log of experience is identified due to the nonlinearity of the measure. The nonlinear measure of experience
is suitable given that the marginal benefit of experience almost certainly decreases with experience.
35
Columns (6) and (7) also report the estimated coefficients on the excluded instrument in the first stage regression,
showing that the instrument to be a very strong predictor of network status.
36
Note that the sample size for these specifications is smaller than previous specifications since the instrument is
based on driver and owner addresses, which are only available in the 2005 data.

33

within-driver model. This puts us in the unusual position of being able to test directly the
identifying assumption of the instrumental variables model, that the instrument is uncorrelated
with the unobserved error term. Columns (7) and (8) show the effect to be approximately zero.
F.

Analysis by summons type and alternative driving outcomes
If effort effects are indeed driving the observed network effects, we would expect

network effect to be largest for the types of summonses that directly impact owners’ costs. For
example, we expect to find a relatively large effect for hazardous driving summonses since they
may reflect more reckless driving and hence higher associated costs from accidents and
mechanical defects for the owner; and for trip sheet, vehicle condition, and missing items
summonses since owners receive a fine when drivers to whom they lease incur these summonses.
These results are more speculative since we cannot identify precisely the level of moral
hazard associated with each summons type and because test power is significantly lower when
analyzing individual summons types. Nevertheless, the results in Table 7, which reports both
OLS and instrumental variables estimates, are generally consistent with effort effects.37 Innetwork driving has the most significant effect on the three summons types that directly result in
an owner violation: trip record violations, vehicle condition violations, and missing item
violations. While the t-statistics for hazardous moving violations and for using the taxi unlawful
purposes, which may also directly generate costs for the owner, are smaller, they have the correct
sign, and the instrumental variables estimates are among the most negative.38
For the reasons discussed in Section 3, we have focused our analysis on summonses.
However, we can also examine accidents and convictions for driving violations as alternative

37

We do not include country fixed effects, nor country-level or within-driver estimates, since there is even less
power to identify these models when summons are broken out by type. The general patterns however appear similar.
38
Results from t-tests and not coefficient estimates are reported since the baseline numbers of summonses across
types varies and hence are not directly comparable.

34

driving outcomes, albeit with less power for tests, and without a panel data component since only
2005 outcomes are available. Accident rate in particular is an attractive measure because it
captures an outcome that affects owners directly.
Columns (1)-(4) of Table 8 report results where the dependent variable is number of
accidents by the driver during the lease period. Columns (5)-(8) report results where the
dependent variable is number of convictions for driving violations. For each measure, we report
baseline OLS estimates, OLS estimates with fixed effects for driver country, country-level
estimates, and instrumental variables estimates. Reassuringly, all of the estimates have the
correct sign and a reasonable magnitude (although the country-level accident effect is somewhat
larger). Furthermore, the magnitudes of the effects of same-country leasing on accidents,
convictions, and summonses are all approximately proportional to their relative frequencies in
the data. The country-level and instrumental variables estimates, which are likely to isolate the
causal effect of in-network driving on driver effort, while imprecise, are again larger than the
OLS estimates, indicating an important network effect and also that in-network drivers are lower
ability on average than out-of-network drivers.
G.

Discussion of sample selection
Given that we only have data on individuals who became drivers, but not on prospective

drivers not already in the industry, readers may wonder whether our findings are driven by some
sample selection bias (as distinct from selection into in-network driving conditional on being in
the sample). Specifically, given that our sample consists of drivers in the industry and not
prospective drivers, readers may wonder if the better outcomes among in-network drivers are
driven by high-quality prospective drivers being more likely to enter the industry as in-network
drivers, while low-quality prospective drivers not entering the industry at all. Such sample

35

selection could potentially bias the driver-level cross-sectional results (OLS and 2SLS).
However, it is important to note that it would not drive the aggregate country-level results as
long as the sample selection process was the same across countries (because this selection within
country-of-birth will be averaged out at the country level), and it would not drive the withindriver results (because all comparisons are within the same driver over time). Given the
robustness of our central findings across models that are, and are not, susceptible to sample
selection bias, we are confident that our results uncover a real causal effect. Moreover, all of our
strategies that account for selection (conditional on being in sample) indicate that the selection
into in-network driving is negative rather than positive, which is generally inconsistent with
sample selection driving our results.

7. EXPLORATION OF MECHANISMS
The preceding section provides a range of evidence indicating that social ties between
owners and drivers lead to significantly better driving outcomes in the NYC taxi-leasing market.
However, as discussed in Section 4, there are at least five mechanisms through which social
networks can operate, including screening, monitoring costs, social sanctions, social preferences,
and social collateral, and we would like to know more about which mechanisms are important.
First, we consider screening and monitoring costs. As discussed in Section 5, the
estimates of the effect of in-network driving from the country-level, within-driver, and
instrumental variables models are likely to reflect the true causal effect of in-network driving on
outcomes, while the estimates of the effect of in-network driving from the OLS model represent
both the causal effect of in-network driving and the effect of any selection of drivers into innetwork driving based on ability. Since the OLS estimates show a significantly smaller benefit of

36

in-network driving versus the other estimates, we have evidence that selection leads to innetwork drivers having lower ability on average than out-of-network drivers. As the predictions
from the theoretical model in Section 4 indicates, under screening, there should be selection of
higher ability drivers into in-network leasing; while under no screening, there should be selection
of lower ability drivers into in-network leasing. Since in-network drivers appear to have lower
average ability than out-of-network drivers, screening is unlikely to be an important determinant
of driver-owner matches and outcomes.
There are several reasons why monitoring costs are unlikely to explain the better innetwork driving outcomes. First, taxis are operated primarily in Manhattan and typically far from
the location of owners and members of the community (which are primarily in Brooklyn and
Queens), and hence direct monitoring of lessee driving is infeasible at reasonable cost regardless
of network status.39 Second, most drivers in the sample lease from an owner-driver who himself
regularly drives the taxi, giving the owner-driver some ability to regularly monitor vehicle
condition again regardless of network status.
Second, we examine the effect of network density on driving outcomes to learn about
social sanctions, social collateral, and social preferences. Following Bertrand, Luttmer, and
Mullainathan (2000) and Gil and Hartman (2011), we use Census data on the density of residents
from a particular country in a neighborhood as a measure of the network strength among
residents from that neighborhood and country. Specifically, we measure driver/owner network
strength as the fraction of residents in the driver/owner Census tract from the same country of

39

One might argue that other drivers from the same country could observe a driver’s driving style while on the road
and report this information to the owner. However, we believe this scenario is very unlikely because of the small
chance that any single driver while operating his taxi would observe another driver he knows exhibiting poor driving
style out of the approximately 40,000 drivers that are actively driving in the industry (short-term lessees, long-term
lessees, and owner-drivers), also happen to know the owner of that taxi, and be interested in reporting the observed
driving style to that owner.

37

birth. While this measure may not capture network strength completely, it nonetheless should
reflect the level of communication and ties between residents, for example, through the number
of community organizations and events. The idea is to test whether denser owner or driver social
networks generate larger improvements in outcomes, which may tell us about which mechanisms
are important.40
Consider social sanctions, which would take the form of community-enforced
punishments against an offending group member. These social sanctions would most likely
operate through the owner’s network (and not a driver’s network) and hence a relatively dense
owner network is likely central to facilitating social sanctions. Social collateral could operate
similarly to social sanctions in that owners may provide or withhold favors to drivers based on
driving outcomes and these favors could operate through the owner’s network. Hence the effect
of social sanctions and possibly social collateral would be reflected in an owner network strength
effect. In contrast, social preferences would likely operate independently of an owner’s or
driver’s network.
In Table 9 we report regression results where the dependent variable is a driver’s number
of summonses and the explanatory variables of interest are an indicator for in-network leasing
and the interaction of in-network leasing and network strength. Columns (1), (2), and (3) report
results driver network strength, owner network strength, and both, respectively. Comparing the
estimates of the interaction terms indicates that owner networks are far more important than
driver networks for generating good outcomes. This result can be seen most clearly in column
(4), where a stronger owner network leads to significantly better outcomes for in-network
drivers. Furthermore, driver network strength has no effect on summonses after conditioning on

40

We examine 2005 outcomes only since address data, required to identify tracts, are available for 2005 only.

38

owner network strength, and when fixed effects for driver country are included, the standalone
in-network effect approaches zero, suggesting that network effects rely in large part on the
density of the owner’s social network.41
In columns (5)-(8), the continuous measure of network strength is replaced with an
indicator variable for whether at least 15 percent of residents in the owner/driver Census tract
have the same country of birth. The idea is that a minimum density of residents might be
necessary for a mechanism that operates through a local community to be effective, but that
increasingly dense networks have marginally smaller benefits. Indeed, results from this measure
are similar, but are now significantly more pronounced.42
The result that network effects appear to operate in large part through owner networks
and not driver networks, and that the in-network effect is weak when the owner network is weak,
suggests that social sanctions may be driving the observed effort effects. Social collateral could
also play a role since there are ways in which social collateral could depend on owner network
strength.43 The limited stand-alone and driver network effects, however, are inconsistent with an
important role for social preferences.

8. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Moral hazard plays a central role in our understanding of numerous contractual
relationships, and researchers have found evidence consistent with moral hazard in many
contexts. However, much less is known about how one might mitigate moral hazard problems

41

The number of observations varies slightly across specifications due to differences in the availability of addresses.
Fifteen percent was chosen because it corresponds to the level at which the marginal effect of network density
appears to begin leveling off.
43
One way that social sanctions and social collateral might operate is by making it easier for owners to collect
damages from drivers with bad outcomes since damages may often be identifiable but not legally recoverable.
42

39

where contract are necessarily incomplete. While there is some mixed evidence that social ties
can mitigate moral hazard problems in group lending schemes in developing countries, little is
known on the potential role of social ties in mitigating moral hazard outside of this particular
developing-country context.
In this study we investigate the role of social networks in aligning the incentives of
economic agents in a United States labor market setting with incomplete contracts. Specifically,
we compare the driving outcomes of drivers who lease from owners from the same country of
birth to the driving outcomes of drivers who lease from owners from a different country of birth.
We find that across three models that exploit three distinct plausibly exogenous sources
of variation to account for selection, drivers have better outcomes when driving in-network
versus out-of-network ─ indicative of a real causal effort effect. Consistent with social ties
reducing moral hazard, we find that these effects are largest for outcomes that impose a cost to
the owner. Also the marginal effects of driving in-network increase with the strength of the
owner network but not the driver network, and appear to be weak when the owner network is
weak. This is consistent with social sanctions, in the form of community-enforced punishments,
playing a primary role in facilitating the network effects.
Given the prevalence of in-network driving and the strength of the observed network
effects in the taxi industry, our results indicate that social ties have incentive benefits in addition
to any positive selection effects. In many labor markets, jobs are frequently obtained through
referrals via social ties. It is commonly thought that the main benefit of these referrals is to
overcome asymmetric information over candidate quality. However, our results suggest these
referrals may also help to overcome the moral hazard problem. More generally, our findings
provide direct evidence that even in developed nations with strong institutions, social

40

connections can play a valuable role in achieving better economic outcomes.
Finally, an interesting policy implication of the literature on micro-credit group lending is
the possibility of introducing a joint liability program among groups of taxi drivers from the
same network when there is an insufficient number of in-network owners from whom to lease.
Given that responsibility for mechanical defects typically cannot be contractually assigned to any
single driver, and that the costs of bad outcomes like accidents often cannot be recovered from
individual drivers, group liability may induce a higher level of effort among these drivers and
allow more flexibility in which owners and drivers can optimally form business relationships.

REFERENCES
Ahlin, C. and Townsend, R. (2007) “Using repayment data to test across models of joint liability
lending,” Economic Journal.
Alesina, A., R. Baqir, and W. Easterly (1999) “Public goods and ethnic divisions,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 114(4), 1243-84.
Baker, G. and T. Hubbard (2003) “Make versus buy in trucking: Asset ownership, job design,
and information,” American Economic Review.
Baker, G. and T. Hubbard (2004) “Contractibility and asset ownership: On-board computers and
governance in the U.S. Trucking Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bandiera, O., I. Barankay, and I. Rasul (2005) “Social preferences and the response to
incentives: Evidence from personnel data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bandiera, O. I. Barankay, and I. Rasul (2009) “Social connections and incentives in the
workplace: Evidence from personnel data,” Econometrica, 44(4), 1047-1094.
Banerjee, A. T. Besley, and T. Guinnane (1994) “The neighbor’s keeper: The design of credit
cooperatives with design and test,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, Glennerster, R., and C. Kinnan (2009) “The miracle of microfinance?
Evidence from a randomized trial,” working paper.
Bertrand, M., Luttmer, E., and S. Mullainathan (2000) “Network effects and welfare culture,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
41

Besley, T. and S. Coate (1995) “Group lending, repayment incentives and social collateral,”
Journal of Development Economics, 46 (1), 1-18.
Blackwell, D. (1965) “Discounted dynamic programming,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
36(1), 226-235.
Borjas, G. (2000) “Ethnic enclaves and assimilation,” Swedish Economic Policy Review, 7, 89122.
Duflo, E., A. Banerjee, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan (2009) “The miracle of microfinance?
Evidence from a randomized evaluation,” working paper.
Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2003) “The role of information and social interactions in retirement plan
decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3):
815-842.
Edin, P.-A., P. Fredriksson, and O. Aslund (2003) “Ethnic enclaves and the economic success of
immigrants: Evidence from a natural experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1),
329-357.
Ellison, G. (1994) “Cooperation in a prisoner’s dilemma with anonymous random matching,”
Review of Economic Studies.
Fernandez, R. and N. Weinberg (1997) “Sifting and sorting: Personal contacts and hiring in a
retail bank,” American Sociological Review.
Fong, C. and E. Luttmer (2009) "What determines giving to Hurricane Katrina victims?
Experimental evidence on racial group loyalty,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics.
Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig (1994) “A test for moral hazard in the labor market: contractual
arrangements, effort, and health,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 76(2), 213-227.
Gebers, M. (2003) “An inventory of California driver accident risk factors,” California
Department of Motor Vehicles, Research and Development Branch, RSS-03-204.
Gil, R. and W. Hartmann (2011) “Airing your dirty laundry: Vertical integration, reputational
capital, and social networks,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organizations.
Giné, X. and D. Karlan (2006) “Group versus individual liability: Evidence from a field
experiment in the Philippines,” Yale University Economic Growth Center working paper 940.
Giné, X. and D. Karlan (2009) “Group versus individual liability: Long-term evidence from
Philippine microcredit lending group,” working paper.

42

Glaeser, E., D. Liabson, J. Schneinkman, and C. Soutter (2000) “An economic approach to social
capital,” Economic Journal.
Granovetter, M. (1974) Getting a job: A study of contracts and careers. The University of
Chicago Press.
Greif, A. (1993) “Contract enforceability and economic institutions in early trade: The Maghribi
Traders’ coalition,” American Economic Review.
Holmstrom, B. (1979) “Moral hazard and observability,” Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 7491.
Hungerman, D. (forthcoming) “Race and charitable church activity,” Economic Inquiry.
Jackson, C. Kirabo and Elias Bruegmann, (2009). "Teaching Students and Teaching Each Other:
The Importance of Peer Learning for Teachers," American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 1(4), 85-108.
Jackson, K. (2010) “Match quality, worker productivity, and worker mobility: Direct evidence
from teachers,” NBER Working Paper. w15990.
Kandori, M. (1992) “Social norms and community enforcement,” Review of Economic Studies.
Karlan, D. (2005) “Using experimental economics to measure social capital and predict financial
decisions,” American Economic Review.
Karlan, D. (2007) “Social connections and group banking,” Economic Journal.
Karlan, D., M. Mobius, T. Rosenblat, and A. Szeidl (2009) "Trust and social collateral," The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1307-1361.
Lazear, E. (2000) "Performance pay and productivity," American Economic Review, 90(5),
1346-1361.
Luttmer, E. (2001) “Group loyalty and the taste for redistribution,” Journal of Political
Economy, 109(3), 500-528.
Mas, A. and E. Moretti (2009) “Peers at work,” American Economic Review.
Montgomery, J. (1991) “Social networks and labor-market outcomes: Towards an economic
analysis,” American Economic Review.
Munshi, K. (2000) "Networks in the modern economy: Mexican migrants in the U.S. labor
market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 549-597.

43

Pellizzari, M. (2010) “Do friends and relatives really help in getting a good job?,” The Industrial
and Labor Relations Review.
Pitt, M. and S. Khandker (1998) “The impact of group-based credit programs on poor
households in Bangladesh: Does the gender of participants matter?,” Journal of Political
Economy, 106.
Portes, A. and J. Sensenbrenner (1993) “Embeddedness and immigration: Notes on the social
determinants of economic actions,” American Journal of Sociology.
Rai, A. and T. Sjostrom (2004) “Is Grameen lending efficient? Repayment incentives and
insurance in village economies,” Review of Economic Studies.
Schneider, H. (2010) “Moral hazard in leasing contacts: Evidence from the New York City taxi
industry,” Journal of Law and Economics.
Sharma, M. and M. Zeller (1997) “Repayment performance in group-based credit programs in
Bangladesh: An empirical analysis,” World Development.
Smith, J. (1986) "Moral hazard, costly supervision, and agricultural mechanization" The Journal
of Developing Areas, 21(1), 75-86.
Stevens, J. and Gilby, I. (2003) “A conceptual framework for non-kin food sharing: timing and
currency of benefits,” Animal Behavior, 67(4), 603-614.
Stiglitz, J. (1990) “Peer monitoring and credit markets,” World Bank Economic Review 4, 351366.
Urbanonomics (2004) “Taxi & Limousine Commission environmental impact statement
socioeconomic conditions report,” internal document prepared for the TLC.
Woodcock, S. (2009) “Match effects,” working paper.
Wydick, B. (1996) “Credit access, human capital and class structure mobility,” Journal of
Development Studies, 35(6) 131-152.

44

Figure 1: Graphical evidence in support of the validity of the instrument

Notes: From top to bottom, the curves represent mean experience, fraction of drivers leasing innetwork, and fraction of drivers at that distance, all versus distance to an in-network owner.
Figure 2: Country-level relationship between in-network leasing and summons

Notes: Circle size represents the number of drivers from that country. The line is the fitted
relationships between fraction of drivers leasing in-network by country versus mean number of
summonses by country, unweighted by number of drivers by country (the weighted fit is similar).
45

Table 1: Summary statistics
Years of NYC taxi-driving experience
Lease from same-country driver
Number of summons
Number of accidents
Number of convictions for driving violations
Passed English language test on first try
Driving test score on first try
Fraction residents in driver's Census tract from same country
Fraction residents in owner's Census tract from same country

N
1824
1824
1824
1824
1824
731
743
1677
1678

Mean
11.0
0.45
0.39
0.04
0.17
0.90
78.6
0.06
0.08

2005
SD
7.5
0.50
0.76
0.21
0.46
0.30
10.5
0.09
0.15

Min
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00

Max
33.0
1
3
2
3
1
100
0.85
0.94

N
1877
1877
1877

Mean
11.2
0.42
0.33

2007
SD
8.0
0.49
0.68

957
967

0.92
78.2

0.28
10.5

Min
0.8
0
0

Max
35.4
1
3

0
12

1
100

Notes: The table shows summary statistics of the sample of drivers used in the regression analyses. Fewer observations are available
for the English-language and driving test results because these data are only available for drivers entering the industry after 1997, and
for fraction residents in driver/owner Census tract from the same country because of missing addresses. Accident, conviction, and
address (and hence Census) data are only available for 2005.

Table 2: Availability of data on driver and owner country of birth

All long-term lessees (N)
Mean experience (years)
Drive owner-driver taxis (N)
Mean experience (years)
Drive non-owner-driver taxis (N)
Mean experience (years)

13,523
9.3
2,540
10.3
10,983
9.1

1,955
10.6
1,504
10.9
451
9.9

2005
Country data available
In network
Out of network
874
1,081
11.1
10.2
782
722
11.1
10.6
92
359
11.3
9.5

12,683
9.6
2,548
10.7
10,135
9.3

2,053
10.7
1,604
10.9
449
10.2

2007
Country data available
In network
Out of network
850
1,203
11.8
9.9
770
834
11.8
10.0
80
369
11.9
9.8

Notes: The table shows number of drivers for whom country-of-birth data are available for both the driver and the corresponding
owner, by ownership arrangement, along with mean experience levels.

46

Table 3: Patterns of matches between owners and drivers
Driver country
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
China
Colombia
Dom. Rep.
Ecuador
Egypt
Ghana
Greece
Haiti
Hong Kong
India
Morocco
Nigeria
Pakistan
Peru
Puerto Rico
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Turkey
U.S.
Ukraine
Vietnam
Other
Total

Bangladesh
0
124
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
6
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
138

China
0
5
11
3
3
1
1
1
0
3
4
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
5
3
44

Colombia
0
2
0
26
3
5
0
1
0
1
0
5
1
1
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
62

Egypt
0
2
0
0
0
1
18
2
0
0
0
3
1
0
6
2
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
7
43

Owner country
Greece
Haiti
India
0
1
0
7
16
18
0
1
0
1
2
2
2
5
1
1
0
2
3
9
3
1
6
4
9
1
0
3
101
1
0
1
0
5
15
278
1
6
1
0
4
0
5
29
36
0
1
0
2
1
0
1
0
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
0
2
2
7
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
7
23
11
50
235
359

Pakistan
0
4
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
0
11
1
0
106
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
6
136

Russia
0
22
0
0
1
1
11
3
0
8
0
19
1
2
22
0
0
2
21
2
1
0
6
0
27
149

U.S.
1
17
1
2
9
3
2
7
0
12
0
8
1
0
21
0
4
0
2
5
0
12
0
1
19
127

Ukraine
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
6
0
1
4
0
1
0
10
2
0
0
6
0
4
40

Other
13
53
4
13
13
19
14
28
0
18
4
34
10
6
55
5
6
13
14
3
3
12
5
8
88
441

Total
15
272
17
50
38
33
64
53
10
151
10
392
24
14
285
10
18
16
51
16
7
35
18
15
210
1,824

Notes: The table shows the country of birth for drivers and corresponding owners for the 2005 sample. Patterns for the 2007 sample
are similar.

47

Table 4: Predictors of leasing from owner in same block
Driver resides in same block as in-network owner 0.321***
[0.020]
Driver resides in same block as any owner
0.061***
[0.017]
Constant
0.009
[0.009]
Observations
1663
R-squared
0.249

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the driver leases in-network and zero otherwise, and is limited to the
2005 sample since addresses are only available for this year. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in brackets. ***
indicates significance at the 1 percent level.

Table 5: Models of summonses
Lease in network

(1)
OLS
-0.085***
[0.023]

(2)
OLS
-0.078***
[0.026]

(3)
Country level
-0.308**
[0.125]

(4)
Within driver
-0.323***
[0.092]

-0.103***
[0.014]
-0.058**
[0.023]
0.640***
[0.037]

-0.108***
[0.015]
-0.055**
[0.024]
0.647***
[0.039]

-0.095
[0.079]
-0.238***
[0.082]
0.775***
[0.200]

-0.288*
[0.167]
-0.015
[0.056]
1.102***
[0.331]

(5)
Within driver
-0.472***
[0.146]
0.268
[0.201]
-0.298*
[0.167]
-0.013
[0.028]
27.013
[56.905]

No
No
3701
0.024

Yes
No
3701
0.063

No
No
174
0.084

No
Yes
3701
0.033

No
Yes
3701
0.035

Lease in network x lease out of network in 2005
Log years of experience
2007 indicator
Constant
First stage coefficient on lease in-network
First stage F-statistic
Fixed effects for driver country
Fixed effects for driver
Observations
R-squared

(6)
2SLS
-0.248**
[0.126]

(7)
2SLS
-0.233
[0.227]

-0.082***
[0.022]

-0.086***
[0.025]

0.658***
[0.071]
0.312
131.4
No
No
1663
0.007

0.686*
[0.368]
0.189
40.9
Yes
No
1663
0.063

Notes: The dependent variable is number of summonses per driver. The 2SLS sample is limited to 2005 since addresses are only
available for this year. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that are adjusted for clustering at the country of birth level are
reported in brackets. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.
48

Table 6: Falsification tests for the excluded instrument

In-network owner in block
Constant
Fixed effects for driver country
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Log years of
experience
-0.086
[0.055]
2.074***
[0.026]
No
1663
0.001

(2)
Log years of
experience
-0.075
[0.058]
2.072***
[0.025]
Yes
1663
0.144

(3)
Passed
English test
-0.003
[0.027]
0.903***
[0.013]
No
663
0.000

(4)
Passed
English test
-0.018
[0.031]
0.906***
[0.013]
Yes
663
0.108

(5)
Driving test
score
0.880
[0.974]
78.363***
[0.460]
No
674
0.001

(6)
Driving test
score
1.520
[1.085]
78.210***
[0.470]
Yes
674
0.086

(7)
Driver effect
from panel
0.005
[0.038]
0.015
[0.021]
No
1663
0.000

(8)
Driver effect
from panel
-0.001
[0.042]
0.016
[0.021]
Yes
1663
0.073

Notes: The dependent variables are measures of driver ability (reported at the top of each column) and the explanatory variable of
interest is the excluded instrument (in-network owner in block). The sample is limited to 2005 since addresses are only available for
this year. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that are adjusted for clustering at the country of birth level are reported in brackets.
*** indicates significance at the 1 percent level.

Table 7: Results by individual summons type
Summons for TLC driver violation
Non-hazardous moving violation
Stationary vehicle violation
Shift violation (primarily cell phone and smoking)
Abuse (primarily verbal abuse)
Passenger refusal
Hazardous moving violation
Passenger request violation
Noncooperation with TLC
Using taxi for unlawful purpose
Off-duty procedures violation
Discourteous to passenger
Trip records violation
Vehicle condition violation (primarily safety related)
Item missing from taxi (primarily trip records)

N OLS
(2005, 2007)
169
104
79
64
118
95
61
104
211
56
85
153
84
184

t-stat OLS
(2005, 2007)
0.95
0.00
-0.37
-0.41
-0.43
-0.44
-0.69
-0.72
-0.98
-1.02
-1.32
-1.70
-2.06
-3.42

N 2SLS
(2005)
84
30
35
39
43
60
20
74
96
36
44
90
34
97

t-stat 2SLS
(2005)
0.28
-0.06
-2.39
-0.10
-0.26
-1.99
1.10
-0.12
-1.32
-0.81
0.03
-2.12
0.36
-1.82

Corresponding TLC owner violation or risk

Risk to taxi

Risk to taxi

Missing driver records violation
Vehicle condition violation
Item missing from taxi (primarily trip records)

Notes: The table reports sample size and the t-statistic for regressions of in-network driving on the probability of the driver incurring
the summonses type listed in the left-most column. T-statistics for OLS regressions and for 2SLS regressions (available for 2005 only)
are listed. The corresponding risk to the owner from the particular summons type is listed in the right-most column.
49

Table 8: Models of alternative driving outcomes
(1)

Lease in network
Log years of experience
Constant
Fixed effects for driver country
Observations
R-squared

OLS
-0.022**
[0.010]
-0.005
[0.006]
0.067***
[0.014]
No
1839
0.003

(2)

(3)
Accidents
OLS
Country level
-0.020*
-0.093**
[0.012]
[0.047]
-0.002
-0.067**
[0.007]
[0.030]
0.059***
0.225**
[0.016]
[0.086]
Yes
No
1839
96
0.065
0.086

(4)

(5)

(6)

2SLS
-0.031
[0.038]
-0.007
[0.007]
0.074***
[0.018]
No
1674
0.005

OLS
-0.035*
[0.021]
-0.017
[0.012]
0.221***
[0.030]
No
1870
0.003

(7)
Convictions
OLS
Country level
-0.030
-0.068
[0.025]
[0.103]
-0.017
-0.104**
[0.013]
[0.049]
0.220***
0.411***
[0.032]
[0.124]
Yes
No
1870
97
0.072
0.057

(8)
2SLS
-0.057
[0.079]
-0.017
[0.014]
0.224***
[0.040]
No
1704
0.002

Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) is number of accidents and in columns (5)-(8) is number of convictions for driving violations per
driver. The sample is limited to 2005 since accidents and convictions data are only available for this year. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors
that are adjusted for clustering at the country of birth level are reported in brackets. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
levels.

Table 9: Models of the effect of network strength
Lease in network
Lease in network x driver network strength

(1)
-0.093**
[0.040]
-0.211
[0.226]

Lease in network x owner network strength
Log years of experience
Constant
Fixed effects for driver country
Observations
R-squared

-0.094***
[0.021]
0.625***
[0.054]
No
1677
0.020

(2)
-0.079**
[0.040]

-0.397*
[0.214]
-0.091***
[0.022]
0.616***
[0.054]
No
1678
0.020

(3)
-0.074*
[0.042]
0.114
[0.327]
-0.665*
[0.355]
-0.087***
[0.022]
0.608***
[0.056]
No
1550
0.020

(4)
-0.026
[0.050]
0.076
[0.353]
-0.634*
[0.384]
-0.087***
[0.025]
0.587***
[0.060]
Yes
1550
0.109

(5)
-0.107***
[0.037]
-0.004
[0.092]

-0.095***
[0.021]
0.626***
[0.054]
No
1677
0.020

(6)
-0.092**
[0.037]

-0.152**
[0.067]
-0.091***
[0.022]
0.616***
[0.054]
No
1678
0.020

(7)
-0.096**
[0.038]
0.078
[0.108]
-0.218***
[0.075]
-0.087***
[0.022]
0.608***
[0.056]
No
1550
0.020

(8)
-0.048
[0.044]
0.086
[0.119]
-0.221***
[0.085]
-0.087***
[0.025]
0.586***
[0.060]
Yes
1550
0.110

Notes: The dependent variable is number of summonses per driver. Network strength in columns (1)-(4) is fraction of residents in the
driver’s/owner’s Census tract from the same country, and in columns (5)-(8) is an indicator for at least 15 percent of residents from the same
country. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that are adjusted for clustering at the country of birth level are reported in brackets. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

50

APPENDIX: SUPPLEMENTARY RESULTS (FOR ONLINE REFERENCE ONLY)
Drivers leasing from a family member
Previous work in the context of micro-credit group lending finds evidence that network
effects are weaker in groups where members have sufficiently close relationships, such as family
members, suggesting a breakdown of the social sanctions mechanism (Sharma and Zeller (1997),
Ahlin and Townsend (2007), and Karlan (2007) provide empirical evidence and Rai and
Sjostrom (2004) have a theoretical analysis). We examine this issue in the taxi industry by
comparing the outcomes of drivers who lease from a family member versus the outcomes of
drivers who lease in-network but not from a family member and drivers who lease out-ofnetwork. Family member are identified as drivers who are registered as leasing from an owner
with the same last name.44 The sample consists of 326 drivers who lease from a family member
(9 percent), 1,290 lessees who lease in-network but not from a family member (35 percent), and
2,085 lessees who lease out-of-network (56 percent). The categories are defined to be mutually
exclusive such that in-network and family member do not overlap.
The regression results are provided in Table 10 and show that drivers leasing from a
family member have 0.13 and 0.10 fewer summons than out-of-network drivers versus nonfamily in-network drivers having 0.08 and 0.08 fewer summons than out-of-network drivers,
depending on whether fixed effects for the driver’s country of birth are included. Thus, the
results suggest that family members have even better driving outcomes than non-family innetwork drivers, and that the effect of social ties is monotonic in the strength of that relationship,
44

This method of identifying family members is imperfect: Drivers identified as family members are very likely to
actually be family members since sharing a last name with drivers operating the same taxi is unlikely to be
coincidental. However, some drivers who are family members may not be identified as such since drivers related to
owners by marriage, for example, would not have the same last name. Nevertheless, family members classified in
the data as non-family members are likely to represent only a small fraction of total lessees, and hence this
misclassification is unlikely to affect the results meaningfully (and if anything will bias the estimate of the family
effect towards zero).

51

although of course it is possible that the selection process by which drivers come to lease from a
family member versus a non-family member but same-country owner may differ in systematic
ways.
In-network drivers versus owner-drivers
Table 11 shows how in-network lessees fare versus the owner-drivers from whom they
lease, both relative to out-of-network lessees. As expected, the owner-drivers show somewhat
better outcomes in terms of fewer summonses for driving violations. Note however that the
selection process based on ability by which drivers come to lease in-network versus become an
owner-driver may be very different, and hence a comparison of the magnitudes of these
estimates is only suggestive.
Alternative models and samples
Table 12 reports results from the basic model of number of summons versus in-network
leasing, but uses alternative modeling functions, including a Poisson regression model and a
more flexible negative binomial regression model. Estimates for the later two models are
reported as marginal effects. The results are nearly identical. The estimates in Table 13 provide
results regarding the effects of in-network leasing for alternative samples. Columns (1)-(4)
provide results for the 2005 and 2007 samples individually, showing that the in-network leasing
effect appears robust to the sample period.

52

Table 10: Outcomes of drivers leasing from a family member
Lease in network from non-family
Lease from family
Log years of experience
2007 indicator
Constant
Fixed effects for driver country
Observations
R-squared

(1)
-0.077***
[0.025]
-0.132***
[0.039]
-0.104***
[0.014]
-0.058**
[0.024]
0.643***
[0.037]
No
3701
0.025

(2)
-0.076***
[0.027]
-0.101**
[0.042]
-0.109***
[0.015]
-0.055**
[0.024]
0.649***
[0.039]
Yes
3701
0.063

Notes: The dependent variable is number of summonses per driver. Robust standard errors
adjusted for clustering at the country of birth level are reported in brackets. ** and *** indicate
significance at the 5 and 1 percent levels.

Table 11: Outcomes of owner-drivers
Lease in-network
Owner-driver
Log years of experience
2007 indicator
Constant
Fixed effects for driver country
Observations
R-squared

(1)
-0.084***
[0.023]
-0.122***
[0.021]
-0.106***
[0.012]
-0.042**
[0.017]
0.637***
[0.033]
No
5989
0.034

(2)
-0.068***
[0.025]
-0.105***
[0.023]
-0.104***
[0.014]
-0.043**
[0.017]
0.624***
[0.036]
Yes
5989
0.060

Notes: The dependent variable is number of summonses per driver. Robust standard errors
adjusted for clustering at the country of birth level are reported in brackets. ** and *** indicate
significance at the 5 and 1 percent levels.

53

Table 12: Models of summonses with alternative regression functions

Lease in-network
Log years of experience
2007 indicator
Constant
Fixed effects for driver country
Observations

(1)

(2)

OLS
-0.085***
[0.023]
-0.103***
[0.014]
-0.058**
[0.023]
0.640***
[0.037]
No
3701

Poisson
-0.084***
[0.023]
-0.092***
[0.011]
-0.055**
[0.022]

(3)
Negative
binomial
-0.084***
[0.023]
-0.091***
[0.011]
-0.057**
[0.022]

No
3701

No
3701

Notes: The dependent variable is number of summonses per driver. Estimates in columns (2) and
(3) are reported as marginal effects evaluated at the means of other regressors. Robust standard
errors adjusted for clustering at the country of birth level are reported in brackets. ** and ***
indicate significance at the 5 and 1 percent levels.

Table 13: Models of summonses with alternative samples
Lease from same-country owner
Log years of experience
Constant
Fixed effects for driver country
Fixed effects for driver
Observations
R-squared

(1)
2005
-0.108***
[0.035]
-0.096***
[0.021]
0.636***
[0.052]
No
No
1824
0.021

(2)
2005
-0.055
[0.040]
-0.095***
[0.023]
0.610***
[0.055]
Yes
No
1824
0.097

(3)
2007
-0.063**
[0.031]
-0.111***
[0.018]
0.589***
[0.046]
No
No
1877
0.025

(4)
2007
-0.101***
[0.034]
-0.117***
[0.020]
0.617***
[0.051]
Yes
No
1877
0.064

Notes: The dependent variable is number of summonses per driver. Robust standard errors
adjusted for clustering at the country of birth level are reported in brackets. ** and *** indicate
significance at the 5 and 1 percent levels.

54

