                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PROTECTION REDUCTION AND DIVERSION:
                PTAS AND THE INCIDENCE OF ANTIDUMPING DISPUTES

                                           Thomas J. Prusa
                                             Robert Teh

                                        Working Paper 16276
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16276


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2010




The opinions expressed in this paper should be attributed to the authors. They are not meant to represent
the positions or opinions of the WTO and its Members and are without prejudice to Members' rights
and obligations under the WTO. We would like to thank Philippa Dee for generously providing us
with her tabulation of investment provisions in PTAs. The paper has also benefitted from the many
helpful comments from seminar participants at University of Connecticut, New York Federal Reserve,
Villanova University, CUNY Graduate Center, World Trade Organization, Stockholm University,
Institut d'Études Politiques de Paris (Sciences-Po), and Inter-American Development Bank. All remaining
errors and omissions are the fault of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Thomas J. Prusa and Robert Teh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Protection Reduction and Diversion: PTAs and the Incidence of Antidumping Disputes
Thomas J. Prusa and Robert Teh
NBER Working Paper No. 16276
August 2010
JEL No. F1,F5

                                             ABSTRACT

We analyze whether preferential trade agreements (PTAs) affect the incidence and pattern of antidumping
(AD) filings. We estimate AD provisions in PTAs have decreased the incidence of intra-PTA AD
cases by 33-55% and have increased the number of AD actions against non-PTA members by 10-30%.
The net effect of PTA rules on total AD filings is small. Our results are robust to alternative estimation
approaches and controlling for a myriad of other PTA-related phenomena. Our results suggest a protection
analogue to the “trade creation-trade diversion” impact of PTAs. PTA members are spared from AD
actions but non-PTA members face even greater AD scrutiny.


Thomas J. Prusa
Department of Economics
New Jersey Hall
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
prusa@econ.rutgers.edu

Robert Teh
Economic Research and Statistics Division
WTO
Centre William Rappard
Rue de Lausanne 154
CH-1211 Geneva 21, Switzerland
robert.teh@wto.org
1 Introduction

         Tariff reductions are a key aspect of any preferential trading agreement (PTA), but they
are usually just one part of the overall agreement.1 Competition policy, labor mobility, right-to-
work rules, investor protections, sectoral carve-outs, services liberalization, technical barriers to
trade and rules-of-origin are just some of the provisions often found in such agreements. Any of
these rules can have a significant impact on trade patterns (Estevadeordal, Suominen and Teh,
2009).
         While it is well known that preferential tariffs discriminate against non-members it is not
clear whether other PTA policies accentuate or attenuate this discrimination. In this paper we
empirically explore the possibility of additional discrimination via PTAs by focusing on the
extent to which PTAs alter the pattern of antidumping (AD) activity. AD is a particularly apt
policy to study not only because it is the most frequently used administrative trade policy but
also because there is considerable variation in AD rules across PTAs. Some PTAs contain no
AD provisions, some prohibit its use, and others contain special rules for its use.
         We find that PTAs have a significant impact on the pattern of protection, tilting the
playing field further in favor of member countries. AD provisions in PTAs have decreased the
number of intra-PTA AD cases by 33-55% and increased the number of AD actions against non-
PTA members by 10-30%. On net, PTAs have had a modest impact on the total number of AD
initiations.
         Our results demonstrate a protection analogue to the well known “trade creation-trade
diversion” impact of PTAs. While PTA members are spared from AD actions (“protection
reduction”), non-PTA members face even greater AD scrutiny (“protection diversion”). While
Bhagwati (1992, 1993) and Bhagwati and Panagariya (1996) conjectured such a protection
pattern could emerge from PTAs, our results provide the first empirical support for their
hypothesis.
         We believe our study is especially relevant given the prominence that both AD and PTAs
currently play in the trade policy arena. Antidumping has long been the trade remedy of choice.

1
 We use the term “preferential trade agreement” broadly. We use the term PTA to refer to free trade areas and
customs unions, in addition to agreements more strictly referred to as preferential trade arrangements.
In the 1980s there were more AD actions than under all other trade statutes combined (Prusa,
2000) and to this day AD continues to dwarf all other trade remedies. Over the past fifteen
years, AD cases account for an amazing 89 percent of all trade remedy cases (Stevenson, 2009).
In fact, AD’s prominence has increased over the past two decades. The number of countries
using AD has increased five-fold and the annual number of AD disputes has more than doubled
(Prusa, 2005). There were more AD disputes in the smallest year during the past decade than
during the peak year during the 1980s.
       The growth in PTAs is no less astounding. Teh, Budetta, and Prusa (2009) report that
between 1980 and 2006 there has been no less than an eight-fold increase in the number of PTAs
reported to the World Trade Organization (WTO). Given the challenges of successfully
concluding the Doha Round many countries are increasingly turning their attention to bilateral
and regional negotiations. There is no reason to think the proliferation of PTAs will soon end.
       We begin by comparing filing trends before and after the formation of the PTA and find
that intra-PTA initiations fall sharply following the enactment of the PTA. We then extend our
analysis to also include AD activity against non-PTA countries. We estimate difference-in-
difference negative binomial regressions for bilateral filings by each country (country i) against
each trading partner (country j) in each year. After controlling for other factors that influence
AD activity, we find PTAs reduce intra-PTA AD activity and increase filings against non-PTA
countries.
       One concern is that the effect attributed to AD provisions might indeed be related to PTA
membership but not really driven by AD rules. For instance, the PTA might simply engender
“good will” or political closeness. We find little support for this hypothesis. PTAs without AD
language do not experience any change in AD activity whereas PTAs with AD rules are
characterized by protection reduction and protection diversion.
       A related concern involves the possibility that it is other PTA provisions that alter the
pattern of AD activity. If there is a correlation between a PTA’s AD rules and these other rules,
then the interpretation of our results might change. We investigate this possibility by focusing
on what we think is a likely suspect – PTA investment provisions. PTAs often have rules that
facilitate foreign direct investment between PTA members. PTA investment rules might induce
investment deepening (i.e. more multinational trade) which in turn might lead to a decrease in
AD petitions. In this scenario, it is possible that AD activity has fallen not because of the AD



                                                                                                     2
provisions but rather as a result of greater investment ties between PTA members that change the
incentive to seek higher AD duties on PTA members.
           We examine this issue by including a measure of the investment liberalization in each
PTA agreement (Dee, 2008). We find that investment provisions in PTAs do reduce the
incidence of AD disputes. Nevertheless, we continue to find that AD rules remain a significant
independent explanation for the reduction in intra-PTA AD cases. As a robustness check, we
also use OECD foreign direct investment flow data to measure the investment deepening
hypothesis. We again confirm the impact of AD rules.
           We then undertake a large number of robustness checks. We consider a variety of
alternative specifications – year effects, bilateral investment incentives, the impact of China, an
alternative classification of AD rules, fixed and unbalanced panels – and find no significant
change in our findings. Following Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) we also control for
the possibility of inconsistent estimates due the panel nature of our data; our results remain large
and statistically significant.


2 Antidumping and PTAs

           Since the WTO’s Antidumping Agreement already defines AD procedures we presume
the additional rules incorporated in PTAs will not weaken the existing rules governing AD
actions.2 Nevertheless, it is not obvious that PTA provisions will reduce the amount of AD
activity. First, recent research has emphasized the discretionary power of authorities (Blonigen
and Prusa, 2003; Horlick and Vermulst, 2005; Blonigen, 2006; Moore and Fox, 2010). These
papers argue that AD rules are sufficiently vague and give decision-makers considerable latitude
in making their protection decisions; these papers cast doubt on the notion that PTA provisions
will change how the bureaucratic agencies make decisions or alter how industries seek
protection. Second, even if the provisions matter it is unclear whether the measured effect will
be economically significant. In some agreements, the new provisions appear to be quite weak
and may not have any practical effect. In others, however, the provisions “raise the bar” by
restricting how dumping margins are computed, by mandating more restrictive injury and
causation standards, by limiting the duration of duties, by expanding the scope for firms to


2
    Given the pre-existing WTO rules, such provisions in PTAs are often referred to as “WTO plus” rules.


                                                                                                           3
resolve the conflict via negotiations, by providing additional opportunities for the foreign firm to
appeal the decision, etc.
         We reviewed legal provisions governing trade remedies in 80 PTAs.3 To our knowledge
our database is the most comprehensive review of PTA AD provisions ever undertaken. We
reviewed all economically significant PTAs reported to the WTO through 2008. The PTAs were
chosen based on economic importance, accessibility of information and language. While there
are many PTAs not in our sample, the excluded PTAs generally involve small amounts of trade
and have few provisions beyond tariff reductions.
         The coverage of our database is impressive: almost 50% of all worldwide exports are
accounted for by the PTAs in our sample. The database captures the vast majority of PTA-
affected trade and includes the two largest PTAs, the EU and NAFTA. The list is geographically
diverse with PTAs from North America, the Caribbean, Latin America, Asia and the Pacific,
Africa, the Middle East, Western Europe and Central and Eastern Europe.
         We classified PTAs into three mutually-exclusive groups: (i) those with no AD
provisions; (ii) those that prohibit the use of AD; and (iii) and those that include some language
pertaining to AD.4 In Table 1 we list the 80 PTAs in our sample (alphabetical order). We also
include information on the starting year of the PTA. Nine PTAs, including such notables as the
EC/EU, EFTA, CER, EEA, Canada-Chile, and EFTA-Singapore, have prohibited the use of AD;
54 PTAs include special AD rules; 17 PTAs include no discussion of AD.
         We note that some of the PTAs were enacted before we have any information on AD
filings (e.g., EC/EU). In this study, as in almost all other studies, we have information on AD
actions only since the end of the Tokyo Round.5 To some extent, this lack of information on pre-
1980 AD will hinder our ability to accurately assess the impact these early PTAs have had on
AD activity. For this handful of early PTAs we will only be able to assess the impact by
comparing AD filings against PTA and non-PTA members and cannot compare the propensity to
file AD cases pre- and post-PTA.



3
  This is greater than the number of PTAs covered in Teh, Budetta and Prusa (2009).
4
  For this third category of PTAs, an additional template was developed which includes specific information on the
rules included in the PTA. Teh, Budetta and Prusa (2009) offer a complete description of the trade remedy
mapping.
5
  Irwin (2005) is the only paper we are aware of that utilizes pre-1980 AD filings. His analysis is limited to just U.S.
filings.


                                                                                                                      4
       Using official country AD reports to the WTO we collected information on the number of
AD cases filed since 1980. Over this period 5,006 AD filings were initiated. Of this total, only
201 were initiated by countries that are not members of any PTA and hence are dropped. This
leaves us a sample of 4,805 AD filings, 745 (4,060) of which were taken against PTA (non-PTA)
members.



3 A First Look at the Data

       We begin by looking at the trends in intra-PTA AD usage. For each country we calculate
the annual number of AD cases initiated by each PTA member against fellow PTA members.
For the moment, we will ignore trends in AD use by PTA members against non-PTA members
and AD usage by countries not in any PTAs. Given that PTAs are enacted in a variety of years,
we abstract from calendar time and instead consider time as measured relative to the year the
PTA was enacted. For each PTA, year zero is the year the PTA was enacted, year t-1 is the year
before, year t-2 is two years before enactment, t+1 is the year after, etc. This view of time
allows us to conveniently aggregate across PTAs.
       In Figure 1 we plot the aggregate number of AD disputes relative to each PTA’s
inception (panel a). Two comments are in order. First, the raw data provides compelling support
for the protection reduction hypothesis. During the years prior to the PTA enactment, intra-PTA
AD activity is growing. The number of AD disputes drop sharply in the enactment year (t=0)
and remain much lower in subsequent years as compare to the years prior to enactment. On
average, during the 10 years prior to enactment there were 29.5 AD cases per year and during the
10 years following enactment there were just 23.6 cases per year. Second, the dispute data
shows evidence of macroeconomic cyclicality. Knetter and Prusa (2003) argue GDP trends are
an important factor for AD filings; we will control for this issue in our regressions.
       One deficiency with this graph is the unbalanced nature of the data. For PTAs that
emerge late in our sample we observe many years prior to enactment but only a few years post
enactment. Since a large number of PTAs were enacted in the last decade an unbalanced panel
analysis depicted in Figure 1(a) might show there was a decrease in activity following the PTA
but the reduction could in fact be caused by fewer observations in the post-PTA period.




                                                                                                   5
       We can control for this potential bias by restricting each PTA to the same number of
years before and after enactment. In the next two panels in Figure 1 we restrict our sample to
just those PTAs who we have all relevant data for either 3 or 6 years before and after enactment.
In both samples we see strong evidence that PTAs reduce intra-PTA filings. In Figure 1(b) we
see that if we look just at PTAs with information +/- 3 years there were 38.3 cases per year
before as compared to just 14.5 following the PTA. If we expand the horizon and look just at
PTAs with information +/- 6 years we see the there were 19.7 cases per year before versus just
8.6 following the PTA (Figure 1(c)). Both figures offer compelling support for the protection
reduction hypothesis.
       While the results are intriguing we have not yet controlled for the possibility that AD
activity against all source countries may have fallen at a time coincidental with the enactment of
the PTA. The above figures do not distinguish the PTA from some other trend. For instance,
given that the Uruguay Round was concluded in 1994 and given that a number of PTAs were
enacted in the mid-1990s, we cannot guarantee that the observed decline in AD activity might be
a result of AD provisions in the Uruguay Round.
       NAFTA exemplifies the potential issue. In Figure 2 we plot the annual number of AD
disputes filed by NAFTA countries breaking out cases targeting NAFTA and non-NAFTA
countries. As seen, beginning around the time of the enactment, intra-NAFTA filings fall
sharply. On average, there were 14.6 AD disputes per year between NAFTA members in the
decade prior to NAFTA but only 6.9 disputes per year in the decade following NAFTA. The
figure also shows a decrease in AD filings by NAFTA members against non-NAFTA countries.
On average, there were 70.4 AD filings per year by NAFTA members against non-NAFTA
suppliers in the decade prior to NAFTA and 51.6 filings per year in the decade following
NAFTA. While the figure suggests the fall has been greater for PTA members, it is clear that we
need to control for the overall pattern of protection.
       Difference-in-difference is the simplest and best known method for controlling for such
issues. The simplest set up is one where we observe disputes for two groups (PTA and non-
PTA) for two time periods (pre and post). In this application the PTA countries are “treated” to
some additional AD rules that possibly affect activity in the post-PTA period but not in the pre-
PTA period. The non-PTA countries are not exposed to the treatment during either period. The
results from this simple difference-in-difference method are given in Table 2. As seen, countries



                                                                                                    6
file about 58% of AD cases against non-PTA countries prior to PTA enactment but an
impressive 90% following enactment.6
            All of these informal analyses of the filing trends suggest that PTAs alter the pattern of
AD activity. We now turn to identifying exactly what characteristics of PTAs generate these
patterns.



4 Impact of PTAs – Difference in Difference Estimates

4.1      Background

            We estimate the impact of PTAs on AD filings by running a difference-in-difference
(DiD) regression of the form

vijt = β 0 + β1 PTAij + β 2 POSTijt + β 3 ( PTAij * POSTijt ) + λX ijt + ε ijt ,                 (1)


where vijt denotes the count of AD disputes filed by country i against import source j in year t,
PTAij is a dummy variable indicating whether i and j are members of the same PTA, POSTijt is a
dummy variable whether the PTA is in effect in year t, and Xijt denotes a vector of exogenous
factors that influence trade disputes between countries. β1 captures the difference in between
members and non-members and β2 represents the difference over time. Beyond this baseline
time change, we can examine whether subsequent to the PTA, members have experienced a
different trend from non-PTA members, the difference-in-difference (β3).
                           Given that our dependent variable is the count of disputes, it is inappropriate to
use OLS. We instead assume that AD petitions across countries and time follow a discrete
distribution, such as Poisson or negative binomial,

           β 0 + β 1 PTAij + β 2 POSTijt + β 3 ( PTAij * POSTijt ) + λX ijt
vijt = e
                                                                              .                  (2)


            The Poisson distribution imposes a restriction that the variance of the dependent variable
is equal to the mean of the dependent variable, whereas the negative binomial distribution allows


6
    The p-value for this difference is 0.0000 using the binomial test.


                                                                                                                7
the variance to differ from the mean. Often, count data exhibit over-dispersion with respect to
the Poisson model, i.e., the variance of the observed counts exceeds their mean. For our data the
equivalence required by the Poisson distribution is clearly rejected. Hence, we estimate using
the negative binomial distribution with random effects.7 Also, because of the concerns about the
unbalanced time series nature of the panel, our baseline estimates restrict each pair of counties to
the same number of years before and after the PTA enactment.
         There have been a number of previous papers that have statistically examined the factors
that determine frequency of U.S. AD actions, and we follow this literature in determining
appropriate explanatory variables.8 Knetter and Prusa (2003) and Blonigen (2005) are the two
most closely related papers to the approach taken here. The variables we use to measure
pressure for AD protection –foreign and domestic GDP, the real exchange rate, and bilateral
imports – are rooted in these papers.
         Knetter and Prusa (2003) examine the factors that affect AD annual filings for Australia,
Canada, the EU and the U.S. They argue that AD filings should increase for a country in years
after lower GDP growth. Lower GDP growth makes it more likely that the government agencies
will find that there is injury to the domestic industry and this increases the incentives for the
domestic industry to file an AD case. Lower GDP in the foreign country might make it more
likely the foreign firm will sell exports at dumped prices. They also study the effect of changes
in the real exchange rate on AD filings. They show that although in theory an appreciation of the
real exchange rate may either increase or decrease AD filings, in practice real exchange rate
appreciations lead to greater AD filings for all four countries in their sample. Blonigen (2005)
examines the effect of NAFTA on U.S., Canada, and Mexico’s use of AD and argues that the
value of bilateral imports is an effective control for macroeconomic pressure for disputes.
         The literature also guides us in the choice of the lag structure for these variables. Prusa
and Knetter argue the longer lag structure for GDP is related to the statutory requirements that
the economic injury determination be calculated over a longer time horizon, typically three
years; the dumping calculation which is affected by the exchange rate is normally calculated
using a one-year window.


7
  We also estimated the models using fixed effects and found similar results in terms of the statistical and economic
significance of the PTA measures. See section 7.
8
  See, for instance, Finger, Hall, and Nelson (1982), Feinberg (1989), Feinberg and Hirsch (1989), Moore (1992),
DeVault (1993), Baldwin and Steagall (1994), and Jones (2000).


                                                                                                                    8
4.2   Benchmark Estimates

       Let’s begin with Table 3. Here we use a single dummy to capture the PTA impact. We
will focus just on specifications A-C (specification D-F will be discussed below). The estimates
are reported as “incidence rate ratios” associated with the underlying parameter estimates. The
incidence rate ratio (IRR) is the ratio of the counts predicted by the model when the variable of
interest is one unit above its mean value and all other variables are at their means to the counts
predicted when all variables are at their means. For example, if the IRR for the PTA dummy is
0.70, then the PTA would decrease AD activity by 30% when all other variables are at their
means. The null hypothesis is that the IRR=1, which would imply no relationship between the
dependent variable and the regressor.
       In specification A we include just the DiD dummies; in specification B we incorporate
macroeconomic determinants as modeled in Knetter and Prusa (2003). In specification C we
include the value of imports into country i sourced from country j as modeled in
Blonigen (2005). The results are quite similar across specifications. The parameter of primary
interest is the DiD (“PTA x Post”) parameter. For instance, in Table 3 we see that the bilateral
estimates imply that the PTAs reduce the incidence of AD disputes by 57-59%. The parameter is
statistically significant in every specification. The estimated impact is large and is consistent
with the trends depicted in Figure 1. We also note that the estimated impact of the exchange
rate, GDP, and imports are all consistent with the findings in the earlier literature.
       A single PTA dummy is used in all specifications in Table 3 which means we cannot
distinguish among the different approaches toward AD across PTAs. Some PTAs prohibit the
use of AD against PTA members; others contain no AD rules. We expect a different impact
between these two types of PTAs. It is not obvious, however, whether we can expect a
difference between PTAs with rules and those without rules. If bureaucratic discretion is as
prevalent as the literature suggests, then additional rules might not matter. The decrease
attributed to AD provisions may in fact be related to PTA membership but be primarily driven by
other PTA-related phenomena. For example, what might matter are not the AD rules but rather
the political good will that comes from the enactment of a PTA. Membership in PTAs might
result in better relations between countries, stronger political ties and in some cases even outright
favoritism toward PTA members. If any of these factors are significant, we could measure less



                                                                                                     9
intra-PTA AD activity but the reduction could have nothing to do with the explicit AD
provisions.
        The regressions in Table 4 address these concerns. In these specifications we separate
the impact for the three different categories of PTAs. For now we will focus just on
specifications A-C. The results confirm AD prohibition essentially eliminates AD activity – an
estimated IRR of 0. Two comments are in order. First, despite these PTAs’ official abolishment
of AD there are a very small number of disputes that nonetheless occur after enactment. In some
cases this is because there is a long phase-in period for the prohibition; in other cases this is
because the “prohibition” excludes certain political sensitive products/industries from the ban.9
Second, the lack of statistical significance stems from the small number of observations both
before and after the enactment for these PTAs.
        We find that the AD rules lead to a 60-65% reduction in AD disputes against PTA
members (“PTA – AD Rules x Post”). We also find that PTAs without explicit AD rules
experience a statistically insignificant increase in AD disputes. These findings reject the
hypothesis that the PTA effect is due to “good will” rather than rules that affect filings. Across
all specifications there is a large difference in the estimated impact for PTAs with rules and those
without rules. The results imply that rules matter. PTAs may also engender good will, but as
seen from the PTAs without AD rules, good will alone does not result in less AD activity.


5 Investment Deepening

        PTAs are complex, multifaceted agreements. While tariff reduction might garner the
headlines, PTAs are almost always wide reaching accords. In fact, for some PTAs it is arguable
that preferential tariffs were among the least important reasons for the agreement. Most PTAs
involve dozens of other important policies. If one (or some) of these other provisions are
correlated with AD rules then the decrease attributed to AD provisions may be in fact related to
some other provision.
        Investment provisions are a likely candidate. If PTA investment rules induce investment
deepening we could observe a decrease in AD petitions. This is especially likely if the
investment deepening is in the form of foreign direct investment. In this case the reason for the

9
 In the case of the European Economic Area (EEA) for example, the prohibition on anti-dumping does not apply to
agricultural and fishery goods.


                                                                                                             10
fall in AD activity may be due to the fact that imports are sourced from an affiliate of domestic
multinational rather than an independent foreign entity.
           We examine this issue by controlling for investment incentives and flows. Our first
approach involves a numerical measure of the investment liberalization in each PTA agreement.
Dee (2008) scoured the texts of the PTAs agreements and scored the investment provisions on 19
different criteria encompassing both the form and content of each agreement. Each criterion was
given a numerical score ranging from zero (no liberalization and investor guarantees beyond
those in WTO agreements) to one (maximal liberalization and investor protections). Higher
values correspond to greater levels of investor protection. We then summarize the
multidimensional characterization by averaging the 19 investment criteria to create a
unidimensional index.10 Assuming that actual FDI flows are correlated with investment
incentives, the index will proxy for the investment explanation for the decrease in AD activity.
           Dee’s investment index ranges from 0.05 to just over 0.75. On average, the most liberal
services and investment provisions are in CER (Australia-New Zealand), NAFTA and its Latin
American clones, European agreements (EU, EFTA, EEA) and Mercosur. On the other hand,
low scoring PTAs include SPARTECA (South Pacific Trade and Economic Cooperation
Agreement), CACM (Central American Common Market), and ALADI (Latin American
Integration Association).
           The results are contained in specifications D-F in Tables 3 and 4. In all but one
specification the investment index is statistically insignificant but the point estimate is generally
consistent with the hypothesis that higher investment incentives promote FDI which in turn
reduce the incentive to file AD actions against PTA members. We should note that when
interpreting the IRR for this variable, the range of the investment index is far less than 1.
Looking across specifications, our results suggest that PTAs with strong investment protection
experience a modest reduction in AD disputes relative to those with weak investment provisions.
           Importantly, the estimates for the impact of PTAs are about the same as before. The PTA
dummy (Table 3) implies a reduction of 45-60%; in Table 4 where we control for the specific
type of PTA we find that PTAs with AD rules experience a 55%-70% reduction in AD disputes
We continue to find no statistically significant impact for those PTAs without AD rules.



10
     The index takes a value of zero prior to the enactment of the PTA.


                                                                                                    11
        An alternative and more direct control for this issue is to include the annual flow or stock
of foreign direct investment in each year. There are two main challenges with the approach.
First, while OECD countries maintain good records of FDI, annual bilateral investment flows are
simply not available for most countries in our dataset. As a result, we lose a lot of observations.
Second, the timing of the relationship between investment flows and changed incentives is
unclear. We expect a trade deepening to occur with a lag, but we have little basis for
determining lag length.
        Table 5 contains the regressions using the FDI measure. For reference, specification G is
the basic specification where we limit ourselves only to country pairs for whom we have FDI
data. As seen we lose about half the observations due to lack of bilateral FDI information.
Nevertheless, the parameters of primary interest are very similar to the previous estimates. As
we look across the other specifications we see that including FDI flows and stocks do not
significantly alter our estimates. PTAs with AD rules have about a 50-60% reduction in AD
activity; PTAs without AD rules experience an increase in AD activity (albeit statistically
insignificant).


6 Implications for the Aggregate Number of AD filings

        The estimates imply that PTAs reduce the number of intra-PTA AD cases. There are,
however, several reasons why we need to be careful inferring what the estimates mean for
aggregate AD activity. First of all, early in the sample period there were only a small number of
PTAs; this likely means the impact on overall AD filings is small. Second, as seen in Table 2,
intra-PTA AD activity has always accounted for a minority of all cases. Thus, the PTA effect
might be large, but since we are measuring from a relatively small base the aggregate effect may
be small. Third, the steady growth in AD activity is well documented (Prusa, 2000) and some of
this growth in activity could be from AD cases directed at non-PTA members. Nevertheless, the
main culprit for the injurious trade may truly be the PTA’s preferences and rules.
        This type of protection diversion result was conjectured (but not empirically verified) by
Bhagwati (1992, 1993) and Bhagwati and Panagariya (1996). They argued that due to its elastic
and selective nature, administered protection can increase the risk of trade diversion from PTAs.
Bhagwati states



                                                                                                  12
                 My belief that FTAs will lead to considerable trade diversion because
                 of modern methods of protection, which are inherently selective and
                 can be captured readily by protectionist purposes is one that may have
                 been borne out in the European Community. It is well known that the
                 European Community has used antidumping actions and VERs
                 profusely to erect Fortress Europe against the Far East. Cannot much
                 of this be a trade-diverting policy in response to the intensification of
                 internal competition among member states of the European
                 Community? (Bhagwati, 1993, p. 37)



        So apart from discrimination introduced by preferential tariffs, Bhagwati and Panagariya
are concerned that the establishment of PTAs can lead to more discrimination against non-
members of the PTA through more frequent trade remedy actions. They conjecture that there is
a protection analogue to the standard “trade creation-trade diversion” impact of PTAs. PTA
members are spared from AD actions but non-PTA members face even greater AD scrutiny. Our
parameter estimates can be used to test for their conjecture.
        We use the parameter estimates in specification F in Table 4 to compute the predicted
number of AD disputes for each year in our sample and report our findings as five-year averages
(Table 6). We perform a counterfactual exercise where we calculate the reduction in disputes
stemming from intra-PTA effect (i.e., the DiD parameter). The results are in column 1. As seen
until the mid-1990s the effect on overall AD filings is modest, mostly because there were a small
number of PTAs. By the end of the period, however, we see that the proliferation of PTAs have
resulted in about a 9% annual reduction in AD actions.
        In column 3 we also incorporate the dispute deterring impact of PTA investment
provisions. As discussed above, a PTA contains a large portfolio of policies; one can reasonably
argue that the counterfactual calculation of the PTA should also include the investment effect.
Our estimates imply that by the end of the period the total effect of AD provisions and
investment provisions is almost a 13% decrease in the annual number of AD disputes. Said
differently, investment provisions separately reduce AD activity by about 4%.
        We now turn to the Bhagwati-Panagariya hypothesis. According to their theory,
contingent protection is driven by imports.11 Who is targeted in the AD petition is entirely up to


11
  Baldwin and Steagall (1994), Blonigen and Bown (2003, Blonigen and Prusa (2003), and Blonigen (2005) all
provide support for this view.


                                                                                                             13
the discretion of the domestic industry. If PTA rules make PTA members more difficult to
sanction, then the domestic industry will simply target other sources.
           Because PTAs often give rise to a marked increase in bilateral trade we might see an
increase in AD protection directed toward non-PTA members. 12 Following Bhagwati-
Panagariya, if we imagine a world without PTAs it may also be appropriate to suppose that the
increase in imports is also attenuated. For purposes of our counterfactual exercise, we suppose
that imports grow at the same rate they did during the 5 years prior to the enactment of the PTA
(instead of at their actual growth rate) and then re-compute the implied number of AD cases we
would have observed.13
           The results are shown in columns 2 and 4 in Table 5. The results support the Bhagwati-
Panagariya hypothesis. There is an increase in AD cases due to protection diversion. When we
incorporate the increase in AD activity toward non-PTA members our view about the impact of
PTAs on protection is turned on its head: instead of lowering the number of AD cases we find
that PTAs increase the overall amount of AD activity. The reduction is in intra-PTA activity is
more than offset by the increases in activity against the far larger set of non-PTA members. By
the end of the period our results imply that PTAs have increased the overall number of AD
disputes by 6-10%.
           Our primary point is not that PTAs increase overall AD activity, but rather that the
diversion of AD toward non-PTA members offsets the reduction in AD toward PTA members.
At the bottom on Table 3 and 4 we report the implied change in AD activity by the end of the
sample for each specification. For each set of estimates we report both the intra-PTA effect and
also the total effect (including protection diversion). In all specifications we find that while there
is a substantial intra-PTA reduction there is also a significant offsetting effect due to greater
scrutiny of non-PTA countries. For some specifications the net effect is positive and in others it
is negative.
           Overall, we believe the results provide convincing support for the Bhagwati-Panagariya
hypothesis. Namely, to the extent that PTAs adopt special or additional rules on trade remedy
actions against members’ trade, they can effectively increase the level of discrimination against
non-members.


12
     Eicher, Henn and Papageorgiou (2010) and Freund (2010) offer fine discussions of PTAs on imports.
13
     We also hold “post PTA” parameter at the value of 1 for this counterfactual.


                                                                                                         14
7 Robustness Checks

Difference Estimator

       As an alternative to the difference-in-difference specification, we divided our sample into
PTA members and non-PTA members and then simply ran a difference (i.e., pre vs. post)
regression for each set of countries separately. The results are given in the top panel of Table 7.
The specifications across the columns are exactly the same as those used in Table 3.
       As shown, the estimates are quite similar to those in Table 3. The PTA effect continues
to be large and is statistically significant. The intra-PTA effect implies a 40-60% reduction in
AD actions. Only in specification F is the effect not statistically significant. The non-PTA effect
implies a 14-30% increase in AD actions. This is also consistent with the prior results as it
implies a significant diversion of AD actions against non-PTA members.
       At the bottom panel of Table 7 we report the parameter estimates when we separately
estimate the effect for the three types of PTAs (rules, no rules, prohibit). As in the top part of
Table 7, we run the regression separately for PTA and non-PTA members. We again find
compelling confirmation of our findings. In particular, for PTA members we find rules reduce
the incidence of AD filings by about 60%; PTAs without AD rules exhibit an increase (albeit
statistically insignificant) in filings. For non-PTA members we see an increase in AD filings
following the PTA enactment, except for countries in PTA that prohibit AD use. For these
countries, non-members also experience a reduction in AD filings.

Year Dummies / Uruguay Round

       Tables 8 and 9 present the results from a plethora of alternative specifications. First, we
add year effects in an attempt to absorb the PTA effect. The results are virtually unchanged from
our benchmark results.
       We also ran a specification where we included a dummy to capture the impact of the
Uruguay Round agreement. The Uruguay Round contained a number of amendments to the
WTO AD statute. Since all countries in our sample are also WTO members, these amendments
might be an alternative explanation for the measured reduction in AD activity. Our DiD
estimates are virtually unchanged.



                                                                                                     15
Other Measures for Investment Incentives

       PTAs are not the only way countries can attempt to improve the investment climate.
Bilateral investment treaties (BITS) are quite commonly used. A BIT is an agreement
establishing the terms and conditions for private investment by nationals and companies of one
state in another state. Most BITs grant investments a number of guarantees (e.g., fair treatment,
protection from expropriation, etc.) and allow for some type of dispute resolution mechanism.
There were more than 2000 BITS in effect during our sample period.
       For each country pair, we created a vector of dummies indicating whether or not a BIT
was in effect in each year. We then re-ran our regressions including these dummies and report
the DiD parameters in Tables 8 and 9. We find no significant change on the estimated PTA
parameters.

Drop China

       Due to our concern about the inordinate influence of China on our results, we drop all
observations involving China. The PTA estimates are unaffected.

Drop Prominent PTAs (NAFTA & EC/EU PTAs)

       We are also concerned about the impact of the most prominent PTAs. Our concern is
that these PTAs are big outliers and this is why we find such a large effect of PTA rules. First,
we drop NAFTA countries from the sample. We do this because (1) NAFTA countries are
among the largest users of AD, (2) intra-NAFTA AD activity has significantly fallen, and
(3) NAFTA is the largest PTA with AD rules. As seen, dropping NAFTA countries from the
sample does lower the estimated impact – from a 60% reduction in AD activity to a 50%
reduction but the estimate remains statistically significant and large.
       Second, we drop the EC/EU PTAs. Our concern is that the EU in involved as the “hub”
in so many PTAs that its philosophy toward PTAs is the cause of the findings; that is, the results
may be more of an EU story that a PTA story. As with NAFTA, we do not see a significant
impact on our estimates.




                                                                                                    16
Alternative Classification of PTA Rules

           In our review of the AD rules in PTAs we found 11 PTAs that had very weak PTA rules.
We include information on the identity of these PTAs in Table 1. From what we could ascertain
the AD provisions in these PTAs essentially amount to a reaffirmation of WTO AD rules. The
fact that the negotiators felt it necessary to include the language in the PTA text might be a signal
that AD was to be discouraged, but we were not able to identify specific stronger language that
would indicate that intra-PTA AD cases are more difficult. To be on the safe side, we re-
classified these 11 PTAs as having “No Rules” instead of “AD Rules”. We then re-ran our
regressions and report the results in Table 9.14
           The results differ from our benchmark results. While the estimates for “Prohibit” and
“AD Rules” are about the same as our benchmark regressions, the estimated impact of “No AD
Rules” is much lower. In fact, with this new classification we find essentially the same impact
for PTAs with “AD rules” and those with “No AD Rules”. If this alternative classification is
correct, then our results imply that PTA AD rules are not critical for changing the incidence of
AD activity. These results suggest that existence of the PTA deters AD use against member
countries. In this case, the PTA conveys political good will on member countries and deters
protection. While this result is plausible, we continue to have greater confidence in our original
classification. The benchmark results indicate that PTAs with no language do not deter AD use;
This means these new estimates are entirely driven by the 11 PTAs who were reclassified.
Perhaps the insertion of WTO AD language into these 11 PTAs sends a signal that AD
allegations against PTA members are discouraged and, as a result, these 11 PTAs cannot be
considered as having no AD rules.

Fixed and Unbalanced Panels

           Our benchmark specifications utilize random effects and are based on balanced panels.
We relax both requirements and find our results largely unaffected. We do find that the impact
of “No Rules” is changed when we use an unbalanced panel – the point estimate is less than one
but it remains statistically insignificant. We take this as another indication that PTAs without
rules do not significantly impact the pattern of AD activity.


14
     This alternative classification has no impact on the simple “PTA” dummy regressions in Table 8.


                                                                                                       17
Collapse Pre- and Post- Periods (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan)

       In the most standard DiD application one would compares the difference in outcomes
after and before the intervention for countries affected by the PTA to the same difference for
non-PTA countries. In our application, however, we observe countries for a series of years both
before and after the PTA treatment. In an important paper Bertrand, Duflo and
Mullainathan (2004) show that ignoring serial correlation may result in inconsistent standard
errors. Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan suggest collapsing the time series information into a
“pre” and “post” period is a conservative approach toward the problem. We follow their advice
and the results are presented in Table 10. Two comments on these results are warranted. First,
the estimates remain highly significant suggesting that the serial correlation is not driving
statistical significance. Second, the point estimate implies an even bigger effect of PTAs than
found in Table 3. Given the summary data shown in Table 2 we expected a small point
estimate; without the other explanatory variables like GDP and the exchange rate the DiD
variable absorbs all change in filing incidence.

Errors with Respect to the Effective Date of the PTA

       In all of the preceding analysis we presume that the economically relevant date is the year
of PTA enactment. It is possible that the effective date could be before or after the enactment
year. Freund and McLaren (1999) argue that trade patterns change in advance of the official
enactment date as firms anticipate the new trading environment. On the other hand, it is also
possible that firms and bureaucratic agencies adjust to new rules with a lag. We investigated the
sensitivity of our results to the timing and report the results in Figure 3. In this graph we report
the DiD parameter for the basic specification (Table 3) and for the DiD parameter for “AD
Rules” (Table 4). For each case we re-classified the effective date of each PTA from the year of
enactment to +/- 3 years. If a PTA came into force in 1994 our benchmark regression would
treat 1994 as the effective year (t=0). In these robustness runs we perform six alternative
regressions, one where we treat 1993 (t=-1) as the effective year, one where we treat 1992 (t=-2)
as the effective year, one where we treat 1995 (t=+1) as the effective year, etc.
       The results are depicted in the graph. A solid marker denotes statistical significance
while a hollow marker indicates the parameter estimate is statistically insignificant. The results
indicate that as long as the effective date is within +/- one year of the actual year of enactment


                                                                                                     18
our results are essentially unaffected. The parameter estimates do not change very much and the
estimates are statistically significant. If, however, the economically effective date is more than
one year from the official enactment date then we lose significance.


8 Concluding Comments

       This paper presents new evidence that PTAs significantly alter the pattern of protection.
Economists have long known that PTAs grant preferential tariffs to members; this paper provides
evidence that the playing field is further tilted because of how PTA members use AD protection.
Said differently, PTAs discriminate in both direct and indirect ways. Direct discrimination stems
from preferential tariffs and indirect discrimination follows from the altered pattern of AD
activity
       One key implication of this work is that in a world teeming with PTAs, there is greater
need for stronger multilateral disciplines on trade remedies. It appears that Bhagwati and
Panagariya’s fear of increased discrimination against non-members was well founded. To the
extent that PTAs adopt special or additional rules on trade remedy actions against members’
trade, they can effectively increase the level of discrimination against non-members. This
increase in discrimination can occur when PTA members abolish trade remedy actions against
the trade of PTA members but not against non-members’ trade. It could also occur when PTA
members adopt rules that strengthen disciplines on trade remedy actions against the trade of PTA
members but not against the trade of non-members.
       At first blush moves to strengthen disciplines on trade remedy actions against PTA
partners or to abolish trade remedy actions against PTA partners appear good for trade.
However, the welfare effects are ambiguous. Such rules may simply lead to intra-regional
imports substituting for cheaper sources of imports from non-members, i.e., trade diversion.
Since PTAs thrust us into the world of the second best, actions that look like they will lead to an
increase in economic efficiency may achieve exactly the opposite effect.




                                                                                                 19
9 Bibliography

Baldwin, Robert E. and Jeffrey W. Steagall. (1994). “An Analysis of ITC Decisions in
      Antidumping, Countervailing Duty and Safeguard Cases,” Review of World Economics,
      130(2): 290-308.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). "How Much Should We
       Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1),
       249-75.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1992. “Regionalism versus multilateralism,” World Economy 15(5): 535-56.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1993. “Regionalism and Multilateralism: An Overview.” in de Melo, Jaime
     and Arvind Panagariya (eds.) New Dimensions in Regional Integration. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, and Arvind Panagariya. (Eds.). 1996. The Economics of Preferential Trade
     Agreements. Washington, DC: AEI Press.

Blonigen, Bruce A. (2005), “The Effects of NAFTA on Antidumping and Countervailing Duty
       Activity,” World Bank Economic Review, 19(3): 407-24.

Blonigen, Bruce A. (2006) “Evolving Discretionary Practices of U.S. Antidumping Activity.”
       Canadian Journal of Economics, 39(3): 874-900.

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Chad P. Bown (2003) “Antidumping and Retaliation Threats,” Journal
       of International Economics 60(2): 249-273.

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Thomas J. Prusa (2003), “Antidumping” in Handbook of International
       Economics, edited by E. Kwan Choi and James Harrigan, (Malden, MA, Blackwell
       Publishing), 251-84.

Dee, Philippa (2008) “Multinational corporations and Pacific regionalism,” in J. Palacios (ed.),
       Multinational Corporations and the Emerging Network Economy in Asia and the Pacific,
       Routledge, London and New York, 232-66.

DeVault, James M. (October 1993). “Economics and the International Trade Commission,”
      Southern Economic Journal, 60(2): 463-478.

Eicher, Theo, Christian Henn and Chris Papageorgiou (2010) “Trade Creation and Diversion
        Revisited: Accounting for Model Uncertainty and Natural Trading Partner Effects,
        forthcoming Journal of Applied Econometrics.

Estevadeordal, Antoni, Kati Suominen and Robert Teh, editors. (2009) Regional Rules in the
       Global Trading System, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).




                                                                                              20
Feinberg, Robert M. (1989). “Exchange Rates and Unfair Trade,” Review of Economics and
       Statistics, 71(4): 704-7.

Feinberg, Robert M. and Barry T. Hirsch. (1989). “Industry Rent Seeking and the Filing of
       ‘Unfair Trade’ Complaints,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 7(3): 325-
       340.

Finger, J. M., H. Keith Hall, and Douglas R. Nelson. (June 1982) “The Political Economy of
        Administered Protection,” American Economic Review, 72(3): 452-66.

Freund, Caroline L. and McLaren, John (June 1999). “On the Dynamics of Trade Diversion:
       Evidence from Four Trade Blocs,” World Bank International Finance Working Paper No.
       637.

Freund, Caroline L. (2010) “Third Country Effects of Regional Trade Agreements,” forthcoming
       The World Economy.

Gallaway, Michael P., Bruce A. Blonigen, and Joseph E. Flynn. (1999) “Welfare Costs of U.S.
      Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Laws.” Journal of International Economics 49(2):
      211-44.

Horlick, Gary and Edwin Vermulst. (2005) “The 10 Major Problems with the Anti-Dumping
       Instrument: An Attempt at Synthesis”, Journal of World Trade, 39(1), 67-74.

Irwin, Douglas (2005) “The Rise of U.S. Antidumping Activity in Historical Perspective,” The
       World Economy 28(5), 651-668.

Jones, Kent. (April 2000). “Does NAFTA Chapter 19 Make a Difference? Dispute Settlement
       and the Incentive Structure of U.S./Canada Unfair Trade Petitions,” Contemporary
       Economic Policy, 18(2): 145-158.

Knetter, Michael M. and Thomas J. Prusa. (2003). “Macroeconomic Factors and Antidumping
       Filings: Evidence from Four Countries,” Journal of International Economics 61(1), 1-17.

Lindsey, Brink and Dan Ikenson, (2002) “Antidumping 101: The Devilish Details of `Unfair
       Trade’ Law,” CATO Institute Center for Trade Policy Studies Working Paper No. 20.

Mastel, G. (1998), Antidumping Laws and the US Economy (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe).

Messerlin, Patrick A., Measuring the Costs of Protection in Europe. Washington DC: Institute
      for International Economics, 2001.

Miranda, Jorge, Raul A. Torres, Raul and Mario Ruiz (1998) “The International Use of
      Antidumping: 1987-1997.” Journal of World Trade 32(5): 5-71.

Moore, Michael O. (July 1992) “Rules or Politics? An Empirical Analysis of ITC Anti-dumping
      Decisions,” Economic Inquiry, 30(3): 449-466.




                                                                                               21
Moore, Michael O. and Alan Fox (2010) “Why Don't Foreign Firms Cooperate in U.S.
      Antidumping Investigations? An Empirical Analysis,” Review of World Economics
      145(4), 597-613.

Prusa, Thomas J., (2000) “On the Spread and Impact of Antidumping,” Canadian Journal of
       Economics 34(3), 591–611.

Prusa, Thomas J. (2005), “Anti-dumping: A Growing Problem in International Trade’, The
       World Economy, 28(5) 683–700.

Staiger, R. W. and F. A. Wolak (1994), “Measuring Industry Specific Protection: Antidumping
        in the United States,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 51–118.

Stevenson, Cliff (2009) Globe Trade Protection Report 2009, www.antidumpingpublishing.com.

Teh, Robert, Michele Budetta, and Thomas J. Prusa, (2009) “Trade remedy provisions in
       regional trade agreements,” in Regional Rules in the Global Trading System, edited by
       Antoni Estevadeordal, Kati Suominen, and Robert Teh, (Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press), Chapter 4, pp. 166-249.




                                                                                               22
                            Figure 1: Intra-PTA AD Filings
             50
                                  29.5 cases/yr                                       23.6 cases/yr
             45
                                                                  PTA Enactment
             40

             35

             30




   # cases
             25

             20

             15

             10

                 5

                 0
                     -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1               0   1   2   3   4     5    6        7   8   9 10
                                                  Time (relative to enactment of PTA)

                                         (a) unbalanced sample



     50
                             38.3 cases/yr                                     14.5 cases/yr
     45
     40
                                                               PTA Enactment
     35
     30
# cases




     25
     20
     15
     10
             5
             0
                       -3           -2              -1       0        1     2        3
                                                  Time (relative to enactment of PTA)
                                 (b) balanced sample, +/- 3 years


          50
                                 19.7 cases/yr                                        8.6 cases/yr
          45
          40
                                                                  PTA Enactment
          35
          30
# cases




          25
          20
          15
          10
             5
             0
                      -6    -5     -4       -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                              Time (relative to enactment of PTA)
                                 (c) balanced sample, +/- 6 years
                                                                Figure 2: AD Filings by NAFTA Members
                                          30                                                                                                           140
                                                                                                             NAFTA Implemented

                                                                                                                                                       120
                                          25
             # AD Disputes: Intra-NAFTA




                                                                                                                                                              # AD Disputes: Non-NAFTA
                                                                                                                                                       100
                                          20

                                                                                                                                                       80
                                          15
                                                                                                                                                       60

                                          10
                                                                                                                                                       40

                                           5
                                                                                                                                                       20


                                           0                                                                                                           0
                                               1980        82   84        86     88        90   92        94      96       98     2000      02

                                                                               Intra-NAFTA               Non-NAFTA




                                                 Figure 3: Robustness to Errors in Effective Date of PTA
                                     1.0


                                     0.9
IRR - Diff-in-Diff Estimate




                                     0.8


                                     0.7


                                     0.6


                                     0.5


                                     0.4

                                                                                                         Solid markers denote statistically significant estimates
                                     0.3
                                                      -3             -2               -1             0                +1               +2              +3
                                                                                  "Error" in PTA Enactment Year
                                                            Overall PTA Effect (Table 2, Spec F)                        PTA Rules (Table 3, Spec F)
                                  Table 1: PTAs and AD rules

                       PTA        Start                                       PTA         Start
PTA Name             AD Rules     Year                     PTA Name         AD Rules      Year
AFTA                    No        1992                     EFTA-
                                                                            Prohibited    2003
Aladi                   No        1981                     Singapore*
Canada-               Rules       2002                     EFTA-Tunisia*      Rules       2005
Costa Rica*                                                EFTA-Turkey*       Rules       1992
Andean Commty†         Rules      1999‡                    EC/EU            Prohibited    1958
Australia-Singapre     Rules       2003                    GCC*                No         2003
Australia-Thailand     Rules       2005                    Group of 3†        Rules       1994
Australia-US            No         2005                    Japan-
                                                                                No        2002
CACM                   Rules       1961                    Singapore*
                                                                                     **
Canada-Chile         Prohibited    1997                    Korea-Chile        Rules       2004
Canada-Israel*          No         1997                    Mercosur            Rules      1991
Caricom                Rules       1973                    Mexico-
CEFTA                  Rules       1993                    Northern           Rules       2001
CEMAC*                  No         1999                    Triangle
CER                  Prohibited   1990§                    Mexico-Chile         No        1999
China-Hong Kong*     Prohibited    2004                    Mexico-EFTA*        Rules      2001
China-Macao*         Prohibited    2004                    Mexico-Israel      Rules**     2000
COMESA                 Rules       1994                    Mexico-Japan         No        2005
EC-Algeria             Rules       2005                    Mexico-
                                                                              Rules       1998
EC-Andorra*             No         1991                    Nicaragua*
EC-Bulgaria            Rules       1993                    Mexico-
                                                                              Rules       2003
EC-Chile              Rules**      2003                    Uruguay*,†
EC-Croatia*            Rules       2002                    NAFTA              Rules       1994
EC-Egypt              Rules**      2004                    New Zealand-
                                                                              Rules**     2001
EC-Faroe Islands*      Rules       1997                    Singapore
EC-Macedonia*          Rules       2001                    SADC               Rules  **
                                                                                          2000
EC-Israel              Rules       2000                    SAFTA               Rules      1995
EC-Jordan*             Rules       2002                    SPARTECA            Rules      1981
EC-Lebanon*           Rules**      2003                    Turkey-Israel       Rules      1997
EC-Mexico             Rules**      2000                    Turkey-Rom.         Rules      1998
EC-Morocco*            Rules       2000                    UEMOA*              Rules      2000
EC-OCT*                 No         1971                    US-Bahrain*          No        2006
EC-Pal Authority*     Rules**      1997                    US-CAFTA
                                                                              Rules**     2006
EC-Romania             Rules       1993                    Dom. Rep.
EC-South Africa       Rules**      2000                    US-Chile             No        2004
EC-Switz. & Liech.     Rules       1973                    US-Israel            No        1985
EC-Syria*              Rules       1977                    US-Jordan*           No        2001
EC-Tunisia             Rules       1998                    US-Morocco*          No        2006
EC-Turkey              Rules       1996                    US-Singapore         No        2004
EEA                  Prohibited   1994††
EFTA*                Prohibited   2001‡‡          Notes:
EFTA-Bulgaria*         Rules       1993
EFTA-Chile*          Prohibited    2004           *
                                                    No AD Activity
EFTA-Croatia*          Rules       2002           †
EFTA-FYROM*            Rules       2001              Formal notification not given to GATT/WTO (as of
EFTA-Israel*           Rules       1993                04/30/2010)
                                                  ‡
EFTA-Jordan*           Rules       2002              Enacted in 1969; AD provisions added in 1999
EFTA-Morocco*
                                                  §
                       Rules       1999              Enacted in 1983; AD prohibition added in 1990
EFTA-Pal Auth*         Rules       1999           **
                                                      Weak AD Rules
EFTA-Romania*          Rules       1993           ††
                                                      AD abolished among the parties except for
                                                       agricultural and fishery products.
                                                  ‡‡
                                                      Enacted in 1960; AD prohibition added in 2001
Table 2: AD Activity by PTA Status




                     Target
              Non-PTA       PTA
              Country      Country
                506          370
Pre-PTA
                (58%)        (42%)

                3,554         375
Post-PTA
                (90%)        (10%)
Table 3: Bilateral AD Filings (balanced panel)

                                                A           B              C          D          E          F
Post PTA Inception                          1.139**     1.271***       1.315***   1.139**    1.270***   1.315***
                                             [0.041]     [0.003]        [0.001]    [0.041]    [0.003]    [0.001]
PTA                                         1.804***    2.055***       1.860***   1.846***   1.987***   1.678***
                                             [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.002]
PTA x Post                                  0.421***    0.434***       0.418***   0.398***   0.534***    0.675*
                                             [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.008]    [0.081]
Ln Real ER, t-1                                         1.473***       1.378***              1.484***   1.393***
                                                         [0.000]        [0.000]               [0.000]    [0.000]
Ln Importing GDP, t-3                                   0.530***       0.515***              0.530***   0.516***
                                                         [0.000]        [0.000]               [0.000]    [0.000]
Ln Exporting GDP, t-3                                   1.435***         1.103               1.437***     1.097
                                                         [0.000]        [0.301]               [0.000]    [0.331]
Ln Trade Value, t-1                                                    1.295***                         1.306***
                                                                        [0.000]                          [0.000]
WTO PTA Investment Mapping Index                                                    1.092      0.669    0.382***
                                                                                   [0.799]    [0.265]    [0.006]
Observations                                 10,927      8,550          8,330      10,872      8,512      8,292
Number of Bilateral Country Pairs             762         605            598         760        603        596
Log LikeLihood                              -8226.5     -6551.3        -6323.7    -8202.6    -6541.1    -6309.0
Implied Change in AD Activity by End of Sample
 Intra-PTA Effect Only                    -17.1%         -19.9%        -20.1%     -17.9%     -13.0%     -6.6%
 Intra-PTA Effect & Diversion              -7.4%          -3.2%         -1.5%      -8.2%      3.7%      12.1%

Coefficients reported as incidence-rate ratios, p values in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Coefficients reported as incidence-rate ratios
Table 4: Bilateral AD Filings by type of PTA Rules (balanced panel)

                                                A           B              C          D          E          F
Post PTA Inception                          1.139**     1.271***       1.317***   1.139**    1.272***   1.320***
                                             [0.041]     [0.003]        [0.001]    [0.041]    [0.003]    [0.001]
PTA - AD Prohibited                           0.327      0.302*        0.236**      0.327     0.302*    0.235**
                                             [0.105]     [0.090]        [0.034]    [0.105]    [0.090]    [0.033]
PTA - AD Rules                              1.952***    2.181***       1.857***   2.008***   2.194***   1.840***
                                             [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]
PTA - AD No Rules                             0.761       0.894          0.908      0.769      0.896      0.909
                                             [0.727]     [0.886]        [0.902]    [0.737]    [0.890]    [0.902]
PTA - AD Prohibited x Post                      0           0              0          0          0          0
                                             [0.997]     [0.995]        [0.995]    [0.997]    [0.997]    [0.996]
PTA - AD Rules x Post                       0.392***    0.393***       0.361***   0.299***   0.391***   0.441***
                                             [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.001]    [0.003]
PTA - AD No Rules x Post                      1.156       1.335          1.352      1.058      1.323      1.437
                                             [0.853]     [0.713]        [0.698]    [0.943]    [0.724]    [0.641]
Ln Real ER, t-1                                         1.493***       1.398***              1.493***   1.401***
                                                         [0.000]        [0.000]               [0.000]    [0.000]
Ln Importing GDP, t-3                                   0.532***       0.519***              0.530***   0.516***
                                                         [0.000]        [0.000]               [0.000]    [0.000]
Ln Exporting GDP, t-3                                   1.433***         1.095               1.432***     1.091
                                                         [0.000]        [0.341]               [0.000]    [0.359]
Ln Trade Value, t-1                                                    1.306***                         1.310***
                                                                        [0.000]                          [0.000]
WTO PTA Investment Mapping Index                                                    1.672      1.056      0.708
                                                                                   [0.207]    [0.899]    [0.400]
Observations                                 10,927      8,550          8,330      10,872      8,512      8,292
Number of Bilateral Country Pairs             762         605            598         760        603        596
Log LikeLihood                              -8216.0     -6538.6        -6305.0    -8191.4    -6529.1    -6294.0
Implied Change in AD Activity by End of Sample
 Intra-PTA Effect Only                    -12.1%         -13.5%        -13.9%     -17.2%     -12.9%      -9.1%
 Intra-PTA Effect & Diversion              -2.4%          3.2%          4.8%       -7.5%      3.9%        9.9%

Coefficients reported as incidence-rate ratios, p values in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Coefficients reported as incidence-rate ratios
Table 5: Robustness check using OECD FDI data

                                                G           H               I         J          K          L
Post PTA Inception                            1.142       1.145          1.096      1.048      1.146      1.126
                                              [0.16]      [0.15]         [0.36]     [0.66]     [0.17]     [0.27]
PTA - AD Prohibited                         0.221**     0.221**        0.216**    0.190**    0.202**    0.202**
                                             [0.033]     [0.032]        [0.031]    [0.021]    [0.024]    [0.024]
PTA - AD Rules                               1.527*      1.566*         1.592*      1.236     1.493*      1.415
                                             [0.072]     [0.059]        [0.059]     [0.40]    [0.093]     [0.15]
PTA - AD No Rules                             0.735       0.737          0.858      1.252      0.776      1.216
                                              [0.79]      [0.79]         [0.89]     [0.85]     [0.83]     [0.87]
PTA - AD Prohibited x Post                      0           0              0          0          0          0
                                              [1.00]      [1.00]         [1.00]     [0.99]     [1.00]     [1.00]
PTA - AD Rules x Post                       0.427***     0.473*        0.434***   0.512***   0.399***   0.421***
                                             [0.000]     [0.062]        [0.000]    [0.001]    [0.000]    [0.000]
PTA - AD No Rules x Post                      1.754       1.768          1.542      0.958      1.532        1
                                              [0.61]      [0.61]         [0.70]     [0.97]     [0.70]     [1.00]
Ln Real ER, t-1                             2.241***    2.241***       2.127***   2.103***   2.201***   2.166***
                                             [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]
Ln Importing GDP, t-3                       0.282***    0.281***       0.273***   0.417***   0.289***   0.338***
                                             [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]
Ln Exporting GDP, t-3                        1.241*      1.238*          1.192     1.256*     1.253*      1.164
                                             [0.062]     [0.064]         [0.15]    [0.077]    [0.061]     [0.22]
Ln Trade Value, t-1                         1.365***    1.367***       1.369***   1.405***   1.451***   1.425***
                                             [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]
WTO PTA Investment Mapping Index                          0.858
                                                          [0.81]
Ln FDI Outflow, lag 1                                                   1.002
                                                                        [0.88]
Ln FDI Outflow, lag 2                                                             0.960***
                                                                                  [0.0005]
Ln FDI Outward Position, lag 1                                                               0.959***
                                                                                             [0.0003]
Ln FDI Outward Position, lag 2                                                                          0.975**
                                                                                                         [0.042]
Observations                                  5,177      5,148          4,782      4,669      5,004       4,859
Number of Bilateral Country Pairs              291        290            290        290        291         291
Log LikeLihood                               -4040.0    -4034.0        -3751.0    -3574.0    -3914.0    -3724.0

Coefficients reported as incidence-rate ratios, p values in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Coefficients reported as incidence-rate ratios
Table 6: Implied Change in AD Disputes Without PTAs (Table 4, Specification F)



                         (1)              (2)                (3)           (4)
                            AD Provisions              AD & Investment Provisions
                                     Intra-PTA &                      Intra-PTA &
  Time Period     Intra-PTA Only      Diversion      Intra-PTA Only    Diversion
    1980-84            -3.2%             6.6%              -3.4%          6.4%
    1985-89            -1.3%            15.1%              -1.5%         14.8%
    1990-94            -1.5%            14.2%              -2.3%         13.4%
    1995-99            -6.2%            12.8%              -8.6%         10.4%
     2000-             -9.1%             9.9%             -12.8%          6.2%
Table 7: Difference Estimates

                                                            A             B             C           D          E          F
Post PTA Inception
    Intra-PTA                                            0.455***     0.556***       0.513***    0.459***   0.604**      0.81
    Non PTA Members                                      1.140**      1.255***       1.313***    1.140**    1.255***   1.313***




                                                          Rules       No Rules      Prohibited
Post PTA Inception, by PTA Type
    Intra-PTA                                            0.434***      1.211            0
    Non PTA Members                                      1.158**       1.257*        0.649***


* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Same specifications as in Table 3 but only the PTA effect coefficient is reported
Coefficients reported as incidence-rate ratios
Table 8: Robustness Checks

                                   A          B           C           D             E      F
Benchmark (Table 3)
    PTA x Post                 0.421***    0.434***    0.418***    0.398***   0.534***   0.675*
Year Dummies
    PTA x Post                 0.392***    0.404***    0.392***    0.356***   0.469***   0.599**
Control for Uruguay Round
    PTA x Post                 0.417***    0.448***    0.444***    0.380***   0.529***   0.686*
Control for BITS
    PTA x Post                 0.421***    0.424***    0.415***    0.401***   0.524***   0.668*
Drop PRC
    PTA x Post                 0.441***    0.443***    0.424***    0.417***   0.547***   0.681*
Drop NAFTA
    PTA x Post                 0.529***    0.575***    0.585***    0.606**      0.804    0.839
Drop EC/EU PTAs
    PTA x Post                 0.416***    0.437***    0.418***    0.401***    0.596**   0.793
Fixed Effects
    PTA x Post                 0.385***    0.399***    0.376***    0.485**      0.846    0.908
Unbalanced Panel
    PTA x Post                 0.432***    0.427***    0.415***    0.455***    0.590**   0.739
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Same specifications as in Table 2 but only the PTA effect coefficient is reported
Coefficients reported as incidence-rate ratios
Table 9: Robustness Checks (by type of PTA Rules)

                                   A          B           C           D             E       F
Benchmark (Table 4)
    AD Prohibited x Post          0           0           0           0          0          0
    AD Rules x Post            0.392***    0.393***    0.361***    0.299***   0.391***   0.441***
    AD No Rules x Post          1.156       1.335       1.352       1.058      1.323      1.437
Year Dummies
    AD Prohibited x Post          0           0           0           0          0          0
    AD Rules x Post            0.360***    0.360***    0.335***    0.255***   0.319***   0.362***
    AD No Rules x Post          1.283       1.579       1.522       1.152      1.507      1.549
Control for Uruguay Round
    AD Prohibited x Post          0           0           0           0          0          0
    AD Rules x Post            0.389***    0.407***    0.385***    0.287***   0.389***   0.452***
    AD No Rules x Post          1.132       1.306       1.311       1.024      1.274      1.376
Control for BITS
    AD Prohibited x Post          0           0           0           0          0          0
    AD Rules x Post            0.390***    0.381***    0.357***    0.295***   0.372***   0.430***
    AD No Rules x Post          1.172       1.323       1.348       1.074      1.303      1.424
Drop PRC
    AD Prohibited x Post          0           0           0           0          0           0
    AD Rules x Post            0.409***    0.400***    0.364***    0.312***   0.401***   0.446***
    AD No Rules x Post          1.207       1.368       1.382       1.105      1.359       1.47
Drop NAFTA
    AD Prohibited x Post          0           0           0           0           0         0
    AD Rules x Post            0.456***    0.477***    0.454***    0.425***    0.555*    0.533**
    AD No Rules x Post          1.136       1.309       1.348       1.123      1.379      1.427
Drop EC/EU PTAs
    AD Prohibited x Post          0           0           0           0           0         0
    AD Rules x Post            0.384***    0.387***    0.345***    0.312***    0.460**   0.478**
    AD No Rules x Post          1.163       1.347       1.353       1.094       1.417     1.487
Alternative Classification
    AD Prohibited x Post          0           0           0           0           0         0
    AD Rules x Post            0.408***    0.418***    0.378***    0.353***    0.561*    0.570*
    AD No Rules x Post         0.447***    0.458***    0.471***    0.427***    0.560*    0.597*
Fixed Effects
    AD Prohibited x Post          0           0           0           0           0         0
    AD Rules x Post            0.382***    0.402***    0.379***    0.335***     0.513     0.516
    AD No Rules x Post          1.173       0.996       0.931       1.138       1.082     1.033
Unbalanced Panel
    AD Prohibited x Post          0           0           0            0          0         0
    AD Rules x Post            0.451***    0.438***    0.404***    0.433***    0.560**   0.638*
    AD No Rules x Post          0.888       0.888       0.818        0.88       0.99     0.991
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Same specifications as in Table 2 but only the PTA effect coefficient is reported
Coefficients reported as incidence-rate ratios
Table 10: AD Filings (balanced panel), collapse pre-/post-periods



                                                        BDM
PTA                                                     0.905
                                                       [0.892]
Post PTA Inception                                      7.145
                                                    [0.007]***
PTA x Post                                              0.089
                                                     [0.020]**
Observations                                            1,592
Log Likelihood                                        -2131.9
Coefficients reported as incidence-rate ratios, p values in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
