                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       A TAX-BASED TEST FOR
                        NOMINAL RIGIDITIES


                         James M. Poterba

                        Julio J. Rotemberg

                       Lawrence H. Summers



                      Working Paper No. 1621




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1985




We are indebted to Craig Alexander and Ignacio Mas for outstanding
research assistance, to Olivier Blanchard, Rudiger Dornbusch,
Stanley Fischer, and Greg Mankiw for helpful discussions, and to
the National Science Foundation for financial support. Frank
DeLeeuw of the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, and R. Doggett, K.
Newman, and A. Tansley of the U.K. Central Statistical Office, pro-
vided us with unpublished data. The researth reported here is part
of the NBER' s research programs in Economic Fluctuations and
Taxation and project in Government Budget. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research or National Science Foundation.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1627
                                                 June 1985




                   A Tax—Based Test for Nominal Rigidities



                                  ABSTRACT



     In classical macroeconomic models with flexible wages and prices,

whether a tax is levied on producers or consumers does not affect its

incidence. However, if wages or prices are rigid in the short run, as they

are in Keynesian macroeconomic models, then shifting a tax from one side of

the market to the other may have real effects. Tax changes therefore provide

potential tests for the presence of nominal rigidities. This paper examines

the price and output effects of revenue-neutral shifts between direct and

indirect taxation. The results, based on post—war data from both Great

Britain and the United States, reject the view that wages and prices are

completely flexible in the short run.




James M. Poterba          Julio J. Rotemberg         Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics   Alfred P. Sloan            Department of Economics
M.I.T.                    School of Management       Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02139       M.I.T.                     Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 255—6673            Cambridge, MA 02139        (617) 495—2447
                          (617) 253—2956
     The side of a market on which a tax is levied is irrelevant in    the
standard microeconomic analynis of taxation. Students in elementary

economics learn that it makes no difference whether a sales tax is collected

from buyers or sellers. They are taught that the ultimate incidence of a

payroll tax depends on the elasticities of supply and demand for labor, not

on whether the tax is levied on employees or employers. Broader equivalence

results concerning sales and income taxes are at the heart of the analysis of

general equilibrium tax incidence. Standard Keynesian macroeconomic analyses

take a very different view. Raising sales taxes is thought to be

inflationary, even if   monetary policy remains unchanged. There is less
concern    that increases in direct taxation will increase the price level.

     The   microeconomic and Keynesian views diverge because the former
presumes that all wages and prices are fully flexible, while the latter
postulates rigid nominal wages. With wage rates fixed in the short run,
sales tax increases necessarily raise prices; raising income taxes has no
sucb effect. If nominal wages are rigid over reasonable lengths of time,
then the conventional tax analysis   must   be altered. Holding monetary   policy

constant, increases in the price level translate point for point into

reductions in output. Even a temporary one percent decline in NP could

dwarf the potential efficiency gains from many proposed tax reforms.

     The   very existence of nominal rigidities is a subject of contemporary
macroeconomic debate. Many Keynesian scholars take it as self—evident that
nominal wages are sticky, at least in the short run. For example, Solow
(1980) invites his readers to "accept the apparent evidence of one's senses
and take[s] it for granted that the wage does not move flexibly to clear the
labor market." Other researchers claim that there is no available evidence

in support of this hypothesis. For example, King end Plosser (1984) write
                                         2




that "Keynesian models typically rely on implausible wage or price

rigidities, from the textbook reliance on exogenous values to the recent more

sophisticated effort of Fischer that relies on nominal contracts."

        amining how   changes in the money stock affect macroeconomic activity,

a standard test for nominal rigidities, is unlikely to resolve this issue

conclusively. Shifts between direct and indirect taxation can provide tests

which avoid many    of   the difficulties with money—based tests, since they are

less    likely to be endogenous responses to macroeconomic events. This paper
employs both British and American data to investigate how shifts in the
direct versus indirect tax mix affect wages, prices, and output. Our results
support    the existence of nominal rigidities and suggest that they may have

important effects which should be recognized when analyzing the short—run

effects    of tax reform.
        The paper is divided into five sections. Section I clarifies    the

equivalence    of direct and indirect taxation when wages and   prices are fully

flexible.     It also shows how these equivalences fail when nominal rigidities
are    introduced. Section II describes our methodology for examining the

impact of tax changes. The next section explains how we constructed

effective direct and indirect tax rates for Britain and the United States.

Section IV presents      our empirical findings. We examine post—war time series
evidence   from both countries, and   also report a specific analysis of the 1979
"Thatcher   experiment" in Great Britain. This tax change raised indirect

taxes while lowering direct taxes commensurately, providing a strong test for
the presence of nominal rigidities. The concluding section sketches the
implications of our results for the analysis of tax policy and macroeconomic
fluctuations.
                                        3



I.      Shifts From Direct to Indirect Taxation: Classical and Keynesian Views

        In textbook public finance models, the legal incidence of a sales tax

is of no consequence.1 It does not matter whether the tax is collected from

producers    or consumers. The important variables are the net   price which

producers    receive and the gross price which consumers pay. Suppose producers
of a good receive P dollars per unit sold and consumers pay    P(i+e) dollars

per unit    they   buy. Whether producers receive P(i+o) dollars and hand over

dollars to the government or the P® dollars are collected from the consumers

directly has no effect. If the government ceases to collect the tax from

consumers and starts levying it on firms, firms simply raise their price by

P0. The total amount consumers pay per unit and the net amount received        by
firms   remains constant.

        The absence of short run wage and price flexibility is the essence of

Keynesian models. If the price producers charge consumers is temporarily

fixed, then the legal incidence of a sales tax does matter. A switch from

collecting P0 dollars from consumers to collecting them from producers

reduces the price paid by consumers to P, while the price received by firms

falls to p(i—e). This change affects real decisions.

        This example of a sales tax in one market is only illustrative. More

generally, switches between income taxes and value added or sales taxes,

which essentially change the side of the market on which the tax is levied,

have real consequences when there are rigidities of the standard Keynesian

sort. The equivalence theorems of Break (1974) and NcLure (1975) establish

that in an economy without savings and with flexible prices, a sales tax on




.    See for example Muegrave and Muagrave (1977, Chapter 20).
 all goods is equivalent to an equal-revenue tax on all income. This section

begins    by presenting a stylized classical macroeconomic model in which these
 results obtain. The second half of the section introduces wage and price

stickiness and demonstrates the failure of these familiar incidence results.


I. A. The Classical Framework

         The equivalence between sales and income taxation is easily

demonstrated in a simple classical macroeconomic model with perfectly

flexible wages and prices. In the short run, aggregate output (Y) is a

function only of labor input (L):

                                       Y= f(L).                         (i)

With competitive firms, a notional aggregate labor demand schedule can be

obtained by equating the marginal product of labor to the firm's real wage:

                                      f'(L) = w/s                       (2)

where w is the nominal wage and s is an index of prices received by firms.

The notional supply of labor depends on the purchasing power of the worker's

payment for an hour of work:

                               L =   g[w(1—T)/s(1+e)]                   ()
where r is the income tax rate and e is the value added tax rate. Labor

supply is unafected by any reform which does not change (i-r)/(i+G).




.   The  equivalence of a sales tax on all goods and a value added tax has
been  recognized by many -uithors. For a particularly clear discussion see
!lclure (1984).
                                                5




           The   government raises revenue from both income and                sales taxes. Tax

collections,           T, are defined by
                                             T=     rI    + t3(E-s-G)                             (.)
where       I is pre—tax household income, E is pre—tax household expenditure on
goods and services, and G is pre—tax government spending. Government

spending         is treated     as exogenous; the national income identity requires that
G    =    I—E.   The   household budget constraint in our one period model is
                                         (1—r)I = (1+O)E.                                         (5)

To       measure the government's effective tax revenue,                 we focus on tax     receipts
collected        from the private sector: T* =           T   —   0G.    Using (4) and (5),
                                                =
                                                     N + e(1_T)J
                                                          (1+0)
                                                                 I
                                               =     [i      —   (i—)/(i+e)]i.                    (6)
Since       I depends only      on L which depends       only     on (1—T)/(1+0), *      depends only

on (i-.)/(i+e).            It   is therefore independent of changes in the composition of

taxes which leave this ratio constant.3

          We now consider the effects of increasing 0 and reducing ,                      while
leaving (i—T)/(1+0) constant. Clearly both the real wage paid by firms                              (w/s)
and the real wage received by workers ((i_t)w/(i+0)sj are unaffected, so

output is constant. The price level must                     change, however.      Let   a(Y) define
the       demand for money balances. Equilibrium requires that
                                           a(Y) =
                                                    s(+0)
where M is the nominal money supply. We have followed the standard practice




.   For small values of 0, the constancy of (i—t)/(i+0) is equivalent to the
constancy of (+e).
                                         6




of assuming that the demand for real money balances, deflated by product

prices, depends on real output. Since output is unaffected by the tax shift,

absent a change in M the after—tax price level, s(1+G), will not change. An

indirect tax increase will therefore lower s in proportion to the increase in

(i+e).     Similarly,   since w/s remains constant, the nominal wage must fall.

        Alternative approaches might postulate that money demand depends on

households' disposable income, (i—r)Y, or that money balances should be

deflated by an index of consumer prices. In the former case, a revenue

neutral shift towards indirect taxation would reduce prices, while in the

latter case, it would raise them. In neither case would real output be

affected. Namkiw and Summers (1984) present some evidence suggesting the

empirical relevance of the case where money demand depends on household

expenditure. Regardless of the money demand specification, tax changes will

not affect the price level if nominal output is held constant.

     Although shifts between direct and indirect taxes are neutral in this

model, increases in either are not. Combining (2) and (3) it can be seen

that reductions in (1-.t)/(i+O), which correspond to tax increases, lower

equilibri emploent and output. This may raise prices. inder (1973)

among    others   argues that prices may also be subject to a countervailing

force, since tal increases may depress aggregate demand and lower

prices. These nonneutralities, even when prices are fully flexible, make it

difficult to interpret previous empirical studies of inflation and indirect




'.  A change in the direct tax rate would also affect the after—tax interest
cost of holding money. However, these effects are likely to be trivial.
                                         7



taies     as shedding light on the presence of nominal rigidities. These

studies establish only that nominal magnitudes tend to increase when taxes

rise.

        The equivalence between direct and indirect taxation on the same tax

base    follows from the logic of budget constraints    and is not specific to the

simple   model considered here. In a multiple—period model, strict equivalence
requires that the sales tax be levied on all goods including new investments.
In an open economy, equivalence requires that sales or value added tax be
collected on imported but not exported goods. This is done in practice as
described by McClure (1983). Our Appendix demonstrates the equivalence of
direct    and indirect taxes in an extremely general context.


I. B. The Keynesian Framework

         The   hallmark of Keynesian models is that nominal adjustments require
time. Changes in the stock of money or shifts between direct and        indirect

taxation, which have no long run real        effects, therefore may have important
short run      consequences.   We illustrate this proposition by considering three
different types of nominal rigidities.
        Sticky nominal wages are the primary rigidity in most Keynesian models.
They arise both in textbook Keynesian models and in contracting models such
as that developed by Fischer (1977).         Customarily, sticky wages are analyzed




.        studies, such as Tait (1980), have investigated the inflationary
       Some
effects of introducing value added taxes in Eiropean countries. These policy
changes are hard to interpret, however, because in many cases the VAT simply
replaced previous indirect taxes, such as turnover taxes. In other cases,
the imposition of VAT substantially raised the total direct and indirect tax
burden; this could have real effects. Other related work, such as Cordon
(1971), provides some evidence that changing payroll tax rates in the United
States are reflected in the price level. A survey of the broader literature
on   indirect    taxes and inflation may be found in Nowotny (1980).
                                            8



 by adding   a description of wage behavior to the classical model, while

 deleting the requirement that notional labor supply equal notional labor

 demand. Since both explicit and implicit contracts seem to be denominated in

 terms of pre-tax wages, we assinne pre-tax wage rigidity. Since post-tax

wages do not need to adjust to tax shifts, rigidities in (1—r)w do not imply

that shifts between direct and indirect taxation have real effects.

      Consider an increase in 0 which does not change (i—T)/(i+e). With

sticky wages, w is too high after such a shock. If firms are to remain on

their notional labor demand schedules, employment must fall or prices must

rise. In equilibrium, both occur to some extent since a fall in

employment lowers output and therefore requires an increase in s(1+0) to

satisfy (7). Keeping w constant, (1), (2) and (7) imply that the

elasticity of the tax inclusive price with respect to a tax change is:


                         ôlog(s(1+0))   =       —a'f'w/f"     >             (8)
                           ôlog(1+0)
                                        w:
An increase in indirect taxes is like a supply shock6, since prices rise and

output fails. Real wages also rise, inducing firms to demand less labor and

produce   less output.

     A second type of rigidity is real wage resistance, which Branson

and Rotemberg (1980) and Sachs (1979) found in continental European

countries. It can arise from indexing clauses which do not contemplate




6• This term is usually applied to shocks such as increases in the price of
an imported intermediate input (see Gordon (1975), Blinder (1981), or
Rotemberg (1983b)). These shocks raise some prices, lowering real money
balances and output if prices are sticky.
                                       9




 tax   reforms. If wages are indexed to the consumer price index, s(1+O),

then increases in 8 will raise w/s.7 This induces firms to fire

workers, lower output, and raise prices after a revenue neutral shift toward

indirect taxation.8

        We have examined the effects of two types of wage rigidity. At the cost

of some additional complexity, we could also allow for price rigidity as

urged by Blanchard (1984,1985) and Rotemberg (1982). This would not alter

the basic Keynesian prediction that revenue neutral shifts towards indirect

taxation raise prices and reduce output. Rigidities in s would lead to

increases in s(1+O) when 0 rises.9 This lowers aggregate demand and induces

firms to fire workers, possibly reducing real wages along the notional labor

supply curve.

        We have isolated a clear difference in the empirical implications of

models with and without nominal rigidities. A natural way of testing for the

existence and importance of these rigidities is to examine the response of

prices and output to changes in ta.x structure, controlling for total revenue

collections. These tests, while not totally free of ambiguity, are superior

to tests of the relationship between money and output for detecting nominal

rigidities. First, tax structure changes are more likely to be exogenous



 '.    If
       indexing clauses keep w/s or w(1—r)/s(1+0) constant, then changes in 0
unaccompanied by changes in (i—t)/(i+0)    will
                                             have no real effects. These
variables are not affected by tax reforms even when all prices are
flexible.
.   With real wage rigidities, an increase in indirect taxation could
trigger a period of inflation. The nature of this inflation is extremely
sensitive to assumptions about the dynamics of wage adjustment; see
Poterba, Rotemberg, and Summers (1985) for further discussion.

. Rigidities in  s(1+0) would have no effect in isolation, since s(1+0) does
not    change when 0
                  changes. However, combined with rigid nominal wages,
rigidities in s(1+0) may prevent the tax—inclusive price from rising
immediately and lead instead to a period of inflation.
                                     10




policy shoc than are changes in the money stock. King and Plosser (1984)

argue that changes in the money stock may be endogenous. They establish that

most of the observed correlation between money and output arises from changes

in the money multiplier, not from changes in the stock of base money.

Second, as shown in Grossman and Weiss (1935) and Rotemberg (1984), changes

in the money stock which are engineered through open market operations are

likely to have real effects even without nominal rigidities. Some tax

changes suffer from similar difficulties, because they have incentive and

distributional effects which may change real magnitudes. However, by

con.sidering increases in indirect taxes compensated by reductions in direct

taxes, we minimize these problems.
                                           11




II. Methodolocy
       We use both British and American data in studying the effects of tax

changes. Britain has experienced considerably more variation in tax

structure than the United States, and it therefore provides better tests for

the presence of nominal rigidities. Our aim is to discover whether, and how,

revenue—neutral char ;- in V jrir1 e affect prices, wages, and output. We test

for nominal rigidities with a minimal set of maintained assumptions by

studying reduced form     equations    which include a variety of standard aggregate

variables.LQ We investigate whether the mix of direct and indirect taxes

improves the explanatory power of these equations. Other variables are

included to prevent tax switches from appearing significant only because they

are correlated with relevant excluded variables.

       We estimate two systems of equations. The first consists of three

reduced form equations for the logarithms of prices (p.), nominal after—tax

wages (wt(1_'rt)), and output ()•          The explanatory variables are lagged

prices, wages, and output, as well as real government deficits (di) and the

logarithm of the money stock (mt). We also include three tax variables.

The first, TTOT. is the sum     of    the direct and indirect tax rates. The second

is TMIX, the difference between the direct and indirect tax         rates.   Including

both TMIX and TTOT is equivalent to including indirect and direct taxes

separately. However, since we are interested primarily in the effect of

switches between direct and indirect taxes holding their sum         constant,   this

specification is more natural. The third tax        variable,   OTAX, is the ratio of

tax   receipts   which we classify as neither direct nor indirect taxes to GNP.



LU•  Our reduced form specifications could be derived from a wide class of
structural models.
 Tris vstem o' reduced forn        eauations ca be itten as:11

                a'(L     a1(L)                                        a1(L)
                                                       (L)      ...
                                                                                                c1


                a'(L) a(L)       a(L)
                                 2
                                      w1                a4(L)   ... a(L)                    +   2t )
                                                                                    TTOTt
                a3(L)    a3(L) a3(L)                    a3(L) ...     a3(L)         OTAXt       C3t


where the a'(L)'s are second—order lag polynomials. We found                    that    further

lagged variables had little explanatory power. Each                equation     in the system

also includes a time trend and seasonal dummy variables.

     The equations in (9)        include   both the money supply and          the   deficit as

controls for the state of government economic stimulus.                These    are

essentially predetermined policy variables. In principle, it would also be

desirable to control for shocks to the money demand               equation which influence
prices   and   output.   If policy is set so as to offset these shocks, it may be

appropriate     to use nominal NP as       a   summary variable   for the effects of

aggregate demand policies. These considerations led Gordon (1982) to pioneer

the use of nominal GIP in wage an price equations. Thile this approach

captures velocity shocks, it may capture too much: the disadvantage of

including   norninal GNP in these equations is that it may not            be a

predetermined variable.




    This system of equations can be thought of as           from a structural
model like that of anchard (1985), which includes emerging
                                                    an aggregate demand
equation, a pricing equation and a wage setting equation.
     'e estimated a second system of only two equations, for nominal after—

tax wages and prices, which included current an laged noninal GP ir. place

of the deficit and the money supDly. This system of equations is given by


         (L) (L) -i                (L) ...        (L)                +
                                                                         pit
                                                            TTOTt              (10)
         (1) (L)        Wti        (L)      ...
                                                  (L)       OTAXt        V2t
                                                            T'fl't


where t is the logarithm of nominal GNP. In this system, movements in

output for a given nominal GNP can be calculated from price movements.

     Systems (9) and (io) allow for unrestricted wage, price, and output

responses to shifts between direct and indirect taxation. Both Keynesian and

classical models imply, however, that revenue neutral tax switches are

neutral in the long run. We therefore impose long-run neutrality, while

testing for short—run TMIX effects, by restricting the sum of the TMIX

coefficients in each equation to equal zero. The short—run tax neutrality

hypothesis implies the restrictions


                                                        0
                      H0: 4(L) a(L) (L) =
in system (9) and

                          H :   p1(L)    p2(L)     0
                            0    x        x


in system (io). As long as TMIX is a valid exogenouB variable, rejection of

H0 is very unfavorable to the classical model. In Section IV we consider

some, in our view unlikely, reasons why TMIX might appear to matter even if

wages and prices were perfectly flexible.
                                             14



        After   rejecting these null hypotheses, we focus on the relevance of

these rejections for the presence of nominal rigidities. If nominal

rigidities are present, then we expect prices to rise and output to fall for

some time after a tax switch. The response of real wages depends on whether

price   or wage rigidities are more important. To investigate these dy-narnic
effects, we compute our systems' predicted responses to a permanent change in
TMIX.      We   also followed Nishkin's (1979) approach and examined the effect of
a   TMIX   impulse given its actual stochastic process. This procedure avoids
the   problems which might arise if      permanent shocks to TMIX      are   widely at
variance with the historical experience. Because the results were very
similar to those for permanent shocks, only the latter are reported in
Section IV.
        The reduced forms described above may be subject to some of the
criticisms which have been directed at the vector autoregression approach of
Sims (1980). We have not posited an explicit structural model, and the
parameters      in   our reduced forms might vary with changes in the policy regime.
However, we use our reduced forms only to estimate the effects of certain
policy changes within a given policy regime. Our            view   is not that our

equations explain how TMIX        could be   used   as a major tool   of stabilization

policy, or even' the effects of radical changes in the TMIX variable outside

the sample experience. Rather, we believe that the estimated response of

prices and output to changes in TMIX,         given   the current policy regime, can

shed light on the existence of nominal rigidities.

        Any argument of this type must confront issues similar to those raised

in the decades—long debate about the relationship between money and output.

The essential identification problem there involves the possibility that

money and output are correlated either because they both respond to some
                                      15



third   factor, or because changes in money are caused by expectations   of
changes in output. After presenting our empirical results, we present some

evidence supporting the exogeneity of tax changes. At a minimum, it seems

clear   that changes in the tax mix correspond to the ideal experiment for
studying nominal rigidities much more closely than do money supply changes.
                                          16



III. The Data
        This section describes our method for constructing measures of the
direct and indirect tax burden in Great Britain and the United States. It

begins by discussing conceptual measurement issues which apply to both

countries. It then considers the data for each nation in some detail.

        Direct taxes are defined as taxes on individuals, including income taxes

and employee contributions for social insurance. Indirect taxes are those

collected from firms. They include sales and value added taxes, employer

contributions for social insurance, and various excise taxes. Our measured

tax rates,      and , are defined as direct and indirect tax receipts as a

share of GNP at market prices. These variables do not correspond precisely

to the actual tax rates, r and e,    of   Section I. Following the notation

there, let (1+e)E denote tax-inclusive consi.er expenditure and I household

income. Government expenditure equals G(1+e), and gross national product

measured at market prices is (1+e)(E+G). The national income identity

ensures that I = G+E.     Our measured tax rates are therefore

                                    _______      =                            (11
                                    (1+e)(G+E)       i+e
and

                              ...     e(G÷E)
                                    (1+e)(G+E)       T
                                                     e                         12


        Both measured tax rates are slightly lower than their actual rates in

our stylized economy. This will induce a bias in our measurement of TMIX,

since

                                                                          (13)


For values of e between 0 and .15, however, as in our sample, this bias is
                                         17




small. In contrast, the measured tax rates yield exactly the correct measure

for the total tax burden, TTOT:

                                TTOT-r _'T+O
                                         LI_T.             •                         14


In Section I we discussed tax reforms which altered r or e            while keeping
(1—t)/(1+O) constant. Since


                                        (1_t) =
                                   1
                                        i+          i+e                             (15

a tax   reform   with no effect on (i-.T)/(i+®) will not change TTOT.

        This approach to measuring tax rates is only one of many possibilities.

Ideally,   we would like our tax variables to be legislated tax rates which
change only when     government policy changes. Unfortunately, taxes are too

complex for us to define either the direct tax            rate or the indirect   tax rate.

The   tax base is much less than CliP and taxes are frequntly raised or lowered
by changing the tax base. If the elasticities of direct and indirect tax
receipts with respect to CliP are different, then the the measured TTOT and
TMIX variables will be affected by cyclical fluctuations. This could lead to
a spurious correlation between the tax variables, prices, and output.
      We therefore employ two other techniques for identifying shifts between
direct and indirect taxation. First, using data on full employment receipts
and CNP, we   define   full employment TMIX   and   TTOT. This purges these
variables of cyclical fluctuations. We adopted still another procedure for
identifying tax changes in the British data, by studying the response of
prices, wages, and output to dummy variables which correspond to large tax
reforms.    Although   this technique does not use all the information we have
                                        18




about the nature of these tax reforms, it avoids the problems of spurious

correlation which may contaminate our other results.



III. A. The United Kingdom

           Direct taxes in the United Kingdom consist of personal income taxes

and surtaxes, and employee's national insurance contributions. Indirect

taxes include a variety of different levies: Purchase Tax (prior to 1972)

Value Added x, stamp, customs, alcohol, and tobacco duties, car tax, as

well as employers contributions for National Insurance and Selective

Eknployment Tax. Ita on tax receipts were obtained from Financial Statistics

and unpublished tabulations provided by the Central Statistical Office. A

detailed data description is available from the authors on request.

     The resulting shares of direct and indirect taxes in GDP are shown in

Table 1.    The share of indirect taxes ranges from just   over   eleven percent in

1963, to more than fifteen percent during the early 198. There are even

more significant movements in the direct tax share, which varies between 10.1

and 16.8 percent. The table also shows that there are some tax       reforms     which

correspond to shifts between the two sources of revenue. In particular, the

1979 tax   reform involved   a reduction of basic statutory income tax   rates
accompanied by systematic increases in VAT. The direct tax cuts were

forecast to reduce revenue by 4.5 billion pounds, while the increase in VAT

was expected to raise of 4.2 billion. This is the cleanest example of a tax

reform which changed the "side of the market" on which taxes are levied.12



     Oir econometric techniques allow us to investigate tax reforms which are
not revenue neutral, since we include both the total tax burden as well as
the tax mix in our equations.
                                    19




Table 1: Direct and Indirect Taxes in the United Kingdom and the United States

                   United KinEdom                     United States
            Direct Taxes    Indirect Taxes     Direct Taxes Indirect Taxes
                 GDP              GDP              NP             GNP

1947                                               9.2            6.2
1948                                               8.0            5.6
1949                                               7.1            5.9
1950                                               7.3            5.9
1951                                               9.0            5.7
1952                 —                            10.0            5.8
1953                 —                             9.9            5.8
1954                 —                             9.2            5.6
1955                 —                             9.2            5.7
4rcr                 —                             C, C
                                                   7.LJ
1957                 —                            10.0            6.1
1958                 —                             9.8            6.2
1959                 —                            10.0            6.5
1960                 —                            10.6            6.9
1961                 —                            10.5            7.0
1962                 —                            10.6            7.1
1963            10.1             11.2             10.8            7.2
1964            10.1             11.4              9.8            7.1
1965            11.0             12.0             10.0            6.9
1966            11.7             12.3             10.8            6.9
1967            12.1             12.9             11.4            7.0
1968            12.5             13.7             12.3            7.3
1969            13.2             15.3             13.5            7.5
1970            13.9             13.7             12.9            7.6
1971            13.5             12.5             12.0            7.7
1972            12.8             12.4             13.0            7.8
1973            13.0             11.9             12.9            8.1
1974            15.1             12.4             13.6            8.2
1975            16.8             12.4             12.5            8.1
1976            16.5             12.4             13.0            8.1
1977            15.1             12.9             13.3            8.0
1978            14.0             12.7             13.6            8.1
1979            13.2             14.2             14.2            8.0
1980            13.5             14.7             14.5            8.2
1981            14.0             15.1             15.0            8.6
1982            14.2             14.8             15.0            8.4
1983            14.0             14.5             14.1            8.6
1984             —                 —
                                                  13.8            8.7



Wotes: Columns I and 2 report the shares of direct and indirect taxes in the
       gross domestic product of the United Kingdom, measured at market
       prices. Columns 3 and 4 report U.S. direct arid indirect taxes as a
       share of QNP. ta series were constructed by the authors; see text
       for further details.
                                         20



        We   measure the British price level using the deflator for GD? at market

prices, and also report results using the Retail Price Index. Our nominal

wage measure is the index of basic weekly wage rates in all industries and

services. Output is measured by real GDP at market prices. Our equations

also include the logarithm of Ml, the deficit as measured by the Public

Sector Borrowing Requirement, and the level of other tax receipts, defined as

total government tax receipts less direct and indirect taxes.

        There are several intervals of statutory wage and price controls and

implicit wage—price guidelines during our sample period       Previous   attempts

to find significant effects from price controls, for example Sargan (1980),

have been unsuccessful. Wage controls do appear to have had some impact on

wage growth, however. Henry (1981) identifies five periods of statutory wage

restraint and associated wage catch—up. We include his set of indicator

variables for wage controls in all of our British reduced form equations.1




     Quarterly 'SBR and Ml data are only available since 1963, and the wage
series which we use was not computed after 1983. Our sample period is
therefore limited to the eighty—four quarters between 1963:1 and 1983:4
inclusive.

L+•  There is some disagreement regarding the most binding periods of wage
control. Gordon (1983) uses dtnnmy variables which differ from those in Henry
(1981), and Wadhwani (1983) uses yet another set. Our results were
insensitive to alternative choices. We amend Henry's (1981) variables by
adding an indicator variable for rapid wage growth in the second quarter of
1978.
                                        21




III. B. The Uriite States

        Direct tax receipts for the United States include federal personal

income tax receipts, state and local personal income tax receipts, and

personal contributions for social insurance. Our measure of indirect taxes

is the sum of federal indirect business taxes, which consist of both excise

taxes and customs duties, state and local sales tax receipts, and private

employer contributions for social insurance.1 Direct and indirect tax

receipts as a fraction of GNP are shown in the last two columns of Table 1.

The share of direct taxes in GNP displays substantial variability in the

post—war period, ranging from only seven percent in 1949 to nearly fifteen

percent early in the 1980s. Indirect taxes are much less volatile, ranging

between 5.7 and 8.7 percent of GNP and trending upward throughout the sample

period.

    We measure the U.S. price level using both the QNP deflator and the

Urban Worker Consumer Price Index for all goods except shelter.' Wages are
measured   as average hourly   earnings in manufacturing, and output as GNP in

1972 dollars. Our equations include the logarithm     of Ml, the level of the
total   government deficit, and other tax receipts which are defined as total

tax receipts   less direct and indirect taxes.   We also include two variables

drawn   from Gordon and King (1982) to allow for the impact of wage and price
controls during the early 1 97G.




1b• We excluded state and local government employer contributions from our
calculation of social insurance contributions by employers.
b• The CPI's treatment of mortgage interest is widely regarded as a Bource
of spurious movement. We therefore exclude the shelter component.
                                        22




IV.    Epirical    Findings

       This section reports three sets of estimates of how switches between

direct and indirect taxation affect nominal wages, prices, and output. The

first sub—section focuses on the iact of the 1979 Thatcher experinnt in

Great Britain, because it is the clearest example of a switch between direct

and indirect taxation. We then consider the British experience more

generally, using the TMIX variable discussed in the last section. Tne third

sub—section reports results using post—war Anrican data. The section closes

with a discussion of several qualifications to our findings.



IV. A. A Major Episode of Tax Reform: The Thatcher Experiment

      The Conservative Budget on .June 12, 1979 called for: (i) reducing the

basic rate of income tax, the rate paid by virtually all British workers,

from 33   to   30 percent; (ii) raising income tax   personal   allowances, the

analogue of deductions in the United States; (iii) reducing top income tax

rates from 83 to 60 percent; and (iv) raising Value Added Tax rates, which

were previously either 8.5 or 12.5 percent, to 15 percent. This is therefore

very   similar to our ideal "tax   switch"   experiment. 17
       This tax reform is widely thought to have generated substantial
inflationary prssure in the second half of 1979. Buiter and Miller (1981)
suggest that:
            "... the rate of inflation increased sharply in the
            third quarter of 1979 as a direct consequence of the
            seven percent increase in the VAT in the June budget,
                which was estimated to have added about four points
            to the average level of prices... Given the convention
            of effectively indexing annual pay claims for past
            inflation, there can be little doubt that the increase



17 The Value Added Tax applies to roughly half of consuirr expenditure in
Great Britain.
                                         23


               of the value added tax in June 1979 helped to keep tne
               pace of settleints at a high level in the subsequent pay
               round.

Previous attents to estiite the inflationary effects of the 1979 reform

have multiplied the change in indirect tax rates for aifferent categories of

goods by the share of consuiir expenditure in each category. This approach

assumes that pre—VAT prices are not affected by the policy change. Moreover,

it ignores the data on what actually occurred in the second and third

quarters of 1979.

     Our technique for analyzing this tax shift is to include indicator

variables for the quarters around the change in tax regime in our wage,

price, and output equations, and then to use these estimated coefficients to

assess the reform's impact.18 We include indicator variables for both the

quarter of the change and several quarters thereafter. 'This avoids imposing

dyuam.ics which we estimate from the rest of the sample on the 1979

experience.

     Estimates of equation systs (9) and (10), including the dumn

variables for the 1979 tax shock, are reported in Appendix Table A-i. They

employ British data for the 1963—1983 period. Both sets of estimates suggest

the importance of the 1979 changes in affecting prices, wages, and output.

To test the short-run tax neutrality hypothesis, we test the null hypothesis

that DU}1793 does not belong in our equation systems. The test statistic for

excluding DUN793 is 41.1 for system (9), and 13.7 for system (1O).19 These



     The budget change occurred on June 12, 1979. We define a variable equal
to 0 before 1979:2, 1/6 for 1979:2, and 1 thereafter to indicate the presence
of the post—1979 regime. The quarterly difference in this variable, called
DUM793,   is
           our regression variable.

l9   We   coiiute Wald tests of the   exclusion   restrictions as in   Theil   (1971,
Section   8.6).
                                       '4




 test statistics are distributed as x2(9) and x2(b), respectively, uncer the

 null hypothesis. In both cases, we reject the exclusion restrictions at the

 .05 confidence level; in system (9), the rejection is also clear at the .01

level.

        To investigate the dynamic effects of the 1979 tax change, we compute

impulse response functions for prices, wages, and output with respect to an

increase in DUM793.      Because the response functions for systems (9) and   (io)
were similar, we report only those for system (9). Figure I shows both the

point estimates for these impulse response functions, and also reports the

one   standard error band around these estimates.20
        The response functions show the significant movenEnts of wages, prices,
and output after a shock like the 1979 tax reform. The price level rises at
the time of the tax reform by about four percent and it continues rising for
eight   additional quarters.21 At the peak, prices are 8.7 percent higher

than they were before the tax reform; recall that with fixed pretax prices,

the price level would have risen roughly four percent. Beginning ten

quarters after the shock, prices decline. The null hypothesis that the price

effect is zero can be rejected at the .05 level in each of the first ten

quarters   after the change.22


2o The standard errors for the impulse response functions are computed
using standard asymptotic methods. Defining f(&,t) as the impulse response
function t periods after the shock, and a the coefficient estimates from (9),
we compute the variance of f(&,t) as Vf' Q Vf, where Vf is the vector of
derivatives of 1' with respect to &, and Q is the covariance matrix of z.

21 This pattern of price dynamics suggests the presence of price
stickiness, as well as possible wage rigidity.

22• The sum of the price deviations for ten quarters after the shock is 77.6
percent. The hypothesis that this s equals zero can be rejected at the .01
confidence level.
                                                                          25


                                                                                 Figure 1—a:
                                                                                 Deviation of Prices from
                                                                                  Pre—Tax Level (Percentage Points)




c.

                                                                                 Figure I—b:
                                                                                 Deviation of Real Wages from
                                                                                  Pre—Tax Level (Percentage Points)




                            I — ______________________________________

                   S       U                 U




                                                                                 Figure I—c:
04                                                                               Deviat ion of Output from
         A
         It                                                                       Pre—Tax Level (Percentage Points)
         It
      \'yI \' 1'
         ft1


OD




02



04-•

                                                                         bit.,
                   S        U                 U                  a
     Figure I:         Estimated Impulse Responses to the 1979 British Tax Reform
                       Estimates for Great Britain based on modified System (9)
                                             26




         Figure   I also   shows tha4 real wages fall at the time     of   the tax shock.

    Thereafter, they rise for two quarters and reach a point two percent above

    their initial level. They then converge to the new steady state in an

    oscillatory fashion. This appears inconsistent with wage stickiness alone.

    On the contrary it suggests that firms,       unwilling   to lower the prices they

    receive, move down the supply curve for labor. Output also follows an

    oscillatory pattern after the tax change. Although the rise in output

    immediately following the shock is puzzling, output eventually declines by a

    substantial amount. After twelve quarters, output is nearly three percent

    below its starting value. These output deviations are statistically

    significant at standard levels.23

         Two problems could affect our results. Lrst, 1979 was a period of

    dramatic price change world wide as a result of substantial oil price

    increases. Some part of the price effect which we attribute to the tax

    reform may, therefore, be spurious. Although the most substantial oil price

    shocks occurred in the last quarter of 1979, well after the tax change, some

    contamination could occur nonetheless. To control for the effect of oil

    price changes, we added the logarithm of the Wholesale Price Index for Crude

    Oil to our equations. This variable had a t—statistic exceeding four, but

    its inclusion df not alter our conclusions about the 1979 tax reform.

         The second problem is that evidence based on only one event, such as

    this, is especially prone to contamination by omitted variables.

    Fortunate]r, there is another recent British tax      event   which, while not as

•
    stark as   the 1979 tax switch, also provides a potential test for nominal

    rigidities. In April, 1976, after a year of popular dissatisfaction with 25


    23 Note that the incentive effects of the 1979 reform, if anything, should
    have raised output. The finding of lower real GDP is therefore hard to
    attribute to the microeconomic effects of the tax reform.
                                           27




percent VAT rates on durables, the government, reduced them         to   12.5

percent. This should have lowered the tax—inclusive price level. When we

add indicator variables for these changes to       our    equations, we can easily

reject the null hypothesis that they have zero coefficients. The results

suggest a substantial downward effect on prices after tne tax change. All of

the results on the 1979 and 1976 tax changes are robust with respect to

changes in the price level variable; equations estimated with the Retail

Price Index actually suggest larger tax effects. The results are also

insensitive to     inclusion   of exchange rate variables.2

       Our   dumn—variable    procedures are not as efficient as the TMIX method      at
exploiting      the time—series variation in British tax rates, and they do not

constrain equal—sized tax reforms to have the same effect each time they

occur. However, they do enable us to focus on the most dramatic and

potentially most informative changes in tax policy. They also reduce

the danger of spurious findings due to cyclical fluctuations in the tax.

variables. To employ data for a longer period to investigate the ixract of

tax   shifts,   we now turn to the TMIX approach which was described in the last

section.



IV. B. United Kingdom TMIX       Results
       Parameter estimates     for equation systems (9)   and   (10) including the TMIX

variable are shown in Appendix Table A—2. Like the DUM793 equations above,
they are based on     data   from the 1963—1983 period. Both     systems   suggest that
changes    in the direct versus indirect tax    mix have substantial effects. The


2+     Our   discussion
                    has focussed on the results from system (9). The
findings from system (10), which are reported in the bottom panels of Table
A-i, are similar.
null hypothesis that the TMII coefficients equal zero is rejected decisively

in each case. The test statistic in system (9) is 32.5; it is distributed

2(6) unaer tne null hypothesis that the tax mix                variables   have no effect on

the short run movements in wages, prices, and              output.   The null hypothesis is

rejected at the .01 level. For               system (10), the test   statistic is 27.62. In

this case, with only two equations, the test statistic is distributed 2(4)

under    the null    hypothesis; again, we reject the neutrality hypothesis at the

.01   level. These overwhelming rejections suggest the potential importance of
,,.,.,,ol   ie+4
La %JW SS s a


      To describe the effect of increasing indirect taxes, we compute impulse

response functions for prices, wages, and output with respect to a one

percent    increase in TMIX. This corresponds to an indirect tax increase              of

one   half of one percent of GDP, accompanied by an equal—revenue reduction in
direct taxes. If all pre—tax prices remained fixed, the tax inclusive price
level would rise by one half of one percent. The impulse response functions
for system       (9) are   stiown in Figure II.
       In the quarter when the tax change occurs, prices are estimated to              rise

by three tenths       of   one percent. They continue to rise for eight quarters
thereafter, peaking .54 percent above their initial level eight quarters
after the shock Prices then decline, bit remain more than .1 percent above
their initial value for four           and   one half years after the tax change. For
the   first     five quarters after the shock, the sum of the deviations of the
price level from it          initial   value is 2.04,   with   a standard error of 0.965.
The null    hypothesis of no      price effects over this horizon is rejected at the

.05 level. Similar]y, over a ten quarter horizon, the sum of the price
effects is 4.56, with a standard error of 2.24. The t—statistic associated
                                                             29



                                                                  Figure 11—a:
                                                                  Deviation in Prices fr
                                                                   Pre-lax   Level (Percent)



.4                           N     N


       —
           ,   —




                                            S..

                                                  S..



                                           I
                   4     I
                                   a
                                   U       14           Il




                                                                  Figure lI—b:
                                                                  Deviation in Real pages from
                                                                   Pre—Tax Level (Percent)




                                                                  Figure lI—c:
                                                                  Deviation in Output from
                                                                   Pre—Tax Level (Percent)

- C-




       'I'I                  'S.

                                                    /
                                                        /
                                       —
 —.




       Figure          II: Estimated Impulse Responses to a One Percent ThIX Shock
                           Estimates for Great Britain based on System (9)
witn the   price effects in   individual   quarters also exceeds one for nearly

four   years after the tax reform.
    Nominal wages also rise after the tax change. In the first quarter, they
increase by nearly half a percent, raising the firm's real wage by .2
percent. The real wage increases for another quarter, and then begins to
decline.    By seven quarters after the tax reform, real wages have fallen

below their initial level and they remain more than .1         percent below their
starting   point for nearly two years. The wage dynamics       are   not as well

deteined as those for prices. The srn of tne wage impulses for the first

five quarters after the shock is 0.985, with a standard error of 0.895. The

figure also shows that the standard errors associated with the wage impulses

are larger than those for prices.

       The impulse response path also shows     output   moving erratically.

However, the estimates of the output response function are imprecise. Output

rises in the quarter when the shock occurs, and then declines in the next

quarter. The sum of output deviations for the five quarters after the shock

is —0.07 percent, with a standard error of .605. By ten quarters after the

shock, the comparable value is —.310 with a standard error of .465. Six

quarters after the tax shock, output enters a long period of decline. At the

lowest point on its trajectory, output is .1 9 percent below its initial

level.     The individual—quarter output effects should be regarded with

caution,   however, as the large standard errors suggest.
       The estimates from system (io) also suggest significant tax effects, as
can be seen from the impulse response functions in Figure III. Prices rise
by .19 percent in the quarter of the shock,       forty percent of the amount which

would be predicted if pre—tax prices were      completely fixed. They decline

slowly   thereafter, and are still more than .08 percent       above their initial
                                                                   31

                                                                           Figure 111—a:
                                                                           Deviation of Prices from
                                                                            Pre—lax Level (Percent)




                                           —
                  V

1.21
1.                                                                         Figure Ill—b:
                                                                           Deviation of Real Wages from
 .8- -                                                                      Pre—Tax Level (Percent)




        /




     ::
C.D




                                                             *tIl
                  4       S       U            is        a



      .?'
                                                                           Figure III-c:
                                                                           Deviation of Output from
                                                                            Pre—Tax Level (Percent)

            /




     -3• ,..-.-
                                                                 At,-.,-
                                                                 AMct
                              I                      I       I
                      4       4       I?            *4   a


        Figure III: Estimated Impulse Responses to a One Percent TNIX Shock
                    Estimates for Great Britain based on System (10)
                                                      3:




 level four years afterwards. The standard errors for the impulse response

functions from (io) are however larger than those from (9). Five quarters

after the tax change, the sum of the deviation of prices from their initial

level is .655 percent, with a standard error of .710. Real wages again rise

for a short while after the tax shock occurs, and then decline. Output

changes in this system, which are equal to the negative of the price

impulses, display a more stable response pattern than those in system (9).

       We explored the robustness of our tax mix results in several ways. We
         ._1... .__.._
                     ia4.
                       be      .±   4.............1
                                                                             ey
                                                                     L1..._. 4.L

statistically     insignificant coefficients and did not affect our conclusions

about tax policy. We continued to reject the null hypothesis of zero

coefficients     on the tax mix   variables at             very high levels. We also estimated
our   equations without     the indicator variables for wage and price controls,
and most   of the tax coefficients changed very little. Adding further lagged

variables to the system reduced the statistical significance of some

coefficient estimates, but had little iact on either our estimated dynamic

responses or our rejections of the tax neutrality hypothesis.25



IV. C. United States TNIX Results

      In this section, we investigate wflether our U.K. findings are               consistent
with the U.S. experience. Appendix Table A—3 presents estimates of systems

(9) and (10) using American data for the 1955:1—1984:3 period. The central

question is whether we can reject the null hypothesis that TMIX should be



25•   A change in the total tax burden also has real effects. In the three—
equation  system, a one percent of GDP increase in the           burdentotal tax
reduces output .51 percent in the quarter of the tax change, and induces
lower output for three quarters after the shock. The estimates of TTOT's
iact
errors.
        on both prices and output, however, are plagued by very large standard
                                              33




excluded from these systen.is. For         system   (9),   the test statistic is 21.7.

Since it is aistributed X2(6) uncer the short-run tax neutrality hypothesis,

this constitutes a rejection at          tue .01 level.     For system (10), the two—

equation system, the test statistic of 17.8 (2(4) under the null) also

implies rejection at the .01 level. These findings provide strong evidence

for the presence of wage or price stickiness in the United States. To

illustrate effects which these rigidities imply for tax changes, we now

consider impulse response functions for prices, wages, and output. In both

systems, we clearly reject the null hypothesis that the tax mix variables

have zero coefficients. The test statistics again imply rejections at the

.01 level. Our discussion will focus on estimates which use the GNP deflator

to measure prices. Using the shelter—exclusive CPI, however, yields even

stronger rejections of the tax          irrelevance   hypothesis and even more

pronounced price effects after a tax change.

     Figures IV and V report the impulse response functions corresponding to

systems    (9) and   (i o).   The   initial effect of a permanent one percent     TMIX

increase is a .32 percent increase in prices. As in tne british data, prices
continue to increase for one quarter after the tax shock, and decline
smoothly thereafter. The absence of significant tax variation makes the

standard   error on     the estimated price responses larger than those for
Britain. The sum of the price changes for the first five quarters after the
change is 1.130, with a standard error of 1.63. The Arican evidence also
differs from the British in suggesting much slower             adjustment   back to
equilibrium, as is clear from Figure IV.
    Real wages also rise after a tax shock, corroborating our British
findings. The initial effect of a one percent TMIX shock is to raise the
firm's   real   wage by .44 percent. Real wages continue to increa8e for one
 :_
c-c.
       /
         I
           /




                                 U
                                         34
                                                   Figure IV—a:
                                                   Deviation of Prices from
                                                    Pre-Tax Levels (Percent)




                                                   Figure IV—b:
                                                   Deviation of Real Wages from
  1.0-
                                                    Pre—Tax Levels (Percent)




  0.0




                                                   Figure IV—c:
 -0.
                                                   Deviation of Output from
                                                    Pre—Tax Levels (Percent)




                            Ii        _f:r'
           Figure IV: Estimated Impulse Responses to a One Percent TMIX Shock
                       Estimates for the United States, based on System (9)
                                                35

                                                     Figure V—a:
                                                     Deviation of Prices from
 .5_                                                  Pre—Tax Level (Percent)




0.0

                 I    I
                 4    4     U     II       N




                                                     Figure V—b:
1.0       I'I'                                       Deviation of Real Wages from
                                                      Pre—Tax Level (Percent)

 .8-




                                                tm
                                 —          isa
                 4    I     U     *4       40




     1—




C. C
           ,     "                                   Figure V—c:
                                                     Deviation of Output from
—. I—
                                                      Pre—Tax Level (Percent)




—.3—



—.




—.5.




          —.I-----f-----t----i
                 4    I     Ii    II   -
                                           N


     Figure V:       Estimated Impulse Responses to a One Percent TMIX Shock
                     Estimates for United States based on System (10)
additional quarter, and then decline monotonically to their initial level.

Adjustment is slow; even five years after the tax shock, real wages are .13

percent above their initial level.

     Output experiences a pronounced decline after an increase in indirect

taxation. A one percent rise in TMIX induces a .2 percent drop in real GNP

in the quarter of the tax change. The path of output thereafter depends upon

the choice between systems (9) and (10). In (9), the three equation system,

output continues to decline for another quarter and falls to .45 percent

below its initial level before starting to return to its initial level. The

sum of the output effects up to ten quarters after the change is —4.120, with

a standard error of 2.731. The results for (10) suggest that the amount of

lost output declines after the first quarter, although output returns to its

initial level very slowly. The ten—quarter sum equals —2.903 (2.951). Both

sets of results are consistent with the view that nominal wages are sticky,

since the insufficient nominal wage decline in response to indirect tax

increases raises real wages and induces firms to lay off workers. This has

the ultimate effect of lowering real money balances.

     Our   findings   are insensitive to several specification changes.

Fcluding Gordon and King's (1982) wage—price control variables has little

effect on the e'stimated coefficients and iipulse response functions. Adding

interest rates, exchange rates, and further lagged values of the currently

included variables also has little substantive impact on our conclusions.

The central finding, that the short—run tax neutrality hypothesis is strongly

rejected, obtains in a wide variety of specifications.

     These results can also be used to study the inact of revenue—raising

tax increases. Raising the total tax burden permanently, while keeping TMIX

constant, increases prices and real wages and causes a drop in output. A one
                                          37




percent increase in TTOT raises prices by .38 percent, and real wages by .26

percent, in the first quarter. itput declines by .8 percent when the shock

occurs, and continues to fall thereafter. By        eight   quarters after tne tax

increase, output is 1.65 percent below its starting value. These findings,

while suggestive, are accompanied by large standard errors and should

therefore be interpreted with caution.



IV.    D. Qualifications

       Pwo potentially important assuniptions underlie our use of the TMIX

variable to test for the existence of nominal rigidities. First, we assume

that TMIX is exogenous in our reduced form equation systems. Second, we

postulate      that except for the effects of wage and price stickiness, changes
in    TMIX should have no iact on prices or output. The possible failure of

parallel assumptions has caused     debate about the interpretation of linkages
between money and output. We consider each assuition in turn.
       Several arguments might be constructed to suggest that our tax mix

variable is not exogenous. Perhaps most plausibly, it might be noted that if

the output elasticities     of direct and indirect taxes are different, then
changes   in   real output will induce changes in TiiIX. Price shocks may be

transmitted to'GNP and     tnen to TNIX as   well. This issue is partly addressed

by our inclusion of lagged output in the reduced form systems, and by our

separate examination of the 1979 and 1976 policy changes in Great Britain.

As a further check, we use data on cyclically adjusted revenue collections26



26•  Full employment data are not available for the U.K. on a quarterly
basis. In the United States, data on federal taxes beginning in 1955 are
published in Halloway (1984a, 1984b). Ftimates of high employment state and
local receipts were constructed by the authors.
 to create full employment TMIX and TTOT variables for tne United States.

 These data were only available for the post—1955 period. The results

 obtained using tnese variables were similar to those obtained with our

 unadjusted tax variables, suggesting that cyclical fluctuations are not an

 important source of endogeneity for the receipts—based tax measures.27

 Unfortunately, the data are not available to examine the effects of cyclical

 adjustments for Great Britain, or for the entire post-1948 period in the

United States.

        An   alternative arj.ment against   the exogeneity of TMIX might hold that

the   tax    mix is set in response to projected economic   conditions, or that it
helps   to forecast future economic policies. Consideration of the historical

context which generated changes in TMIX does not support these views. The

1979 tax reform in Great Britain immediately followed an election which was

decided on grounds other than tax policy. The avowed purpose of its

proponents was to improve incentives through reductions in marginal income

tax rates. In the United States, most of the variation in indirect taxes

comes from movements in state sales taxes and employer payroll taxes.

Neither of these are likely to be manipulated for macroeconomic purposes.

More generally, it seems unlikely that governments systematically shift

towards indirec't taxes when they foresee rising prices, or when they intend

to pursue more expansionary monetary policy. The 1979 re(orrn in Britain was

accoan.ied by an announced policy of monetary restraint. Nothing in the



27• Although the results using full employment and unadjusted TMIX are
always similar, the resemblence between our equations for the 1948—1984
period (reported in Table A-.3) and the coirarison equations for 1955—1984
depended upon our choice of price series. The equations using the shelter—
exclusive CPI are very similar to those for the full sample period, while
those using the GNP deflator are substantially different.
                                           59




 history of eitner British or American tax policy suggests that tax changes

 should help to forecast future monetary policies. This inference is

 consistent with the failure of Granger causality tests to reject the

 hypothesis that TMIX does not cause either money or TTOT.

        The second potential objection to our tests is that TMIX might have

effects on output and prices through channels other than wage and price

 rigidities. Such a possibility cannot be ruled out, since changes in TMIX do

not correspond precisely to our theoretical model. Indirect taxes do not

cover all goods, and direct taxes are not strictly proportional.

Nonetheless, it is difficult to explain our findings along these lines.

Increases in indirect taxes coupled with equal revenue decreases in direct

taxes are usually though to improve incentives to work and invest. Since

indirect taxes are also less progressive than direct taxes, they should have

smaller disincentive effects. Thus, they should raise output and reduce

prices ——   the   opposite of what we find.

       There are no controlled experiments in macroeconomics. Nevertheless, we

find it   difficult   to account for our results in   terms   of the limitations of

tax—shift experiments. At a ininimuzii, the flaws in our tax—based tests are
largely independent of those in tests which focus on the relationship between
money and outpt. Hence, our tests       provide at least some additional evidence

to   support the hypothesis of   wage and price stickiness.
                                        40




V.   Conclusions

     A major thrust of much recent macroeconomic research has been the

elucidation of business cycles as equilibria of competitive economies with

fully flexible prices. Theories in both the "misperceptions" and "real

business cycle" traditions emphasize the assption of perfect price

flexibility and the resulting absence of unexploited opportunities for

beneficial exchange. These theories imply strong data restrictions: fully

perceived changes in government policy which do not change any agent's

opportunity set should have no real effects. In contrast, the essence of

contemporary Keynesian thinking is ttiat prices are in some sense sticky, so

certain purely nominal disturbances ao matter.

     The difficulty in exirically distinguishing these theories arises from

the problem of isolating purely nominal disturbances. Traditionally, they

have been tested by examining the relationship between variously—measured

monetary shocks and real variables. These tests have not been entirely

conclusive because a variety of rationalizations, with very   different
structural implications, can be offered for the comovement of money and

output.

     In this paper, we rely on tax shocks of a special sort to distinguish

between classi&al and Keynesian models. A clear implication of microeconoxxiic

theory with flexible prices is that the side of the market on which a tax is

collected does not influence its ultimate real effects. Tax changes between

direct    and indirect taxation therefore provide a natural experiment for
examining the importance of nominal rigidities. The appeal of the experiment
is enhanced by the apparently unsystematic way in which taxes have varied.
     The results of our investigation lead us to decisively reject the
classical view that wages and prices are perfectly flexible. While arguments
                                           44




may be made   to   rationalize the comovements we observe with perfectly flexible

prices, we find it impossible to convincingly account.       for   the empirical

regularities in the data without asstining some sort of price rigidity.

      Asserting    that   prices are rigid falls far short of explaining them or

understanding    their properties. Our results suggest that this remains a
vitally   important research problem. "Menu costs," which have been proposed

as one explanation for price rigidities, cannot explain why many prices which

can be changed costlessly, such as newstand magazine prices,28 appear to

change infrequently. Moreover. moneta policy appears potent even in highly

inflationary economies, where menu costs        should be less important.
     Our results    have potentialir important consequences for tax       policy.
Almost universally, reforms in the tax structure are evaluated within the

context of market clearing      models where prices   are perfectly flexible.

Within such models, the distinction between direct and indirect taxation is

of no consequence. Our       findin   suggest that   this distinction may be
important over periods of      several years, during which prices are sticky.
Indeed   the macroeconomic consequences of some reforms may        dwarf their
microeconoxnic   iact on economic efficiency.        If unemployment is a

significant byproduct of certain tax reforms, traditional thinking about

their incidence needs to be reconsidered.

     Consider as an example current proposals to raise revenue by taxing

domestic and imported crude oil. Available estimates29 suggest that this



28• Cechetti (1984) presents detailed evidence on the inflexibility of
magazine prices.

29• The Congressional Budget Office (1985) discusses this proposal.
                                          42




 measure would raise about 4.2 billion dollars for each one dollar per

 barrel tax. Thus a five dollar a barrel tax would raise the indirect tax

 burden by 21 billion dollars. Our estimates suggest that if monetary policy

were not altered, this would result in lost output of sixty billion dollars

 over the succeeding decade. Similar estimates are obtained assuming that

monetary policy acts to keep nominal GNP constant following the tax reform.

These figures bulk large relative to allocative effects traditionally

enthasized in microeconomic analyses of excise tax reforms. Proposals to tax

only marginal suppliers of goods, such as the proposed surtax on oil imports,

would have much greater output effects per dollar of revenue raised.

     Some might argue that it is inappropriate to assess the output effects

of tax reforms while holding monetary policy constant, since monetary policy

could accommodate tax changes. This issue is treated in Poterba, Rotemberg

and Summers (1985). Note, however, that if the monetary authority has set

monetary policy to trade off unemployment and inflation in a desirable way

prior to tax reform, the loss of welfare from a small tax change will be

independent of the monetary policy response. Unless one believes that

monetary   policy   is wrong prior to a tax reform, there is no reason not to

evaluate   the effects of the tax   holding    monetary policy constant. This is

especially   true   for small reforms such as the   gasoline tax. It   is   also
inconceivable that    the effects of small reforms could be disentangled

accurately enough for them to be explicitly accommodated by monetary policy.

     Our finding    that shifts towards indirect taxation have adverse
macroeconomic consequences raises an obvious question. Could macroeconomic
performance be improved by reducing indirect taxes and increasing direct
taxes? The conscious and regular use of such tax policies as stabilization
measures   would be such a significant change in policy regime that our
                                           4

estimates cannot shed much light on this issue. However, they do suggest

that such a change might well improve the tradeoff between unemployment and

inflation on a one-shot basis. The gains might be taken either in the form

of reduced inflation or increased output. Poterba, Rotemberg and Summers

(1985) demonstrate that if output is held constant, tax changes may well have

a permanent effect on the rate of inflation.

     Our results suggest a number of directions for future research. The

robustness of our conclusions might be examined by studying tax changes in

other countries or in individual American states. Structural estimation

might yield more precise information on the nature of wage and price

stickiness, and   tax   reforims might facilitate identification of these

models. The effects of alternative policy responses to large tax reforms

might also be considered. Perhaps most importantly, our results isolate a

major class of apparent rigidities which economic theory needs to explain.
                                            44




                                       he fe ren ce s




Blanchard, Olivier J., 1983, Price desynchronization and price level inertia,
     in R. Dornbusch and M. Simonsen (eds.), Inflation, Debt, and Indexation,
     MIT Press, Cambridge, ?A.

Blanchard, Olivier J., 1985, The wage price spiral, MIT mimeo.

Blinder, Alan S., 1973, Can income taxes be inflationary? An expository
     note, National Tax Journal, 26, 295-301.

Blinder, Alan S., 1981, Monetary accommodation of supply shocks under
     rational expectations, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 13, 425—
     38.

Branson, William and Julio Rotemberg, 1980, International adjustment with
     wage rigidity, European Economic Review 13, 309-332.

Break, George 11., 1974, The incidence and economic effects of taxation, in
     Alan Blinderetal., Tne Economics of Public Finance, Brookings
     Institution, Washington, D.C.
Buiter, Willem and      Marcus   Miller, 1981, The Thatcher experiment: The first
     two years. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 315—79.

Cecchetti, Stephen, 1984, The frequency of price adjustment: A study of the
     newsstand prices of magazines, xaimeo, New York University Graduate
     School of Business.

Fischer, Stanley, 1977, Long term contracts, rational expectations, and the
     optimal money supply rule, Journal of Political Economy 86, 191—206.

Gordon, Robert 3., 1971, Inflation in recession and       recovery,   Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, 1.

Gordon,    Robert J., 1975, Alternative responses of policy to external     supply
     shocks,    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 183—206.

Gordon, Robert J., 1981, Price inertia and policy ineffectiveness in the
     United States, 1890—1980, Journal of Political Economy 90, 1087—1118.

Gordon, Robert 3., and Stephen King, 1982, The output cost of disinflation
     in traditional and vector autoregressive models, Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity 1, 205—42.
Gordon, Robert J., 1983, A century of evidence on wage and price stickiness
    in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan, in 3. Tobin (ed.),
    ?iacroecononiics, Prices and Quantities, Brookings Institution,
     Washington, D.C.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Lawrence Weiss, 1985, A transaction—based model of
     the monetary tranission mechanism, American Economic Review,
     forthcoming.
                                           45




Halloway,   Thomas M.,   1984a,   Cyclical Adjustment of   the   Federal Budget and
     Federal Debt: Detailed Methodology and Estimates, U.S. Department of
     Commerce, bureau of Economic Analysis Staff Paper 40, Washington, D.C.

Halloway, Thomas M., 1984b, Cyclical Adjustment. of the Federal Budget:
     Revised and Updated Estimates, unpublished manuscript, U.S. Department
     of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, November.

Henry, S.G.B., 1981, Incomes policy and aggregate pay, in R. Elliot and
     L. Fallick (eds.), Incomes Policies, Inflation, and Relative Pay,
     George, Allen and Unwin, London.

King, Robert C. and Charles Plosser, 1984, Money, credit, and prices in a
     real business cycle model, American Economic Review 74, 363—80.

Long, John B. Jr. and Charles Plosser, 1983, Real business cycles, Journal of
     Political Economy 91, 39—69.

Mankiw, Gregory and Lawrence Summers, 1984, Are tax cuts really
     expansionary?, NBEh Workcing Paper o. 1443, Cambridge, MA.

McLure, Charles E., 1975, General equilibrium incidence analysis: The
     Harberger model after ten years, Journal of Public Economics 4, 125—
     161.

McLure, Charles E., 1984, Value added tax: Has the time come?, in
     Charles E. Walker and Mark A. Bloomfield (eds.), New Directions in
     Federal Tax Policy for the 1980s, Ballinger Publishing Coany,
     Cambridge, MA.

Nishkin, Frederic S., 1979, Simulation nietbodolo in macroeconomics:                An
     innovation technique, Journal of Political Econony 87, 816—36.
Nusgrave, Richard and Peg Musgrave, 1977, Public Finance in Theory and
    Practice, 1'lcGraw-Hil]., New York.
Nowotny, Ewald, 1980,    Inflation and   taxation,   Journal of Economic Literature
    43, 1025—1050.
Poterba, James, Julio Rotemberg, and Lawrence Summers, 1985, Tax
     policy and inflation, in preparation.

Roteuiberg, Julio, 1982, Monopolistic price adjustment and aggregate output,
     Review of Economic Studies 44, 517—31.

Rotemberg, Julio, 1983a, Monetary policy and the costs of          price adjustment,
     Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 267—288.

Rotemberg, Julio, 1983b, Supply shocks, sticky prices,           and   monetary   policy,
     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 489—98.
Rotemberg, Julio, 1984, A monetary equilibrium model with transactions
     costs, Journal of Political Economy 92, 40—58.
                                     4

Sachs, Jeffrey, 1979, Wages, profits and macroeconomic adjustment: A
     comparative study, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 269_319.

Sargan, J.D., 1980, The consumer price equation in the post—war itish
     econour: An exercise in equation specification testing, Review of
     Economic Studies 47, 113—135.

Sims, Christopher A., 1980, Nacroeconomics and reality, Econometrica 48, 1—48

Solow, Robert M., 1980, On theories of unemployment, American Economic Review
     70, 1-10.

Tait, Alan A., 1980, Is the introduction of a value—added tax inflationary?,
     International Monetary Fund Departmental Memorandum DM/80/75, November,
     Washington, D.C.

Theil, Henri, 1971, Principles of Econometrics, New york: John Wiley and Sons

United States Congressional Budget Office, 1985, Reducing the deficit:
     Spending and revenue options, Government Printing Office, Washington,
     D.C.

Wadhwani, S.B., 1983, Wage inflation in the United Kingdom, Working Paper
     No. 1 32, Center for Labour Economics, London School of Economics.
                                             47




                                        APPENDIX

      This appendix demonstrates the widespread applicability of the

neutrality results discussed in Section I. First, we show thak value added

taxes and income taxes are equivalent in a multiperiod econonw when there are

only spot markets for consuntion and capital. At time t, households can

purchase a consumption vector          and claims on           units of capital. Firms

receive a price p for consumption goods, and               for a new unit of capital.

Households     receive income from   the capital and labor they supply to firms.

Each claim on capital purchased at t pays r+1 of "interest inconie" at t+1,

and becomes a claim on     (1—8) units of capital at t+1. Households supply L

units of labor     and firms    pay a wage   w per labor unit.
       The government taxes all value added at rate 0,            so households          uust   pay

 (1+e)p for consumption goods and (i+0)q for claims on capital. Investment
goods are not exempt from the VAT; exempting them would be equivalent to an
investment tax credit. Households pay income taxes on the wages and interest
income which they receive, but there is no capital gains tax. The
household's budget constraint at t is therefore:
                           +         = (wL+rK1)(I          —
                                                               t)/(1   +   0).                  (A.1)


Relative prices at time t, and governnt revenue, depend only                     on
(i—)/(i+e). We aist also show that intertemporal prices depend only on the

tax   factor   (i—)/(i+e). By      foregoing   one unit   of   a good with       price     it
                                                                                                at t

and          at   t+1, buying   claims on    capital, and consuming the proceeds at

t+1, the household obtains (pt/pt+i)(rt+i +               (1—o)q1)/q units of              the good

at t+1. This depends only on 6 and           the   prices facing firms, which depend
only on (1_)/(i+e). This completes the demonstration of equivalence.

       Second, we show the euivalence between sales and income taxes in an

econoity with complete contingent claims markets, as in the real business

cycle literature (Long and Plosser (983), for example). Goods are indexed

by time   and state of nature. Suppose that all trade is intermediated by
firms, which charge prices P for the goods they sell. The vector of

household purchases is Q,          while   the vector of household sales to firms is V.

Let W be the vector of prices the firms pay the households for the goods they

purchase. We consider an income tax r levied on all state contingent sales

by households, and a sales tax 0 levied on all state contingent sales by

firms. The household's lifetime budget constraint can then be written as

(1 +   e)P.Q =   (1   — r)W.V.      Firm's decisions depend only   on    P and W, while

household's actions depend on P, W and (1—r)/(i+0). To show that sales and

income taxes are equivalent it therefore suffices to shaw that government

revenue also depends only on (i—r)/(1+0). Tax receipts from the private

sector equal T = OP.Q + tW.V, which may be written as

                        T =   [e           + ] w.v   =
                                                         [i   —   w.v.              (A.2)


This completes the equivalence proof.

       This result generalizes to an econoiry in which sales and income taxes

are not levied on all state contingent transactions, but only on those

transactions which take place after states of nature are realized, under two

conditions. First, there must be a complete set of Arrow—Debreu securities

which pay one dollar at time t if state a is realized. Second, the "income"

from these securities imist be untaxed. A more detailed discussion is

available frrom the authors on request.
                                                                                                                                                             60.4 40 U04641(j)0)9 10) 001% 0.46      U01011001000101
                                                                                  404)00.6     40 01001004$ .446 %00)1O$4 00.4) 600gI_00$ lOlJlflb_1l40) S 0$ (o)b    005340141003 $14 $4160441 3.50 )oooo po.puS
                                                                                         400(0000.4440 ZO 40 jIlO)        I'
                                                                                                                          c41I-)-(0ot 4404.1041 090 004 aSnL0 040.64 £14044410 £q p..ss*o3 315 $Il4.JOIlObl                                   fly     IIO%04(
                           4.".
.44')'j         444.0      444.0       (IA.0           -          -               -         -                -      (640')
                                                                                                                     6000
                                                                                                                               (604)
                                                                                                                                6400
                                                                                                                                         ((Or)
                                                                                                                                          0*0.4
                                                                                                                                                   (404')
                                                                                                                                                    046.0           0*ii- (,ol)
                                                                                                                                                                   (04o)
                                                                                                                                                                           &t(•0
                                                                                                                                                                                         (Ito-)
                                                                                                                                                                                          4(00
                                                                                                                                                                                                  (6,01 (000)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (60- gwo                    —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ((iv)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      III-O-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     $04-)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ('4'l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 046-0-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ('"I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.-s      4664$)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L91          •04 10
                           4,,..      (.4...
                                                                                  -         -                                                                      (ot)                                                                                         (iii)                                       •
                                                                                                                    bOO)       (460) (110-)                                    (1(t •)            (ito) ((to)
                      0     .44.0      lfl.40          -                                                     -       0400        *400 0tl0
                                                                                                                                                   (446')
                                                                                                                                                    (tl4                                  oo
                                                                                                                                                                                         (004)                       -         -     (600)          (o1                (((il         D44-)
                                                                                                                                                                    4*16-       1006-              04o6- 6.400                        6*00           (II,        4(40-  14*)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (0104
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (44-0       •'001
               I,,44.4.0   4.'—.
                                                       -          -               -                                                                                (too) (*OI)
  $4   .44..                .,4.4.0    4" 0-                                                -       -        -      (0.40')
                                                                                                                     $100-
                                                                                                                               (401)
                                                                                                                                004.0-
                                                                                                                                         (404')
                                                                                                                                          I*0.0
                                                                                                                                                   (loo-)
                                                                                                                                                     4646           044$-       0460
                                                                                                                                                                                         (4.0)
                                                                                                                                                                                          (4*9
                                                                                                                                                                                                  IL4O) (600)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   4440 4600         -         -     (0.1-)         (14$)       (64$-)    (40')      (4**i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      016-0-         16.0)       (40-0-    0416       604-)         00.1
                       I       —      I'——             -          -                                                 (U0')      (400) (040')                                              (0 0)
                            o*00       1040                                        -                -        -       4000       l40'*     1604
                                                                                                                                                   (6.00-)
                                                                                                                                                     $600
                                                                                                                                                                   (044)
                                                                                                                                                                    144,0-
                                                                                                                                                                               (01$)
                                                                                                                                                                                40440-    6040    ((tO) (60)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   4,00-    (40                      (Ooo-)         (6t.0)      (II6)     (66$4      (lou s) (°l•Ia.o)
                                                (4.:r(                         (.6,)             (oi)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ($60-          $156        1140      400,4       )i4j—      ..lo      ..(
                                                 .4410
                                                               (006')
                                                                1100
                                                                                      (604.0)
                                                                                060,0 (0$0    (401
                                                                                                    (1000)
                                                                                                     1040
                                                                                                                    (4(6')     ((Ir)     (04,')    (6(4            (0(0)       (000)     ((00)    (140) (640-) (006)       (046.4    (66')          (006-)      (640)     (061)
                                                                                                                     14044      41(0      *140      040             6(66        0600-     0100     1600- *600 *040          01.40     (*66           $K'6        010,0-     6440-    (440-fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      044-0       I0.4i.1 •01
                                                41.0 )
                                                 060.0-
                                                               (044   4
                                                                0.0.0.4
                                                                               (4.40)
                                                                                060-0
                                                                                      (oooo) (8(00) (0106)
                                                                                          140     1040    4440-0—
                                                                                                                    (040-)
                                                                                                                     4000
                                                                                                                               (00') (lOt')
                                                                                                                                (4410-   0406
                                                                                                                                                   ((404')
                                                                                                                                                    *4*6
                                                                                                                                                                   (oci-) ((ol')
                                                                                                                                                                    Poll 6440
                                                                                                                                                                                         (Ito)
                                                                                                                                                                                          6100    (040-) (600-) (160e-) (000-)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   4(0-0 0400 (6(40     (64*- $.W'O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (041.1         (•)         (44I$)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 $10-     (444)      (40)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ()
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     000$                  0*6.6      144$                  14
                                                (lol)          4604.)          (4,0) )O(i) (10(4) (404;-,) (.00)               (400') (000-)       (104-)          ((4$)       (0(4')    (440)    ((44) (iio') ((00') ((o.i-)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $4191
                                                 4000           64,04-          0,00- 0066  410'S'- 0430    0400                0400- 4600          OWO-            100*-       0106      4.06     1600- 4*00 1.06- 1000- (000-)                    (000-)      (106)     (o(.-)                   (lol)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *6)4                   4600        (31-4-    6(44       6440         04%
                                                4444
                                                 04.4.0
                                                           4   (064)
                                                                1&Or0
                                                                               4444 4
                                                                               9(410
                                                                                         (41*4) (4494) ((9414) (4i4')
                                                                                          4410   14.0.4. 0496   ((.00-
                                                                                                                               4464')
                                                                                                                                *4(0
                                                                                                                                         (5*4
                                                                                                                                          *16'
                                                                                                                                                   (00$'
                                                                                                                                                    (.4*     -     (OO0 -4
                                                                                                                                                                    60(6
                                                                                                                                                                               (iuo-)
                                                                                                                                                                                1&40
                                                                                                                                                                                         (440-4
                                                                                                                                                                                           000
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ((40-) ((00')    (I)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    )0'0 6304 0460 ((Oi-)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *0410
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (6s-)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *44*0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (61.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4*0*       (0(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COOrS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (600-) (0404)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (01-0- *6*1           I.4I.Q     0$
                                                               (44,)           )4.oO)    )*4t)   (4004) (00444)     (604)                                                 (ui')
                                                                                                                                                                                                            j
                                                (1.44. 4
                                                  0406'         1100           0400- 0401                                      (004')    (044)     (loIr)          ((It-)                (uio-)   (.440') (oto-) ($446-) (00'-) (Oti-)              (041)       (00$-)
                                                                                                  ((464  4(40-       4,6.0      $166-     (010-     10)0            (44$-       6*0*      (100      0000   160$   (*4.6- (140- 4041-                 64(4        0410-    $644-)    ($o($)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0(0*       (41.4)         0091    15
                                                (600)          (400.)          464.0) (044 I)    (OoO4 (444-,)      (o..o-)    )1.o-)
                                                                                                                                                                                ji jjjjjjjj ij jj
                                                                               (011'                                                     (04.0-)   (0(4-)          (44.4 4     (0.6')    (440')   46,0) ((40') (tOQ') (toO') (4U()                  (60$)
                                                  4,4.0         14.06                  4600       (000- 4.00         0.400-     0*00      0000-     6(46            4(44-       04(5-     (600                                                                  (0($)     (494)     ((*0- I) 460$.j4 .a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tirO-
                                                                                                          (i
                                                                                                                                                                                                   06.00-   0*00   1606-     00440    (0.66'-        (006                 0)6)       44*-)--      01(44
'4      0.0    (0 (4044    (   0o1       4.4 (444$40I 1Tuo60
                                                                          -.
                                                                                6.4400   Ti•1 1-:Zii-
                                                                                         (4-011 (4-6.01     .160
                                                                                                                    -W(oo      riei io
                                                                                                                                                                   •           '0*'tH '5.l.) $0$4 II ••' •9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             'jjj -j'
                                                                                                                                                           .°491        444$                                        $00,91     •$    •°144    4i •io
                                                                                                                                                                             6i
                                                                                                                                                 50

                                                                             bbl•    *.3,p !s.a,      P,tas., Oatp.I s.d    ..•s                           ;d,.a Nid.s
                                                                                                                                                                                                        066                   0514-3)
      !!t!!tl.               Pdea(-I) Pr*e.(.$          I!(JI      !!IJ1 !!iI                                                                     ?0?Y&42)        051706*   0280A1(.l)                                                     606'!                                                 !'!.71
                                                                                           .!!1I 1LI                                                                                                (j
                                                                                                                                                                                           01!? (9) OeP(-I)                                           K0J?*l) !2!121!t      ll!        .!.°!J1
      601..      —7.750      (.722          —0.267      0.099      —*043        0.033      —00003 —0.494          0.721     0.057                                                                                                                                                                 .
      (0.67.6.,) (.990)                                 (.094)                                                                         —0394)          0.032      -0.041       0.063       -0.066        7.950     —I .256     0.566       .0001      -0.036      0090                                        '290 2 )1c
                             (.t)            (.I)                   (.092) (0.071) (0.087)             (.766) (.649)        (.719)      (.206)         (.2l)       (.083)      (.086)       (.092)      (I.)       (0.640) (1.54?)         (.072)      (.099)     (old
      V.a.        0.568      0.496                      7.371      —0.269      -0046        00l1       0419       0.727     0.050                                                                                                                                                                             '1779 I
                 (1.163)     (.126)                                                                                                                    0.57!      -0.024 —0030             —0.021       0.049       0.1773  I.l'l'. -0023 -0/734                  0.063                                                     7''
                                            ..7.485
                                               .755)    (.111)      (.609)      (.o91)      (.,o)      (.795) (.625)        1?06) —tic,
                                                                                                                                  (.242)               (.sa)       (.018) (.102)            (.0%)       (7.66)     ('.950) (1.514) (.oes) (.776)                  (.062)
      0,lI        2.993     -0.489          —0.995      0.048       0.320       0.02!       0.524      0427 -0042          —0.512       0.409         -0.126       0.024       0.313       —0069         0.502     -5.973   0.064           04203     -0.060      0.029                           -           '''i ''')
                 (7.224)     (.160)          (.239)     (.064)      (.060)      (.634)      (.052)
                                                                                          (.259)                  (.259)    (.307)      (.358)         (,3a)       (.745)      (.050)       (.742)      (2.75')    (2.556) (2.6114)         (.725)     (.727)     (.121)
      WOe.        0.059      7.064          —0.300      0.090       0.062 —0044 —0.030 ,0'459                     o.on      o.1o                                                                                                                                             -          -         -                   1/)' *
      (sri)                                                                                                                            —0.690         —0.062      -0.029       0025        -0.011        1.217     .7639       7.639        0.059     -0.064      0.111                                       1027
                  (.940)     (.123)          (.606)     (.075)      (.Ose) (.060) (.024) (.lsI)                   (.735)    (.756)      (.0)9)                                                          (lIla)                                         (.006)     (.062)
                                                                                                                                                       (.0,6)                  (.ofl)       (.067)                 (7.422) (7.45?)          (.016)
      Vsg.       0.268       0.105          —0.457      7.294       0.725 .0.064 0.027 —0.658                     0.700     0.256                                                                                                                                            -          -
                 (t.no)                                                                                                                —0001           0.766      0.053        04)02        0007        0.396       2.372      0.645        0.059     -0.018      0.061                                               ""'
                             (.Is)           (.osi)     (.101)      (.709)  (.018) (.096) (.1st)                  (.719)    (.202)                                                                      (6.805)                                        (.714)
                                                                                                                                        (.232)         (.257)     (.oge)       (.790)       (.018)                 (7.903) (7.1184)         (.086)                (.067)
      0.tp.%      3444      —0.261          —0.052 —0.070           0.264        0.126  0.479          0.111 —0.098 -0.533                                                                                                                                                              .
                 (i.m)       (.257)          (.244)     (.764)                                                                          0.722         -0.099       0.056       0.359       .0.116        0.025     -7.726 -0.425            0.060     -0.019      0.040
                                                                    (.799)       (.028) (.156)         (.377) (.262) (.326)             (.374)         (.425)      (.15a)      (.167)       (.746)      (3.0%)     (3.099) (3.043)          (.I9)      (.784)     (.039)
      760..      —2.010      0.933          —0.743      0.151      —0.606        —          —
                                                                                                      -0.304 0.604          0.160      —0.274          0.092       0000       -0.014       -0.043                                                       .           .        Q.2'27)   0.04'     -0.019       7623    I .9*2
      (I,.ri.o.,) (.,io)     (.o,)           (.60!) (.069)          (.09,)                             (.043) (.63!)        (.75,)                                                                                                                                               072) (.012)           on')
                                                                                                                                        (.605)         (.6,4)      (.on)       (.015)       (.070)
      lags       0.417       0.300                      7.236                    —          —
                                            —0.503                 —0.236                             —0.671      0.786     0.253                                             —0056                       ..         .                                  —           —       -0.04) .0.27)4       -0.074       '1679   .989
                 (l.i,v)     (.066)                     (.1o6)                                                                         —7024           0.400      —0033                    —0003
                                             (.735)                 (.101)                             (.179) (.063)        (.11)       (.226)         (.242)      (.092)      (.093)       (.096)                                                                           (.890) ).onI)         (.InI)
      WI.,.      0.612       6.602           -.376                               —          —
                                                        0.093       0.049                             —0.2%       0.026     0.362                                                                         —          -                                  -           —        0.047     0.078     .004?                7.170
      2PI)       (.599)                                                                                                                —0.366         —0.796      —0.069      —0015        —0.006                                                                                                             1Il
                             (.037)          (.toq)     (.os)       (.096)                             (.646) (.732)        (.049)      (.066)         (.I,)      (o.nis)      (.073)       (.064)                                                                           (.077) (.072)        (.071)
.     lag.       —0.094      0.256          —0.459      6.266      —0.096        —          ,—        —0.410      0.073     0.290                                                                                                —
                                                                                                                                                       0.341       0440        9.021                                                                                ..      -0.029 0.073          Q0'23       '1046   2     'II
                  (.475)     (.169)          (.634)     (.703)      (.709)                             (.0s1)     (.762)    (.684)                                                     )           )



                                             Notest       All equations are estimated by ordinary least squares for the perIod 1963:3 to 1983:4, a total of 82 observations.
                                                          Standard  errors are shown in parentheses.  Q(4)                                 is
                                                                                                               a four—quarter Box—L3ung teSt against the presence of
                                                          residual sutocorrelatlon.                     Sea    text for definition of variables.

                                                                             bI.     1-31    v•1•, W4...          tp.t Sal tSaI        VI.
                                                                                                      TM          TRIO                                                                     01170U(-2)                                        loll!                          !          !!!1 !'!!4!1           979
      Ts,Isbi.   Coast.M     hIa.(-4) Prte.(-2) Vas(.I)             s-)        jj                                 mi*-2) eon*1                        .!i!11 !!!d& 0*-t)                                (y)        (j                                  jJil        0.070     -                     -          7709    7.09
                                                                                                                                                        0.090       0.654      —0.301       —0.052         4.395  -2.979   7.799             0.607     -63.760
I..              —7)166       7.337          -0.349  -0.040          0.033  0.026 —6.036 —0421 0.119     0.371 —0.370
                                                                                                                  (.169)                                            (.656)      (.209)       (.631)       (4.559) (7.377) (4.9837            (.o5)      (.097)     (006)
                              (.090)          (.0,4) (.oe6)          (.oeo) (.oss) (.051)         (.191) (.751)
                                                                                                           (.,)                                         (.208)
       (0.61.1,,) (.107)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -                     —          2989    7.546
                                                                                                                 -0.916                                —0.449       0.979 —0.09,            —0.999       615.601 -13.722 94.231 0.746 -0.227                       0.017
                                                         0409        0.769  0.00S  0.032  -0.390 -0.359  I .54 I                                                                                                                                                   (.or)
lb.    Tag.        0.003      0.466          -Q.552                                                                                      (')            (.241)      (.161) (.231)            (.673)      (50.49) (11.63) (33.19) (.052) (.o*)
                   (.171)     (.100)          (.104)     (.095)      (.089) (.olt) (.ofl) (.235) (.273)                                                                                                                                                                      —                     —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .9.7)77                                     6090    1.1?'
                                                                                                                                         0.111         -0.349       0.952      —0.051       —0049        309.713 .240.931      - 6.829       0.298 -0.050          (.096)
I,.    Ip.%        0.996      0.149          —0045      —0.541       0.291  1005 —0-Il, 0.235 -0094 —0.678                                                                                                                                   (.0'9) (.743)
                                                         (.046)      (.039) (.093) (.oes)          (.336) (.321)
                                                                                                           (.y)                          (.46?)         (.316)      (.267)      (.312)        (.27;)     (79.92) (727.1) (56.25)
                   (.o)       (.056)          (.762)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.034     -                                79')4   1.70
                                                                                                          0.695                         —54            —0.4)97      0.536      —0.494       —0035         72.969      —7.999 54.243         —0.771      0.724
       WI..       —0.041      6.473          -0471      —0039        0.02! -0003 -0.002 -0.493 -0.724                                                                                                                                        (.060)                (.064)
.                                             (.06,) (.099)          (.oas) (.062) (.058) (.266) (.224) (.267)                           (.3,0)         (.247)      (.073)      (.245)        (leo)      (31.56)     (94.79) (57.26)                    (.091)
       (OPt)       (.725)     (.086)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.077
                                                                                                          1.646                         —1.176         -0.509       0.960 —0.752            —0.129        94.563    —49.937     67.111       0.7)1     -0.779
26.    Ia..       —0023       0.334          -0.2    0060            0.061  -0.033 0079 -0481 -0.331
                                                         (.018)      (.064)   (.062) (.032) (.263) (.222) (.210)                         (.307)         (.244)      (.61,) (.242)             (''71)     (57.26)    (s.,i)      (56.60)      (.059)      (.o9)
                   (.174)     (.005)          (.094)
                                                                                                                                         t0O                                                -0.024       362036     753.159       5.2753     0.2752    —0.744     -0.121                                       SI'5 0279'-
2..                0.691      0.765          -0.015 .Q.376           0.229        0.5017  -0.114           0.203 -0.102 -0.749                         -0.395       0.933 -0.050                                                                                   (.oqo)
       0.tp..6                                                                                             (.396) (.994) (.366)          (.46?)         (.368)      (.257) (.,64)             (.261)     (71.74) ('25.4)        (es.19)      (.089)      (.039)
                   (.751)     (.620)          (.126) (.132)          (.126)         (.092) (.086)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -    0.73? -0.237         0.044       22974   6C'9
                                                         0.056      —0.041           —           —.     —0.434     0.03?     0.423      —0.534          0.134       0402 -0-235             -0.057                                                                                                (.070)
       W1,S       —0.323      1.341          —0.394                                                                                                                                          (.6 47)                                                                         (.04?) (.006)
                              (.Oa.4)         .(.0e2)    (.090)       (.071)                               (.208) (.005)     (.725)      (.242)         (.191)       (.067)     (.196)
       (6463*6.,) (.093)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                —                                               9   9')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.212 -0.209         09     32)0
                                                                                     —           —      —0.329    —0.330      I.79 -1299               —0.295       0.459 -0.161              0.044
3b.    64i        —0.224      0.423          —0.393      0.814       0066.                                                                                                                                                                                                   (.046) (.oi)         (.002,)
                                                         (.099)      (.085)                                        (.650)    (.193)      (.247)         (.21)       (.785) (.272)             (.662)
                   (.703)     (.093)           (.091)                                                      ')                                                                                                  -         —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -    0.072  -0040         0.079        39)4     7.6'
                                                                                     —           —                           0.696      —0.263          0.728       0.729 —0.413            —0.749
Is,     WOe.      —0.207       1.375         —0.624      0.020      —0.002                              —0.613 —0.037                                                                                                                                                        (.o'.t) (.0.7)       (.n',4)
                                               (.026)    (.092)       (.090)                               (.260) (.22')      (.'13).    (.i)           (.239)      (.211) (.744)             (.181)
        (cr1)      (.709)      (.021)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -                                               5.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.220 -0.700         0.052        2171
46.               -0.397       0.283    .    —0.290      0.938        *003                       —         -0.322 -0.398      1.661     428            -9.119       9.133 -9.267            -0035                                                                            (.049) (.07,)        (.049)
       Vais                                                                                                                   (•,,,)     (.272)          (.219)     (.793) (.273)             (.765)
                   (.0,6)      (.070)          (.069)     (.oe,)      (.oe)                                 (.245) (.203)
                                                                                                                                        1948:1 to 1984:3, a total of 147 observation!.
                                              8otea! All equations are estimated by               ordinary least squares for the perIod                                                                    the                  of
                                                                            errors are shown in               Q(4) is a four—quarter 8ox—LJun test against      presence
                                                           Standard                                           parenthese..
                                                           residual         autocorrelation.  See text for definition of variables.
