                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     INSIDE THE REFRIGERATOR:
IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT AND CHILLING EFFECTS IN MEDICAID PARTICIPATION

                                               Tara Watson

                                          Working Paper 16278
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w16278


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2010




 The author thanks Anna Aizer, Martha Bailey, Marianne Bitler, Tom Buchmueller, Mark Duggan,
 David Frisvold, Nora Gordon, Paula Lantz, Helen Levy, Tony LoSasso, Catherine McLaughlin, Jim
 Marton, Edward Norton, Dean Yang, participants in several conferences and seminars (at the Southern
 Economic Association meetings, the University of Michigan, the Robert Wood Johnson Scholars in
 Health Policy Annual Research Conference, the Southeastern Health Economics Study Group, the
 American Association of Public Policy and Management, Williams College, Wesleyan University,
 the University of California at Irvine, and the National Bureau of Economic Research) for extremely
 valuable comments. Lara Shore-Sheppard generously shared programs, data, and advice. Excellent
 research assistance was supplied by Aubriana Ard, Leland Brewster, Elizabeth Calano, Gauri Gupta,
 Najma Khatri, Jeff Mutuc, and Ruchika Vij. Support from the Robert Wood Johnson Scholars in Health
 Policy program and the West Coast Poverty Center is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
 herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2010 by Tara Watson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
 may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
 the source.
Inside the Refrigerator: Immigration Enforcement and Chilling Effects in Medicaid Participation
Tara Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 16278
August 2010
JEL No. I18,I3

                                              ABSTRACT

Economists have puzzled over why eligible individuals fail to enroll in social safety net programs.
“Chilling effects” arising from an icy policy climate are a popular explanation for low program take-up
rates among immigrants, but such effects are inherently hard to measure. This paper investigates a
concrete determinant of chilling, Federal immigration enforcement, and finds robust evidence that
heightened enforcement reduces Medicaid participation among children of non-citizens. This is the
case even when children are themselves citizens and face no eligibility barriers to Medicaid enrollment.
Immigrants from countries with more undocumented U.S. residents, those living in cities with a high
fraction of other immigrants, and those with healthy children are most sensitive to enforcement efforts.
Up to seventy-five percent of the relative decline in non-citizen Medicaid participation around the
time of welfare reform, which has been attributed to the chilling effects of the reform itself, is explained
by a contemporaneous spike in immigration enforcement activity. The results imply that safety net
participation is influenced not only by program design, but also by a broader set of seemingly unrelated
policy choices.


Tara Watson
Department of Economics
Williams College
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER
tara.watson@williams.edu
Given the widespread concern about moral hazard and crowd-out arising from social
safety net programs, it is perhaps surprising that a high fraction of low-income
individuals fail to participate in programs for which they are eligible. A Kaiser Family
Foundation report estimates that 52 percent of eligible adults without private insurance
took up Medicaid in 2002, for example (Davidoff et al., 2005). Take-up rates are
particularly low for immigrants; just 30 percent of eligible non-citizen adults were
enrolled in Medicaid in 2002, compared with 57 percent of citizens. (Davidoff et al.,
2005).


A growing literature investigates why some refrain from using social assistance to which
they are entitled. In the wake of the 1996 welfare reform and the associated decline in
immigrant participation in public programs, some researchers posit that the general policy
environment can affect program participation even for those who maintain eligibility.
Such indirect effects are termed “chilling effects” because they arise from an icy policy
climate rather than from direct eligibility changes. The term more generally is used to
describe a situation in which “speech or conduct is suppressed by fear of penalization at
the interests of an individual or group.” 1


In the academic literature, “chilling” has been treated as a residual that explains otherwise
puzzling responses to changes in safety net programs.                    This paper investigates a
previously unexplored determinant of chilling for immigrants, Federal immigration
enforcement, to assess the extent to which the overall policy environment influences
participation decisions in Medicaid.


As described below, the results suggest an economically and statistically significant
relationship between the level of enforcement and participation in Medicaid by children
of non-citizens, even when the children themselves are citizens. The results point to the
importance of seemingly unrelated policy choices in determining program take-up.



1
  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chilling_effect_(term). Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan used the
term to describe a situation in which there was a policy deterring freedom of expression but no law
explicitly prohibiting the expression.


                                                    2
                                                I. Background


Economists interested in understanding take-up of public programs have emphasized the
roles of stigma, information, and program design. 2 Though a full discussion of the take-
up literature is beyond the scope of this paper, Remler and Glied (2003) and Currie
(2004) offer reviews. Both conclude that the most consistent determinant of take-up is
program design, including information provision, transactions costs, and the generosity of
benefits. 3

As noted above, the take-up issue is more severe for immigrants. Immigrants may have
particular difficulty obtaining information about programs, completing English
application forms, and navigating the complex administrative system. Stigmatization of
participation may be high for some immigrant groups (Bertrand et al., 2000). A sizable
literature suggests that immigrant groups have higher eligibility for and lower take-up
rates of public programs, and that assimilation facilitates take-up (Currie, 2004).


Until recently, the role of the broader policy climate in influencing program participation
has received less attention.          After welfare reform, however, there was a decline in
program participation beyond what would have been expected due to strict eligibility
changes, especially for immigrants. 4             As a result, some observers hypothesize that
“chilling effects” arising from the anti-immigrant language of the welfare reform bill may
have discouraged immigrant participation in public programs for which they remained
eligible. 5

2
  For example, Daponte, Sanders and Taylor (1999) find that providing information about Food Stamp
eligibility to low-income households substantially increases participation rates, particularly for households
with the most to gain from participation. Other studies explore how culture propagated through social
networks could influence participation, perhaps due to stigma or information (Bertrand et al., 2000, Borjas
and Hilton, 1996, and Aizer and Currie, 2004.)
3
  Despite its popularity as an explanation, there has been little empirical work successfully isolating the
effect of stigma on program take-up.
4
  A sizable literature explores the effect of welfare reform on health insurance more broadly. See Bitler,
Gelbach, and Hoynes (2005) and DeLeire, Levine, and Levy (2006) for examples. More recent work
focuses on the 2005 Deficit Reduction Act which increased citizenship documentation requirements
(Sommers, 2010).
5
  The 1996 PRWORA welfare reform bill included a number of provisions that were targeted towards
immigrants. Immigrant eligibility for public means-tested programs was restricted for legal non-citizens.
For Medicaid, the law banned the use of federal funds for most post-enactment immigrants (those arriving


                                                      3
Though the existence of “chilling” due to an icy policy climate is plausible, fear and
informal dissuasion are difficult to observe. Analysts typically assume that otherwise
unexplained declines in participation or take-up of non-citizens are due to chilling effects.
Mazzolari (2004), for example, accounts for a wide range of economic and demographic
factors and finds that non-citizen immigrants have an unexplained decline in take-up of
several safety net programs of 3-4 percentage points following welfare reform. She
attributes this excess decline to chilling.         Similarly, Kandula et al. (2004) report that
Medicaid participation fell for pre-enactment immigrants following welfare reform even
though they maintained eligibility.


Other literature exploits variation in state generosity towards immigrants following
reform. 6    The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PRWORA) welfare reform bill removed Federal support for post-enactment immigrants
(those arriving after August 1996) for the first five years of residence; states have the
option to use their own funds to support this group. Royer (2005) finds that non-citizen
Medicaid take-up declined for those states that denied benefits to new immigrants
following reform. Borjas (2003) reports that non-citizen Medicaid participation fell more
in less generous states. Noting that most non-citizens in the sample had arrived before
1996 and therefore maintained eligibility for Medicaid, Borjas surmises that declines in
participation stemmed from the “chilling effects” of welfare reform. In contrast, Kaushal
and Kaestner (2005) do not find differences in new immigrant Medicaid participation in




after August 1996) for the first five years after arrival. States had the option to use their own funds to
provide Medicaid to this group and about half of them chose to do so. The law also allowed states to ban
legal pre-enactment non-citizen immigrants from participating in Medicaid, though almost all continued
offering Medicaid to pre-enactment immigrants. In addition, the reform made it harder for states to use
their own funds to provide benefits to undocumented immigrants. Welfare reform also restricted immigrant
eligibility for food stamps, Supplemental Security Income, and cash welfare in ways that differed across
states. Exceptions to immigrant restrictions were made for recently arrived refugees, Cuban/Haitian
entrants, and some other groups.
6
  Hungerman (2005) uses the differential impact of welfare reform on non-citizens to study charitable
giving.


                                                    4
more and less generous states. 7 However, they also interpret their results as evidence of
“chilling effects,” in this case arising from the icy national policy environment.


In sum, previous analyses have found that program participation decisions respond to
policy changes in ways that extend beyond what would be expected based on the strict
eligibility changes. These unexplained changes in participation decisions are commonly
attributed to chilling. An Urban Institute report on the subject concludes:


        “Because comparatively few legal immigrants were ineligible for public
        benefits as of December 1997, it appears that the steeper declines in
        noncitizens' than citizens' use of welfare, food stamps, and Medicaid owe
        more to the "chilling effect" of welfare reform and other policy changes
        than they do to actual eligibility changes.” (Fix and Passel, 1999)


This paper takes a different approach by considering chilling induced by Federal
enforcement of immigration laws. Enforcement of immigration law sharply increased in
the mid 1990s. There are good reasons to believe that Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS) actions could affect program participation.                  For example, following
Proposition 187’s passage in 1994 in California, the Department of Health Services
developed a program with the Immigration and Naturalization Service to request
repayment of Medicaid benefits for non-citizen immigrants upon re-entry into the United
States after a trip abroad. Other anecdotes suggest that applicants for citizenship were
occasionally asked to reimburse the government for previously used benefits, though this
was not official policy.


For undocumented immigrants seeking health insurance for their children, fear of
government authority is a natural concern. Loue, Cooper, and Lloyd (2005) interview
157 women in San Diego in 1999-2001 and find that roughly a quarter of immigrants
arriving after 1996 and a quarter of undocumented immigrants had heard that they could


7
 Kaestner and Kaushal (2005) report no evidence of “chilling” in TANF (Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families, the program providing cash welfare following welfare reform) participation for new immigrants.


                                                    5
not obtain medical care due to immigration status.             Similar proportions said they were
somewhat or very afraid to obtain medical care for themselves or a family member.


Program design and the general policy climate have the potential to exacerbate or
ameliorate the fears of undocumented immigrants. For instance, application forms for
means-tested programs typically require or request Social Security numbers for every
member of the household, even if only children are applying for benefits. 8 Of six welfare
sites studied in a 2003 report for the Department of Health and Human Services, only one
uses an application that explicitly states that applicant information will not be shared with
the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). On the other hand, applications at two
sites explicitly state that information will be shared with the INS and that the INS
response could affect benefit levels or lead to an investigation. 9


INS policy could influence the program participation decisions even for legal permanent
residents. For example, the welfare reform bill reiterated a long-standing doctrine that
immigrants deemed a “public charge” could be deported or denied future citizenship.
Though “public charge” deportations have rarely been implemented in the post-war
period, the term was not defined in the legislation. It was not until late 1997 that a
clarification was made indicating that occasional use of safety net services would not be
grounds for deportation or denial of citizenship. Nevertheless, even after that date there
were reports of immigrants being told that participation in public programs could
jeopardize their immigration status (Schlosberg and Wiley, 1998).                          Heightened
enforcement could intensify fears about public charge deportations.


To investigate the interactions between program participation and enforcement of
immigration law, I exploit spatial and temporal variation in enforcement action between
1993 and 2002.          The increase in immigration enforcement in the 1990s varied



8
  Recently some states have been removing requests for household social security numbers on application
forms in an effort to increase Medicaid and State Children’s Health Insurance Program participation among
children of undocumented immigrants (Holcomb et al., 2003).
9
  Holcomb et al., 2003.


                                                   6
substantially across the 33 INS administrative districts and across country-of-origin
groups.


In the next section, I discuss the patterns of enforcement and factors driving variation
across areas and over time. The analysis described below aims to consider a novel
determinant of “chilling.”         There has been little previous work examining the link
between enforcement and program participation. 10


                            II. Enforcement and Enforcement Data


Immigration enforcement data were obtained from the Department of Homeland Security
via a 2009 Freedom of Information Act request. The dataset covers fiscal years 1992 to
2003 and consists of counts of Immigration and Naturalization Services “deportable
aliens located” as the result of internal investigations, by INS internal district, country of
origin, and fiscal year. 11 “Deportable aliens located” is the INS term for apprehensions.
Because some cells are suppressed due to confidentiality concerns, these data are
supplemented with published reports in the INS Statistical Yearbooks listing deportable
aliens located by INS district and fiscal year.


Figure 1 shows trends in enforcement over time.                      There is a sharp increase in
enforcement in the mid-1990s, presumably due to the sharply increasing INS budget and
manpower. 12 The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996
increased enforcement expenditures and gave the INS expanded authority to locate and


10
   One exception is unpublished work by Vargas (2010) who explores the effect of fear of deportation on
WIC and SCHIP participation for immigrants in mixed status families. Previous research has looked at the
effect of enforcement on labor market outcomes. Bansak (2005) finds a negative effect of employer
sanctions on wages of likely illegal immigrants in the 1980s, for example. Orrenius and Zavodny (2009)
report adverse labor market consequences for Latin American immigrants post-2001 which they attribute to
increased enforcement.
11
   Border enforcement activities are excluded because they are less likely to affect resident immigrants and
because the geographic distribution of the impact is unclear.
12
   Full-time equivalent staffing for internal immigration enforcement jumped from 1746 in fiscal year 1995
to 2513 in fiscal year 1998. The overall enforcement budget increased from 2.1 billion to 3.4 billion over
the same time period, and the share of those funds spent on border control declined from 64 to 56 percent,
leaving additional resources for internal enforcement and investigations. (Source: “Immigration
Enforcement Spending Since IRCA,” Migration Policy Institute Fact Sheet, November 2005.)


                                                     7
remove undocumented immigrants. The number of internal deportable aliens located
went from 70,000 in 1995 to 123,000 in 1997, for example.                         These trends mirror
Medicaid participation rates for children non-citizens.


I aggregate the 33 INS districts into 25 “clusters” of states which map into Current
Population Survey geography for use in the analysis described below. 13                     The level of
enforcement in a fiscal year is summarized by the number of deportable aliens located
divided by the estimated number of non-citizens in 1995. 14 The log average enforcement
over a two year period including the year prior to and year of the Medicaid decision is the
indicator of enforcement activity; results using levels of enforcement rather than logs are
reported in the appendix. Figure 2 reports the level of enforcement activity by fiscal year
for 7 of the 25 INS clusters in the data. Some areas, such as Texas, experienced sharp
increases in enforcement activity while others, such as California, saw more modest
changes.


To distinguish the impact of enforcement from potential confounding factors, it is helpful
to understand what drives variation in enforcement within a district over time. There are
several potentially important factors. First, new illegal immigration is likely to affect
both the perceived need for enforcement as well as the number of apprehensions
conditional on the level of effort.           Second, though enforcement is implemented by
Federal authorities, local attitudes toward immigration could influence the actions of the
district manager. Third, the budget and staff available to district offices have a direct
impact on the level of enforcement activity.               Finally, district managers have a large
amount of discretion as to the level and type of enforcement they pursue.


New immigration could be a potential confounding factor if it affects enforcement and
has a direct effect on Medicaid participation decisions. 15 The government produces

13
   Clusters are usually a single state or a group of states. The one exception is that the New York
metropolitan area within New York state is an independent INS district and its own cluster. INS districts
typically follow county lines and are often states or groups of states.
14
   I estimate the number of non-citizens using IPUMS Census data for 1990 and 2000. The average of
these two numbers is the estimated population for 1995.
15
   New immigrants are generally less likely to participate in safety net programs.


                                                     8
estimates of inflows of undocumented immigrants for large states based on the Current
Population Survey, but these tend to be quite noisy and are not available nationwide.
More reliable estimates are produced using decennial Census data but these lack annual
detail. Legal immigration is reliably reported at the state-year level, however.


I use a number of approaches to address the potential bias stemming from the correlation
between new immigration and enforcement. First, regressions account for the main effect
of enforcement on citizens, so any effect of new immigration that burdens non-citizens
and citizens equally is controlled. Second, I remove non-citizen children arriving within
five years of the survey date from the sample. In some specifications, I further limit the
sample to mothers who arrived more than five years ago or mothers who arrived prior to
1992.    These results indicate that enforcement affects the long-standing non-citizen
population. In addition, I allow new legal immigration to a state to differentially affect
non-citizen Medicaid participation decisions, but I find no evidence that it does so.
Furthermore, I document below that enforcement is not correlated with observable
characteristics of non-citizen families in the sample.


A second potential cause of enforcement variation is local attitudes. District managers
work for the Federal government and have no obligation to tailor enforcement to local
preferences. Local law enforcement officers are not legally permitted to enforce Federal
immigration law. 16       However, local efforts could facilitate Federal apprehensions if
undocumented immigrants are apprehended for other crimes and then transferred to
Federal authorities.


In the analysis below, I consider three imperfect proxies for local attitudes – media
coverage of enforcement activity, survey data on attitudes toward immigration, and
immigration issue “report card” scores for Congressional representatives. None of these
proxies offer much predictive power and controlling for them does not alter the results.
Nevertheless, it is possible that local attitudes are important but not captured by the


16
  See Seghetti et al. (2004). Starting in 2003, the Federal government has trained selected local law
enforcement agencies to play a more active role in enforcing immigration law.


                                                     9
available variables; if so, the “chilling” that appears to be induced by enforcement may
stem in part from general anti-immigrant sentiment at the local level.


Resources available for enforcement activity have an important impact on the number of
apprehensions. Although changes in aggregate enforcement spending stemmed from the
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 and related
Congressional policy changes, less clear is how resources were allocated across districts.
Reports typically describe the INS as a dysfunctional agency without the cultural will or
the information infrastructure to make optimal resource allocation decisions. 17 Davila,
Pagan, and Grau (1999) suggest that the agency seeks to maximize total apprehensions
rather than minimize the number of undocumented immigrants.


Furthermore, the bureaucracy of the INS is generally perceived to leave a large amount of
discretion to district managers. Many observers lament the lack of centralized decision
making and the absence of communication between districts.                      Martin (2000), for
example, notes:


        “Consistency of approach among district offices has been a longstanding
        issue for INS….[T]he position of INS district director has traditionally
        carried considerable power and wide enforcement discretion. District
        directors proudly place their own distinctive personal stamp on the actions
        of the district office, and sometimes this custom has led to broad
        disparities in actual practices, with regard to both enforcement and
        services (adjudications). Even within district offices, particular units
        sometimes follow their own priorities. (p.2)”


Similarly, a GAO report concluded that the “INS leadership had allowed INS’
organizational structure to become decentralized without adequate controls. Specifically,
its regional structure had created geographical separation among INS programs and


17
 See, for example, Center for Equal Opportunity (1995), Siskin et al. (2006), and Government
Accountability Office (1999).


                                                  10
hampered resource allocation and consistent program implementation.” 18 Idiosyncratic
preferences of district managers combined with aggregate budget fluctuations are likely
important determinants in the degree of immigration enforcement within districts over
time.


In sum, variation in immigration enforcement may stem from several sources. Because
the determinants of enforcement cannot be easily characterized, the empirical strategy
controls for a wide range of potential factors that could be correlated with enforcement.
The key identifying assumption is that, after controlling for these factors, variation in
enforcement stems from sources that are uncorrelated with differential Medicaid
participation for children of non-citizens.


                                 III. Medicaid Data and Other Data


Information on Medicaid participation comes from the March Annual Demographic
Supplements to the Current Population Survey (CPS), a survey implemented by the U.S.
Census Bureau which aims to be nationally representative of households in the United
States. 19   The CPS asks whether each individual in the household was covered by
Medicaid in the previous calendar year and is among the most commonly used data sets
in studies of Medicaid participation. In the years following the introduction of the State
Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), children participating in the SCHIP
program are coded as participating in Medicaid. 20 Citizenship status and country of
origin of each household member is available starting in the 1994 survey. The survey
contains a number of other demographic and economic indicators as well.


I pool the March surveys for the years 1994-2003 to generate the sample, which covers
the reference years 1993-2002.          My sample is limited to children under 18 years of age
who can be matched to a mother within the household. I also exclude children directly


18
   General Accounting Office (1999), page 3, summarizing a January 1991 GAO/GGD report.
19
   Undocumented immigrants are likely to be undercounted in the Current Population Survey; legal status
of non-citizens is not reported.
20
   States vary as to whether SCHIP programs are administratively distinct from the Medicaid program.


                                                   11
targeted by the provisions of the 1996 PWRORA bill:                        non-citizen children whose
mothers arrived less than five years prior to the survey. Another advantage to excluding
this group is that it mitigates bias coming from new immigrant inflows: such inflows are
likely to be associated with increased enforcement. The primary analysis is based on a
low-SES sample, which is limited to children below 200 percent of the poverty line
whose mothers lack a college degree.


I assign children’s status based on their mother’s country of origin and citizenship status,
under the assumption that mothers are likely to make decisions about Medicaid
enrollment for the family. 21 The immigration status of non-citizens (i.e. whether they are
documented or undocumented immigrants) is not observable in the CPS.                                  In the
appendix, I show that children whose mothers are from counties with a high number of
undocumented migrants are more sensitive to enforcement. However, I cannot rule out
the possibility that legal non-citizens are being “chilled” by enforcement efforts.


Under-reporting of program participation is an important limitation of these data. Meyer,
Mok, and Sullivan (2009) find substantial under-reporting of public benefit receipt
compared to administrative records in five major surveys, including the Current
Population Survey. The Meyer et al. study does not examine Medicaid participation, but
finds reporting rates of only 50-70 percent for AFDC/TANF (cash welfare) in the CPS.
Medicaid misreporting may be a particular problem because state Medicaid programs
have multiple names and Medicaid may lack the salience of cash welfare for participants.
However, Klerman, Ringel, and Roth (2005) find a Medicaid reporting rate of 70 percent
for adults and 75 percent for children in the CPS using California data, with much lower
rates for welfare reporting in the same sample. Of particular concern is the potential that
under-reporting behavior is responsive to enforcement; I explore the implications of
endogenous under-reporting below.



21
  Alternative methods of assigning child’s status are also explored in the appendix; the citizenship status of
the mother’s spouse (typically the child’s father) appears to be at least as important as that of the child’s
mother. Children who are themselves non-citizens appear to be more responsive to enforcement than other
children of non-citizens, as shown in Appendix Table 2.


                                                     12
As is common in the literature, I use the data available in the CPS to impute each child’s
Medicaid eligibility. 22      This imputation includes measurement error.                  For example,
individuals with high levels of medical expenses may qualify for Medicaid but appear
ineligible, whereas individuals with high levels of assets may be disqualified but appear
eligible.     I use two alternative measures of eligibility.                   Because recipients of
AFDC/TANF (cash welfare) are typically enrolled in Medicaid, the first eligibility
measure incorporates imputed AFDC/TANF eligibility. A child is imputed to be eligible
for Medicaid if her family appears to qualify for AFDC/TANF or if her family appears to
qualify for Medicaid via “expansion eligibility.” “Expansion eligibility” includes children
with family income low enough to qualify for Medicaid regardless of AFDC/TANF
status.


Because AFDC/TANF eligibility is difficult to measure, a second definition of Medicaid
eligibility relies on expansion eligibility only. 23 Over 88 percent of children deemed
eligible through the first definition are imputed to be eligible using the Medicaid
expansion eligibility rules only. Both measures of eligibility are imperfect, and analyses
that examine take-up (rather than overall participation) should be interpreted with some
caution.


Table 1 shows the key summary statistics for the children in the low-SES sample and the
full sample. Medicaid participation is highest for children of non-citizens. Such children
have less educated mothers but are less likely to live in single parent families. Children of
non-citizens are also more likely to be income-eligible for Medicaid, to lack health
insurance, and to have inferior health status.


The analysis also requires information on state welfare policy.                      I rely on detailed
information provided by Zimmerman and Tumlin (1999) on state welfare policies related
to immigrants following welfare reform. I use three definitions of generosity. First, I

22
   Many thanks to Lara Shore-Sheppard for sharing the imputation algorithm and eligibility rules.
23
   To impute eligibility for TANF after 1996, I use AFDC rules in place in 1996. For subsequent years,
states were required to offer Medicaid to those children who would have been eligible under AFDC rules.
States also have work requirements and other policies that shape eligibility for TANF; these are not fully
captured by my imputation algorithm.


                                                    13
follow Borjas (2003) and consider a state “generous” if it offered food assistance or SSI
to pre-enactment immigrants or offered any of four major programs (TANF, Medicaid,
food assistance, or SSI) to post-enactment immigrants. 24 This definition includes the six
largest immigrant states; 89 percent of children of non-citizens in my sample live in a
generous state according to the Borjas definition. 25 Kaushal and Kaestner (2005) offer a
simpler definition, describing a state as “generous” if it offered TANF or Medicaid to
post-enactment immigrants. Under this definition 56-57 percent of children of non-
citizens live in generous states. Among the six largest immigrant states, only California
and Illinois are considered generous. As a third alternative, I describe states as generous
if Zimmerman and Tumlin (1999) categorize immigrant safety net programs in the state
as most available or somewhat available. All of the major immigrant states except Texas
are included as generous; 72 percent of children of non-citizens live in generous states
according to the Zimmerman and Tumlin definition.                      For all three measures of
generosity, the state is labeled as generous or not generous after welfare reform and the
generosity variable equals zero for all states prior to welfare reform.


I measure perception of enforcement using newspaper coverage of immigration
enforcement events; a typical event is a raid on an employment or housing site. The
sample of newspaper articles comes from a balanced panel of newspapers available in
Lexis-Nexis (English) and Proquest Ethnic NewsWatch (English and Spanish); articles
are included if they cover a non-criminal internal immigration enforcement event
involving five or more migrants. 26 I construct three measures of coverage: the number of
articles in national news media relating to an event within the cluster, the circulation-
weighted number of local articles relating to an event within the cluster, and the
circulation-weighted number of articles in local newspapers regarding any event. All



24
   Post-enactment immigrants are those arriving after welfare reform in August 1996. TANF refers to
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families, the cash welfare which replaced Aid to Families with Dependent
Children (AFDC) program after welfare reform. SSI refers to Supplemental Security Income, which
provides cash to low-income disabled individuals.
25
   The six states with the highest numbers of immigrants are California, Florida, Illinois, New York, New
Jersey, and Texas.
26
   The Spanish-language article sample from ProQuest Ethnic Newswatch is too small to generate
meaningful separate analysis.


                                                   14
three measures are adjusted for the cluster population size. Due to incomplete coverage in
the databases, these variables are noisy proxies for actual media attention to enforcement.


I also use the American National Election Study (ANES) to calculate state-level measures
of attitudes towards immigration. 27 The ANES asks each respondent whether he or she
would like to see immigration increased, unchanged, or decreased in the years 1992,
1994, 1996, 1998, 2000, and 2004. The answers to this question are collapsed and
aggregated to the state level to generate the fraction of state residents who would like to
see immigration decreased. Interpolation is used for non-response years. For states
without responses, the average of the Census region is used. Unfortunately, small sample
sizes in the ANES mean that this variable does not offer much predictive power.


Finally, I use Congressional representation in each state as a proxy for local attitudes
towards immigration.         Immigration report cards for each member of Congress are
obtained from an advocacy group which aims to curb immigration, NumbersUSA. 28
Report card scores range from 0 to 100 and are based on the members’ votes on
immigration related legislation from 1989-2010; high scores indicate that the
representative typically votes to reduce immigration.                 State scores are averages of
Congressional members’ career scores for representatives in office during the two years
prior to the CPS survey year. 29


                                  IV. Methodology and Results


A. Enforcement and Non-Citizen Medicaid Participation


The analysis examines the effect of immigration enforcement on Medicaid participation
by children of non-citizens. For an overview of the data, I start by considering a sample
of children of non-citizens only. The preliminary linear probability model is:

27
   The National Election Studies (www.electionstudies.org). THE 2004 NATIONAL ELECTION STUDY
[dataset]. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, Center for Political Studies [producer and distributor].
28
   See http://www.numbersusa.com/content/my/tools/grades.
29
   I use the NOMINATE data set (http://www.voteview.com/dwnomin.htm) and Wikipedia to identify
members of Congress in office at the end of each Congressional session.


                                                    15
                       Medicaidict = β 0 + β 1enforcect + θ c * year + δ t + µ ict
where enforce refers to INS enforcement activity in cluster c relevant for participation
year t, θ c interacted with year controls for a cluster-specific linear time trend, and time
fixed effects λ t control for shocks that affect all non-citizens nationally. Standard errors
are clustered by INS cluster to account for common shocks in a given local area.


Table 2 shows the results for the low-SES sample and the overall sample of children of
non-citizens. One log-point increase in enforcement activity in one’s local area reduces
Medicaid participation by 8.7 percentage points for low-SES children and 4.9 percentage
points for all children. It is also evident from Table 2 that there is no comparable effect
on children of non-citizens, suggesting that the results for the non-citizen sample are not
generated by factors discouraging Medicaid participation more generally. Furthermore,
there are no comparable effects if one considers the lead in enforcement, where the lead
is defined as the average of the survey year (the year following the reference year) and
the subsequent year.          These results suggest that enforcement reduces Medicaid
participation for children of non-citizens.


B. Full Analysis of Participation


To improve statistical power and to more fully account for local shocks, the bulk of the
analysis combines non-citizens and citizens and looks for a differential response to
enforcement activity. The preferred specification is a linear probability model:
                    Medicaidicsgt =β 0 + β 1enforcect * nonciti + β 2enforcect +
                           Ωcsg * nonciti + λ t * nonciti + XiB 3 + µ icsgt
where enforce refers to INS enforcement activity in cluster c relevant for participation
year t, nonciti indicates that the mother of child i is a non-citizen. Controls account for
cluster-state-group-citizen fixed effects Ωcsg * nonciti to capture permanent state
differences facing children of non-citizens of a particular country-of-origin group, 30 and
year dummies λ t interacted with nonciti to account for annual changes in non-citizen

30
   The New York City metropolitan area and the remainder of New York are treated as separate “cluster-
states” because they are located within separate INS clusters.


                                                   16
participation nationally. Demographic controls Xi include child age*year fixed effects,
mother’s education, mother’s marital status, indicators for whether the family lies below
100 or 200 percent of the poverty line, an indicator for whether the mother has been in
the U.S. at least five years, an indicator for whether the mother arrived in the U.S. during
the 1980s, and an indicator for whether the mother arrived prior to 1980. Standard errors
are clustered on INS cluster to account for common shocks. In this specification, the key
coefficient β 1 represents the effect of enforcement on children of non-citizens over and
above the effect of enforcement on other children.


Panel A of Table 3 shows the main results for the low-SES sample with different sets of
controls. The preferred baseline specification (second column) shows that one log point
increase in enforcement efforts differentially reduces Medicaid participation by children
of non-citizens by 9.2 percentage points.                One can also restrict to citizen children,
children whose mother’s arrived more than five years ago, or both. 31 Results are largely
comparable for these groups. That is, even for children born in the U.S. to long-standing
non-citizen residents, enforcement influences the Medicaid participation decision.
Similar effects are estimated if the comparison group is restricted to children of foreign-
born citizens.


Panel B of Table 3 shows analogous results for the full sample. Point estimates are
roughly half the size for this group because few high-SES children participate in the
Medicaid program.          Nevertheless, even in the full sample there is a statistically
significant reduction in Medicaid participation for children of non-citizens of at least 4.7
percentage points.


In Appendix Table 1, I explore whether enforcement is predictive of other observable
factors that might influence participation. These include family poverty status, mother’s
marital status, mother’s education, mother’s labor supply, child’s age, and mother’s time
since arrival. There is no statistically significant relationship between enforcement and

31
  Recall that non-citizen children whose mothers arrived less than five years ago are potentially directly
affected by welfare reform and are therefore excluded from all analyses. The results are not substantively
changed if this group is included.


                                                    17
any of these factors. This fact suggests that Medicaid participation is influenced by
enforcement rather than by contemporaneous economic or demographic changes across
areas that disproportionately affect non-citizens.


C. Eligibility and Take-Up


Table 4 explores the implications of enforcement for Medicaid eligibility. The baseline
results (i.e., those reported in column II of Table 3) could be biased if enforcement
changes coincided with state eligibility expansions that disproportionately benefited non-
citizens, or if economic conditions changed such that fewer non-citizens were eligible. I
impute eligibility in two ways, as described in the Section III. The first incorporates the
AFDC/TANF pathway and eligibility arising due to Medicaid expansions and the second
ignores the AFDC/TANF eligibility pathway. Columns II and III of Table 4 show that
immigration enforcement is not predictive of Medicaid eligibility for the low-SES sample
or the overall sample.


Table 4 also examines the effect of immigration on take-up of Medicaid – that is,
participation conditional on eligibility. Comparing column I to columns IV and V for the
low-SES sample, it is clear that the effects of enforcement on take-up are of similar
magnitude to the effects on participation. This is not surprising given that at least two-
thirds of the low-SES sample is Medicaid eligible. For the high-SES sample, the effect
on take-up is larger than the effect of participation. In sum, it appears that enforcement is
not correlated with income eligibility and that enforcement discourages take-up
conditional on eligibility for children of non-citizens.


D. Is Chilling National or Local?


In Table 5, I explore alternative dimensions of enforcement for the foreign born low-SES
sample.   Column I repeats the preferred analysis for the foreign-born sample using
enforcement at the INS cluster level. Column II instead considers enforcement targeted
at one’s country-of-origin group at the national level, and finds that it is not predictive of



                                              18
Medicaid participation. 32 Similarly, group-specific enforcement in one’s cluster has a
smaller effect than overall enforcement in one’s local area and has a statistically
insignificant effect on participation. 33 It appears that aggregate local enforcement is the
most important determinant of participation, though some caution is warranted due to
measurement error in the local group-specific variable. When all three measures of
enforcement are included simultaneously, the standard errors are large and one cannot
say anything definitive.


Measures of enforcement are unavailable at geography smaller than the INS district.
However, it is possible that metropolitan areas with many non-citizens experience a
disproportionate share of district enforcement per non-citizen.                    Furthermore, even if
enforcement is proportional to the number of non-citizens across cities within a district,
residents of areas with many non-citizens might be more connected to immigrant social
networks and thus more aware of enforcement policy.


To explore effects in high- and low-exposure areas, I find the fraction non-citizen of the
total population for each of the 201 metropolitan areas in the sample. The median level
of fraction non-citizen is computed for each country-of-origin group in the sample, and
for each group the sample is split into those above and below the median. 34                           As is
evident in column V of Table 5, there is an insignificant effect of cluster-level
enforcement for non-citizens residing in areas with few other non-citizens. Columns VI
through VIII also suggest no statistically detectible pattern relating enforcement and
Medicaid participation for those living in “low exposure” areas.




32
   Because the regressions control for non-citizen*year effects, this is the effect of enforcement targeted
towards one’s group over and above aggregate national changes in enforcement.
33
   The relatively weak results for group-cluster enforcement may stem from measurement error. Local
group-specific enforcement is suppressed for small cells in the enforcement data.
34
   I calculate exposure to non-citizens by averaging the fraction non-citizen in the metropolitan area in the
1990 Census and fraction non-citizen in the 2000 Census. The median is constructed separately for each
country of origin group because groups that cluster in non-citizen areas may also respond differently to
enforcement for other reasons. I combine those at and above the median into a single group; the results are
not sensitive to this choice. Results are also quite similar if exposure to non-citizens is replaced with
exposure to same-group members.


                                                     19
In areas with many non-citizens, on the other hand, the effect of aggregate enforcement at
the cluster level is quite pronounced (see column IX of Table 5).                   There is also a
marginally significant effect of local group-specific enforcement in column XI. In the
horse race in column XII, aggregate cluster-level enforcement appears to be more
important that group-specific local enforcement, but this may be due to measurement
error in the latter variable.


The more substantial impact of enforcement in non-citizen enclaves may arise because
enforcement per non-citizen is disproportionately located in these areas, because
immigrants have more access to information about enforcement actions, because
immigrant social networks are more likely to include someone affected, or some
combination of these factors.         Baseline participation rates are also higher in high-
exposure areas.


E. Who Responds to Enforcement?

In Appendix Table 2, I use a triple interaction approach to explore the responsiveness of
different sub-groups to enforcement policy. 35            For example, the first two columns
indicate that children under 2 and children under 7 are slightly more affected by
enforcement than older children, though the differences are extremely small. Similarly,
married mothers are slightly more likely to respond to enforcement.


According to INS, the share of undocumented residents differs substantially across
country-of-origin groups. 36 One might suspect that groups with many undocumented
migrants are likely to respond more dramatically to enforcement efforts. Mexicans have
the highest proportion undocumented of any group in the U.S.; roughly 52 percent of the
Mexican-born population living in the U.S. is estimated to be undocumented. Children of
Mexican mothers do appear to respond more than other children to enforcement efforts,
as shown in the fourth column of Appendix Table 2.

35
  All two-way interactions are accounted for in these regressions.
36
  U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, “Estimates of the Unauthorized Immigrant Population
Residing in the United States: 1990 to 2000,” Office of Policy and Planning, Report 1211.


                                                  20
I also examine mothers from countries with at least 25 percent residents estimated to be
undocumented. 37 The effect of enforcement is marginally significant for groups in which
most immigrants are documented, but is nearly triple in size for groups with a high
fraction of undocumented migrants, as shown in column V. Column VI of Appendix
Table 2 indicates that non-citizen children are more responsive to enforcement than other
children of non-citizens.


The final columns of Appendix Table 2 investigate whether responsiveness to
enforcement varies by child health status. Medicaid participation is most responsive for
the healthiest children, perhaps because parents view participation for these children as
less essential. 38


F. Insurance Status, Health, and Program Participation


Table 6 presents information on how enforcement affects insurance status. The effect of
enforcement on public health insurance is almost identical to the effect of Medicaid. This
suggests that immigrants deterred from Medicaid due to enforcement are not enrolling in
alternative public health insurance programs. 39               Private health insurance increases
slightly but not statistically significantly in response to enforcement for the low-SES
sample. The point estimates from Panel A imply that a 10 percentage point increase in
Medicaid participation (due to absence of enforcement) crowds out 1.4 percentage points
of private insurance for the low-SES sample.                However, the crowd-out “ratio” (the
change in private insurance divided by the change in Medicaid) would have standard
errors too large to generate a precise crowd-out estimate.


Table 6 also suggests that the reduction in a child having any health insurance (5.8
percentage points due to a log-point increase in enforcement) is only 63 percent of the

37
   High-undocumented groups include those with mothers born in Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico,
Dominica, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Venezuela, and Kenya.
38
   As discussed below, health status may respond directly to enforcement.
39
   Alternative public programs could include idiosyncratic state programs, Indian Health Service programs,
military insurance programs, etc.


                                                   21
reduction in Medicaid, implying 3.7 percentage points of “crowd-out” associated with a
10 percentage point change in Medicaid. The discrepancy between the change in private
insurance and the change in any insurance stems from the fact that about 8 percent of
low-SES children participate both in Medicaid and private insurance over the course of a
year. 40 Thus, the point estimates suggest that of every 100 children discouraged from
Medicaid participation due to enforcement, 14 enroll in private insurance that they would
not have otherwise had, and another 23 rely exclusively on private insurance that they
would have had for part or all of the year. 41 These are not precisely estimated numbers,
however, and the confidence intervals are also consistent with no crowd-out. Panel B
presents results for the full sample; here the point estimates suggest little or no crowd-
out.


Reductions in Medicaid participation could lead to inferior child health. Aizer (2003)
shows that exogenous increases in Medicaid participation reduce hospitalizations for
conditions that benefit from preventative care. Enforcement could also directly impact
reported health status by affecting the level of stress in the household or the willingness
of parents to seek health care conditional on insurance status. The Current Population
Survey asked the respondent to rate the child’s health status on a five-point scale from
Excellent to Poor; such data are readily available starting in survey year 1996. 42 The
limited health data in the CPS allow for the examination of the reduced form relationship
between enforcement and reported health, but do not allow one to distinguish among
mechanisms.


The impact of enforcement on reported health status is shown in Table 6. Column V of
Table 6 replicates the Medicaid analysis for the years 1996 and onward; the point
estimates are slightly larger than the baseline. The final columns of Table 6 demonstrate

40
   About 21 percent of low-SES children with private health insurance during some point of the year also
have public health insurance during some point in the year. About 17 percent of low-SES children with
public health insurance also have private insurance. The CPS does not offer information about whether
these sources of insurance are concurrent or sequential.
41
   The different implied crowd-rates highlights the importance of considering within-year insurance
transitions. See Buchmueller and Shore-Sheppard (2010).
42
   Similar self-reported health scales are widely used and shown to predict mortality across race/ethnicity
groups (McGee et al., 1999). It is nevertheless possible that enforcement could affect reporting biases.


                                                     22
the higher levels of enforcement are associated with inferior reported health outcomes
both in the low-SES and the full samples. Further analysis (not shown) reveals that
higher enforcement is primarily associated with children moving from the “very good”
health category to the “good” health category.


Table 7 presents the estimated effect of enforcement on other poverty programs. The
impact on any receipt of public assistance (AFDC/TANF), Disability Income, and
Supplemental Security Income are small and statistically insignificant. On the other
hand, there is suggestive evidence that Food Stamp participation has a similar response to
enforcement as Medicaid, though standard errors are large.


One explanation for the greater sensitivity of non-cash benefits to enforcement is that
undocumented immigrants may be reluctant to apply for cash benefits even in the
absence of enforcement. Health benefits typically have the most streamlined application
process (often possible to complete by mail or internet) and are least likely to require an
in-person interview or fingerprinting. Food stamp applications are often integrated with
the cash assistance application and tend to be complicated, but some states have
integrated a Food Stamp screen into the Medicaid/SCHIP determination process and
some states have stand-alone food stamp application locations (Holcomb et al., 2003). 43
An in-depth analysis of the effect of enforcement across programs is beyond the scope of
this paper, but the differences suggest that enforcement can interact with program design
to influence participation.


G. State Policy Climate and Local Attitudes


The chilling literature has emphasized state policy generosity towards immigrants. It is
important to account for state policy changes around the time of welfare reform in the
analysis of the effect of enforcement on Medicaid participation. Researchers have used
various criteria to categorize as a state as generous. As described in Section III, I
consider three alternative definitions of state generosity. For all three measures of

43
     It is also possible that higher marriage rates among immigrants may influence responsiveness.


                                                      23
generosity, the state is labeled as generous or not generous after welfare reform and the
generosity variable equals zero for all states prior to welfare reform.


Table 8 shows the effect of state policy climate. 44 Both the Borjas and the Kaushal and
Kaestner definitions of generosity show a negative (wrong-signed) and insignificant
effect of state generosity on non-citizen participation.                 Inclusion of these variables
slightly increases the magnitude of the estimated coefficient on enforcement.                           The
Zimmerman and Tumlin definition of generosity is positively (though insignificantly)
associated with Medicaid participation. The coefficient on enforcement is reduced to -
0.065 when the Zimmerman and Tumlin measure of generosity is included, but statistical
significance is unaffected.


As described in section III, I also incorporate several measures of local immigration
attitudes – media coverage, local attitudes, and congressional representation. The three
media variables interacted with non-citizen status are included in the fourth column of
Table 8. Individual coefficients are not shown; only one (the number of national news
stories about local events) is statistically significant with the sign as expected and another
is wrong-signed and significant. The inclusion of the media coverage variables slightly
reduces the magnitude of the coefficient on enforcement but does not affect statistical
significance. As shown in the final two columns of Table 8, anti-immigrant sentiment of
the population and anti-immigration Congressional representation have no detectible
effect on Medicaid participation and do not affect the coefficient on enforcement. These
variables, like the media coverage variables, are imperfect proxies for local attitudes, so
one cannot rule out the possibility that local attitudes matter to Medicaid participation
decisions.




44
  State Medicaid policies vary on a range of other dimensions that could differentially affect non-citizens.
A full exploration is beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                     24
H. Robustness


Appendix Table 3 presents the results of sensitivity analysis. The preferred specification
is replicated in the first column. The second column shows the results using a linear
rather than logged measure of enforcement. The results suggest that a one percentage
point increase in enforcement (e.g. increasing from one arrest per 100 non-citizens to two
arrests per 100 non-citizens) reduces Medicaid participation by 4.9 percentage points.
This effect is of the same order of magnitude as that implied by the log specification
evaluated at the sample mean.


The baseline measure of enforcement divides deportable aliens located by the estimated
number of non-citizens in the cluster in 1995. In the third column of Appendix Table 3,
the denominator instead incorporates a time-varying measure of the number of non-
citizens based on linear interpolation between Census years. This alternative method of
defining enforcement has little impact on the results.


The fourth column of Appendix 3 restricts the sample to mothers arriving in the U.S.
prior to 1992. The robustness of the results to this sample restriction mitigates concerns
about the correlation of enforcement activity with unobservable characteristics of new
migrants.


The fifth column incorporates state-citizen-specific linear time trends. This variable
reduces the size of the enforcement coefficient by about a quarter and raises the standard
error, rendering the coefficient insignificant.   The result indicates that some of the
identifying variation is caused by differential time trends for non-citizens and citizens
across states, which could be caused by enforcement or other factors. Similarly, allowing
the effect of the state unemployment rate to vary by citizenship status somewhat weakens
the enforcement coefficient. In both the fifth and sixth columns, the enforcement results
are weakened only when the new variables and a full set of demographic controls are
included, suggesting that the analysis may be limited by statistical power issues (the
analyses without controls are not shown).



                                            25
The final column of Appendix Table 3 controls for the effect of new legal immigration.
The results are not substantively changed. I also try dropping each of the eight largest
immigrant states one at a time (results not shown). The results are robust to exclusion of
individual states.


The baseline analysis uses the mother’s citizenship status to predict Medicaid
participation. Appendix Table 4 explores alternative definitions of citizenship. Results
are similar if the mother’s spouse is a non-citizen, if either parent is a non-citizen, or if
both parents are non-citizens. The final two columns of Appendix Table 4 show that
having a non-citizen spouse makes a citizen mother much more responsive to
enforcement but has a relatively minor effect on a non-citizen mother. In sum, families
are responsive to enforcement when either or both parents are a non-citizen.


I. Endogenous Citizenship and Endogenous Under-Reporting


One potential threat to identification is that individuals have some ability to decide
whether to become citizens, and they may pursue citizenship if the policy climate is less
favorable towards non-citizens.           Rates of citizenship increased substantially over the
sample period. 45 Van Hook (2003) argues that the changing composition of citizenship
may explain up to half of the decline in non-citizen welfare participation following
welfare reform. To investigate the possibility of endogenous citizenship, I first examine
whether the probability that a child’s mother is a citizen appears to respond to
enforcement. I do not find evidence that this is the case, perhaps because it usually takes
five years of legal residence plus a year or more of processing time to become a citizen. 46




45
   Van Hook (2003) notes that the number of naturalizations was 240,000 in 1992 and peaked in 1996 at
over one million.
46
   Results not shown. In a regression with mother non-citizen on the left hand side and including state-
group fixed effects and education controls, the coefficient on enforcement is 0.012 with a standard error of
0.009; in other words, enforcement has an insignificant and wrong-signed coefficient. High application
fees and English language requirements may further deter would-be citizens. Immigrants married to
citizens and those serving in the military have shorter residency requirements.


                                                    26
To further investigate this question, I instrument for mother’s citizenship using her
country of origin. In this framework one can control for state-group fixed effects but not
state-group-citizen fixed effects. The OLS analysis using the revised specification yields
a smaller but statistically significant differential effect of enforcement on children of non-
citizens. The instrumented coefficients shown in Appendix Table 5 are larger than the
OLS estimates and similar to the baseline effects reported in Table 3, suggesting that
endogenous citizenship is not driving the results.                   This test does not rule out the
possibility of selective return migration or survey non-response by those fearing
enforcement, but does suggest that the relationship between enforcement and Medicaid
participation does not arise because of selective maternal entry into citizenship.


It is also important to consider the effect of bias arising from under-reporting of
Medicaid. Of particular concern is the possibility that enforcement reduces the reporting
rate differentially for children of non-citizens. To assess the degree to which endogenous
under-reporting could be driving the results, I simulate data assuming that the reporting
rate for children of non-citizens varies linearly up to 100% with the percentile of the
enforcement distribution. Children who report “no Medicaid” are randomly assigned to
“Medicaid” accordingly. In the simulation, reporting rates for children of citizens are
assumed to be 100% and unresponsive to enforcement.


The results of this exercise are presented in Appendix Table 6. Reporting rates of 80 to
90 percent under the highest enforcement only slightly attenuate the results, and the
coefficient on enforcement remains marginally significant even if reporting rates range
from 70 percent under the highest enforcement to 100 percent under the lowest
enforcement.        Thus, moderate degrees of enforcement-induced under-reporting are
unlikely to be responsible for the baseline results. 47




47
  If enforcement does not affect participation but drives severe under-reporting for non-citizens, the
baseline results are misleading. It is also possible that enforcement affects the overall survey response rate
for non-citizens. If undocumented immigrants are less likely to participate in the survey under high
enforcement, the baseline results are likely to be biased towards zero.


                                                      27
J. Magnitude of the Effects


To gauge the magnitude of the effects, I use the estimated model to predict what would
have happened to Medicaid participation among children of non-citizens if enforcement
levels had maintained their initial levels – specifically, the average of 1993 and 1994
levels. The results suggest that participation would have fallen from 46.5 percent in
survey year 1995 to 45.5 percent in survey year 2000, a drop of 1 percentage point, had
enforcement stayed constant at the 1993-1994 levels.                       The rise in immigration
enforcement can therefore explain three-quarters of the actual 4.4 percentage point
decline during this time. Using the 1995 to 1999 time frame, the simulation indicates
enforcement can explain almost half of the actual 8.3 percentage point decline. A large
fraction of the decline in immigrant Medicaid participation around 1996, which has
previously been attributed to welfare reform, is due to the contemporaneous rise in
immigration enforcement. 48


                                             V. Conclusion

The results presented here cast new light on the chilling of immigrant Medicaid
participation around the time of welfare reform.                 Previous literature documents an
unexplained decline in immigrant program participation and hypothesizes that low take-
up stems from fear and confusion stemming from changes in welfare policy. The current
paper suggests a new potential culprit - Federal immigration enforcement – which
contributes to immigrant reluctance to participate in Medicaid.                              Immigration
enforcement “chills” would-be Medicaid applicants even when they remain eligible. The
results imply that much of the decline in immigrant Medicaid participation around the
time of welfare reform can in fact be attributed to increased enforcement of immigration
law.



48
  Aggregate enforcement explains only a small fraction of the rebound in non-citizen participation rates in
the latter years of the sample. Other factors such as the adoption of the SCHIP program, which most states
adopted in 1998, may help explain rising participation rates after the 1999 survey year. Buchmueller et al.
(2008) document that SCHIP take-up among children of immigrants was at least as high as take-up for
children of natives, thereby causing convergence in public health insurance rates.


                                                    28
The findings highlight the fact that seemingly unrelated policies can have important
consequences for program take-up.     Economists interested in take-up have mainly
focused on program design and interactions across safety net programs.    However,
interactions across broad policy areas may be important determinants of program
participation.




                                        29
                                     VI. References

Aizer, Anna, “Low Take-Up in Medicaid: Does Outreach Matter and For Whom?,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 93(2), 2003.

Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie, “Networks or neighborhoods? Correlations in the
use of publicly-funded maternity care in California,” Journal of Public Economics,
88(12), 2004.

Bansak, Cynthia, “The Differential Wage Impact of the Immigration Control and
Reform Act on Latino Ethnic Subgroups,” Social Science Quarterly, 86(s1), 2005.

Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Network Effects and
Welfare Cultures,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3), 2000.

Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Hilary W. Hoynes, “Welfare Reform
and Health,” Journal of Human Resources, 40(2) 2005.

Borjas, George J., "Welfare Reform, Labor Supply, and Health Insurance in the
Immigrant Population,” Journal of Health Economics, 22(6), 2003.

Buchmueller, Thomas C., Anthony T. LoSasso, and Kathleen Wong, “How Did
SCHIP Affect the Insurance Coverage of Immigrant Children?,” The B.E. Journal
of Economic Analysis and Policy, 8(2), 2008.

Borjas, George J., and Lynette Hilton, “Immigration and the Welfare State:
Immigrant Participation in Means-Tested Entitlement Programs,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111(2), 1996.

Buchmueller, Thomas, and Lara Shore-Sheppard, “Stability of Children's Insurance
Coverage and Implications for Access to Care: Evidence from the Survey of Income and Program
Participation,” manuscript, 2010.

Center for Equal Opportunity, “Abolish the INS: How Federal Bureaucracy Dooms
Immigration Reform,” Policy Brief, 1995. (Available at
www.ceousa.org/content/view/178/90/).

Currie, Janet,“The Take Up of Social Benefits,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 10488, 2004.

Davila, Alberto, Jose A. Pagan, and Montserrat Viladrich Grau, “Immigration Reform,
the INS, and the Distribution of Interior and Border Enforcement Resources,” Public
Choice, 99(3-4), 1999.

DeLeire, Thomas, Judith A. Levine, and Helen Levy, “Is Welfare Reform Responsible
for Low-Skilled Women’s Declining Health Insurance Coverage in the 1990s?,” Journal
of Human Resources, 41(3), 2006.


                                            30
Daponte, Beth Osbourne, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor, “Why Do Low-Income
Households not Use Food Stamps? Evidence from and Experiment,” Journal of Human
Resources, 34(3), 1999.

Davidoff, Amy, Alshayde Yemane, and Emerald Adams, “Health Coverage for Low-
Income Adults: Eligibility and Enrollment in Medicaid and State Programs, 2002,”
Kaiser Commission on the Uninsured Policy Brief.

Fix, Michael E. and Jeffrey Passel, “Trends in Noncitizens’ and Citizens’ Use of
Public Benefits Following Welfare Reform, 1994-1997,” Urban Institute, 1999.
(Available at http://www.urban.org/url.cfm?ID=408086.)

General Accounting Office, “Immigration and Naturalization Service: Overview of
Management and Program Challenges,” Testimony before the House Committee on
the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims, July 1999.

Holcomb, Pamela A., Karen C. Tumlin, Robin Koralek, Randolph Capps and Anita
Zuberi, “The Application Process for TANF, Food Stamps, Medicaid and SCHIP:
Issues for Agencies and Applicants, Including Immigrants and Limited English
Speakers,” report for the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the
Secretary, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, January
2003.

Hungerman, Daniel M., “Are church and state substitutes? Evidence from the 1996
welfare reform,” Journal of Public Economics, 89 (11-12), 2005.

Kandula, Namratha R., Colleen M. Grogan, Paul J. Rathouz, and Diane S.
Lauderdale, “The Unintended Impact of Welfare Reform on the Medicaid
Enrollment of Eligible Immigrants,” Health Services Research, 39(5), 2004.

Kaestner, Robert, and Neeraj Kaushal, “Immigrant and Native Responses to
Welfare Reform,” Journal of Population Economics, 18(1), 2005.

Kaushal, Neeraj, and Robert Kaestner, “Welfare Reform and Health Insurance of
Immigrants,” Health Services Research, 40(3), 2005.

Klerman, Jacob, Jeanne Ringel and Beth Roth, “Under-Reporting of Medicaid and
Welfare in the Current Population Survey,” RAND Corporation Working Paper 169-3,
2005.

Loue, Sana, Marlene Cooper and Linda S. Lloyd, “Welfare and Immigration Reform and
Use of Prenatal Care among Women of Mexican Ethnicity in San Diego, California,”
Journal of Immigrant Health, 7(1), 2005.




                                         31
McGee, Daniel L., Youlian Liao, Guichan Cao, and Richard S. Cooper, “Self-Reported
Health Status and Mortality in a Multiethnic US Cohort,” American Journal of
Epidemiology, 149(1), 1999.

Martin, David. A., “Consistency in Law Enforcement: Best Practices,” manuscript
prepared for the University of California-Davis Workshop on the Santiago Summit of the
Americas Declaration, 2000.             (Available at: http://migration.ucdavis.edu/cf
more.php?id=87_0_2_0).

Mazzolari, Francesca, “Effects of Welfare Reform on Immigrants’ Welfare Participation:
How ‘Chilling’ Are They?,” unpublished manuscript, 2004.

Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K.C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan, “The Under-Reporting of
Transfers in household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 15181, 2009.

Orrenius, Pia M., and Madeline Zavodny, “The Effects of Tougher Enforcement on the
Job Prospects of Recent Latin American Immigrants,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 28(2), 2009.

Remler, Dahlia and Sherry Glied, “What Other Programs Can Teach Us: Increasing
Participation in Health Insurance Programs,” American Journal of Public Health, 93(1),
2003.

Royer, Heather, “The Response to a Loss in Medicaid Eligibility: Pregnant Immigrant
Mothers in the Wake of Welfare Reform,” unpublished manuscript, 2005.

Seghetti, Lisa M., Stephen R. Vina, and Karma Ester, “Enforcing Immigration Law: The
Role of State and Local Law Enforcement,” Congressional Research Service Report for
Congress, 2004.

Sommers, Benjamin D., “Targeting in Medicaid: The costs and enrollment effects of
Medicaid’s citizenship documentation requirement,” Journal of Public Economics, 94(1-
2), 174-182, 2010.

Van Hook, Jennifer, “Welfare Reform’s Chilling Effects on Non-Citizens: Changes in
Noncitizen Welfare Recipiency or Shifts in Citizenship Status,” Social Science Quarterly,
84(3), 2003.

Vargas, Edward, “Mixed Status Families and Public Assistance: The Impact on Both
States and Families,” unpublished dissertation, University of Indiana.

Schlosberg, Claudia, and Dinah Wiley, “The Impact of INS Public Charge
Determinations on Immigrant Access to Health Care,” National Immigration Law Center
report, 1998.




                                           32
Siskin, Alison, Andorra Bruno, Blas Nunez-Neto, Lisa M. Seghetti, and Ruth Ellen
Watson, “Immigration Enforcement Within the United States,” Congressional
Research Service Report for Congress, 2006.

Zimmerman, Wendy, and Karen Tumlin, "Patchwork Policies: State Assistance for
Immigrants Under Welfare Reform,” Urban Institute report, 1999.




                                          33
                                  Figure 1. Medicaid Participation for Children of Non-Citizens and
                                              Immigration Enforcement, 1994-2003
                    -6.8                                                                                                        0.55




                     -7                                                                                                         0.5




                                                                                                                                       Fraction Participating in Medicaid
                    -7.2                                                                                                        0.45
Log (Enforcement)




                    -7.4                                                                                                        0.4




                    -7.6                                                                                                        0.35




                    -7.8                                                                                                        0.3




                     -8                                                                                                         0.25
                           1994       1995    1996   1997        1998        1999           2000           2001   2002   2003
                                                                    Survey Year

                                                      Log (Enforcement)           Medicaid Participation
               Figure 2. Deportable Aliens Located Per Non-Citizen, Selected Areas
 0.05



0.045



 0.04



0.035



 0.03                                                                                NYC
                                                                                     FL
                                                                                     NJ
0.025
                                                                                     IL, IN, WI
                                                                                     TX, NM, OK
 0.02                                                                                CA
                                                                                     AZ, NV
0.015



 0.01



0.005



   0
        1993      1994   1995   1996   1997   1998    1999   2000   2001   2002
                                                                          Table 1. Means of Key Variables


                                                                       Low-SES Sample                                                                 Full Sample


                                                                      Mom Foreign Born                                                            Mom Foreign Born
                                               Mom Non-Citizen            Citizen             Mom Native Born              Mom Non-Citizen             Citizen            Mom Native Born
                                                 (N=26,942)              (N=6,978)              (N=112,286)                  (N=42,012)              (N=19,371)             (N=331,558)

Medicaid                                              0.45                   0.39                    0.47                         0.32                    0.17                   0.20
Medicaid Eligible (Definition 1)                      0.80                   0.75                    0.73                         0.54                    0.31                   0.29
Medicaid Eligibile (Definition 2)                     0.69                   0.67                    0.64                         0.47                    0.28                   0.26
Any Health Insurance                                  0.68                   0.74                    0.84                         0.74                    0.85                   0.90
Any Food Stamps                                       0.27                   0.23                    0.35                         0.17                    0.09                   0.13
Any Public Assistance/Welfare                         0.17                   0.14                    0.22                         0.11                    0.05                   0.08
Any SSI                                               0.04                   0.07                    0.07                         0.03                    0.04                   0.03
Any DI                                                0.01                   0.01                    0.01                         0.01                    0.01                   0.01
Child is Citizen                                      0.81                   0.96                    1.00                         0.82                    0.97                   1.00
Mom is High School Grad Exactly                       0.22                   0.33                    0.45                         0.22                    0.27                   0.34
Mom is Some College Exactly                           0.09                   0.22                    0.29                         0.13                    0.24                   0.31
Mom is College Grad or More                           0.00                   0.00                    0.00                         0.13                    0.27                   0.23
Family Under 200% FPL                                 1.00                   1.00                    1.00                         0.65                    0.37                   0.36
Child Age                                             7.47                   9.08                    7.91                         7.51                    9.23                   8.45
Mom Worked Last Year                                  0.42                   0.57                    0.62                         0.52                    0.73                   0.75
Mom Married                                           0.76                   0.70                    0.49                         0.82                    0.84                   0.75
Mom Spouse Citizen (if married)                       0.22                   0.70                    0.96                         0.31                    0.81                   0.98
Lives in Generous State (Borjas Definition)           0.89                   0.88                    0.68                         0.89                    0.89                   0.71
Lives in Generous State (KK Definition)               0.57                   0.49                    0.41                         0.56                    0.53                   0.45
Lives in Generous State (ZT Definition)               0.72                   0.70                    0.44                         0.72                    0.75                   0.48
Anti-Immigrant Sentiment in State                     0.53                   0.52                    0.53                         0.53                    0.52                   0.53
National Coverage of Local Events Index               2.24                   2.35                    2.18                         2.27                    2.34                   2.22
Local Coverage Index                                  0.04                   0.03                    0.03                         0.03                    0.03                   0.03
Local Coverage of Local Events Index                  0.04                   0.03                    0.03                         0.03                    0.03                   0.03
Enforcement Level in Cluster*1000                     7.79                   7.80                    8.44                         7.53                    6.92                   8.39
Enforcement Level for Group*1000                      1.99                   0.88                    n/a                          1.61                    0.49                   n/a
Enforcement Level in Cluster-Group*1000               2.15                   1.11                    n/a                          1.73                    0.60                   n/a
Child in Excellent/Very Good Health                   0.69                   0.70                    0.72                         0.73                    0.77                   0.83
Child in Good Health                                  0.27                   0.26                    0.23                         0.24                    0.20                   0.15
Child in Poor Health                                  0.01                   0.01                    0.01                         0.00                    0.00                   0.00




Notes: All samples exclude non-citizen children whose mothers arrived within the past five years. The Low-SES sample includes children of mothers lacking a college degree and under 200
percent of the poverty line. Medicaid eligibility definition 1 imputes the AFDC/TANF eligibility pathway; Medicaid eligibility definition 2 does not. Measures of state generosity and anti-
immigrant sentiment described in text. Enforcement level is the average number of deportable aliens located in the reference year and previous year per non-citizen in the cluster, group, or
cluster-group.
                                                                                                         Table 2. Preliminary Analysis

Dep.Var: Medicaid Participation                                                                               I                                    II                                   III                                  IV



Sample                                                                                          Mother Non-Citizen                   Mother Non-Citizen                       Mother Citizen                        Mother Citizen

Cluster f.e.                                                                                                yes                                  yes                                   yes                                  yes
Year f.e.                                                                                                   yes                                  yes                                   yes                                  yes
Cluster-specific time trends                                                                                yes                                  yes                                   yes                                  yes


Panel A. Low-SES Sample                                                                              (mean=0.45)                          (mean=0.44)                           (mean=0.47)                          (mean=0.47)

Log(Enforcement)                                                                                       -0.087+                                                                      0.019
                                                                                                       (0.043)                                                                     (0.022)
Log(Lead of Enforcement)                                                                                                                      0.005                                                                     -0.002
                                                                                                                                             (0.032)                                                                    (0.023)


Number of Observations                                                                                   26,942                               23,528                               119,264                              102,790
R-squared                                                                                                0.042                                0.041                                 0.016                                0.016



Panel B. Full Sample                                                                                 (mean=0.32)                          (mean=0.32)                           (mean=0.20)                          (mean=0.20)

Log(Enforcement)                                                                                       -0.049+                                                                      0.014
                                                                                                       (0.027)                                                                     (0.014)
Log(Lead of Enforcement)                                                                                                                      0.013                                                                      0.002
                                                                                                                                             (0.018)                                                                    (0.013)


Number of Observations                                                                                   42,012                               36,103                               350,929                              296,775
R-squared                                                                                                0.033                                0.033                                 0.010                                0.010


Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All samples exclude non-citizen children whose mothers arrived within five years. The
Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200 percent of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree. Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the reference year
and the year prior to the reference year in the INS cluster. The lead of enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the two years following the reference year in the INS cluster.
                                                                    Table 3. Effect of Immigration Enforcement on Medicaid Participation

Dep.Var: Medicaid Participation                                                        I                             II                             III                            IV                             V                              VI

                                                                                                                                                                        Mom Arrived > 5             Kid Citizen and Mom
Sample                                                                               All                            All                      Kid Citizen                    Years                     Arrived> 5 years  Mom Foreign Born


Mom Non-Cit*State f.e.                                                               yes
Mom Non-Cit*Year f.e.                                                                yes                            yes                            yes                            yes                            yes                            yes
Log(Enforcement)                                                                     yes                            yes                            yes                            yes                            yes                            yes
State*Group*Mom Non-Cit f.e.                                                                                        yes                            yes                            yes                            yes                            yes
Demographic Controls                                                                                                yes                            yes                            yes                            yes                            yes


Panel A. Low-SES Sample                                                       (mean=0.47)                    (mean=0.47)                    (mean=0.47)                    (mean=0.47)                    (mean=0.47)                    (mean=0.44)

Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                                    -0.106**                        -0.092*                        -0.099*                        -0.095*                        -0.103*                        -0.113*
                                                                                 (0.031)                        (0.035)                        (0.041)                        (0.035)                        (0.040)                        (0.048)


Number of Observations                                                           146,206                        146,206                        140,587                        143,599                        137,980                         33,920
R-squared                                                                         0.025                          0.226                          0.227                          0.225                          0.227                          0.258


Panel B. Full Sample                                                          (mean=0.21)                    (mean=0.21)                    (mean=0.21)                    (mean=0.21)                    (mean=0.21)                    (mean=0.27)

Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                                     -0.049*                        -0.047*                        -0.049+                        -0.048*                        -0.052*                        -0.079*
                                                                                 (0.023)                        (0.022)                        (0.024)                        (0.023)                        (0.024)                        (0.028)


Number of Observations                                                           392,941                        392,939                        384,288                        388,856                        380,205                         61,383
R-squared                                                                         0.023                          0.359                          0.364                          0.358                          0.364                          0.327



Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All samples exclude non-citizen children whose mothers arrived within five years. The
Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200 percent of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree. New York City and the remainder of New York are treated as distinct states because they lie in different INS clusters.
Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the reference year and the year prior to the reference year in the INS cluster. Demographic controls include dummies for mother's educational attainment,
age*year fixed effects, indicators for being below 100 percent and 200 percent of the poverty line, an indicator for the mother arriving in the U.S. within the previous five years, an indicator for the mother arriving in the U.S. after birth and prior to 1980, an
indicator for the mother arriving in the U.S. during the 1980s, and an indicator for the mother being currently married.
                                                       Table 4. Effect of Immigration Enforcement on Medicaid Eligibility and Take-Up

                                                                   I                                   II                                 III                              IV                              V


                                                                                                                                                                 Medicaid (if Eligibile          Medicaid (if Eligibile
Dependent Variable                                     Medicaid Participation                  Eligibility Def 1                  Eligibility Def 2                  by Def 1)                       by Def 2)

Mom Non-Cit*Year f.e.                                             yes                                yes                                 yes                               yes                            yes
Log(Enforcement)                                                  yes                                yes                                 yes                               yes                            yes
State*Group*Mom Non-Cit f.e.                                      yes                                yes                                 yes                               yes                            yes
Demographic Controls                                              yes                                yes                                 yes                               yes                            yes


Panel A. Low-SES Sample                                     (mean=0.47)                         (mean=0.74)                         (mean=0.65)                      (mean=0.56)                     (mean=0.55)

Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                  -0.092*                              0.017                               0.032                           -0.115*                         -0.112*
                                                               (0.035)                             (0.025)                             (0.029)                          (0.047)                         (0.042)


Number of Observations                                         146,206                             146,206                             146,206                          109,433                         96,444
R-squared                                                       0.226                               0.453                               0.555                            0.181                          0.183


Panel B. Full Sample                                        (mean=0.21)                         (mean=0.32)                         (mean=0.28)                      (mean=0.51)                     (mean=0.51)

Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                  -0.047*                              0.019                               0.024                           -0.099*                         -0.093*
                                                               (0.022)                             (0.025)                             (0.024)                          (0.046)                         (0.042)


Number of Observations                                         392,939                             392,939                             392,939                          126,839                         112,367
R-squared                                                       0.359                               0.667                               0.603                            0.207                           0.211


Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All samples exclude non-citizen children
whose mothers arrived within five years. The Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200 percent of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree. New York City and the remainder of
New York are treated as distinct states because they lie in different INS clusters. Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the reference year and the year
prior to the reference year in the INS cluster. Demographic controls as described in Table 3. Eligibility Definition 1 imputes eligibility incorporating the AFDC/TANF eligibility pathway and Medicaid expansions. Eligibility
Definition 2 ignores the AFDC/TANF eligibility pathway.
                                                                 Table 5. Measurement of Enforcement, Foreign-Born Low-SES Sample

Dep.Var.: Medicaid Participation                                             I          II          III         IV          V           VI          VII         VIII        IX           X          XI          XII

Sample                                                                      All         All         All         All        Low         Low         Low         Low         High        High        High        High
                                                                                                                         Exposure    Exposure    Exposure    Exposure    Exposure    Exposure    Exposure    Exposure
                                                                                         (mean=0.44)                                     (mean=0.41)                                     (mean=0.50)



Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement of All Non-Citizens in Cluster)             -0.113*                              -0.123       0.013                              -0.021 -0.412**                             -0.417**
                                                                        (0.048)                              (0.074)     (0.060)                             (0.121) (0.069)                              (0.096)
Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement of Group Nationally)                                      0.057                   0.076                  -0.029                  -0.066           0.027                        0.043
                                                                                     (0.091)                 (0.076)                 (0.161)                 (0.170)         (0.122)                      (0.078)
Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement of Group Within Cluster)                                             -0.047      -0.003                               0.005       0.050                              -0.152+ -0.017
                                                                                                 (0.036)     (0.048)                             (0.049)     (0.096)                             (0.075) (0.046)



Number of Observations                                                    33,920      33,920      33,809      33,809      12,089      12,089      12,054      12,054      16,475      16,475      16,457      16,457
R-squared                                                                 0.192       0.192       0.190       0.190       0.263       0.262       0.259       0.261       0.172       0.171       0.170       0.172




Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All samples exclude non-citizen
children whose mothers arrived within five years. The Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200 percent of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree. All regressions
include full set of fixed effects and demographic controls as in the previous tables. Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the reference year and
the year prior to the reference year in the INS cluster. High exposure indicates that the child resides in an area with greater than or equal to the fraction of non-citizens of a typical child from her (mother's)
country of origin group.
                                                                     Table 6. Effect of Immigration Enforcement on Health Insurance Status and Health

                                                             I                         II                        III                       IV                        V                         VI                        VII                       VIII

                                                                                                                                                                                     Excellent or Very
                                                                                Public Health            Private Health                                     Medicaid (Survey        Good Health (Survey Good Health (Survey Poor Health (Survey
Dependent Variable                                      Medicaid                  Insuance                 Insurance           Any Health Insurance          Year>=1996)               Year>=1996)         Year >=1996)        Year>=1996)



Mom Non-Cit*Year f.e.                                      yes                        yes                       yes                       yes                       yes                       yes                        yes                       yes
Log(Enforcement)                                           yes                        yes                       yes                       yes                       yes                       yes                        yes                       yes
State*Group*Mom Non-Cit f.e.                               yes                        yes                       yes                       yes                       yes                       yes                        yes                       yes
Demographic Controls                                       yes                        yes                       yes                       yes                       yes                       yes                        yes                       yes


Panel A. Low-SES Sample                               (mean=0.47)               (mean=0.49)               (mean=0.39)               (mean=0.81)                (mean=0.46)               (mean=0.72)               (mean=0.24)               (mean=0.01)

Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                            -0.092*                   -0.092*                     0.013                   -0.058*                   -0.134**                   -0.078+                   0.070*                    0.010**
                                                         (0.035)                   (0.033)                   (0.023)                   (0.022)                    (0.033)                   (0.038)                   (0.032)                    (0.004)


Number of Observations                                   146,206                   146,206                   146,206                   146,206                   114,904                    114,904                   114,904                   114,904
R-squared                                                 0.226                     0.203                     0.210                     0.085                     0.213                      0.054                     0.047                     0.020


Panel B. Full Sample                                  (mean=0.21)               (mean=0.24)               (mean=0.70)               (mean=0.89)                (mean=0.21)               (mean=0.81)               (mean=0.16)               (mean=0.00)

Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                            -0.047*                   -0.048*                    -0.016                   -0.044*                   -0.073**                   -0.051*                   0.045*                    0.007**
                                                         (0.022)                   (0.023)                   (0.017)                   (0.017)                    (0.021)                   (0.022)                   (0.018)                    (0.002)


Number of Observations                                   392,939                   392,939                   392,939                   392,939                   316,467                    316,467                   316,467                   316,467
R-squared                                                 0.359                     0.313                     0.393                     0.095                     0.346                      0.054                     0.047                     0.014


Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All samples exclude non-citizen children whose mothers arrived within five years.
The Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200 percent of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree. New York City and the remainder of New York are treated as distinct states because they lie in different INS
clusters. Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the reference year and the year prior to the reference year in the INS cluster. Demographic controls as in Table 3. Columns V through VIII based
on years 1996 onwards.
                                                   Table 7. Effect of Immigration Enforcement on Program Participation

                                                                                             I                                 II                                III                                IV

                                                                                 Public Assistance/             Supplemental Security
Dependent Variable                                                                    Welfare                         Income                         Disability Insurance                   Food Stamps



Mom Non-Cit*Year f.e.                                                                      yes                                yes                               yes                                yes
Log(Enforcement)                                                                           yes                                yes                               yes                                yes
State*Group*Mom Non-Cit f.e.                                                               yes                                yes                               yes                                yes
Demographic Controls                                                                       yes                                yes                               yes                                yes


Panel A. Low-SES Sample                                                              (mean=0.21)                       (mean=0.06)                       (mean=0.01)                        (mean=0.33)

Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                                            -0.015                              0.001                            -0.006                            -0.078+
                                                                                        (0.020)                            (0.009)                           (0.006)                           (0.041)


Number of Observations                                                                  146,206                            146,206                           146,206                           146,206
R-squared                                                                                0.258                              0.060                             0.028                             0.258


Panel B. Full Sample                                                                 (mean=0.08)                       (mean=0.03)                       (mean=0.01)                        (mean=0.13)

Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                                             0.007                              0.002                             0.001                            -0.051+
                                                                                        (0.011)                            (0.005)                           (0.004)                           (0.027)


Number of Observations                                                                  392,939                            392,939                           392,939                           392,939
R-squared                                                                                0.287                              0.064                             0.019                             0.383



Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All samples exclude non-citizen children whose
mothers arrived within five years. The Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200 percent of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree. New York City and the remainder of New York
are treated as distinct states because they lie in different INS clusters. Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the reference year and the year prior to the
reference year in the INS cluster. Demographic controls as in Table 3.
                                                         Table 8. Local Determinants of Participation, Low-SES sample

Dep.Var: Medicaid Participation                             I                    II                   III                   IV                   V                    VI                   VII
(mean=0.47)

                                                                                              Generous*Post- Generous*Post-                                                           State Anti-
                                                                         Generous*Post-       Reform: Kaushal    Reform:                  Cluster Media          State Anti-          Immigrant
                                                                         Reform: Borjas        and Kaestner   Zimmerman and                Coverage of           Immigrant           Congressional
Measure of Local Climate                                Baseline           definition            definition   Tumlin definition           Enforcement            Sentiment          Representation



Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                            -0.092*             -0.113**              -0.114**              -0.065*             -0.081*                -0.096*             -0.093**
                                                        (0.035)              (0.026)               (0.038)              (0.030)             (0.032)                (0.036)              (0.030)
Mom Non-Cit*Local Climate                                                    -0.096                -0.045                0.041             not shown                0.010                0.222
                                                                             (0.056)               (0.038)              (0.039)                                    (0.167)              (0.207)




Number of Observations                                  146,206              146,206               146,206              146,206              146,206               146,206              146,206
R-squared                                                0.101                0.101                 0.101                0.100                0.100                 0.100                0.100



Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All samples exclude non-
citizen children whose mothers arrived within five years. The Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200 percent of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree.
All regressions include full set of fixed effects and demographic controls as in the previous tables. Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen
in the reference year and the year prior to the reference year in the INS cluster. Definitions of state policy generosity, media coverage, anti-immigrant sentiment, and anti-immigrant congressional
representation are described in the text.
                                                               Appendix Table 1. Does Enforcement Predict Other Characteristics?

                                                                      I                 II               III               IV                 V                VI                VII               VIII              IX                 X



                                                                                                                        Mom                                                                                                  Mom
                                                                 Poverty           Poverty                             Spouse              Mom                                  Mom                                         Arrived
                                                                  Under             Under             Mom             Citizen (if         College        Mom Some Mom High     Worked                                      Within Five
Dependent Variable                                              200% FPL          100% FPL           Married          Married)             Grad           College School Grad Last Year                       Age of Child   Years


Panel A. Low-SES Sample

Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                        n/a            -0.004             0.031            -0.006               n/a            -0.007             0.012             0.005            -0.174            -0.003
                                                                                   (0.029)           (0.022)           (0.018)                             (0.017)           (0.023)           (0.022)           (0.238)           (0.009)




Number of Observations                                                             146,206           146,206            80,038                             146,206           146,206           146,206           146,206           146,206
R-squared                                                                           0.045             0.093              0.634                              0.081             0.078             0.081             0.028             0.200


Panel B. Full Sample

Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                      0.004            -0.014            -0.025             0.019            -0.015             0.005             0.016             0.015            -0.101             0.004
                                                                 (0.023)           (0.024)           (0.018)           (0.015)           (0.015)           (0.015)           (0.015)           (0.027)           (0.176)           (0.009)



Number of Observations                                           392,941           392,941           392,941           297,360           392,939           392,939           392,939           392,939           392,941           392,941
R-squared                                                         0.095             0.066             0.037             0.563             0.068             0.046             0.037             0.063             0.021             0.192




Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All samples exclude non-citizen children whose mothers arrived within
five years. The Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200 percent of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree. Regressions include citizen*year fixed effects and state*group*citizen fixed effects but not
demographic controls. Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the reference year and the year prior to the reference year in the INS cluster.
                                                                                             Appendix Table 2. Differential Responses to Enforcement, Low-SES Sample

                                                                                                       I                           II                          III                          IV                           V                          VI                         VII                     VIII
Dependent Variable: Medicaid


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mother From High                                         Child in Very
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Undocumented                                           Good/Excellent             Child in Poor
Characteristic                                                                                Child Under 2               Child Under 7              Mother Married               Mother Mexican                  Group       Child Non-Citizen                          Health                    Health



Mother Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)*Characteristic                                                    -0.007*                     -0.006*                     -0.009**                     -0.055+                      -0.114*                    -0.058**                   -0.017**                   0.019
                                                                                                   (0.003)                     (0.002)                      (0.002)                     (0.027)                      (0.044)                    (0.013)                    (0.003)                   (0.013)
Mother Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                                                   -0.091*                     -0.090*                      -0.093*                     -0.079*                      -0.058+                     -0.080*                   -0.123**                 -0.135**
                                                                                                   (0.036)                     (0.036)                      (0.037)                     (0.029)                      (0.032)                    (0.034)                    (0.034)                   (0.034)



Number of Observations                                                                            146,206                      146,206                     146,206                      146,206                     142,739                     146,206                    114,904                  114,904
R-squared                                                                                          0.226                        0.226                       0.226                        0.226                       0.219                       0.227                      0.219                    0.215



Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All samples exclude non-citizen children whose mothers arrived within five years. The Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200
percent of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree. All regressions include full set of fixed effects and demographic controls as in the previous tables and the two-way interaction Log(Emforcement)*Characteristic. (One exception is that the coefficient on Kidcit*enforcement is reported rather
than the triple interaction.) Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the reference year and the year prior to the reference year in the INS cluster. Mothers from "High Undocumented Group" are those from countries estimated to have at least 25 percent
residing illegaly in the U.S. The countries include Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Dominica, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Venezuala, and Kenya. Rates of documentation are unavailable for a small number of country-of-origin groups. Health status analyses use survey years 1996 and later.
                                                              Appendix Table 3. Robustness Checks, Low-SES Sample

                                                        I                     II                   III                   IV                    V                    VI                   VII


Dependent Variable: Medicaid


                                                                                          Estimated Number                                                  Add Control for       Add Control for
                                                                          Linear            of Non-Citizens Restrict to Moms Add State-Specific                  State            State New Legal
                                                   Preferred           Enforcement        Rather Than Point- Arriving Before    Linear Time                 Unemployment         Immigration Rate
Change from Preferred Specification               Specification          Measure           in-Time Measure        1992        Trends*Non-Cit                 Rate*Non-Cit             *Non-Cit



                                                                                                                Mothers Arriving
Sample                                                 All                   All                   All           Before 1992                  All                   All                  All



Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                        -0.092*                                     -0.089*              -0.089*               -0.067                -0.072+              -0.089*
                                                    (0.035)                                     (0.042)              (0.037)               (0.041)               (0.042)              (0.035)
Mom Non-Cit*Enforcement                                                   -4.945+
                                                                          (2.700)


Number of Observations                              146,206               146,206               146,206              138,897               146,206               146,206              146,206
R-squared                                            0.226                 0.226                 0.226                0.228                 0.227                 0.226                0.226


Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All samples exclude non-
citizen children whose mothers arrived within five years. The Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200 percent of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree. All
regressions include full set of fixed effects and demographic controls as in the previous table. Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the
reference year and the year prior to the reference year in the INS cluster.
                                                 Appendix Table 4. Alternative Definitions of Citizenship, Low-SES Sample




Dependent Variable: Medicaid
                                                                                Mom and         Mom and                                       Household
                                                 Mom Non-     Mom's Spouse     Spouse Non-    Spouse Mixed     Any Parent     Any Parent      Head Non-     Mom's Spouse Mom's Spouse
Definition of Citizenship                         Citizen      Non-Citizen       Citizen       Citizenship     Non-Citizen    Non-Citizen      Citizen       Non-Citizen  Non-Citizen


                                                                                                                                                             Married and
                                                                                                                                                             Non-Citizen    Married and
Sample                                               All          Married        Married         Married        Married            All            All          Mom          Citizen Mom



Definition of Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)            -0.099*        -0.123**        -0.120**        -0.085+        -0.112**       -0.105**        -0.113**        -0.055         -0.156**
                                                  (0.036)         (0.032)         (0.037)        (0.044)         (0.038)        (0.031)         (0.027)        (0.034)         (0.051)




Number of Observations                            146,206         80,038          80,038         80,038          80,038         146,206         146,206         19,857         60,181
R-squared                                          0.101           0.109           0.106          0.108           0.108          0.102           0.102           0.201          0.092


Notes: Linear probability model. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. All
samples exclude non-citizen children whose mothers arrived within five years. The Low-SES sample is restricted to children living below 200 percent of the poverty line and whose
mothers have less than a college degree. All regressions include full set of fixed effects and demographic controls as in the previous tables, except that citizenship categories for fixed
effects are defined as indicated. Enforcement is measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the reference year and the year prior to the
reference year in the INS cluster.
                                          Appendix Table 5. Instrumenting for Citizenship (Low-SES Sample)

Dep.Var: Medicaid Participation                                                                      OLS                                          IV

Mom Non-Cit*Year f.e.                                                                                yes                                    Instrumented
Log(Enforcement)                                                                                     yes                                         yes
State*Group f.e.                                                                                     yes                                          yes




Mom Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                                                      -0.045**                                    -0.101**
                                                                                                   (0.009)                                      (0.037)



Number of Observations                                                                             146206                                      146206
R-squared                                                                                           0.071



Notes: OLS model differs from baseline model in that state-group fixed effects are included rather than state-group-citizen fixed effects. IV model instruments for citizen*year
fixed effects and citizen*enforcement using group*year and group*enforcement. Standard errors in parantheses are clustered by INS cluster. **, *, and + represent statistical
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. Sample excludes non-citizen children whose mothers arrived within five years and is restricted to children living below 200 percent
of the poverty line and whose mothers have less than a college degree. All regressions include full set of fixed effects but exclude demographic controls. Enforcement is
measured as the average of the number of deportable aliens located per non-citizen in the reference year and the year prior to the reference year in the INS cluster.
                                                           Appendix Table 6. Simulated Under-Reporting, Low-SES Sample

                                                                                                                              I                     II                    III                    IV                     V
Dependent Variable: Medicaid
Simulated Non-Citizen Reporting Rate Under Highest Enforcement                                                             50%                    60%                    70%                   80%                    90%




Definition of Non-Cit*Log(Enforcement)                                                                                   -0.035                 -0.050                -0.063+                -0.079*               -0.087*
                                                                                                                         (0.032)                (0.032)                (0.031)                (0.033)               (0.035)



Number of Observations                                                                                                   146,206               146,206                146,206                146,206                146,206
R-squared                                                                                                                 0.219                 0.220                  0.221                  0.223                  0.224


Notes: Baseline specification using simulated data. **, *, and + represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. Reporting rates are assumed to vary linearly up to 100% based on the percentile of the enforcement
distribution. Reporting rates for children of citizens are assumed to be 100% and unresponsive to enforcement. See text for more details.
