                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE CAPITAL STRUCTURE DECISIONS OF NEW FIRMS

                                          Alicia M. Robb
                                         David T. Robinson

                                        Working Paper 16272
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16272


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2010




The authors are grateful to the Kauffman Foundation for generous financial support. Malcolm Baker,
Thomas Hellmann, Antoinette Schoar, Ivo Welch, and seminar participants at the Kauffman/Cleveland
Federal Reserve Bank Entrepreneurial Finance Conference, the University of Michigan, the Stockholm
School of Economics, the Atlanta Fed, and the NBER Summer Institute Entrepreneurship Meetings
and the Kauffman/RFS conference on entrepreneurial finance provided helpful comments on previous
drafts. Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato provided expert research assistance. The usual disclaimer applies.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Alicia M. Robb and David T. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Capital Structure Decisions of New Firms
Alicia M. Robb and David T. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 16272
August 2010
JEL No. G21,G24,L26

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the capital structure choices that firms make in their initial year of operation,
using restricted-access data from the Kauffman Firm Survey. Contrary to many accounts of startup
activity, the firms in our data rely heavily on external debt sources such as bank financing, and less
extensively on friends and family-based funding sources. This fact is robust to numerous controls for
credit quality, industry, and business owner characteristics. The heavy reliance on external debt underscores
the importance of well functioning credit markets for the success of nascent business activity.


Alicia M. Robb
UC, Santa Cruz
arobb@ucsc.edu

David T. Robinson
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
davidr@duke.edu
1         Introduction

Understanding how capital markets affect the growth and survival of newly created
firms is perhaps the defining question of entrepreneurial finance. Yet, much of what we
know about entrepreneurial finance comes from firms that are already established, have
already received venture capital funding, or are on the verge of going public—the dearth
of data on very early stage firms makes it difficult for researchers to look further back in
firms’ life histories.1 Even data sets that are oriented towards small businesses do not
allow us to measure systematically the decisions that firms make at their founding. This
paper uses a novel data set, the Kauffman Firm Survey (KFS), to study the behavior
and decision-making of newly founded firms. As such, it provides a first-time glimpse
into the capital structure decisions of nascent firms.

        In this paper we use the confidential, restricted-access version of the KFS, which
tracks nearly 5,000 firms from their birth in 2004 through their early years of operation.2
Because the survey identifies firms at their founding and follows the cohort over time,
recording growth, death, and any later funding events, it provides a rich picture of firms’
early fundraising decisions.

        Rather than attempt to test specific theories of capital structure, our main goal is a
more modest, descriptive one: to examine the financing choices that firms make when
they launch, and ask whether any patterns emerge from the data. This is motivated
in part by the widely held view that frictions in capital markets prevent startups from
achieving their optimal size, or indeed, from starting up at all. In the presence of such
acute frictions, startups are assumed to pursue financing from informal channels, or
    1
     Some noteworthy recent exceptions are Kaplan, Sensoy and Strömberg, 2009, which follows a small
sample of firms beginning at business plan stage, and Reynolds (2008) which uses data from individuals
who are contemplating starting businesses.
   2
     To be eligible for inclusion in the KFS, at least one of the following activities had to have been
performed in 2004 and none performed in a prior year: Payment of state unemployment (UI) taxes;
Payment of Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) taxes; Presence of a legal status for the
business; Use of an Employer Identification Number (EIN); Use of Schedule C to report business income
on a personal tax return.


                                                  2
through the heavy reliance on trade credit (see, for example, Peterson and Rajan, 1994,
2000.) The richness of the KFS data allows us to explore the extent to which startups
rely on friends and family versus more formal financing arrangements, such as bank
loans, credit cards, and venture capital.

   A working null hypothesis for this descriptive exercise is that no clear patterns in
capital structure are present, because idiosyncracies in firm and owner characteristics,
market conditions and access to financial and human capital are associated with a high
degree of variability in the capital structure choices that nascent firms make. The
alternative offered by conventional wisdom is that informal capital dominates the capital
structure.

   Our main result is that newly founded firms rely heavily on formal debt financing:
owner-backed bank loans, business bank loans and business credit lines. Indeed, funding
from formal debt dwarfs funding from friends and family. The average amount of bank
financing is seven times greater than the average amount of insider-financed debt; three
times as many firms rely on outside debt as do inside debt. Even among firms that rely
on inside debt, the average amount of outside debt is nearly twice that of inside debt.

   The reliance on formal credit channels over personal credit cards and informal lending
holds true even for the smallest firms at the earliest stages of founding. The average pre-
revenue firm in our sample has twice as much capital from bank loans than from insider
sources. And when we look at only those firms who access outside equity sources, such
as venture capital or angel financing, we still see a heavy reliance on debt: the average
firm that accesses external private equity markets still has around 25% of its capital
structure in the form of outside debt.

   We also examine trade credit as a potential source of capital, especially since it may
be especially important in scenarios where trade creditors possess information (or stand
to forge relationships through supply channels) that banks might not be able to obtain
(Peterson and Rajan, 1997). While our data show that trade credit is undoubtedly

                                            3
important, the average firm uses less than half as much trade credit as it does outside
debt, and almost twice as many firms rely on outside debt than do trade credit. Indeed,
if trade credit were counted as a source of financial capital (instead of operating capital),
it would rank third, behind outside debt and owner equity, but ahead of outside equity
and inside debt/equity.

   Of course, these statements only speak to the equilibrium amount of borrowing from
inside and outside sources; the quantities are determined by both the supply and the
demand of different types of capital. Ultimately, it is challenging to separate supply
and demand in the absence of some quasi-experiment. We nevertheless take some small
steps in this direction.

   First, to control for the fact that differences in firm quality or creditworthiness may
be driving the patterns we see in the data, we make use of commercial credit scores of
the firms. This gives us two avenues to control for demand-side variation. The first is
simply to include the credit score directly in our analysis as a proxy for firm quality.
(Alternatively, we can partition the data into high credit and low credit samples and
compare capital structures in the two sub-samples.) Surprisingly, this partitioning has
little effect on the observed capital structure choices firms make. Firms with high credit
scores simply have more financial capital. The level of financing of these firms is nearly
three times larger on average than low-credit firms. But the relative amount of outside
debt to total capital is about the same for both types of firms.

   Second, we identify plausibly exogenous variation in access to capital by using hous-
ing price elasticity data calculated by Saiz (2010). Using sophisticated GIS techniques to
measure geographical constraints on local land supply, as well as factors that account for
endogenous restrictions on land use through zoning, he estimates housing supply elastic-
ities at the MSA level which, in turn, allow us to capture the effect of the housing boom
on access to capital. Roughly speaking, high elasticity areas saw housing inventories in-
crease as the housing bubble expanded, while low elasticity areas saw home prices spike


                                             4
instead. In areas with high elasticity of supply, homes provide better loan collateral,
because the underlying home equity is less sensitive to local pricing conditions.

   This is exactly what we find. Entrepreneurs in areas with high supply elasticity were
more reliant on bank loans as a source of capital. Because our data do not map the
entrepreneurs’ actual home prices onto bank financing choices, we must remain cautious;
nevertheless, we find evidence that high price stability acts as a catalyst for bank loans.

   This of course raises the concern that credit conditions at the time of our survey
were so unique that they do not necessarily reflect broader patterns from other time
periods. While ultimately we are limited to the data that are available, we speak to this
possibility by considering the impact of capital structure decisions on outcome variables
like firm survival, employment growth, and profitability growth. We find that having a
capital structure that is more heavily tilted towards formal credit channels results in a
greater likelihood of success. This fact holds even when we include the credit score as
a measure of firm quality to guard against the possibility that unobserved factors drive
both success and credit access. Our findings indicate that even if credit conditions in
2004 were unique, credit market access had an important impact on firm success.

   This paper is related to a number of papers in the banking, capital structure, and
entrepreneurship literature. Given the emphasis in the current work on the role of formal
banking channels and trade credit, our paper is also related to the literature on the role
of banks and other sources of financing for small firms (Peterson and Rajan, 1994, 1997,
2000). Cosh, Cumming and Hughes (2008) find a similarly important role for bank
capital using British data, but they observe firms at a later point in their life cycle.

   The remainder of the paper is as follows. We begin in Section 2 by describing the KFS
in greater detail. Section 3 examines initial capital structure choices. We incorporate
credit scores and other firm characteristics in Section 4. Section 5 explores multivari-
ate regressions of capital structure on a range of business and owner characteristics to
explain capital structure decisions. Section 6 explores the link between home supply

                                             5
elasticity and bank debt. In Section 7 we examine how initial capital structure affects
firm outcomes. Section 8 concludes.



2     The Kauffman Firm Survey

The KFS is a longitudinal survey of new businesses in the United States. This survey
collected information on 4,928 firms that started in 2004 and surveys them annually.
These data contain detailed information on both the firm and up to ten business owners
per firm. In addition to the 2004 baseline year data there are four years of follow up
data (2005 through 2007) now available. Additional years are planned. Detailed infor-
mation on the firm includes industry, physical location, employment, profits, intellectual
property, and financial capital (equity and debt) used at start-up and over time.

    Information on up to ten owners includes age, gender, race, ethnicity, education,
previous industry experience, and previous startup experience. For more information
about the KFS survey design and methodology, please see Robb et. al (2009). A public-
use dataset is available for download from the Kauffman Foundation’s website and a
more detailed confidential dataset is available to researchers through a secure, remote
access data enclave provided by the National Opinion Research Center (NORC). For
more details about how to access these data, please see www.kauffman.org/kfs.

    A subset of the confidential dataset is used in this research—those firms that either
have data for all three survey years or have been verified as going out of business in 2005,
2006 or 2007. This reduces the sample size to 3,972 businesses. The method we used for
assigning owner demographics at the firm level was to define a primary owner. For firms
with multiple owners (35 percent of the sample), the primary owner was designated by
the largest equity share. In cases where two or more owners owned equal shares, hours
worked and a series of other variables were used to create a rank ordering of owners
in order to define a primary owner. (For more information on this methodology, see

                                             6
Robb et. al, 2009). For this research, multi-race/ethnic owners are classified into one
race/ethnicity category based on the following hierarchy: black, Asian, other, Hispanic,
and white. As a result of the ordering, the white category includes only non-Hispanic
white.

   Tables 1 and 2 provide details on business characteristics. In Table 1, we report
key features of the business—its legal form, location, and other features of operations.
Roughly 36% of all businesses in the data are sole proprietorships, and about 58% are
structured to provide some form of limited liability to owners. About 28% are organized
as S or C corporations.

   Half of the businesses in the survey operate out of the respondents home or garage; the
vast majority (86%) market a service, and only a quarter of the firms in the survey have
any form of intellectual property (patents, copyrights, and/or trademarks). Reflecting
the fact that they are being measured at their inception, the firms are also tiny by almost
any conceivable measure. Nearly 60% of the firms have no employees other than the
founder, and less than 8% of firms in the sample have more than five employees in their
first year of operations.

   Table 2 considers the cash flow characteristics of these nascent businesses. Even
though these firms are small, nearly twenty percent of firms (16.8%) have over $100,000
in revenue in their first year. Indeed, 45% of the firms in the sample have more than
$10,000 in annual revenue in their first year. Of course, over 57% of firms have more
than $10,000 in expenses, and almost one firm in four reports zero profit or loss.

   Table 3 examines owner characteristics in more detail. The entrepreneurs in our
data are overwhelmingly male and white: less than one-third of respondents are female
and over three-quarters are non-Hispanic white. In spite of the fact that most of the
businesses in our data begin at home, in people’s garages, with fewer than five employees,
the overwhelming majority of business owners have at least some industry experience.
Less than ten percent of owners have no previous industry experience, while more than

                                            7
half have more than five years of industry experience. Likewise, more than forty percent
of business owners have started a business before. More than 80% of respondents are
over the age of 35 when they start their business, and roughly half the sample is aged
45 or older.

    The entrepreneurs in our sample are relatively well educated. Less than 20% of re-
spondents have less than a high school degree, while well over half of respondents have
completed some form of a college degree. Finally, nearly a quarter of all respondents
have received some form of advanced, post-graduate education. In broad terms, these
demographics match those reported in other data sources. For example, these demo-
graphics are similar to those reported in Puri and Robinson (2008), using the Survey of
Consumer Finances, and Fairlie and Robb (2007), using the Characteristics of Business
Owners Survey.



3     Where do startups go for capital?

This section explores descriptive statistics about the capital structure decisions that
startup firms make. To impose some structure on the details of startup fundraising,
we first put forward a scheme for classifying the different types of capital available to
startups.

    We distinguish capital sources on two main dimensions. The first is debt vs. equity.
Because we do not delve into the contractual details of VC funding agreements, simply
distinguishing debt and equity serves our purposes: loans, credit cards, lines of credit
and the like are classified as debt.

    Next, we distinguish capital according to its source. Capital can be provided either
by owners, by insiders, or by outsiders. The KFS is careful to distinguish owner equity
from cash that a business owner obtained through, say, a home equity line, which in our



                                           8
classification scheme, would be a source of outside debt, since it was provided through a
formal contract with a lending institution. Informal financing channels include debt or
equity from family members and personal affiliates of the firm, while formal financing
channels include debt accessed through formal credit markets (banks, credit cards, lines
of credit) as well as venture capital and angel financing.

   The most notable implication of our classification scheme is that it groups together
personal debt on the business owner’s household balance sheet with business bank loans,
and places these under the “outside debt” category. We do this for several reasons. First,
if the business is structured as a sole proprietorship, then there is no legal difference be-
tween the assets of the firm and those of the owner. Thus, for around 40% of our
sample, the distinction is meaningless in the first place. But more importantly, research
has shown that personal guarantees and personal collateral must often be posted to se-
cure financing for startups (Moon, 2009; Avery, Bostic and Samalyk, 1998; Mann, 1998).
This means that in the remaining 60% of the firms, the limited liability offered by incor-
poration would often be contractually circumvented in the borrower/lender agreement
with the bank. As such, our primary distinction is not whether the debt is claim on the
business owner’s household assets or her business assets, but rather, whether this debt
was issued by an institution, or by friends and family.



3.1    A detailed look at capital structure

In Table 4, we use this classification scheme to provide a detailed look at the capital struc-
ture choices that nascent firms make. The thirty different sources of capital for startup
businesses are grouped into the six categories described above (owner/insider/outsider
× debt/equity). Over 75% of firms have at least some owner equity; of these, the mean
amount is just over $40,500. If we include the quarter of firms with no reported owner’s
equity, the average owner equity amount drops to $31,734.



                                              9
   Owner debt plays a much smaller role. Only about 1/4 of firms have some form of
owner personal debt, and the vast majority of this is mostly in the form of debt carried
on an owner’s personal credit card. The overall average amount of credit card debt used
to finance startups is a modest $5,000, but this includes the roughly 75% of owners
who do not use personal credit cards to start their businesses. Among those who do,
the balance is considerably larger—$15,700, or about 1/3 of the size of owner equity.
But in general, personal credit card balances make up a relatively small fraction of the
startup’s overall capital structure at inception—only about 4 to 5% of the firm’s total
capitalization is in the form personal credit card balances held by firm owners.

   While owner-provided capital is heavily tilted towards equity, the capital from other
sources is heavily tilted towards debt. If we include the firms with zero values, firms use
about five times as much debt as they do equity. This holds for both inside debt ($6,362)
to equity ($2,102), as well as outside debt ($47,847) to equity ($15,935). But seven times
as many firms report outside debt as report outside equity. Yet, among those who do
receive outside equity, there is no question that it is important. The average amount of
outside equity among the 205 firms who access this source of financing is over $350,000,
roughly twice as large as the total financial capital for the average firm in the survey.

   Turning first to insiders, we see that equity is uncommon. Only about five percent
of the sample relies on equity from a spouse or other family members, and the overall
average amount (including the 95% with no family equity) is only about two percent
of the average funding. Yet, among the group who uses family equity, the source is
important: the magnitude of insider equity is roughly the same as that of owner equity,
and many times larger than the magnitude of owner debt.

   Insider debt is more common, but still a small source of funding relative to outside
debt and equity. The mean value of inside debt for all firms is $6,362, and this primarily
comes from personal loans received by the respondent from family and other owners.
Loans directly to the business from owners or other family members are also important,


                                            10
but the fact that less than ten percent of surveyed firms rely on any one type of inside
debt suggests that this funding source is not commonly relied upon by new firms.

       When we turn to outsider debt, we see that on average it is the largest single financing
category for startups during their first year of operation. While this no doubt reflects
the relative supply of outside debt to other funding sources, it is noteworthy that only a
relatively small fraction of this comes from credit card balances issued to the business.
Of the $47,847 average debt level, less than $2,500 on average comes from business credit
cards.

       One widely held view about entrepreneurial finance is that startups lack access to
formal capital markets, and thus are forced to rely on an informal network of family,
friends, and other financing sources like credit cards to bootstrap their initial financing.
Table 4 speaks against this idea. First, outside capital is extremely important, even at
the earliest stages of a firm’s life. The average new firm has approximately $109,000 of
financial capital. Of that, roughly half comes from outside sources.

       To be clear, however, informal investors do play an important role for those firms who
obtain external equity funding. Looking solely at the external equity funding, of the 205
firms who received some form of external equity funding, over half received funding from
outside informal investors. The average amount, around $245,000, is roughly one-fourth
the average for the handful of firms that report obtaining venture capital.3

       Second, the vast majority of this outside capital comes in the form of credit, either
through personal loans made directly to the owner or through business credit cards.
Moreover, credit cards play a relatively small role for the average startup. If we total
the average credit card holdings on all personal and business accounts associated with
the business, the amount sums to less than half the average personal bank loan. If we
tally the average personal bank loan and the average business bank loan, this amount is
   3
    Some firms may indeed misclassify angel investors as venture capital, as the average amounts are
quite low.



                                                11
roughly four times the size of the average total credit card balances outstanding.



3.2    Capital Structure and Firm Type

Perhaps the most surprising finding in Table 4 is that formal credit channels—business
and personal bank loans—are the most important sources of funding for startups. To
push this observation further, we segment the data in Table 5 to report capital structure
patterns for different types of startup firms.

   The idea behind Table 5 is to isolate those firms that are in their very earliest stages
of starting up, to see if the overall capital structure patterns hold there as well. This can
be done according to a number of criteria. In the first column of Table 5, we examine
the 2,425 firms who have no employees other than the founder. These firms are small
relative to the average reported for all firms in Table 4—there total capital is only around
$45,000 as compared to the roughly $110,000 in Table 4. But proportionately, outside
debt plays a quite similar role: the average non-employer firm has $19,500 in outside
debt, or about 43% of its total capital, compared to approximately $48,000, or about
44% of total capital on average for firms overall. Of the outside debt, we again see that
business bank loans and personal bank loans make up the bulk of the $19,500. Only
about $2,500 comes from other sources on average.

   The second column examines the 2,168 businesses which are home-based, meaning
that they do not operate any office or warehouse space outside the home. These too are
small, presumably including the proverbial “garage business” as well as businesses of a
professional nature that operate out of a home office. The capital structure patterns
for these businesses are remarkably similar to the non-employer businesses: about forty
percent of their total capital is financed through outside debt, and the lion’s share of
that comes from personal and business bank loans, rather than credit card balances.




                                             12
   Another way to pinpoint firms at their earliest stages is to focus only on pre-revenue
or pre-profit firms. We examine these firms in columns (3) and (4), respectively. These
firms are considerably larger than the previous two categories, presumably because these
include many firms that have secured inventories in advance of sales, or require external
building space to operate. Indeed, these columns look quite similar to the averages
reported in Table 4 for the whole sample.

   Because the first four columns of Table 5 monotonically expand the size and scope
of firms under consideration, they offer an alternative way to examine capital choice,
albeit descriptively. Moving from the first column of data to the fourth column of data
more than doubles the firm’s size by adding an additional $80,000 of total capital to the
firm. By far the bulk of this comes from outside debt and equity, which together make
up about half the increase in firm capital. Since columns (3) and (4) also contain some
non-employer and home-based firms, this comparison understates the magnitude of the
shift in capital structure. Thus, the comparisons across the columns of Table 5 indicate
that friends and family is probably an earlier source of financing than outside debt, as
previous accounts have indicated. It is just not terribly important in terms of total size.

   The final two columns of Table 5 split the data according to whether the firm contin-
ued to operated throughout the first four waves of the KFS, or whether the firm ceased
operations. Firms that survive look very much like the overall average reported in Table
4. On the other hand, firms that ceased operations sometime before 2007 not only began
smaller, but also had considerably smaller proportions of outside debt to total capital.

   Rather than focus on the firms least likely to access debt markets from a size perspec-
tive, in Table 6 we focus on firms that demonstrated an ability to access outside equity.
Since here we are conditioning the sample on the presence of outside equity, we would
naturally expect outside equity to play an important role for these firms. It does. For
example, angel-backed firms are about 50% outside equity, and they are considerably
larger than the average firm on the KFS. The ratio of outside equity to total capital


                                            13
is even higher for VC-backed and corporate-equity backed firms. Notwithstanding the
reliance on outside equity, these firms have large amounts of outside debt. Outside debt
is the second largest source of capital for these firms, behind outside equity, for all types
except corporate-backed firms. Outside debt dwarfs trade credit for these firm types,
again, with the exception of corporate equity backed firms.



4     Firm Quality and Capital Structure Decisions

4.1       Credit worthiness, technology and the financing pyramid

Table 7 takes the detail of the preceding tables and boils it down to six categories:
owner debt, owner equity, inside debt, inside equity, outside debt, and outside equity.
These classifications are as described in the left-most column of Table 4. Reducing the
amount of detail not only makes the firms’ capital structure choice more apparent, it
also facilitates more comparisons across different types of firms.

    The rows of Table 7 are arranged from highest to lowest in terms of the overall
weighted average level of 2004 funding. If we interpret the magnitudes as an indication
of relative importance, then if not a pecking order, we at least see we see a clear “financing
pyramid” emerge: first outside debt, then owner equity, then debt from insiders. Fourth
in the pyramid is outside equity, followed by owner debt; the least used source is inside
equity.

    An alternative way to characterize the financing pyramid of nascent firms is to com-
bine owner debt and equity into a single category, internal funding. Looking at capital
structure this way, the average firm is roughly equal parts internal funding and outside
debt. These two sources of funding are each roughly four times larger than the next
largest source of financing. Regardless of how the financial pieces are assembled, outside
debt plays a paramount role in funding newly founded firms.

                                             14
   One reason for this may simply be that outside debt is more plentiful than other
sources of funding. To explore this possibility, we obtained commercial credit scores
for each firm to identify high credit worthiness and low credit worthiness firms. Table 7
shows that while high credit worthiness firms have access to much more financial capital,
they access capital in roughly the same proportions as low credit worthiness firms. Thus,
a firm’s credit score induces a first-order shift in the level of financing it obtains, but
only a second-order shift in capital structure choice it makes.

   Outside equity plays a substantially more important role in the capital structure of
high tech firms. Across all high tech firms, outside equity is the third largest funding
source behind outside debt and owner equity. Among high tech firms with high credit
scores, outside equity is the largest form of financing. It is only the low credit score firms
in the high tech sector that display a capital structure that resembles the average firm
in the data—but for those firms, owner equity is a more important source of financing
than outside debt.



4.2    Separating credit quality from owner wealth

Of course, one reason why the capital structures of high and low credit quality firms may
be so similar is that the credit scores of the business are highly correlated with those
of the founders. All else equal, wealthier individuals may have higher credit scores, and
simultaneously find it easier to post their own equity to start the business, leaving the
overall capital structure unchanged as underlying credit quality changes.

   One way to account for this possibility is to regress the firm’s credit score on variables
that proxy for owner characteristics that would influence credit ratings. We consider
two models. First, we run the following regression:


                                   scoreij = α + βj + i                                  (1)



                                             15
where scoreij is the credit score of firm i in industry j, βj are industry fixed effects. Thus,
the first estimation simply includes a set of 60 industry dummies. If some industries
faced systematically lower entry costs, this would control for the fact that individuals
with systematically lower wealth levels could enter this industry to start their business.

   For the second specification, we run the following regression:


                           scoreij = α + βj + γ1 Fij + γ2 Kij + i                         (2)


where scoreij is the credit score of firm i in industry j, βj are industry fixed effects, and
F is a vector of owner characteristics, and K is a vector of firm characteristics, both
of which likely vary with demand for credit. For this specification, we include a full
set of industry dummies, a set of education dummies corresponding to the breakdown
presented in Table 3, and we also include factors such as race, ethnicity, industry ex-
perience, intellectual property, legal structure of the enterprise, whether the business is
home-based, and whether the business sells a product or provides a service. While these
coefficient estimates are interesting in their own right, a full discussion is beyond the
scope of this paper. Indeed, in Robb, Fairlie and Robinson (2009) we explore the issue
of race and access to credit in greater detail.

   The idea behind both specifications is that by purging the credit score of variation
that is linked to factors affecting personal credit scores, the remaining variation in credit
score would reflect supply-side credit restrictions. Firms with high unexplained credit
scores should have easier access to capital, while firms with low unexplained credit scores
should have relatively more difficult access to capital. Moreover, the differences in their
access to capital could reflect suppliers willingness to lend, rather than differences in
capital needs.

   Recovering the regression errors from these two models gives us a mechanism for
classifying firms as credit constrained or unconstrained. Of course, a firm with a low



                                              16
unconditional credit score is constrained, but this low score may arise endogenously
because the firm has little need for external capital, low growth prospects, etc. By
relying on the conditional credit score as opposed to the raw credit score, we circumvent
these problems.

    Table 8 reports financing choices for firms in the lowest and highest quintiles of the
unexplained credit score distribution. Firms in the lowest quintile face the most severe
unexplained restrictions to credit access, since their credit scores are much lower than
would be predicted based on their demand characteristics. In contrast, the top quintile
have the easiest access to credit, since they have high unexplained credit scores, given
their access to capital.

    In general, the results of Table 8 mimic the results from the previous table, in that
they show a first order affect on the amount of capital raised, but only a second or-
der effect on capital structure choice. Credit constrained firms have capital structures
that look very similar to those of unconstrained firms. The primary difference is that
unconstrained firms have much higher levels of capital investment.



5     Explaining Funding Decisions

Having described initial capital structure choices in detail, we now turn to the task of
decomposing capital structure choice in a multivariate framework. We do this in Table
9, where we regress capital structure ratios on owner and firm characteristics. In general,
Table 9 reports OLS regressions of the following form:

                    Financing Category
                                       = α + βj + γ1 Fij + γ2 Kij + i                 (3)
                       Total Capital

where βj are industry fixed effects, F is a vector of owner characteristics, and K is
a vector of firm characteristics. The dependent variable in each column is a financial


                                            17
ratio—either outside debt, outside equity, outside loans, or inside finance—each scaled
by the firm’s total capital. (The unmeasured category is the ratio of owner financing
to total capital.) Outside loans are a subset of outside debt that include only personal
bank loans and business loans. The firm characteristics include not only the survey
characteristics described in Tables 1-3, but also the firm’s credit score, a measure of
quality that might well be unobserveable to the econometrician in other circumstances,
but would be readily observable to credit market participants.

      Are gender and race correlated with initial capital structure choices? Table 9 suggests
that this is definitely the case. First, gender: women receive significantly less outside
capital than other groups. The results for women indicate that the average female-
owned business holds about 5% less outside debt than the same male-owned business.
Although these results may reflect the fact that women face more restricted access to
capital in the credit market, the data do not allow us to rule out the possibility that,
notwithstanding the industry fixed effects, female-owned businesses simply may demand
less outside capital, perhaps because they are more likely to be second-income businesses.

      Next, the question of race. Table 9 shows that black-owned businesses hold much
less outside debt in their initial capital structure than other businesses. The magnitudes
are similar to those found for gender: the ratio of outside debt to total capital is about
13% lower for black-owned businesses than for otherwise equal white-owned businesses.
Whether this attributable to supply-side or demand-side considerations, it is important
to note that these regressions hold constant the industry of the business, the firm’s
credit quality, the owner’s education, and their prior industry and startup experience.
Thus, unobserved heterogeneity in underlying business quality seems unlikely to be a
first-order explanation for the difference.

      We also observe other racial differences in capital structure choice. Hispanics and
Asians, but not Blacks, rely heavily on inside finance.4 While Hispanic or Asian ethnicity
  4
      This is measured as the sum of inside equity and debt.



                                                   18
explains little variation in access to external capital, these groups average about 25%
more inside capital in their total capital structure. Given that the average firm in Table
4 has an inside-to-total capital ratio of around 12%, this effect is enormous in economic
magnitude, representing a 75% increase in the average amount.

   Across the board, increasing hours worked in the business is associated with greater
outside and inside capital, and consequently, lower owner financing. Similarly, owner
age has an increasing but concave relationship with access to external capital, for both
debt and equity, while it has the opposite relationship for inside financing.

   Prior experience plays an interesting role in determining initial capital structure.
Owners with prior startup experience tend to rely on external equity more than others.
In contrast, Table 9 indicates that owners with more industry experience rely signifi-
cantly more on their own financing, since the association between industry experience
and capital type is negative across all types reported in the table.

   The regressions also include, but do not report, owner education. Different categories
of education have similar experiences accessing external debt equity, but there is a
pronounced effect associated with inside financing. Namely, those who do not finish
high school are significantly more likely to rely on inside financing than other groups.
Since the regressions include industry fixed effects, it is not the case that this is driven
by sorting of low education respondents into industries with low capital requirements.
Rather, this is probably an indication that lower quality businesses are more likely to
rely on inside financing instead of accessing external capital markets.

   The business characteristics reported in the bottom of the table demonstrate that
firms with lower asymmetric information problems enjoy more ready access to external
capital sources, and in particular, external credit funding. Home-based businesses rely
more heavily on owner financing, while firms with multiple owners have larger fractions
of outside-to-total capital. Comparing the point estimates in Table 9 to the averages
in Table 4 suggests that multiple-owner firms receive about a ten percent increase in

                                            19
the baseline amount of outside debt, and about a 25% increase in the baseline level of
external equity (from around 8% to around 10%). Firms that have intellectual property
are not more likely to access outside debt, but are more likely to access external equity,
than those that do not.



6     Housing Markets, Bankruptcy Exemptions, and
      Access to Debt

In this section we explore two potential strategies for decoupling supply and demand for
capital. The first is to examine housing price appreciation as a potentially exogenous
source of variation in collateral that drives the availability of credit. Since housing prices
are likely to be endogenous to the expected future profitability of the business ventures,
we instead link housing supply elasticity to bank credit. This variable is obtained from
Saiz (2010) and is based on exogenous geographical factors that affect the amount of
developable land, as well as factors like zoning restrictions. Because the housing price
elasticity is largely predetermined prior to 2004, it provides an exogenous source of
variation in collateral values.

    The data provided by Saiz (2010) contain housing supply elasticity estimates for
269 metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) in the United States. While this includes
all the major metropolitan areas in the United States, it also includes a great many
smaller regions. For example, the 1st percentile of the population distribution (using
the population in 2000) is less than 80,000 residents. The size of the 25th percentile is
around 163,000 residents. Nevertheless, this variable does not measure the actual home
price appreciation (or home ownership status) of the respondents of the KFS; it contains
only a regional measure of land developability.




                                             20
       If housing supply were perfectly inelastic, then demand shocks would translate di-
rectly into price shocks, and home equity values would be highly sensitive to underlying
changes in housing demand. In such a world, home equity would provide poor collateral
for business loans, because the value of the collateral would be sensitive to factors that
were outside the borrower’s control. In contrast, a region with a perfectly elastic supply
of housing would experience no price change whatsoever as housing demand changed. In
such a world, home equity would be unaffected by fluctuations in housing demand. Thus,
in regions where housing supply is elastic, we should expect to see a greater reliance on
outside debt, since the underlying home equity is more pledgeable.5

       Table 10 tests this prediction by regressing the fraction of bank capital on the housing
supply elasticity, controlling for a variety of owner and business characteristics. Across
the various specifications reported, increasing supply elasticity raises the fraction of
bank debt by about 2%. To translate this into economic magnitudes, moving from the
25th to 75th percentile, which is approximately moving from Reno, Nevada to Peoria,
Illinois, is associated with a 3% increase in bank debt. Since the average startup is about
40% bank financed, this effect seems economically large.

       The second potential channel for decoupling supply and demand is to examine state-
level bankruptcy exemptions. All else equal, borrowers in states with higher bankruptcy
exemption levels should expect to receive less total outside capital in the form of bank
debt, since increased bankruptcy protection impairs the collateral value of the assets they
own.6 Since state-level bankruptcy laws are unlikely to be determined by local varia-
tion in entrepreneurial opportunity, including an exemption measure gives us another
opportunity to separate credit supply from credit demand.
   5
     The KFS survey instrument explicitly instructs respondents to exclude from owner’s equity any cash
they put into the business from home equity loans or lines of credit. The survey instrument allocates
these funding sources to personal bank debt.
   6
     This argument is consistent with Berkowitz and White (2004), who show that higher personal
bankruptcy exemption levels are associated with more credit denials among small businesses.




                                                  21
    Column (5) of Table 10 includes a bankruptcy exemption variable, which is the
bankruptcy homestead exemption in the respondent’s state of residence, in tens of thou-
sands of dollars. Taken by itself, the variable has the expected sign, but is statistically
insignificant. But Column (5) does not include credit score dummies. When we include
credit score information, as in Column (7), we see that the loading on the bankruptcy
exemption is both negative and statistically significant. This indicates that borrowers
in states with higher bankruptcy exemptions indeed obtained a lower ratio of outside
bank debt to total capital (see also Cerquiero and Fabiana Penas, 2010).



7     Does Financial Access Affect Survival?

One possible explanation for our findings that certainly merits consideration is that the
fact that startups rely extensively on external credit markets to fund their early life is
being driven by peculiarities in the credit market in 2004.

    We address this possibility in two ways. First, in Table 11 we examine the importance
of debt for later-stage fundraising decisions. Is the reliance on debt a feature of the
starting conditions of the business only? Do businesses wean themselves off of outside
debt as they grow? Table 11 suggests not. It suggests that they continue to rely on debt
in the years after the firm’s founding.

    Table 11 shows that, for the average firm, the fraction of new capital coming into
the firm that is made up of outside debt is actually increasing as the firm matures. If
anything, the fraction of owner equity falls as the firm ages. This supports life-cycle
theories such as Berger and Udell (1998) in favor of the idea that startups used personal
loans to kick start the business and then moved away from debt as the firm matured.

    The columns of Table 11 consider different types of firms to see if the increased
reliance on outside debt is particularly important for certain kinds of firms. Column (2)



                                            22
reports firms that have some form of outside equity at startup. These firms typically
receive a large equity injection in the first year after founding, but in the following years,
they rely much more heavily on outside debt. This is consistent with outside equity being
staged to coincide with milestones, but at the same time, the reliance on outside debt
in 2006 and 2007 suggest that these firms too continue to rely on outside debt.

   The final two columns of Table 11 look at opposite ends of the spectrum. Column
(3) only considers the set of firms that are incorporated, have employees, and have assets
such as inventories in the year of their founding. These firms typically have about 40%
of their initial capital coming from outside debt, and this ratio grows over time. By the
time of the third year (2007), the total capital coming into the firm is over 55% outside
debt. And while the absolute levels of financing are considerably smaller for home-based
firms (column 4), the story is very much the same: these firms rely on outside debt to
an increasing degree as they age.

   If our findings simply reflect the fact that credit was readily available in 2004, then
there is no reason to believe that access to external credit should affect firm success.

   To test this, we report Probit analysis of three key measures of growth from 2004-
2007. First, we create a dummy for whether a firm has above median revenues in 2007.
Then we repeat this calculation for profits and for employees. Our key explanatory
variable is the ratio of outside debt to total capital. The hypothesis that we are testing
is that firms with greater levels of external capital had better growth prospects.

   Table 12 presents the findings. It includes the same basic set of owner and firm
characteristics, plus the ratio of outside debt to total capital and the level of 2004 sales.
The outside debt ratio has a positive and highly significant effect on revenue growth and
employee growth, but a statistically insignificant positive effect on profit growth.

   Before it is possible to attach a causal interpretation to these findings, it is important
to control for unobserved characteristics that might affect access to debt and success.


                                             23
In that regard, including the credit score and other firm characteristics are essential
for interpreting our findings. Including the credit score allows us to conclude that
controlling for firm creditworthiness, firms that accessed more external debt were nearly
ten percent more likely to be in the top revenue group, and nearly six percent more likely
to have hired employees. Note too that this also controls for the initial revenues the firm
experienced in 2004, therefore the effect is not attributable to initial size. Table 12
indicates that, indeed, initial capital structure decisions are important for firm success.

    The owner and firm characteristics, which are included as controls in Table 12, are
interesting in their own right and raise many questions for future research. First, they
show that female-owned businesses are significantly less likely to grow than male-owned
businesses. Black-owned businesses are significantly less likely to have grown in terms
of profits or sales, but they are more likely to have added employees than white-owned
businesses. Asian-owned businesses are also more likely to have added employees, al-
though Asian ownership is unrelated to revenue or profit growth. And finally, the vector
of firm characteristics that might describe a firm, a priori, as a lifestyle business or not
indeed predicts whether a firm has grown.



8     Conclusions

This paper uses a novel data set to explore the capital structure decisions that firms
make in their initial year of operation. In the vast majority of cases, this is when the
firms in question are still being incubated in their founders’ homes or garages, before
outside employees have joined the firm in any significant number, and certainly well
before the firms in question would be attractive to the types of funding sources that are
the focus of most discussions of early stage financing.

    In spite of the fact that these firms are at their very beginning of life, they rely to
a surprising degree on bank debt. Partly this is a function of the availability of bank

                                            24
debt: in regions that experienced an increase in the supply of home loans, startups relied
to a larger extent on bank debt. Higher quality firms operate at a larger scale in part
because they can access larger amounts of bank financing.

   The notion that startups commonly rely on the beneficence of a loose coalition of
family and friends seems misleading given our findings. While the data suggest that
informal investors are important for the handful of firms that rely on outside equity
at their startup, the data also indicate that most firms turn elsewhere for their initial
capital. Indeed, roughly 80-90% of most firms’ startup capital is made up in equal parts
of owner equity and bank debt.

   To be sure, our findings underscore the importance of liquid credit markets for the
formation and success of young firms. Because startups rely so extensively on outside
debt as a source of startup capital, they are especially sensitive to changes in bank
lending conditions, perhaps more sensitive than would be suggested based on accounts
of entrepreneurial finance that focus on the importance of informal capital.




                                           25
References

 [1] Avery, Robert B. and Raphael W. Bostic and Katherine A. Samolyk, 1998. “The
    role of personal wealth in small business finance,” Journal of Banking and Finance,
    vol. 22, pp. 1019 - 1061.

 [2] Berkowitz, Jeremy and Michelle J. White, 2004. “Bankruptcy and small firms’
    access to credit,” RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 35, no. 1, Spring. pp. 69-84.

 [3] Cerqueiros, Geraldo and Maria Fabiana Penas, 2010. “Debtor protection and start-
    up financing sources: evidence from the US” Working Paper, Tilburg University.

 [4] Cosh, Andrew, Douglas Cumming and Alan Hughes, 2008. “Outside En-
    trepreneurial Capital,” forthcoming, Economic Journal.

 [5] Fairlie, Robert and Harry Krashinsky, 2007. ”Liquidity Constraints, Household
    Wealth, and Entrepreneurship Revisited,” working paper, University of California,
    Santa Cruz.

 [6] Fairlie, Robert and Alicia Robb, 2008. ”Why are Black-Owned Businesses Less
    Successful than White-Owned Businesses: The Role of Families, Inheritances, and
    Business Human Capital,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(2): 289-323.

 [7] Faulkender, Michael and Mitchell Peterson, 2006. “Does the source of capital affect
    capital structure?” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 19, pp. 45-79.

 [8] Gompers, Paul and Josh Lerner, 2001. “The venture capital revolution.” Journal
    of Economic Perspectives.

 [9] Helwege, Jean and N. Liang, 1996. “Is there a pecking order? Evidence from a
    panel of IPO firms.” Journal of Financial Economics, vol 40, no. 429-458.

[10] Hurst, Erik and Annamaria Lusardi, 2004. Liquidity Constraints, Household
    Wealth, and Entrepreneurship, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112.

                                          26
[11] Kaplan, Steven N., Berk Sensoy, and Per J. Strömberg, 2009. “Should investors
    bet on the jockey or the horse? Evidence from the evolution of firms from early
    business plans to public companies.” Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

[12] Lemman, Michael L., Michael R. Roberts and Jaime F. Zender, 2008. “Back to the
    beginning: persistence and the cross-section of corporate capital structure,” Journal
    of Finance, vol 63, no 4, pp. 1575-1603.

[13] Mann, Ronald J., 1998. “Comment on Avery, Bostic and Samolyk” Journal of
    Banking and Finance, vol. 22, pp. 1062-1066.

[14] Moon, John, 2009. “Small business finance and personal assets,”Community Invest-
    ments, vol. 21, issue 3, Winter 2009/2010.

[15] Myers, Steward and Nicholas Majluf, 1984. Financing and investment decisions
    when firms have information markets do not have, Journal of Financial Economics,
    vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 187-221.

[16] Peterson, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 2000. “Does distance still matter? The
    information revolution in small business lending,” NBER Working Paper #7685.

[17] Peterson, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 1994. “The benefits of lending relation-
    ships: evidence from small business lending,” Journal of Finance, vol. 49, no. 1, pp
    3-37.

[18] Peterson, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 1997. “Trade credit: theories and evi-
    dence,” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 10, no. 3, pp 661-691.

[19] Puri, Manju and David T. Robinson, 2008. “Optimism and Economic Choice,”
    Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 86, no. 1, 71-99.

[20] Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, 1995. “What do we know about capital struc-
    ture? Some evidence from international data,” Journal of Finance, vol. 50, no. 5,
    pp. 1421-1460.

                                          27
    Robb, A., Ballou, J., Barton, T., DesRoches, D., Potter, F., Reedy, E.J., & Zhao,
    Z. (2009). An Overview of the Kauffman Firm Survey: Results from the 2004-2007
    Data. Kauffman Foundation.

[21] Robb, Alicia M., Robert Fairlie and David T. Robinson, 2009. “Capital Injections
    among New Black and White Business Ventures: Evidence from the Kauffman Firm
    Survey,” Working paper.

[22] Saiz, Albert (forthcoming) ”The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics.

[23] Shyam Sunder and Stewart Myers, 1999. ”Testing static tradeoff against pecking
    order models of capital structure, Journal of Financial Economics, vol 51.

[24] Wong, Andrew, 2003. “Angel finance: the ‘other’ venture capital.” PhD disserta-
    tion, University of Chicago.




                                         28
                          Table 1: Business Characteristics
Sample includes 3,972 firms that either survived over the 2004-2007 period or were verified as going
out of business over the same period. Corporation includes C- or S-corporations. Limited liability
corporation includes LLC or LLP designations. Home based business means that the primary
business location was the same as the owner’s home. Credit score is a quintile score of the credit
quality of the business.
                                                                                  Weighted
                                                                                 Percentage
Business Legal Status
                                          Sole Proprietorship                        0.360
                                                  Partnership                        0.057
                                                  Corporation                        0.277
                                Limited Liability Corporation                        0.306

Business Location
                                                         Home Based                  0.500
                                                        Leased Space                 0.396
                                                               Other                 0.104

Business Product/Service Offerings
                                        Service Offered                              0.858
                                       Product Offered                               0.516
             Business Offers Both Service(s)/Product(s)                              0.378

Intellectual Property
                                                              Patents                0.022
                                                           Copyrights                0.086
                                                          Trademarks                 0.137
Employment Size
                                                                     Zero             59.2
                                                                        1             14.0
                                                                        2              9.1
                                                                        3              4.6
                                                                      4-5              5.8
                                                                     6-10             3.9
                                                                     11+               3.6
Credit Score
                                              High Credit Score                      0.115
                                            Medium Credit Score                      0.553
                                               Low Credit Score                      0.332




                                                29
                   Table 2: Cash flow characteristics of startups in the KFS
Sample includes 3,972 firms that either survived over the 2004-2007 period or were verified as going out of business over
the same period. Panel A refers to the distribution of revenues and expenses, while Panel B refers to the distribution of
profits and losses. In Panel B, 44.5% of the sample reported earning profits, of whom 19.4% indicated approximately zero
profits; likewise, 55.5% reported losses, of whom around 3.4% reported zero loss.
               Panel A: Percent of Businesses by Revenues and Expenses
                              Weighted                                 Weighted
Revenues                      Percentage Expenses                      Percentage
Zero                          35.3%        Zero                        6.7%
$1,000 or less                5.1%         $1,000 or less              8.5%
$1,001- $5,000                7.7%         $1,001- $5,000              16.0%
$5,001- $10,000               6.1%         $5,001- $10,000             11.3%
$10,001- $25,000              10.5%        $10,001- $25,000            16.2%
$25,001- $100,000             18.6%        $25,001- $100,000           25.3%
$100,001 or more              16.8%        $100,001 or more            15.8%

             Panel B: Percent of Businesses by Amount of Profits or Losses
                              Weighted                                   Weighted
Profit (44.5 %)               Percentage Loss (55.5%)                    Percentage
Zero                          19.4%         Zero                         3.4%
$1,000 or less                10.2%         $1,000 or less               13.2%
$1,001- $5,000                16.4%         $1,001- $5,000               27.3%
$5,001- $10,000               12.5%         $5,001- $10,000              17.0%
$10,001- $25,000              17.4%         $10,001- $25,000             17.9%
$25,001- $100,000             20.0%         $25,001- $100,000            16.9%
$100,001 or more              4.1%          $100,001 or more             4.2%




                                                         30
                      Table 3: Business owner demographics
Sample includes 3,972 firms that either survived over the 2004-2007 period or were verified as
going out of business over the same period.
                                 Weighted                                          Weighted
Characteristics                  Percentage        Characteristics:               Percentage
Male                                69.2
Female                              30.8           Industry Exp. (Yrs.)
                                                   Zero                                9.8
White                                 79.3         1-2                                13.9
Black                                 8.6          3-5                                15.6
Asian                                  4.2         6-9                                 9.9
Others                                2.3          10-14                              13.6
                                                   15-19                              11.3
Non-Hispanic                          94.5         20-24                               9.3
Hispanic                              5.5          25-29                               7.5
                                                   30+                                 9.3
Owner Age
24 or younger                          1.3
25-34                                 16.5         Previous Start-ups
35-44                                 33.6         0                                  57.5
45-54                                 29.0         1                                  21.5
55 or older                           19.6         2                                  10.2
                                                   3                                   5.0
Owner Education                                    4 or more                           5.8
HS Grad or Less                       13.9
Tech/Trade/Voc. Deg.                  6.4
Some Coll., no deg.                   21.8         Hours Worked
Associate’s                           8.6          Less than 20                       18.5
Bachelor’s                            25.3         20-35                              19.5
Some Grad, No Deg.                     5.9         36-45                              14.3
Master’s Degree                       13.4         46-55                              15.2
Professional/Doctorate                 4.7         56 or more                         32.5




                                              31
                         Table 4: Sources of Financing for 2004 Startups
Sample includes 3,972 firms that either survived over the 2004-2007 period or were verified as going out of business over
the same period. The mean, in dollars, for all firms is reported in the first column. The second column reports the mean,
in dollars, for only firms with positive amounts of that source of funding. The sample size for that source of funding is
reported in the third column.
Category                                          Funding Source         Grand Mean          Mean if > 0         Count
Owner Equity                                                                  31,734             40,536           3,093
Owner Debt                                                                     5,037             15,765           1,241
                                  Personal CC balance, resp.                   2,811               9,375          1,158
                                 Personal loan, other owners                   1,989            124,124              67
                                 Personal CC balance, others                     238               7,415            132

Insider Equity                                                                     2,102            44,956          177
                                                   Parent Equity                   1,456            42,509          126
                                                   Spouse Equity                     646            40,436           62

Insider Debt                                                                       6,362            47,873          480
                                  Personal Loan from family                        2,749            29,232          327
                                   Business loan from family                       1,760            57,207          115
                                Family loan to other owners                          284            34,509           29
                               Personal loan to other owners                         550            28,988           73
                                        Other personal loans                         924            81,452           45
                                     Business loan by owner                           15             9,411            5
                                      Business loan by emp.                           79            22,198            9

Outsider Equity                                                                  15,935           354,540           205
                                                 Angel investors                  6,350           244,707           110
                                                 Venture Capital                  4,804         1,162,898            26
                                                 Business equity                  3,645           321,351            56
                                                    Govt. equity                    798           146,624            27
                                                    Other equity                    337           187,046             8

Outsider Debt                                                                    47,847            128,706        1,439
                                        Business bank loan                       17,075            261,358          243
                                        Personal bank loan                       15,859             92,433          641
                                        Credit line balance                       5,057             95,058          210
                                      Non-bank bus. Loan                          3,627            214,920           72
                        Personal bank loan by other owners                        1,859             80,650           92
                                          Govt. bus. Loan                         1,331            154,743           34
                                   Owner bus. CC balance                          1,009              7,107          543
                                          Bus. CC balance                           812              6,976          452
                                   Other Bus. CC balance                            135              7,852           62
                                          Other bus. Loan                           231             78,281           19
                                     Other individual loan                          226             43,202           22
                                                Other debt                          626            119,493           22

Total Financial Capital                                                         109,016            121,981        3,972
Trade credit                                             32                      21,793             93,536          838
               Table 5: Sources of Financing for 2004 Startups by Firm Type

This sample includes the 3,972 firms that either survived over the 2004-2007 period or were verified as going out of business over the
same period. Non-employer means the firm had no employees apart from the owner. Home-based means that the firm did not have a
place of business outside the owner’s home.
                                                   Non-         Home-         Pre-          Pre-          Survived        Closed
Funding Source                                   Employer        Based       Revenue       Profits       thru 2006        by 2006
Owner Equity                                      $17,269       $20,035      $31,201       $35,433        $31,784         $31,609

Owner Debt                                         $2,318        $2,624       $3,720        $5,445         $4,896          $5,392
      Personal Credit Card -Owner                  $1,896        $2,093       $1,937        $3,499         $2,634          $3,256
Personal Credit Card-Other Owners                   $159          $218         $133          $305           $217            $291

Insider Equity                                      $698         $1,024       $2,271        $2,553         $1,705          $3,101
                           Spouse Equity            $270          $215         $612          $638           $468           $1,094
                           Parent Equity            $428          $809        $1,659        $1,915         $1,237          $2,007

Insider Debt                                       $2,381        $3,074       $6,456        $7,852         $5,856          $7,635
                Personal Family Loan               $1,051        $1,683       $2,451        $3,342         $2,437          $3,535
            Business Loan from family               $350          $580        $2,114        $2,335         $1,481          $2,464
                 Other Personal Loan                $475          $302        $1,233        $1,177         $1,191           $252

Outsider Equity                                    $2,774        $4,731      $16,268       $21,530        $18,753          $8,841
          Other Informal Investors                  $785         $2,489      $7,006        $9,704          $7,992          $2,218
             Other Business Equity                 $1,529        $1,568      $4,539        $4,727          $3,840          $3,155
                Government Equity                    $10          $226         $550         $945           $1,083           $81
            Venture Capital Equity                  $441          $443        $4,164       $5,618          $5,373          $3,373

Outsider Debt                                     $19,353       $26,960      $44,839       $54,536        $50,087         $42,208
                    Personal Bank Loan            $11,453       $12,898      $12,962       $17,738        $17,416         $11,941
                    Bank Business Loan            $5,231         $9,180      $18,474       $21,160        $18,653         $13,103
                            Credit Line            $341           $656       $2,986        $4,823          $5,061         $5,047

Total Financial Capital                           $44,793       $58,448      $104,755      $127,349      $113,080         $98,787
Trade Credit                                       $6,883       $5,537        $4,825       $14,640        $22,684         $16,642

Observations                                       2,425         2,168         1,615         2,144          3,390            773




                                                        33
                Table 6: Do Equity-backed Firms Embrace or Eschew Debt?
Each column in this table reports capital structure decisions for firms with different types of outside equity. Thus, the
sample size of each column is reported in the third row of Table 4, in the “Outside Equity” section. Amounts are averages
over all firms that had the type of funding in the column header in 2004. Some subcategories are suppressed for brevity,
but they are included in the totals reported in each category.
Source                                            Angel           VC            Corporate            Govt-Other
Owner Equity                                     $116,792       $119,459        $105,062              $47,062

Insider Equity                                   $12,948          $4,278          $5,346                $5,521
                           Spouse Equity         $1,080             $0            $3,507                 $58
                           Parent Equity         $11,868          $4,278          $1,839                $5,463

Outsider Equity                                  $328,999      $1,499,644        $515,051              $171,145
          Other Informal Investors               $244,707       $126,811         $183,110               $9,901
            Other Business Equity                 $60,568       $209,130         $321,351               $4,335
               Government Equity                  $6,488          $804             $443                $110,147
           Venture Capital Equity                $17,084       $1,162,898         $10,148                $229
                     Other Equity                  $151            $0               $0                 $46,533

Owner Debt                                       $19,558          $9,949         $13,041                $5,450

Insider Debt                                     $15,997         $32,365          $9,033                $3,109
            Personal Family Loan                 $8,196           $4,051          $4,008                 $190
Personal Family Loan-other owners                  $651             $0            $2,098                 $257
             Other Personal Loan                  $1,033         $15,862           $878                   $0
           Other Personal Funding                 $4,567         $12,452           $860                   $0
      Other Personal Owner Loan                  $14,139          $6,176          $4,668                  $0

Outsider Debt                                    $164,891       $628,398         $75,156               $96,030
                Personal Bank Loan               $21,629        $286,853         $23,295                $8,046
                Bank Business Loan                $67,728       $299,169         $28,882               $56,094
                        Credit Line              $25,590          $1,216          $5,855                $1,918
              Other Non-Bank Loan                $17,359         $19,005          $2,752                  $0
                  Other Bank Loan                $10,416           $128           $6,513                $2,080
          Government Business Loan                 $352            $402             $0                 $22,219
              Other Individual Loan               $3,402         $12,170           $73                   $420
               Other Business Debt                $14,491           $0              $0                  $4,049

Total Financial Capital                          $659,184      $2,294,093        $722,690              $328,316
Trade Credit                                     $73,272        $161,417         $129,815              $168,277




                                                         34
                                                    Table 7: Credit quality and capital structure
     Source: Kauffman Firm Survey Microdata. Sample includes only surviving firms over the 2004-2007 period and firms that have been verified as going out of
     business over the same period. Sample size 3,972. This table reports mean levels of 2004 startup funding by type of funding. The first column matches the
     category-level data reported in the previous table. The remaining columns report breakdowns for various types of firms. Columns 2 and 3 focus on firms with
     high and low Dun and Bradstreet credit scores. The final three columns repeat the first three, but only examine high-tech firms.
                                                       All firms:                                            Only High Technology           firms:
                               All                   High credit           Low credit            All Tech          High credit               Low credit
     Owner Equity              $31,734               $53,994               $21,199               $27,875           $57,655                   $17,122
     Owner Debt                $5,037                $8,926                $3,245                $7,000            $28,760                   $3,774




35
     Insider Equity            $2,102                $6,190                $1,316                $4,503               $16,508               $252
     Insider Debt              $6,362                $13,738               $5,088                $3,412               $6,860                $1,963

     Outsider Equity           $15,935               $41,527               $6,225                $53,736              $136,945              $215
     Outsider Debt             $47,847               $112,803              $26,492               $29,478              $115,590              $6,013

     Total
     Financial Capital         $109,016              $237,179              $63,565               $126,005             $362,317              $29,339
     N                         3972                  472                   1264                  532                  85                    109
Table 8: Capital structure differences between High Residual Credit and Low Residual
Credit firms
 Panel A reports capital structure based on quintiles from the residuals of regression of credit scores on industry fixed
 effects. A total of 60 industry dummies are included. Panel B reports capital structure averages according to quintiles
 from the residuals of regressions of the following form:

                                           scoreij = α + βj + γ1 Fij + γ2 Kij + i                                         (4)

 where scoreij is the credit score of firm i in industry j, βj are industry fixed effects, and F is a vector of owner
 characteristics, and K is a vector of firm characteristics. For this specification, we include a full set of industry dummies,
 a set of education dummies corresponding to the breakdown presented in Table 3, and we also include factors such as race,
 ethnicity, industry experience, intellectual property, legal structure of the enterprise, whether the business is home-based,
 and whether the business sells a product or provides a service.
                 Panel A: Regression based on INDUSTRY CONTROLS
                       Overall      Bottom Quintile   Top Quintile                                               Difference
                  Mean Percent Mean Percent Mean Percent                                                     Mean Percent
 Owner Equity     27,365    35%     39,503     32%  18,672   35%                                             20,831      -4%
 Insider Equity   1,695      2%      3,012      2%   1,497    3%                                              1,515       0%
 Outsider Equity 6,979       9%     14,194     11%   4,117    8%                                             10,078       4%
 Owner Debt       3,506      4%      3,649      3%  3,351     6%                                               298       -3%
 Insider Debt      7,605    10%     13,023     10%   6,574   12%                                             6,449       -2%
 Outsider Debt    31,255    40%     51,621     41%  18,758   35%                                             32,863      6%
 Total Capital    78,406 100% 125,002 100% 52,969 100%                                                       72,033       0%
 % Zero Capital    10%                9%             12%                                                       3%

                                Panel B: Regression based on FULL MODEL
                                Overall      Bottom Quintile     Top Quintile    Difference
                           Mean Percent Mean Percent Mean Percent Mean Percent
 Owner Equity              27,365 34.9%       33,970    32.5% 24,085 33.9%    9,885      -1%
 Insider Equity            1,695     2.2%      2,102     2.0%   1,660   2.3%   442        0%
 Outsider Equity            6,979    8.9%      8,392     8.0%   6,622   9.3%  1,770      -1%
 Owner Debt                3,506     4.5%      3,431     3.3%   3,848   5.4%  (417)      -2%
 Insider Debt               7,605    9.7%     11,738    11.2%   7,181  10.1%  4,558       1%
 Outsider Debt             31,255 39.9%       45,014    43.0% 27,648 38.9% 17,366         4%
 Total Capital             78,406 100.0% 104,648 100.0% 71,043 100.0% 33,604              0%
 Zero Capital               10%                 9%               9%            0%




                                                            36
                  Table 9: Explaining Capital Structure Ratios for Startups
Sample includes 3,972 firms that either survived over the 2004-2007 period or were verified as going out of business over
the same period. The dependent variable in each column is the ratio of that form of capital to total financial capital
(excluding trade credit). Bank debt includes personal loans for business as well as business bank loans, but excludes the
other sources of outside debt. Inside finance is the sum of inside debt and equity. Outside debt encompasses column (1)
but also includes the other sources of outside debt. Outside equity includes VC, angel, gov’t, business equity, and other
outside equity. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 2-digit industry dummies and owner education dummies included.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                  Ratios of Financing Source to Total Capital:
                       Bank debt Inside Finance Outside Debt Outside Equity
Black                    -0.166**          0.162**        -0.127**          -0.0512
                         (0.0827)         (0.0681)        (0.0600)          (0.153)
Asian                     -0.0553          0.246**         -0.0380          -0.0135
                          (0.108)          (0.101)        (0.0814)          (0.188)
Other                     -0.0879           0.183          -0.0210          -0.0972
                          (0.143)          (0.122)        (0.0975)          (0.350)
Hispanic                 -0.00336         0.253***         -0.0129           -0.267
                         (0.0927)         (0.0888)        (0.0702)          (0.203)
Female                    -0.0586          0.0115          -0.0505        -0.260***
                         (0.0483)         (0.0502)        (0.0363)         (0.0978)
Hours worked           0.00267***       0.00681***      0.00267***        0.00385**
                       (0.000897)       (0.000895)      (0.000675)        (0.00157)
Age                       0.0265*        -0.0267**       0.0228**          0.0509*
                         (0.0135)         (0.0132)       (0.00948)         (0.0274)
Age2                   -0.000250*         0.000195     -0.000237**       -0.000517*
                       (0.000142)       (0.000142)     (0.0000997)       (0.000284)
Work Experience       -0.00671***       -0.00582**     -0.00447***         -0.00181
                        (0.00212)        (0.00241)       (0.00161)        (0.00382)
Startup Experience         0.0536          0.0204           0.0162           0.0237
                         (0.0431)         (0.0437)        (0.0321)         (0.0772)
Multiple Owners         0.174***           0.0471        0.137***         0.684***
                         (0.0425)         (0.0446)        (0.0316)         (0.0834)
Credit Score          0.00436***          0.000139      0.00355***        0.000791
                       (0.000918)       (0.000959)      (0.000679)        (0.00165)
Intellectual Property     -0.0524         0.0968*          -0.0481        0.210***
                         (0.0507)         (0.0521)        (0.0380)         (0.0805)
Comparative Adv.          -0.0189          0.0240           0.0197          -0.0690
                         (0.0456)         (0.0491)        (0.0344)         (0.0815)
Sells product              0.121*         -0.00448          0.0527          -0.0725
                         (0.0729)         (0.0792)        (0.0545)          (0.120)
Sells Prod. & Serv.       -0.0123          0.0236          0.00560          -0.0193
                         (0.0656)         (0.0726)        (0.0495)          (0.103)
Observations                3418            3418             3418             3418


                                                         37
                                        Table 10: Elasticity of Housing Supply and Reliance on Bank Debt
     The dependent variable in each column is the ratio of bank debt to total financial capital. The key independent variable is the elasticity of housing
     supply, taken from Saiz (2010). This variable measures the availability of land in an MSA as a function of both exogenous geographical barriers
     to growth, and endogenous barriers to development. High supply elasticities mean that the supply of housing has a large response to a change in
     the price of housing, which in turn means that areas with high elasticity saw rapid growth in housing stock during the housing bubble. The state
     exemption variable is the level of the homestead exemption in the state of each respondent’s residence, in tens of thousands of dollars. Each of the
     seven alternative specifications includes different control variables, as indicated below.
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)                (7)

     Home supply elasticity             0.0163***        0.0156***        0.0153***        0.0149**                   0.0150***           0.0163***
                                         (0.0058)         (0.0058)         (0.0059)        (0.0058)                    (0.0058)            (0.0058)

     State bankruptcy exemption                                                                             -1.92                           -2.52*
                                                                                                           (1.33)                           (1.48)




38
     Industry Dummies                        No               Yes              No              Yes          Yes            Yes                Yes

     Owner Characteristics                   No               No               Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes                Yes

     Credit score dummies                    No               No               No              No            No            Yes                Yes


     Observations                          2,564           2,564      2,466       2,466                    3,389          2,466              2,466
     R-squared                             0.004           0.029      0.040       0.058                    0.048          0.061              0.062
                                                         Standard errors in parentheses
                                                        *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
             Table 11: Time-series evidence on the importance of formal debt
Each column in this table reports the average for the subset of firms with the characteristics described in the column
header. Column classifications are based on 2004. Column 3 is the set of firms that are incorporated, have at least
one employee other than the founder, and have assets such as inventories. Home-based businesses are ones that report
operating out of the founders’ home.
                             All                 Firm Has Outside            Inc./Employees/  Home-based
                           Firms                      Equity                   Asset-backed  Non-employers
Panel A: Initial (2004) Baseline
Owner Equity              $31,734                       $92,806                   $72,170                  $14,652
Insider Equity             $2,102                        $9,205                     $6,733                   $658
Outsider Equity           $15,935                      $354,540                    $57,428                  $3,086
Owner Debt                 $5,037                      $14,320                     $12,730                  $2,045
Insider Debt               $6,362                       $12,825                   $15,781                   $2,129
Outsider Debt             $47,847                      $179,710                   $120,843                 $21,802
Total Financial Capital $109,016                       $663,407                   $285,686                 $44,371

Panel B: First (2005) Capital Injection
Owner Equity             $15,352                        $41,040                   $33,855                   $4,795
Insider Equity            $1,782                         $1,426                     $4,992                   $420
Outsider Equity          $19,718                       $275,713                    $70,438                   $658
Owner Debt                $4,447                        $7,712                     $6,107                   $1,849
Insider Debt              $5,423                        $11,792                   $11,494                    $913
Outsider Debt            $45,237                       $137,049                   $102,092                 $19,003
Total Injection          $91,959                       $474,732                   $228,978                 $27,637

Panel C: Second (2006) Capital Injection
Owner Equity            $10,540           $38,720                                 $27,599                   $4,848
Insider Equity            $585             $770                                     $2,182                   $34
Outsider Equity         $10,033           $79,265                                  $38,656                 $2,284
Owner Debt               $3,159           $7,075                                   $7,519                   $1,942
Insider Debt             $4,241           $12,103                                 $10,345                    $584
Outsider Debt           $42,326          $309,176                                 $135,750                 $16,055
Total Injection         $70,884          $447,109                                 $222,051                 $25,746

Panel D: Third (2007) Capital Injection
Owner Equity             $8,210                        $23,817                     $19,224                  $4,674
Insider Equity           $1,029                          $8,513                     $4,710                   $148
Outsider Equity          $7,801                         $92,488                   $38,496                    $433
Owner Debt               $3,155                        $10,370                     $7,776                   $1,852
Insider Debt             $3,394                         $20,990                   $12,908                    $535
Outsider Debt           $35,706                         $90,086                   $105,758                 $18,930
Total Injection         $59,295                        $246,264                   $188,873                 $26,571


                                                       39
             Table 12: Capital Structure Choices and Firm Outcomes
This table reports probit regressions in which the dependent variable is a dummy for whether each perfor-
mance metric is above the sample median in 2007. 2-digit industry dummies, owner age, age2 , and education
dummies included. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                              DV               is dummy for above sample median:
                       Revenue                      Assets    Profits     Employee
2004 log Revenue      0.0843***                  0.0267** 0.0512***       0.0313***
                       (0.0117)                   (0.0119)   (0.0102)      (0.0104)
Outside debt ratio     0.420**                   1.256***       0.148       0.318*
                        (0.172)                    (0.214)    (0.162)       (0.165)
Black                 -0.609***                  -0.592*** -0.616***        0.398*
                        (0.235)                    (0.215)    (0.194)       (0.209)
Asian                    0.455                       0.149      0.276      0.547**
                        (0.282)                    (0.294)    (0.250)       (0.261)
Other                   -0.741*                     -0.133     -0.226        0.620*
                        (0.381)                    (0.436)    (0.382)       (0.351)
Hispanic                 -0.365                   -0.505**     -0.341        0.292
                        (0.263)                    (0.256)    (0.246)       (0.265)
Female                -0.597***                  -0.572*** -0.351***       -0.278**
                        (0.132)                    (0.131)    (0.117)       (0.116)
Hours Worked          0.0182***                 0.0202*** 0.00771***      0.0164***
                      (0.00251)                  (0.00269) (0.00223)      (0.00241)
Work Experience       0.0179***                    0.00953 0.0162***      0.0157***
                      (0.00598)                  (0.00602) (0.00523)      (0.00545)
Startup Experience       0.0540                     0.151     -0.184*       0.229**
                        (0.117)                    (0.118)    (0.104)       (0.107)
Multiple Owners        0.690***                  0.718***      0.0396      0.382***
                        (0.115)                    (0.130)    (0.107)       (0.109)
Credit Score          0.0149***                 0.0151*** 0.00863***      0.0144***
                      (0.00248)                  (0.00275) (0.00226)      (0.00233)
Intellectual Property -0.00931                     -0.0552  -0.532***        -0.103
                        (0.138)                    (0.151)    (0.129)       (0.130)
Comparative Adv.         0.202*                     0.196       0.162        0.0931
                        (0.121)                    (0.127)    (0.109)       (0.109)
Sells Product           -0.367*                     0.118    -0.415**       0.0241
                        (0.207)                    (0.225)    (0.186)       (0.191)
Sells Prod. & Serv.    0.405**                     0.0772       0.174        0.146
                        (0.189)                    (0.209)    (0.171)       (0.176)
Observations              2507                       2507       2507          2507



                                                   40
A     Unabridged tables

This appendix contains the unabridged versions of Tables 5 and 6, and 8.




                                         41
              Table 13: Sources of Financing for 2004 Startups by Firm Type

                                                    Non-         Home-          Pre-         Pre-          Survived        Closed
Funding Source                                   Employer         Based       Revenue       Profits       thru 2006        by 2006
Owner Equity                                      $17,269        $20,035      $31,201       $35,433        $31,784         $31,609
                      Owner Debt                  $2,318         $2,624        $3,720       $5,445          $4,896          $5,392
      Personal Credit Card -Owner                  $1,896         $2,093       $1,937       $3,499          $2,634          $3,256
Personal Credit Card-Other Owners                   $159           $218         $133         $305            $217            $291

Insider Equity                                      $698         $1,024        $2,271        $2,553         $1,705         $3,101
                           Spouse Equity            $270          $215          $612          $638           $468          $1,094
                           Parent Equity            $428          $809         $1,659        $1,915         $1,237         $2,007

Insider Debt                                       $2,381        $3,074        $6,456        $7,852         $5,856         $7,635
              Personal Family Loan                 $1,051        $1,683        $2,451        $3,342         $2,437         $3,535
 Personal Family Loan-other owners                  $194          $144          $260          $244           $220           $445
         Business Loan from family                  $350          $580         $2,114        $2,335         $1,481         $2,464
         Business Loan from Owner                     $0           $0            $3            $24            $5             $39
               Other Personal Loan                  $475          $302         $1,233        $1,177         $1,191          $252
            Other Personal Funding                  $300          $366          $388          $598           $422           $873
   Business Loan from Employee(s)                    $11           $0            $7           $130           $100           $27

Outsider Equity                                    $2,774        $4,731       $16,268       $21,530        $18,753         $8,841
          Other Informal Investors                  $785         $2,489       $7,006        $9,704          $7,992         $2,218
             Other Business Equity                 $1,529        $1,568       $4,539        $4,727          $3,840         $3,155
                Government Equity                    $10          $226          $550         $945           $1,083          $81
            Venture Capital Equity                  $441          $443         $4,164       $5,618          $5,373         $3,373
                     Other Equity                    $9            $5            $9          $537            $466           $14

Outsider Debt                                     $19,353        $26,960      $44,839       $54,536        $50,087         $42,208
               Personal Bank Loan                 $11,453        $12,898      $12,962       $17,738        $17,416         $11,941
              Business Credit Card                 $577            $561         $683        $1,094           $969           $1,107
       Other Personal Owner Loan                   $263            $314        $1,650        $1,641         $2,046         $1,845
 Business Credit Card-other owners                  $25             $53         $44           $187           $100            $225
             Business Credit Cards                 $538            $460         $460          $946           $826            $776
               Bank Business Loan                 $5,231          $9,180      $18,474       $21,160        $18,653         $13,103
                       Credit Line                 $341            $656       $2,986        $4,823          $5,061          $5,047
             Other Non-Bank Loan                   $296           $1,044       $4,970        $3,229         $2,311          $6,941
        Government Business Loan                    $58            $309       $1,925        $1,671          $1,514           $871
              Other Business Loan                  $145            $324          $36          $232           $303             $52
                  Other Bank Loan                  $369           $1,193       $1,316        $2,247         $2,045          $1,391
             Other Individual Loan                 $146            $146         $15           $198           $236            $201
              Other Business Debt                  $176            $135         $967        $1,010           $655            $553

Total Financial Capital                           $44,793        $58,448     $104,755       $127,349       $113,080        $98,787
Observations                                       2,425          2,168       1,615          2,144           3,390           773
Source: Kauffman Firm Survey Microdata. Sample includes  42only surviving firms over the 2004-2007 period and firms that
have been verified as going out of business over the same period. Sample size 3,972.
               Table 14: Do Equity-backed Firms Embrace or Eschew Debt?
Each column in this table reports capital structure decisions for firms with different types of outside equity. Thus, the
sample size of each column is reported in the third row of Table 4, in the “Outside Equity” section. Amounts are averages
over all firms that had the type of funding in the column header in 2004. Some subcategories are suppressed for brevity,
but they are included in the totals reported in each category.
Source                                                Angel            VC             Corporate         Govt-Other
Owner Equity                                         $116,792        $119,459         $105,062           $47,062

Insider Equity                                        $12,948          $4,278           $5,346             $5,521
Spouse Equity                                         $1,080             $0             $3,507              $58
Parent Equity                                         $11,868          $4,278           $1,839             $5,463

Outsider Equity                                      $328,999 $1,499,644               $515,051           $171,145
Other Informal Investors                             $244,707 $126,811                 $183,110            $9,901
Other Business Equity                                 $60,568  $209,130                $321,351            $4,335
Government Equity                                      $6,488    $804                    $443             $110,147
Venture Capital Equity                               $17,084 $1,162,898                $10,148              $229
Other Equity                                            $151      $0                      $0              $46,533

Owner Debt                                            $19,558          $9,949           $13,041            $5,450
Personal Credit Card -Owner                            $4,877          $3,749            $7,686            $4,882
Personal Credit Card-Other Owners                       $543            $24               $688              $568

Insider Debt                                          $15,997         $32,365           $9,033             $3,109
Personal Family Loan                                   $8,196          $4,051           $4,008              $190
Personal Family Loan-other owners                       $651             $0             $2,098              $257
Business Loan from family                              $1,091            $0             $1,189             $2,662
Business Loan from Owner                                $436             $0               $0                 $0
Business Loan from Employee(s)                           $22             $0               $0                 $0
Other Personal Loan                                    $1,033         $15,862            $878                $0
Other Personal Funding                                 $4,567         $12,452            $860                $0
Other Personal Owner Loan                             $14,139          $6,176           $4,668               $0

Outsider Debt                                        $164,891        $628,398           $75,156            $96,030
Personal Bank Loan                                    $21,629        $286,853           $23,295             $8,046
Business Credit Card                                  $2,645           $3,736            $3,405              $546
Other Bank Loan                                       $10,416           $128             $6,513             $2,080
Business Credit Card-other owners                       $209            $65              $1,068               $26
Business Credit Cards                                  $1,038          $5,654           $3,122               $632
Bank Business Loan                                   $67,728         $299,169           $28,882            $56,094
Credit Line                                          $25,590          $1,216             $5,855            $1,918
Other Non-Bank Loan                                   $17,359         $19,005            $2,752               $0
Government Business Loan                                $352            $402               $0              $22,219
Other Business Loan                                      $32             $0               $192                $0
Other Individual Loan                                  $3,402
                                                         43           $12,170             $73                $420
Other Business Debt                                   $14,491            $0                $0               $4,049

Total Financial Capital                              $659,184       $2,294,093         $722,690           $328,316
                  Table 15: Sources of Financing for 2004 Startups
                                             Model 1                    Model 2
                                        residual quintiles:        residual quintiles:
Funding Source                      Top           Bottom      Top           Bottom
Owner Equity                        $51,335       $22,112     $39,225       $29,187

Owner Debt                          $7,481        $3,352      $6,386        $4,376
Personal Credit Card -Owner         $2,854        $2,356      $2,836        $3,031
Personal Credit Card-Other Owners   $281          $435        $188          $620
Other Personal Owner Loan           $4,345        $562        $3,362        $725

Insider Equity                      $4,539        $1,589      $3,884        $1,907
Spouse Equity                       $799          $713        $789          $919
Parent Equity                       $3,740        $877        $3,094        $988

Insider Debt                        $10,852       $6,354      $10,991       $7,790
Personal Family Loan                $3,621        $2,823      $3,890        $3,036
Personal Family Loan-other owners   $256          $53         $480          $135
Business Loan from family           $4,671        $2,215      $4,433        $2,873
Business Loan from Owner            $0            $5          $0            $5
Business Loan from Employee(s)      $238          $11         $231          $11
Other Personal Loan                 $1,233        $721        $1,177        $1,032
Other Personal Funding              $834          $526        $779          $697

Outsider Equity                     $45,089       $7,844      $23,797       $11,139
Other Informal Investors            $21,798       $1,223      $9,058        $1,549
Other Business Equity               $7,591        $2,115      $791          $3,818
Government Equity                   $1,312        $438        $1,217        $647
Venture Capital Equity              $14,324       $2,697      $12,671       $3,584
Other Equity                        $65           $1,371      $60           $1,541

Outsider Debt                       $89,329       $25,122     $73,079       $40,345
Personal Bank Loan                  $26,911       $8,864      $23,794       $10,107
Business Credit Card                $1,203        $675        $1,291        $971
Other Bank Loan                     $2,841        $2,332      $1,531        $3,237
Business Credit Card-other owners   $123          $188        $109          $269
Business Credit Cards               $1,113        $743        $985          $1,014
Bank Business Loan                  $30,179       $8,954      $22,730       $17,106
Credit Line                         $17,087       $1,453      $13,787       $2,625
Other Non-Bank Loan                 $5,573        $1,142      $5,168        $2,029
Government Business Loan            $1,170        $260        $1,100        $2,359
Other Business Loan                 $423          $8          $315          $17
Other Individual Loan               $604          $60         $564          $101
Other Business Debt                 $2,102        $443        $1,706        $511

Total Financial Capital             $208,625      $66,374     $157,361      $94,745
                                         44
N                                    790           820          810         811
Robust standard errors in parentheses. 2-digit industry dummies and owner education dum-
mies included. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
B     Alternative Classification Schemes for Inside/Outside
      Capital

The following tables change the classification scheme from formal vs. informal to per-
sonal vs. business to illustrate the importance of personal access to formal bank channels.




                                            45
       Table 16: Reclassifying Personal and Business Debt: Overall Levels
         Equity Source Average                             Debt Source Average
  Total Personal Equity $31,734                    Total Personal Debt $21,906
                                                    Personal bank loan $15,859
                                               Owner bus. CC balance $1,009
                                            Personal CC balance, resp. $2,811
                                           Personal CC balance, others    $238
                                            Personal loan, other owners $1,989

   Total Insider Equity    $8,452                     Total Insider Debt   $8,221
          Spouse equity     $646                             Family loan   $2,749
          Parents equity   $1,456           Family loan to other owners     $284
Other informal investors   $6,350         Personal loan to other owners     $550
                                                   Other personal loans     $924
                                                Business loan by family    $1,760
                                                 Business loan by owner      $15
                                                  Business loan by emp.      $79
                                     Personal bank loan by other owners    $1,859


  Total Outsider Equity    $9,585                 Total Outsider Debt      $29,120
        Business equity    $3,645                     Bus. CC balance        $812
          Govt. equity      $798                Other Bus. CC balance        $135
             VC equity     $4,804                      Bus. bank loan      $17,075
           other equity     $337                    Credit line balance     $5,057
                                                   Non-bank bus. loan      $3,627
                                                       Govt. bus. loan      $1,331
                                                       Other bus. loan       $231
                                                 Other individual loan       $226
                                                            Other debt       $626

           Total Equity    $49,771                           Total Debt    $59,247




                                        46
         Table 17: Reclassifying Personal and Business Debt: Credit Scores
                                             Model 1                   Model 2
                                        residual quintiles:       residual quintiles:
Funding Source                      Top           Bottom      Top           Bottom
Owner Equity                        $51,335       $22,112     $39,225       $29,187

Owner Debt                          $37,062       $13,524     $32,699       $16,312
Personal Credit Card -Owner         $2,854        $2,356      $2,836        $3,031
Personal Credit Card-Other Owners   $281          $435        $188          $620
Other Personal Owner Loan           $4,345        $562        $3,362        $725
Other Personal Loan                 $1,233        $721        $1,177        $1,032
Other Personal Funding              $834          $526        $779          $697
Personal Bank Loan                  $26,911       $8,864      $23,794       $10,107
Other Individual Loan               $604          $60         $564          $101

Insider Equity                      $26,336       $2,813      $12,942       $3,456
Spouse Equity                       $799          $713        $789          $919
Parent Equity                       $3,740        $877        $3,094        $988
Other Informal Investors            $21,798       $1,223      $9,058        $1,549

Insider Debt                        $8,908        $5,295      $9,143        $6,330
Personal Family Loan                $3,621        $2,823      $3,890        $3,036
Personal Family Loan-other owners   $256          $53         $480          $135
Business Loan from family           $4,671        $2,215      $4,433        $2,873
Business Loan from Owner            $0            $5          $0            $5
Business Loan from Employee(s)      $238          $11         $231          $11
Business Credit Card-other owners   $123          $188        $109          $269

Business Equity                     $23,292       $6,621      $14,739       $9,591
Other Business Equity               $7,591        $2,115      $791          $3,818
Government Equity                   $1,312        $438        $1,217        $647
Venture Capital Equity              $14,324       $2,697      $12,671       $3,584
Other Equity                        $65           $1,371      $60           $1,541

Business Debt                       $61,692       $16,010     $48,613       $29,869
Business Credit Card                $1,203        $675        $1,291        $971
Other Bank Loan                     $2,841        $2,332      $1,531        $3,237
Business Credit Cards               $1,113        $743        $985          $1,014
Bank Business Loan                  $30,179       $8,954      $22,730       $17,106
Credit Line                         $17,087       $1,453      $13,787       $2,625
Other Non-Bank Loan                 $5,573        $1,142      $5,168        $2,029
Government Business Loan            $1,170        $260        $1,100        $2,359
Other Business Loan                 $423          $8          $315          $17
Other Business Debt                 $2,102        $443        $1,706        $511

Total Financial Capital             $208,625      $66,374     $157,361      $94,745
                                         47
