NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUTTING THE CO IN EDUCATION:
TIMING, REASONS, AND CONSEQUENCES OF COLLEGE COEDUCATION FROM 1835 TO THE PRESENT
Claudia Goldin
Lawrence F. Katz
Working Paper 16281
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16281

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2010

Bernie Zipprich gave exceptional research assistance on all parts of the project and Ryan Sakoda followed
in turn. Julia Fifer helped with the coding of the coeducation data set, and Janet Currie and Louis
Galambos supplied some of the coeducation dates. Emily Glassberg Sands provided much appreciated
assistance with the references. Comments on a draft were offered by Julie Reuben, Emily Glassberg
Sands, and members of the NBER-DAE 2010 Summer Institute. We thank all of them. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Putting the Co in Education: Timing, Reasons, and Consequences of College Coeducation
from 1835 to the Present
Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 16281
August 2010
JEL No. I2,I23,N3,N31,N32
ABSTRACT
The history of coeducation in U.S. higher education is explored through an analysis of a database
containing information on all institutions offering four-year undergraduate degrees that operated in
1897, 1924, 1934, or 1980, most of which still exist today. These data reveal surprises about the timing
of coeducation and the reasons for its increase. Rather than being episodic and caused by financial
pressures brought about by wars and recessions, the process of switching from single-sex to coeducational
colleges was relatively continuous from 1835 to the 1950s before it accelerated (especially for Catholic
institutions) in the 1960s and 1970s. We explore the empirical implications of a model of switching
from single-sex to coeducation in which schools that become coeducational face losing donations from
existing alumni but, because they raise the quality of new students, increase other future revenues.
We find that older and private single-sex institutions were slower to become coeducational and that
institutions persisting as single sex into the 1970s had lower enrollment growth in the late 1960s and
early 1970s than those that switched earlier. We also find that access to coeducational institutions
in the first half of the twentieth century was associated with increased women’s educational attainment.
Coeducation mattered to women's education throughout U.S. history and it mattered to a greater extent
in the more distant past than in the more recent and celebrated period of change.

Claudia Goldin
'HSDUWPHQWRI(FRQRPLFV
+DUYDUG8QLYHUVLW\
&DPEULGJH0$
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu
Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu

Women now receive 57 percent of all BAs in the United States and 97 percent of them
are awarded by coeducational institutions, defined here as institutions that admit both males and
females and in which both can take classes together.1 Almost all undergraduates in the United
States today attend a coeducational institution, but none could have prior to the appearance of the
first such college around 1835. When did institutions of higher education become coeducational,
why did they, and what was the impact of coeducation on women’s educational attainment?
These subjects are explored through an analysis of a database containing information on
all institutions of higher education offering four-year undergraduate degrees that operated in
1897, 1924, or 1934, most of which still exist today.2 Data on all four-year institutions in 1980
that were founded from 1934 to 1980, or established as four-year institutions during that period,
are added. These data reveal many surprises about the timing of coeducation and the reasons for
the increase in coeducation.3
Coeducational colleges can increase in number because more colleges are founded as
coeducational institutions or because single-sex institutions switch to become coeducational.
The founding of coeducational institutions in both the public and private sectors occurred at a
relatively steady rate from 1835 to 1980. In addition, the rate of switching from single-sex to
coeducational status was also relatively continuous from the 1860s through the 1950s. After that
point it increased considerably in the 1960s and 1970s, although the jump was greatest among
Catholic single-sex institutions, especially female-only schools.
The relative continuity that we find in the evolution of coeducation is in contrast to the

1

Newcomer (1959) also employs this definition. Whether or not males and females take the same
courses, concentrate in the same subjects, and are admitted using the same criteria are different matters.
2
The 1934 Coeducation College Database contains 769 institutions that existed at some point from 1897
to 1934. Of these, 22 closed by 1934 and 59 of the remaining 748 institutions closed after 1934, (others
merged but did not officially close). Therefore, only about 8 percent of the institutions existing in 1934
subsequently closed.
3
The historical literature on coeducation and higher education is sparse. An excellent, but brief, review
piece is Rosenberg (1988). See also the essays in Miller-Bernal and Poulson (2004). Several articles
contain short summaries of the history of coeducation, including Graham (1978). Early writings on
coeducation include Thomas (1900) and Woody (1929). On coeducation at Catholic institutions, see
Poulson (1995). A thicker literature exists on women’s education. See Newcomer (1959) on women’s
colleges and Solomon (1985) on women’s higher education. Some insightful research exists on
individual colleges and universities, including Conable (1977) on Cornell University and McGuigan
(1970) on the University of Michigan.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -1-

implications of the most commonly found reasons offered for its rise. These factors include the
various roles that war play, changes in ideology, and the impact of national economic
downturns.4 These factors would imply a more episodic evolution of coeducation.
We offer a framework to understand the switch from single-sex to coeducational status
that emphasizes potential tradeoffs between the demand for a coeducational or single-sex
environment by current and future undergraduates on the one hand, and expected alumni giving
by past and future graduates on the other. Estimates of hazard models of time to switching from
single-sex to coeducational status are suggestive of the role of alumni influence with older and
privately-controlled institutions being slower to switch. Linear probability models of
institutional switchers with controls for both institutional characteristics and time-varying
measures of the competitive environment reinforce our findings on continuity in the rate of
switching from the 1870s to the 1950s followed by sharp acceleration in the 1960s and 1970s. In
a separate analysis we demonstrate that by the 1960s the undergraduate enrollments at
institutions that shifted to coeducational status grew faster than those that delayed switching.
Greater access to coeducation in higher-education, as we demonstrate, had a positive
impact on women’s college attainment in the period before the 1930s. Currie and Moretti (2003)
have shown the same thing for the more recent period. Even when women’s colleges existed in
an area, an increase in coeducational institutions furthered the college education of women
relative to men because women’s colleges were costly and many coeducational institutions were
public and less expensive.
The paper is structured as follows. We begin with a brief history of coeducation and then
move to a discussion of our coeducation database and a description of the evolution of
coeducation. We develop a framework to understand the shift to coeducation by single-sex
institutions and use our data to detect which factors mattered and the validity of the framework.
The impact of coeducation on female educational attainment is addressed next, and we close
4

On the role of the Civil War in reducing the supply of male students, see Graham (1978, p. 764),
Newcomer (1959, p. 12), and Rosenberg (1988); Solomon (1985, p. 188) discusses similar factors with
regard to World War II. On war and the changing perceptions of women, see Conable (1977), and on the
GI Bill in opening women’s colleges to men see Eisenmann (1997), Newcomer (1959), and Solomon
(1985). Newcomer (1959) discusses the Great Depression in spurring coeducation among some schools,
and Miller-Bernal (2004) claims that both world wars and the Great Depression created financial
hardships for small single-sex institutions and prompted them to switch.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -2-

with a section on the end of in loco parentis and true gender equality with sex-blind admissions.
A. Coeducation Historically Considered
In 1897 56 percent of all undergraduates, and 60 percent of undergraduate women, were
enrolled in coeducational institutions (Table 1, part A). Coeducation varied considerably by
region in 1897, with the Northeast educating just 29 percent of its undergraduates in dual-sex
institutions, the South 40 percent, and the Midwest and the West around 86 percent (part B).
Much changed with regard to coeducation in the next quarter century. In 1924 almost
three-quarters of all undergraduates were in coeducational settings. Even in the Northeast 52
percent were in coeducational setting and 60 percent were in the South.5 By 1980 virtually all
undergraduates were educated in coeducational institutions.6 The trend for privately controlled
institutions closely follows that for all institutions, although private institutions had a lower
coeducation share in 1897 than did those in the public sector.
The typical female undergraduate in 1897 went to an institution where 60 percent of the
students were female, even though only 29 percent of all undergraduates in four-year institutions
were (part C, cols. 1 and 2). In contrast, the typical female college student in 1980 was in a
school with only a slightly higher share of women than that faced by the typical male student.
An interesting summary statistic of these changes is the “isolation index,” which measure the
degree to which the typical woman is educationally segregated from men with 0 being perfect
integration and 1 being complete segregation by sex (that is, only single-sex institutions). In
1897 the isolation index was 0.44; it decreased to 0.30 by around 1930, and then to 0.05 by 1980
(part C, col. 3).7
The earliest coeducational institutions in the United States were founded by abolitionists,
Congregationalists, Quakers, Methodists, and others committed to equality in general. The
institutions were disproportionately founded in the newer parts of the young nation, known at the

“All students” for 1924 include graduate students and those in professional divisions.
Our data differ from those in Newcomer (1959, tables 2, 3). The college data she uses, from the U.S.
Office of Education, include two-year institutions whereas ours do not. In consequence she obtains a
higher fraction of women in coeducational institutions and a lower fraction in women’s colleges.
7
The isolation index, it should be noted, takes as given the proportion of students that are female and
examines the extent to which female students are institutionally integrated with their male counterparts.
5
6

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -3-

time as the “West” and included many in Ohio, such as Antioch, Marietta, Oberlin and
Wilberforce. Of the 54 institutions that became coeducational before 1860 (and existed in 1934)
27 were in the five states of the Old Northwest (OH, MI, IN, IL, and WI) and another 13 were in
states west of the Mississippi. Only one was in New England (Bates College in ME).
The public sector entered the coeducation arena somewhat later than the private sector.
Of the 30 public institutions founded before 1860 (and existing in 1934), just three were
coeducational at the time of founding or soon thereafter, whereas of the 195 private institutions
founded before 1860, 50 (or 26 percent) were coeducational at founding or within a decade of
founding.8 Part of the slower response of the public sector was because more than half of the 30
public institutions founded before 1860 were in the South and southerners had a strong
preference for single-sex education.9 But even in the absence of the South the public sector was
a coeducational laggard.10 Another reason for the greater prevalence of coeducation among
private as opposed to public institutions in the ante-bellum era was the religious control of many
of the private institutions and the commitment of certain religious orders to access by all people.
The public sector quickly became more closely associated with coeducation as it moved
west. Of the 34 publicly controlled institutions founded from 1861 to 1880, 24 (or 71 percent)
were established as coeducational institutions or became so within a decade. In the private sector
122 were founded from 1861 to 1880 and 59 of these (or 48 percent) were coeducational within a
decade of founding.11
The public higher education sector in the western parts of the nation was coeducational,
in the nineteenth century for the same reasons that their primary and secondary schools were.12
These regions were sparsely settled and coeducational facilities were cost-effective.

8

Excluding Catholic institutions, the private sector had 171 institutions founded before 1861 of which 50
(or 29 percent) were coeducational.
9
In 1861 just 9 percent of private institutions in the South were coeducational, whereas 36 percent were
in the rest of the nation.
10
Non-southern states established 14 public institutions before the Civil War and two were coeducational
within five years (Iowa State University and the University of Utah), the standard used in this analysis.
Another (Michigan State) was coeducational after five years.
11
Excluding Catholic institutions established from 1861 to 1880, the private sector founded 105 new
institutions and 58 of these (or 55 percent) were coeducational within a decade of founding as compared
with 71 percent for the public sector.
12
All were coeducational at their founding except for mining schools in the Pacific and Mountain states.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -4-

There was, in addition, a commitment on the part of the public sector to afford training
for certain professionals, including teachers and nurses, and, in much of the nation, to provide
equal access. For cash-strapped states, coeducation was cheaper, as when the Michigan state
legislature in 1870 forced the University of Michigan to accept coeducation rather than building
an institution for women.13
Coeducational institutions of higher education also proliferated in parts of the nation that
were leaders in the high school movement. In fact, the main reason we can discuss the shift to
college coeducation in the United States is because of the spread of coeducational secondary
education throughout much of the nation in the mid- to late-nineteenth century. 14 Girls went to
and graduated from high school at higher rates than did boys nationally in the late nineteenth
century and in every state from 1910 to at least 1940 (Goldin 1998; Goldin and Katz 2008).
The United States was distinctive among nations in the nineteenth century and for much
of the twentieth century in terms of the extent of pre-college training for women and its
coeducational nature. At the turn of the twentieth century, some Europeans expressed disbelief
that Americans educated young women together with young men. The (female) French minister
of public instruction remarked in 1893: “Of all the features which characterize American
[secondary school] education, perhaps the most striking is the coeducation of young men and
young women … for it reveals a state of mind and of habits which is entirely strange” (Goldin
and Katz 2008, p. 154).
As more coeducational institutions were established in an area, the prospective founders
of new institutions often used the successes of female students in existing coeducational
institutions to argue for coeducation. Andrew Dickson White did precisely that to justify
coeducation at Cornell in 1872 when he was the inaugural president of that institution.15

13

See Rosenberg (1988) and McGuigan (1970) on coeducation at the University of Michigan.
This pattern can be seen in the western states but the same factors played out within other states. For
example, M. Carey Thomas noted the case of Massachusetts: “It was impossible until 1878 for a Boston
girl to be prepared for college in a city high school [because Latin schools in Boston were male-only],
whereas, in the country towns of Massachusetts, where boys and girls were taught together … the girl had
had the same opportunities as the boy” (1900, fn. 1, p. 4).
15
Cornell’s founders did not consider the issue of coeducation when the institution opened in 1868.
Nothing in the charter of the institution made it male-only. White formed a committee to examine the
subject and marshaled evidence on women’s successes and achievements from Antioch, Oberlin, and
14

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -5-

When male-only institutions were preponderant, as they were in New England and parts
of the Middle Atlantic, first mover disadvantage appears to have dominated.16 None in a
competitive group could move successfully by itself, as that case of Wesleyan demonstrates.
Wesleyan College (now University) opened in 1831 as a male-only Methodist institution. It
became coeducational in 1871, largely due to Methodist commitment to equality in the wake of
the Civil War. In 1909 Wesleyan returned to single-sex status, in part because of the hostile
reaction to female undergraduates by male undergraduates and because its closest competitors
were elite male-only colleges. Wesleyan became coeducational again in 1969.17
Only long after male student demand demonstrably shifted in favor of a coeducational
environment did most of the male-only schools in the northeast become coeducational
institutions. Our model explains such a lag in the institutional response to shifts in demand as
arising from concerns about jeopardizing alumni giving.

B. The Coeducation College Database
The Coeducation College Database was formed in two parts. The first part, termed the
1934 Coeducation College Database, contains information for all institutions of higher education
granting a four-year degree in existence in 1897, 1924, or 1934. The data include time invariant
variables such as opening year. Religious affiliation and public versus private control can vary
but are generally time invariant. Other variables are time varying and exist in the data set for the
three years given, for example the number of students enrolled and faculty by program, degrees
granted, revenue by source, and expenditure by category.18 The surveys from which these data
were taken were executed by the Office of Education. The first was published in the 1897
Michigan. White’s report and Henry Sage’s large donation allowed the institution, in 1872, to become
truly coeducational, with a residence for women. Conable (1977) provides an excellent account of the
origins of coeducation at Cornell University but also tries to defend the point that coeducation was not
equal education at Cornell for a long time to come.
16
The single-sex status quo dominated because many of the male-only institutions in the northeast were
the finest academically in the region. The public sector in the northeast was held back compared with that
in the rest of the nation (Goldin and Katz 1999). Deviation from the male-only standard in the northeast
was a signal of financial or other weakness. When academic markets widened geographically and when
male students preferred to be in coeducational settings, the switch to coeducation became universal.
17
See Potts (1992).
18
Very few institutions (e.g., Rutgers) changed control over time.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -6-

Annual Report of the Commissioner of Education. The other two come from the 1922-24 and
1932-34 Biennial Surveys of the Commissioner of Education. The 1930s data were
supplemented with those from the 1933 College Blue Book.
There are 769 institutions in the 1934 Coeducation College Database, almost all of which
were four-year BA granting institutions in 1934 (see Data Appendix). Of the full group, 81
percent were privately controlled and 44 percent were non-sectarian. Catholic was the most
common religious affiliation with 16 percent of all institutions (see Table 2).
A critical variable to the investigation here is the year that an institution became
coeducational, if it did. Some institutions opened coeducational and others “switched.” In the
1934 Coeducation College Database 42 percent of the institutions opened coeducational (39
percent of those in the private sector and 56 percent in the public sector) and 85 percent of the
remainder switched at some date to the present.19
The moment a single-sex institution switches is generally clear, but classification of some
institutions required deeper information. Take Harvard and Radcliffe for example. Harvard
opened in 1638; Radcliffe opened in 1882 but never had a faculty of its own. Harvard professors
would teach a course in the Harvard Yard and then walk to the Radcliffe Yard and give the
course to female undergraduates. When the United States entered World War II, some faculty
decided to teach men and women together on an experimental basis and a year later, in 1943,
coeducational instruction was accepted. Admissions remained separate until 1976, when genderblind admissions were instituted. Because the definition employed here concerns the sharing of
classrooms, the 1943 date is employed.20
Institutional data across the three years are linked. Mergers that occurred between
reporting dates are resolved, but those that occurred before 1897 cannot be considered because
institutions that did not survive to 1897 are not in the database. If an institution closed after the

19

Information on whether the institution opened coeducational or single sex is available for 753 (682 of
which remained in operation to the present) of the 769 institutions.
20
There are other relevant dates in the coeducation history of Harvard and Radcliffe. Radcliffe women
received Harvard degrees in 1963 but the printed degree included the Radcliffe College name until 1977,
when an agreement formally put Radcliffe women in Harvard College. Coeducational residential halls
are another matter and were formalized at Harvard in 1972. The switch to them is important in the ability
of the institution to have gender-blind admissions, as we will later discuss.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -7-

1930s, that date is also recorded. The date at which an institution became coeducational is either
the opening date or the date that coeducation was established gleaned from websites, personal
correspondence, and archival information. All institutions that began as single-sex institutions
are followed to the present to determine when they became coeducational, if they did. There are
currently 35 female-only colleges still in existence from this group and three male-only colleges.
The second part of the data set, termed the 1980 Coeducation College Database, adds to
the group of institutions existing in 1934 all the four-year institutions existing in 1980 that
opened after 1934 and contains information on institutional closings and mergers since 1934.21
Standard NCES FICE codes and IPEDS UnitID codes are added to the full list of institutions.
The database includes 1980 enrollment numbers by sex for all institutions surviving to 1980.
Thus, the resulting data set contains information on the approximately 1,500 four-year
institutions that existed from around 1897 to the present. Enrollment, faculty, and financial data
are included for 1897, 1924, and 1934. The year when an institution became coeducational, if it
began single sex, is included for all institutions. Precise opening years are available for the 1934
sample but not always for the group that is included after 1934. Some of the institutions added
to the 1934 group were previously two-year colleges and the precise year that the school became
a four-year institution is difficult to ascertain.22
Differences with regard to student information exist across the various data sets. The
1897 data include undergraduates in the “collegiate” group and exclude graduate and preparatory
students. Independent professional and theological schools in 1897 are omitted from the sample.
The 1924 student data includes all students, both undergraduate and graduate, but excludes those
in summer school, extension, and military drill courses. The 1934 data separate undergraduates
from graduate students and also from those enrolled in a first professional program.

21

Many of the institutions that are added were established before 1934 but as two-year institutions, often
teachers’ college. We have not been able to obtain the precise date at which the institution became a fouryear institution. In part, this is because of the lack of good institutional memory and also because some of
the institution subsequently failed. But it is also because in many cases there were a handful of students
who did a four-year degree even when the institution was primarily a two-year institution.
22
A substantial number of the four-year institutions in the 1980 database that are not present in the 1934
database give opening dates that are before 1934. These institutions were not captured in the Office of
Education statistics as four-year schools in 1934. Many of these schools opened as two-year institutions
prior to 1934 but actually became four-year institutions between 1934 and 1980.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -8-

C. Chronology of Coeducation: College Openings and Switchers
In 1934, 64 percent of all four-year institutions with undergraduates were coeducational
and 70 percent of undergraduate enrollments were in coeducational institutions. Of the
coeducational schools at that time, 34 percent had begun as single-sex institutions.
Coeducation occurs through two routes: the establishment of new coeducational
institutions and the conversion of previously single-sex institutions. In the period to 1934, the
more important of these two routes, by far, was the establishment of public and private
institutions that were coeducational from their start. In 1900, for example, 58 percent of schools
(that existed in 1934) were coeducational and 73 percent of them had been coeducational from
their inception. Similarly, in 1880 46 percent of schools were coeducational and 72 percent of
these were founded as coeducational institutions.
The establishment of male-only schools (in the 1934 Coeducation College Database)
from the early 1800s occurred in a fairly steady manner. Their founding, however, waned after
the 1890s (see Figure 1, part A). Similarly, the Catholic group of male-only institutions
increased continuously to 1890 (part C). The establishment of female-only institutions was
somewhat less continuous and did not diminish to 1934. Spurts in the founding of female-only
institutions occurred at times, such in the early 1870s and 1890s. A lull in the establishment of
women’s colleges occurred in the 1860s, although not for male-only institutions oddly enough
given the Civil War disruption. The 1910s and 1920s contain a large group of new female-only
colleges, most of which were Catholic schools (part C). Female-only Catholic schools were
almost non-existent before 1900 but exceeded the male-only group by the mid-1920s.
Prior to around 1835 there were no institutions of higher education that were
coeducational, but that soon began to change. The opening of the schools that began as
coeducational institutions was fairly continuous starting in 1835 but a marked increase occurred
from the mid-1860s to the 1890s (see Figure 1, part A). Most of the increase in coeducational
schools during the latter part of the nineteenth century came from the opening of coeducational
private institutions rather than from the opening of public universities, even under the auspices of

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -9-

the Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862 (see Figure 1, part B).23
The decadal shift from single-sex (predominantly male-only) to coeducational institutions
increased in the years immediately following 1860 but then continued in a somewhat unbroken
fashion from the Civil War decade to the 1950s (see Figure 2, part A). About 8 percent of the
male-only undergraduate institutions that existed at the start of the decade switched to
coeducational status by the end of the decade, for each decade from 1861 to 1950.24
The decadal rate of switching was higher in the 1860s than before and a bit higher in the
1870s than just after, which might lend some credibility to the notion that the wartime absence of
men leads to coeducation.25 But for the entire group of men’s colleges these rates are not much
different from those in any of the subsequent decades from the 1860s to the 1950s. Of some
interest is that the rates during the Great Depression and World War II are not greater than those
extending back to the 1860s and for the men’s non-Catholic group, they are considerably
smaller. These findings hold up in the hazard and linear probability analyses to be presented.
Catholic institutions (not shown separately) underwent almost no switching until the
1960s, although there was some. Rather than having their men’s colleges become coeducational,
many orders founded separate women’s colleges in the early to late1920s.
The hazard rate did increase considerably in the 1960s for men’s and women’s Catholic
institutions and for men’s non-Catholic colleges (Figure 2, part C). At that point in the history of
coeducation a large fraction of the pre-existing men’s non-Catholic schools had already become
coeducational institutions. In fact, 72 percent of non-Catholic male-only institutions had
switched by 1960. Almost all of the remaining male-only schools (both Catholic and nonCatholic schools) switched to coeducational institutions during the 1960s and 1970s.26 We

23

The 1862 Morrill Act did not require that the institutions founded with its bequest be coeducational and
many were not at their outset.
24
Throughout this paper, the proportion of single-sex institutions (all or male-only or female-only)
existing at the start of a decade that became coeducational during that decade will be referred to as the
hazard rate, as in Figure 2.
25
Institutions that may have folded in the 1860s cannot be observed, although a search of institutions that
closed does not yield a large number for the 1860s. In addition, although some may have folded, the
question here is the shift to coeducation.
26
For example, out of the approximately 222 non-Catholic male institutions that opened to 1980, just 38
remained as male-only institutions in 1970 and just 9 survived as all-male colleges to 1980.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -10-

discuss this important period and the role of Title IX later.
The growth of coeducational institutions both for the total and the non-Catholic group is
shown in Figure 3 by institution and weighted by 1934 enrollment. In 1860 25 percent of all
institutions (which also existed in 1934) were coeducational (14 percent of the 1934 weighted
enrollment). In 1870 35 percent of the institutions were coeducational (39 percent of the 1934
weighted enrollment) and by 1890 more than half of the institutions were coeducational (more
than 60 percent weighted).
Coeducation may have been bolstered by both the Morrill Land Grant Act and the Civil
War but the increase in the fraction of coeducational institutions appears relatively constant and
substantial from 1861 to the 1910. The emphasis in the literature on the direct impact of the Civil
War on coeducation may be misplaced. The surge in coeducational public institutions,
especially in the “west,” had a greater effect on coeducation than the impact of a dearth in
college-aged men wrought by the war.27 In addition, the emphasis on the role of World War II
also seems misplaced since the decades with the lowest rate of switching, before the 1970s, are
the 1940s and the 1950s.
A substantial and prominent group of single-sex institutions switched in the late 1960s
and early 1970s. Because of the reputation of many in that group, the era from 1967 to 1975 is
often accorded a special place in the history of coeducation. But the period is not unique among
non-Catholic institutions. Whereas 20 percent of all switchers that occurred since 1835 did so
from 1967 to 1975 for non-Catholic institutions, 53 percent did for Catholic colleges.28 Thus, if
the period bears any particular significance it is in the transformation of Catholic institutions of
higher education (see Figure 4, part D). When the Catholic institutions are omitted, the increase
in coeducation is far less extreme during the 1967 to 1975 era (compare parts A and C).
The change to coeducation among the “big” Ivies (Dartmouth, Princeton, and Yale) and
the “little” Ivies, (Amherst, Haverford, Wesleyan, Williams, and other prestigious liberal arts
colleges such as Bowdoin, Colgate, Hamilton, Lafayette, and Lehigh) has long been viewed as
one of enormous importance. According to many, their switch enabled large numbers of high27

On the Morrill Land Grant Act, see Radke-Moss (2008) who emphasizes both the changed ideology
after the Civil War and the economic necessity of coeducation in the sparsely-settled West and Midwest.
28
These figures include single-sex institutions that opened after 1934 and switched from 1967 to 1975.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -11-

performing women to be educated in schools that trained the nation’s leaders and whose
graduates entered the finest professional and graduate schools. But the admission of women to
male-only institutions from 1967 to 1975 increased the percentage of undergraduate women
taught in a coeducational environment by only about 4 percentage points.29 In fact, the switch
from female-only to coeducational institutions during those years had an approximately equal
impact on the fraction of women educated with men.
One of the reasons that the opening up of many elite male-only institutions did not have a
larger impact is because many of the eastern elite institutions were already coeducational and had
been so for some time. Although Dartmouth, Princeton, and Yale admitted undergraduate
women for the first time in the period of change, four of the other Ivies – Brown, Cornell,
Harvard, and the University of Pennsylvania – were already coeducational. Columbia University
would not become fully coeducational until 1983, but the women in its coordinate college,
Barnard, could take courses at Columbia. In the rest of the nation, the very best institutions of
higher education (e.g., Stanford, University of Chicago, Northwestern, University of Washington
at St. Louis) began as coeducational schools or became coeducational soon after their founding.
Table 3 gives information on the top 50 schools in the nation according to the 2010 U.S.
News and World Report list, when they first opened and when each became coeducational. In
the top 50, 23 schools began as coeducational institutions or switched to coed soon after
founding and seven others became coeducational before the early twentieth century. In the top
25, 11 were coeducational institutions at founding or soon thereafter and one other (Duke)
became coeducational before 1900.

D. Theoretical and Empirical Models of Switching from Single Sex to Coeducational
To understand the factors that affect the decision to switch from a single sex to a
coeducational institution, we model the decisions of a college that maximizes the present
discounted value of its resources. Resources can be thought of as the college’s endowment plus
the present discounted value of expected future revenue streams (coming from alumni donations,

29

Institutions existing in 1966 are included and the 1980 enrollment data are used.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -12-

tuition, research grants and public-sector subsidies) net of expected future costs (staffing,
equipment, and materials costs), or as a combination of faculty, buildings, other productive
resources, savings, and future net revenue streams. In the private sector these resources come
mainly from tuition and alumni giving.
Alumni live for a finite number of periods and during their post-college lives give to their
institution an amount g per time period which is a positive function of their (intrinsic) ability, q.
They give the amount g with probability λsS if the institution remains as they knew it (S= single
sex; superscript refers to the current status of the institution and subscript to its status at the time
the individual received a BA) and less, λsC < λsS, if the school switches to being coeducational.
We assume that college size does not change, and we consider only the decisions and ability of
the representative student from each cohort in every period.
If incoming students remain at a constant ability level, q, and the school cannot increase
the ability of incoming students by becoming coeducational, the school will be in steady state
and has no reason to deviate from its single-sex status. But if future students reduce their desire
for a single-sex school, then the school will be faced with a tradeoff.30 If the institution does not
switch, it will be faced with lower quality incoming students who will give less as alumni. If the
institution becomes coeducational, existing alumni prior to the change will cut back on their
giving (from λsS to λsC), but the effect will be eroded over time as these individuals die. In
addition, the new alumni and alumnae will give more because of their higher q and this effect
will be reinforced if λcC is greater than λsS.
The institution can remain single sex, appease existing alumni, but get lesser-quality
students or it can switch to coeducational status, have reduced giving among prior alumni, but
gain better (and possibly more) students.31 Intelligent administrators will discount the two
streams and choose the optimal switching date when long-term gains from switching just begin
to outweigh short-term losses.
30

A related change, reinforcing those from the increased demand of potential incoming students for
coeducation, is that current alumni may decrease λsS and increase λsC, if their daughters would benefit
from college. Rossi (1987) provides guidance regarding the financial and demographic factors that led
schools to remain single sex and those that caused it to embrace coeducation. See also Miller-Bernal
(2004) on the enrollment and financial concerns of single-sex college administrators in the late 1960s.
31
The switch to coeducation is assumed to be irrevocable. In fact, almost all were. One exception is
Wesleyan College (see Potts 1992).

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -13-

One of the model’s predictions is that current student quality will decline (particularly
relative to competing coeducational institutions) before the school switches and possibly long
before. The trade-offs suggested by the model are borne out in the histories of single-sex
schools. For example, according to Karabel (2005, chap. 14), in 1956 the admissions officer at
Yale observed that many of their best admits had chosen coeducational institutions and that
student quality at Yale was declining. His statement was greeted with strong resistance from
alumni. By the mid-1960s current students at Yale were demanding a switch to coeducation. At
Princeton 55 percent of alumni polled in 1969 were opposed to coeducation, but the trustees
supported the switch to stem declining quality.32 Similar changes occurred at the other all-male
institutions in the 1960s and 1970s.
It should be emphasized that anti-discrimination legislation did not play a quantitatively
important role in the switch to coeducation. Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 was
passed and its implementation written long after most male-only institutions had decided to
become coeducational.33
There were, to be sure, other reasons for switching, such as institution-specific fiscal
shocks, depletion of potential students due to wartime draft or fatalities, and general economic
downturns, the effects of which could be smoothed by a sufficiently large endowment. Public
institutions often face different constraints than private colleges because pressures exist for
public dollars to serve all people.34 State legislatures often forced coeducation on an institution
to save expenses on building a separate women’s college.
We first examine the institutional characteristics associated with faster or slower
transitions of single-sex four-year colleges to coeducational institutions. We estimate formal
A dissent, filed by director of development Arthur J. Horton ’42, noted: “I fear that there will be alumni
who, liking the University as an all-male institution, could lose much of their present ardor” and reduce
their alumni giving. He asked: “Can we really argue that we are not getting the best applicants when over
46% of our senior class graduated last June with Honors.” The Patterson Committee advocated the
switch over member Horton’s lone dissent (Horton Dissent 1968).
33
The switch of most institutions to coeducation also preceded the interpretation of Title IX in Mississippi
University for Women v. Hogan, 102 Supreme Court Reporter 3331 (1982), that private single-sex
undergraduate institutions can be exempt from the admissions requirements of Title IX but must comply
with constitutional equal protection requirements in admissions.
34
As M. Carey Thomas, then president of Bryn Mawr College, noted around 1900: “public opinion in the
United States almost universally demands that universities supported by public taxation should provide
for the college education of women” (1900, p. 358b).
32

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -14-

hazard models of the duration spent as a single-sex school for all colleges starting as a single-sex
school in our 1934 and 1980 Coeducation College Databases (including all originally single-sex
schools present in 1897, 1924, 1934, and/or 1980). The estimation sample consists of 511
schools of which 281 started as men’s colleges and 230 started as women’s colleges.
Cox proportional hazard models are estimated for the duration of a spell as a single-sex
school using a nonparametric (fully flexible) baseline hazard.35 The time at risk for becoming a
coeducational institution is assumed to begin in 1835, the year that Marietta College opened and
a year after Oberlin College began coeducational classes. In 1837 Oberlin was the first to accept
female students into a BA-granting program and to switch from a single-sex to a coeducational
institution.36 Thus, the time at risk begins in 1835 for schools founded before 1835 and at the
actual opening date for schools founded in 1835 or after. A “failure event” is a transition to
being a coeducational school. Schools remaining single-sex institutions today (three male-only
and 35 female-only in our dataset) are treated as censored spells with 2010 as the censoring date;
schools that closed as single-sex schools are treated as spells censored at the date of closing.37
The basic hazard models for all single-sex schools and men’s and women’s colleges
separately are presented in Table 4. The models include as the covariates time-invariant
institutional characteristics, including a continuous measure of the year of opening and indicator
variables for private control (versus public), religious affiliation, and region. The year of
opening indicates the strength of alumni resistance to a switch. The religious affiliation shows
the particular ideology and, in the case of Catholic institutions, the degree to which their
decisions are dictated by a higher authority and are, therefore, coordinated. The reported
coefficients are hazard ratios. (A coefficient greater than 1 indicates that a variable increases the
hazard rate of being coeducational; a coefficient less than 1 implies it shrinks the hazard rate.)
The estimates for all single-sex schools (men’s and women’s colleges pooled) in col. (1)
35

The findings are similar to those from standard parametric models such as with a Weibull hazard.
Fletcher claims that in 1834 when the first college classes began at Oberlin “[male] college students
shared their classrooms and class instructions with women,” and also that “in 1837 four ladies were
admitted to the Collegiate Course [at Oberlin] with the men and in 1841 three of them received the A.B.
degree, the first bona fide college degrees ever granted to women” (1943, pp. 379-80). Marietta College
began in 1835 as a coeducational institution but may not have granted a BA degree until later.
37
The decision to switch to coeducational status is treated as irreversible. We know of only one school
that began male only, switched to coeducational, returned to male only, and then became coeducational.
36

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -15-

indicate that women’s colleges persisted as single-sex schools far longer than men’s colleges
(had a significantly lower hazard rate) conditional on region and other school characteristics. All
three columns of Table 4 indicate that private institutions were slower than public institutions in
becoming coeducational. For the initially all-male schools, the land grant institutions (mainly
public institutions) were particularly rapid in making the transition to coeducation, while
technology (and military institutions) and historically black colleges persisted longer as all-male
institutions. Transitions to coeducational status have been far more rapid for institutions that
opened in the more recent period and that finding remains when the sample is limited to
institutions founded after 1835.
Catholic schools and nonsectarian private institutions were slower to become
coeducational schools than were private single-sex schools having other, mainly Protestant,
religious affiliations (e.g., Baptist, Lutheran, Methodist) for both men’s and women’s colleges.
Single-sex schools in the Midwest (especially those in the East North Central) were quicker to
transition to coeducational status than were those in other parts of the country. Schools in the
South (especially the South Atlantic) were the biggest laggards for men’s colleges followed by
those in New England and the Middle Atlantic. Women’s colleges in New England were the
slowest to make the transition to coeducational status.38
The dynamics of transitions from single-sex to coeducational schools are next examined
focusing on the roles of time-varying aggregate factors (such as wars, changes in attitudes, and
macroeconomics conditions) captured by decade dummies, and “competition” with or
“substitutability” by existing coeducational schools. We estimate linear probability models of
the transition from single-sex to coeducational schools with controls for time-invariant institution
characteristics, decade dummies, and a time-varying state competition variable (the share of the
state enrollment in coeducational schools at the start of the decade). The basic findings of the
linear probability models are similar to those from probit and logit models.
The unit of observation is a school-decade with a 0 for the dependent variable indicating
that a school remained single sex throughout the decade and a 1 meaning it switched to
coeducation during the decade. For example, the observation for a single-sex school at the start
38

Note that although the regressions indicate that the West was slower than the northeast, New England
(included in the northeast) was the slowest.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -16-

of the 1960s would have a 1 for the dependent variable if the school became coed from 1961 to
1970 and a 0 if it remained single sex at the start of the next decade (1970).
The full sample covers the 511 initially single-sex schools in the 1934 and 1980
Coeducation College Databases yielding 3,899 school-decade observations. The regressions
include observations for each single-sex school from its opening (or from 1830 if it opened
before 1830) to the decade it switched to being coeducational (or to the 2000s if it remained
single sex by 2010 or to its decade of closure if it closed as a single-sex school). We cluster the
standard errors at the state level to account for the state

year nature of the coeducation

competition variable and repeated observations per institution.39
Table 5 presents the core findings of the linear probability duration models for all singlesex schools and for men’s colleges and women’s colleges separately. We include a full set of
census division dummies and the same controls for time-invariant school characteristics as in
Table 4, as well as the coeducational share of state college enrollment.
The impacts of the time invariant school characteristics mirror those in Table 4. A lower
transition rate to coeducational status is found for women’s colleges, private colleges, technical
institutes, historically black colleges, Catholic and nonsectarian schools and a faster rate is
estimated for land-grant schools. For all single-sex colleges and men’s colleges, more
competition from coeducational schools in one’s state at the beginning of a decade is associated
with a slower transition to coeducational status (or greater persistence as single-sex schools)
suggesting that “substitutability” across institutions and product differentiation dominated,
perhaps until the late 1960s. It does not matter whether the variable is all coeducational schools
or only those in the public sector. The coeducation competition variable does not have a
detectable effect for the women’s colleges (Table 5, col. 3).
The decade dummy coefficients show little evidence of large and distinctive impacts of
the war and recession periods. For men’s colleges, the transition rate increases substantially in
the 1860s and 1870s (relative to the 1830s to the 1850s), stays at the new higher levels through
the 1950s, and then jumps in the 1960s and 1970s. That jump is dominated by the large number
of switches concentrated from around 1967 to the early 1970s for both elite schools in the
39

The standard errors are similar if one clusters, instead, by institution.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -17-

northeast and for Catholic men’s schools. The time pattern for women’s colleges shows almost
no transition to coeducation until the 1940s and 1950s and then a large increase in the 1960s and
1970s.
Prior to the 1960s, institutions that switched from single-sex to coeducational status were
a somewhat idiosyncratic group. Individual institutional factors, rather than aggregate
downturns and wartime disruption, appear to have been the overriding considerations. By the
1960s there were fewer single-sex schools, and the male-only institutions that remained were
clustered in the northeast and were disproportionately Catholic. Of the 110 private non-Catholic
male-only institutions that switched from 1835 to 1955, 28 (or 25 percent) were in the northeast.
But of the 25 that switched from 1967 to 1975, 25 (or 71 percent were). A disproportionately
low fraction of Roman Catholic institutions switched before 1967.40 At that time 37 male-only
Catholic institutions remained and 84 percent switched to coeducational status by 1975.
In the cases of the northeast male-only and the Catholic institutions, coordination brought
about speedy change and can account for the more rapid conversion in the 1960s and 1970s. The
groundwork for both groups was laid in the 1950s.
For the Catholic institutions, the Second Vatican Council (1962 to 1965) pronounced that
women had the right “to acquire an education … equal to [that] recognized for men.”41 Catholic
colleges, according to trenchant criticisms launched in the mid-1950s, could not aspire to be
serious research institutions given the narrowness of their instruction and the limitations of
reconciling science with Church teachings.42 As male-only institutions began to lose their best
men to coeducational institutions, the elite institutions of the northeast switched to coeducation,
and Catholic schools soon joined that bandwagon.
The framework we proposed to understand when institutions switched from single sex to
coeducation emphasized the possibility of declining quality of students when student demand
changed. Although we cannot measure the quality of the student body for all the institutions in a

40

Most of the Catholic institutions that switched before the late 1960s were founded by the Jesuits or
other Catholic missionaries.
41
Quoted in Poulson (1995, p. 122-3).
42
See Gleason (2001), in particular his discussion of Msgr. John Tracy Ellis’s biting criticism of the
scholarship and research records of American Catholic higher education.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -18-

consistent manner spanning the long historical period covered by our sample, we can examine
the quantity of students for the period since 1966. Single-sex institutions at the upper end of the
quality distribution probably did not suffer declining numbers when demand shifted in favor of
coeducation, but less prestigious institutions may have faced declining enrollments. To examine
further the implications of the framework, Table 6 provides estimates of the impact on BA
growth of switching or remaining single sex during various periods for institutions that opened
all-male or all-female relative to those that opened coeducational. In each case BAs are
measured as all BAs, male (female) BAs, and all BAs restricted to non-Catholic institutions.
We regress the growth in BAs from 1966 to 1974 (thus the growth in entering freshmen
from 1962 to 1970) on the year the school first opened, the initial 1966 level (in logs) of BAs,
control of institution, region dummies, and whether the school was always coeducational,
changed before 1962, or changed from 1962 to 1970. The omitted institutions are those that
were not coeducational by 1970. The question is whether the late-comers began to suffer losses
in enrollments as the demand for coeducation among undergraduates increased.
By measuring the dependent variable as all students we may overstate the difference
between the early switchers and the others since the trustees’ condition for the switch to
coeducation, in some case, was that the number of male students could not be reduced below
existing numbers. For a while that was true for Yale as well as for Dartmouth. In these cases,
switching from single sex to coeducation increased enrollments by definition. But by restricting
the dependent variable to only male or only females we often understate the difference by
excluding the new group. Therefore, we estimate the equation both ways. The initial three rows
of the table give the effect on the growth of BAs of changing early versus late and the other rows
show the estimates for the key control variables.
We find that institutions that were always coeducational or changed before 1970 had
faster BA growth from 1966 to 1974 than those that changed after 1970, if at all. The one
instance where that is less clear is in col. (2) where the coefficient on switching from 1962 to
1970 for male BAs is smaller and less significant than the others. Institutions that initially began
as all-female had the largest percentage decrease in enrollment if they remained single sex by
1970 (cols. 4, 5, and 6) and that is true even if one restricts attention to female BAs (col. 5). A
single-sex institution of either gender that remained single sex after 1970 had lower enrollments
Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -19-

(expressed in BAs) by about 25 percentage points during the eight-year period from 1962 to
1970 than one that switched during those years.

E. Coeducation and Female Educational Attainment
Substantial evidence has recently accumulated that an increase in the number of colleges
available to women in a geographic area increases the education of young women living in that
area (see, for example, Currie and Moretti 2003).43 Thus the existence of coeducational
institutions of higher education may have mattered to the education of women.44 Even if femaleonly colleges existed, they would not have been as numerous as the full group of institutions and
thus would have been less convenient than if coeducation were the norm. In addition, most
female-only colleges would not have provided as complete and as high-quality an education as
the larger coeducational institutions. In addition, they were considerably more expensive than
coeducational institutions in the private or public-sectors.45
To evaluate the possibility that an increase in coeducational institutions was beneficial to
women’s education, we use the eventual educational attainment of a birth cohort, as gleaned
from the U.S. population census. We aggregate to (birth cohort
fraction of females in a (birth cohort

state of birth) cells. The

state) attending college is then regressed on the fraction of

undergraduates in the state who attended a BA-granting coeducational institution of higher
education (or the fraction of such institutions in the state) when the cohort was around 25 years
old. Undergraduate data for 1934 are used to form the weighted enrollment percentages.

43

An increase in the education of a woman has been shown to improve the life chances of her offspring,
increase the probability that she is married, help her own health outcomes, and reduce her fertility. For
references see Currie and Moretti (2003) and Oreopolous and Salvanes (2009). Although these
considerations are beyond the scope of this paper, these beneficial outcomes to individuals and society
suggest why the education of women is important historically and in developing nations today.
44
The analysis in this section is at the state-cohort level for women born around the beginning of the
twentieth century. Currie and Moretti (2003) exploit high-frequency county-level data for more recent
birth cohorts to see if college openings and switching from male-only to coeducation had a positive
impact on women’s college education.
45
The full cost for a year (tuition, fees, and minimum room and board) at female-only institutions in 1934
was, on average, $650. It was $549 at male-only institutions. It was $386 for coeducational institutions
and $239 for those in the public sector. Sending a daughter to an all-female college was almost three
times as expensive as sending her to a state university.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -20-

The regressions are run two ways: (1) with the female attendance rate as the dependent
variable and the male college rate as a separate regressor, and (2) as the ratio of the female to
male college attendance rates.46 We also add the contemporaneous public high school
graduation rate for females in the state in 1920 or as the ratio of the same for females to males.
The reason for its inclusion is that states with better high schools could also have been those with
more coeducational colleges and higher schooling more generally. The regressions are weighted
by cohort population to reveal the experience of the typical female rather than the typical state.47
The fraction of institutions that are coeducational and the fraction of students in
coeducational institutions increased greatly over time (see Table 1). We focus our regressions on
how access to coeducational colleges impacted on women’s college going in the period of the
1910 and 1920s where coeducation was becoming the norm and much regional variation
remained in the prevalence of coeducational institutions. The regressions presented in Table 7
cover the birth cohorts that were about 25 years old in 1920 (and in 1930), the college educations
of which are given by individuals who were 50 to 59 years old in the 1950 (and 1960) censuses.
In addition, since the enrollment data used to weight coeducational institutions are for 1934,
these data would best reflect the experiences of these cohorts.
The regression results are given in Table 7 for cohorts that were 25 years old in 1920 and
1930 and for the two ways of expressing the dependent variable. We find that the fraction of
females who completed some college (that is attained more than 12 years of education) by the
time they were in their fifties, given the same for males (or, instead, the ratio of females to males
who attended college), is positively related to the fraction of institutions in the state that were
coeducational when the cohort was about 25 years old. Similarly, these two dependent variables
are also related to the fraction of individuals who attended coeducational institutions in the state
when the cohort was about 25 years old. The coefficients of interest suggest that a one-standard
deviation increase in the fraction of institutions in the state that were coeducational would
increase the ratio of the female to male college attendance rate by around 11 to 15 percent

46

We have also estimated the regressions using the female college graduation rate and the corresponding
female to male ratio. The relative magnitudes and significances are not much different.
47
The use of population weights also is sensible to down-weight low-population states in the West that
had no single-sex institutions for the period considered and to give less weight to noisier estimates of
state-cohort means derived from smaller samples.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -21-

without including the public high school graduation rate and from 5 to 8 percent including it.
The relationship mainly reflects differences across regions, as can be seen in the example
given by Figure 5. In the states of the northeast, coeducation rates were low and women had
college attendance rates that were considerably lower than men’s. The South generally had
somewhat higher coeducation rates and also higher relative college attendance rates for women.
In the Midwest and West, in contrast, the fraction of institutions that were coeducational and the
fraction of students in them were exceptionally high. In consequence, women achieved higher
levels of college attendance relative to men. The states of the northeast had somewhat higher
levels of college education for males, but it was the states of the West that had the highest levels
for men and for women as well.
Some states, generally the smaller ones west of the Mississippi, had no single-sex
colleges because their populations were so sparse that their primary or only higher education
institutions were coeducational and in the public sector. These states form somewhat of a cloud
in terms of the relationship between coeducation and women’s college rates. Because they are
small states, the population-weighting procedure reduces their impact in the Table 7 regressions.

F. Coda: The End of In Loco Parentis and the Beginnings of True Coeducational Equality
By the 1970s the vast majority of female and male undergraduates were educated in
coeducational institutions. The fraction female among all undergraduates was rising and would
hit the equality mark around 1980. Differences between the college majors of males and females
had began to narrow. But what about the selection of women into institutions that were once
male-only? Higher educational institutions that today admit students in a non-discriminatory
fashion, with regard to sex, disability, and need, did not always select students in a gender-blind
fashion.48
Many institutions that were once male-only gave preference to men in admissions when
they initially became coeducational. In some cases (e.g., Dartmouth, Yale) the preference was

48

Interestingly, there are examples of institutions that once became gender-blind but have recently given
preference to male applicants to even out the sex distribution.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -22-

due to mandates that were set down by the trustees as a condition for the admission of women
(Karabel 2005). But in other cases the preference was partly due to dormitory limitations for
women at residential institutions. Some of these institutions had coordinate women’s colleges or
related institutions (e.g., Radcliffe and Harvard) that had been kept small. In other cases, the
fraction female was kept down by other factors (e.g., Cornell University and Stanford
University) including the lumpiness and fixed costs of building residential halls.
But if men and women could occupy the same residential areas, admissions in many
institutions could be gender-blind. That began to happen in the late 1960s with the end of in loco
parentis regulations in many colleges and universities.
The end of in loco parentis regulations meant that women no longer had curfews. With
no restrictions on hours, universities no longer had to monitor them in dormitories and students
could live off campus. In institutions with required residential living, male and female students
could occupy the same dormitories and even share the same bathrooms.49 The end of residential
restrictions on some campuses meant that admissions could be gender-blind.50

G. Summary and Conclusions:
Colleges in America accepted women into coeducational settings beginning around 1835
with the acceptance of women at Oberlin College and the founding of Marietta College.
Institutions that were established as coeducational colleges increased in an almost unbroken
fashion from that time to the present. In a similar fashion, institutions that were founded as
male-only switched to coeducational status in a fairly continuous fashion from 1837, with the
conversion of Oberlin, until the 1960s when the rate of switching greatly increased.

49

Goldin conducted a small survey of residential colleges and universities. The responses reveal that
most lifted hours restrictions from upper-class women from 1966 to 1968, shifted to no hours for all
women from 1968 to 1970, and introduced coeducational dormitories beginning around 1969, although
some were earlier. Collecting information on residential living arrangements was difficult because of a
lack of institutional memory regarding mundane student issues.
50
At Harvard, for example, “houses” were coeducational on an experimental basis in 1971 and thereafter
formally. The admission of men and women became gender-blind and was done by the same committee
around 1975. Prior to 1975 the relative number of women to men was increased but was admissions were
not gender-blind.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -23-

We have sought the reasons for the switch from male- or female-only to coeducational
status for institutions offering four-year undergraduate degrees. Many of the aggregate factors
that have been regarded as potentially important do not appear to have mattered greatly for the
precise timing of institutions switching from being single-sex to coeducational. Neither war nor
aggregate economic factors accelerated the rate of change for the total group. Time invariant
aspects of the institution, such as the type of control, the religious group that founded it, and the
opening year of the institution, were important in determining when each of the originally singlesex institutions became coeducational.
The general continuity of change before the 1960s is probably due to the fact that
institutions were affected by a host of idiosyncratic factors striking them in different years.
Whether or not an institution opened coeducationally or not often depended on the whim of the
founders as was the case for Drexel (1872), University of Southern California (1880), Carnegie
Institute of Technology (1905), and Stanford (1891). It was occasionally due to the preference
of a college president, or a large benefactor as was the case for Bucknell (1883). Religious
ideology and its greater intensity after the Civil War mattered for Boston University (1873) and
Vanderbilt (1875) both founded by Methodists. Similarly, Temple (1890) and the University of
Chicago (1892) were coeducational institutions established by Baptists. Economic distress
mattered, as in the interesting case when competing Catholic institutions prompted DePaul
(1911), founded by the Vincentians, to become coeducational. State legislatures often forced
public institutions to be coeducational if enough taxpayers demanded colleges for their
daughters, as in the cases of the University of Michigan (1872) and the College of William and
Mary (1918).51
We have also examined whether the increase in institutions that accepted women and
taught them in coeducational classes mattered to their educational attainment. Evidence for the
more recent period from Currie and Moretti (2003) indicates that increasing the number of
institutions that admit women increases the schooling of those in the geographic area. Our
analysis of data for the 1920s and 1930s supports the notion that greater accessibility of
coeducational college opportunities in a state increased women’s college enrollments and, thus,
51

Dates given are that for the opening of a coeducational institution or the year when a single-sex
institution opened its doors to women. Note that Vanderbilt had female undergraduates ever since 1875
but became officially coeducational later.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -24-

their eventual educational attainment.
For the celebrated period of change in the late 1960s and early 1970s, we have shown
that institutions that switched early or were always coeducational increased enrollments faster
than those that switched later, if at all. The demand for coeducation by students had increased,
probably beginning in the 1950s, and by the 1960s the only force holding coeducation in check
was alumni (and alumnae) support for retaining the prior gender identity of the school.
Declining quality of male students at the top elite institutions in the 1960s led to an almost
complete collapse of the single-sex system.
Although the change that occurred beginning in the late 1960s was important, focusing
on it omits the long history of coeducation in the United States. Coeducation mattered to
women’s education throughout U.S. history and it mattered to a greater extent in the more distant
past than in the more recent and celebrated period of change.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -25-

Table 1: Students in Coeducational Institutions: 1897, 1924, 1934, 1966, and 1980
A. By Sex

Year
1897
1924
1934UPG
1934U
1934UP
1966
1980

All Students
Fraction Number
Coed
of Instit.
0.557
432
0.741
633
0.728
692
0.695
666
0.730
698
0.934
1,165
0.984
1,403

Male Students
Fraction Number
Coed
of Instit.
0.538
384
0.743
516
n.a.
n.a.
0.702
530
0.726
561
0.947
1,134
0.996
1,370

Female Students
Fraction Number
Coed
of Instit.
0.603
303
0.738
528
n.a.
n.a.
0.686
577
0.736
603
0.921
1,157
0.972
1,394

All Students, Private
Fraction
Number
Coed
of Instit.
0.443
343
0.682
522
0.665
554
0.633
540
0.656
559
0.825
791
0.957
913

B. By Region
All Students
Year
1897
1924
1934UPG
1934U
1934UP
1966
1980

Northeast
Fraction Number
0.287
95
0.520
142
0.475
155
0.378
143
0.463
158
0.838
296
0.969
354

South
Fraction Number
0.397
148
0.598
213
0.713
237
0.713
234
0.708
238
0.956
384
0.984
470

Midwest
Fraction Number
0.869
148
0.941
216
0.930
223
0.884
218
0.921
226
0.953
334
0.990
396

West
Fraction Number
0.852
41
0.958
59
0.939
74
0.921
68
0.938
73
0.984
146
0.997
172

C. Fraction Female and “Isolation Index”

Year
1897
1924
1934U
1934UP
1980

(1)
Fraction Female (f)
0.291
0.373
0.439
0.373
0.499

(2)
“Isolation” (I) a
0.604
0.548
0.626
0.543
0.524

(3)
“Isolation Index” b
0.442
0.279
0.333
0.271
0.0499

“Isolation” = i (Fi /F) (Fi /Ti) , where i denotes each institution, Fi is female enrollment in i, Ti = male
plus female enrollment in i, and F is total female enrollment across all institutions. See also Notes
(below).
b
“Isolation index” = [(I – f)/(1 – f)], where f = col. (1) and I = col. (2). See also Notes (below).
a

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -26-

Sources: See Appendix.
Notes: The definition of a student changes somewhat across the years. In 1897 the students are
in the “collegiate” group and do not include those in professional and graduate programs. In
1924 all students (undergraduates, graduates, and those in professional programs), except those
in preparatory and summer school programs are included. The 1934 data allow various
combinations for comparison. 1934U includes only Arts and Sciences undergraduates; 1934UP
adds undergraduates in first professional degree programs, which were mainly in engineering.
1934UPG includes all undergraduates (plus those in first professional programs) and graduates.
The 1934UPG line is most comparable to 1924. The 1934U line is most comparable to 1897 and
the 1934UP line is probably most comparable to 1966 and 1980. Undergraduate enrollment data
for 1980 are used for the 1966 and 1980 coeducation figures. Institutions are categorized in
1966 on the basis of 1966 enrollment data.
The “isolation index” gives the degree to which a typical female student is “isolated” from male
students. “Isolation,” termed I, gives the share female of the students in one’s own institution
experienced by the typical female student. It is computed as the average across institutions of
the fraction female among the students in the institution (Fi /Ti) weighted by each institution’s
female students as a share of the aggregate number of female students in all institutions (Fi /F),
where i denotes each institution, Fi is female enrollment in i, Ti = male and female enrollment in
i, and F is total female enrollment across all institutions. If f = the fraction female for all college
students in year t, the “isolation index” is given by [(I – f)/(1 – f)]. If all women were in singlesex institutions, the “isolation index” would be 1. If all women and all men were in
coeducational institutions that replicated the aggregate share of female students (f), “isolation”
would be the fraction female among all students (f), and the “isolation index” would be 0.
n.a. = not available.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -27-

Table 2: Coeducation College Database Sample Statistics
Sample statistics for 1934 Coeducation Database
Total in sample a
Institutions in sample with 1934 data
Institutions with 1924 or 1897 data only
Institutions expiring between 1924 and 1934
Institutions expiring after 1934
Religious affiliation
Non-sectarian
Total with religious affiliation
Catholic
Methodist
Control
Public
Private
Gender mix
Founded as all male
Founded as all female
Founded as coeducational
Regions b
Northeast
South
Midwest
West
Sample statistics for 1980 Coeducation Database
Total in 1980 Database
Total in sample with 1980 data
Institutions opening after 1934
Institutions expiring before 1980 c
Control
Public control
Private control
Gender mix in 1980 d
All male
All female
Coeducational
Regions b
Northeast
South
Midwest
West

Number of
Institutions
769
714
55
17
53

Fraction of
Institutions
1.000
0.928
0.072
0.022
0.069

Enrollment

Fraction of
Enrollment

717,416

1.000

13,541

0.019

335
434
124
77

0.436
0.564
0.161
0.100

499,733
217,683
69,832
48,718

0.697
0.303
0.097
0.068

147
622

0.191
0.809

316,812
400,604

0.442
0.558

267
167
319

0.355
0.222
0.424

346,720
63,339
302,337

0.483
0.088
0.421

166
269
254
77
Number of
Institutions
1,486
1,412
717
64

0.216
0.350
0.330
0.100
Fraction of
Institutions
1.000
0.950
0.483
0.043

222,847
171,571
234,867
84,756
Enrollment

0.311
0.239
0.327
0.118
Fraction of
Enrollment

5,485,617
2,546,324

1.000
0.464

491
921

0.330
0.620

3,656,922
1,828,695

0.667
0.333

7
78
1,327

0.005
0.052
0.893

8,105
78,274
5,399,238

0.001
0.014
0.984

356
474
397
174

0.240
0.319
0.267
0.117

1,289,810
1,725,579
1,538,805
903,033

0.235
0.315
0.281
0.165

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -28-

a

Includes 10 female “coordinate” institutions of male-only colleges.
Regions do not sum to full sample because AK, HI, PR, and VI are not included in the regional
breakdowns.
c
Institutions are missing 1980 data either because they closed or were not in the 1980 IPEDS.
d
Two institutions are missing coeducational status in 1980.
b

Sources: See Data Appendix.
Notes: Some columns may not add up to the total because of missing information regarding
coeducational or single-sex founding. In the 1980 Coeducation College Database a few
institutions appear twice because they represent a merger of two schools from the 1934 data.
Undergraduate enrollment in 1934 is used in the upper panel and undergraduate enrollment in
1980 is used in the lower panel.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -29-

Table 3: Top 50 Institutions in U.S. News and World Report 2010 College Rankings
State

City

College name

MA
NJ
CT
CA
MA
CA
PA
NY
IL
NC
NH
IL
MO
MD
NY
RI
GA
TX
TN
IN
CA
PA
DC
CA
VA
CA
MI
MA
NC
NC
MA
NY
VA
MA
GA
PA
CA
NY
IL

Cambridge
Princeton
New Haven
Pasadena
Cambridge
Stanford
Philadelphia
New York
Chicago
Durham
Hanover
Evanston
Saint Louis
Baltimore
Ithaca
Providence
Atlanta
Houston
Nashville
Notre Dame
Berkeley
Pittsburgh
DC
Los Angeles
Charlottesville
LA
Ann Arbor
Medford
Chapel Hill
Wake Forest
Waltham
New York
Williamsburg
Chestnut Hill
Atlanta
Bethlehem
La Jolla
Rochester
Urbana

Harvard University
Princeton University
Yale University
CA Institute of Technology
MA Institute of Technology
Stanford University
University of PA
Columbia University
University of Chicago
Duke University
Dartmouth College
Northwestern University
Washington University
Johns Hopkins University
Cornell University
Brown University
Emory University
Rice Institute
Vanderbilt University
University of Notre Dame
University of CA
Carnegie-Mellon University
Georgetown University
University of CA, LA
University of VA
University of Southern CA
University of MI
Tufts University
University of NC
Wake Forest University
Brandeis University
New York University
College of William & Mary
Boston College
GA School of Technology
Lehigh University
University of CA, San Diego
University of Rochester
University of IL

Year
Open
1638
1747
1702
1891
1865
1891
1755
1754
1892
1838
1770
1855
1854
1876
1868
1765
1837
1912
1875
1843
1869
1905
1812
1919
1825
1880
1841
1855
1795
1834
1948
1832
1693
1863
1888
1866
1960
1850
1868

Year
Coed
1943
1969
1969
1953
1870
1891
1914
1983
1892
1894
1972
1869
1869
1972
1870
1971
1953
1912
1875
1972
1869
1905
1969
1919
1970
1880
1870
1892
1897
1942
1948
1873
1918
1970
1952
1971
1960
1900
1868

USNWR
Rank 2010
1
1
3
4
4
4
4
8
8
10
11
12
12
14
15
16
17
17
17
20
21
22
23
24
24
26
27
28
28
28
31
32
33
34
35
35
35
35
39

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -30-

WI
OH
NY
CA
CA
WA
CA
PA
FL
TX
LA
FL

Madison
Cleveland
Troy
Davis
Santa Barbara
Seattle
Irvine
State College
Gainesville
Austin
New Orleans
Miami

University of WI
Case-Western University
RPI
University of CA, Davis
University of CA, SB
University of WA
University of CA, Irvine
PA State University
University of FL
University of TX
Tulane University
University of Miami

1849
1880
1824
1905
1909
1861
1965
1859
1853
1883
1835
1926

1863
1960
1942
1905
1909
1861
1965
1871
1947
1883
1886
1926

39
41
42
42
42
42
46
47
47
47
50
50

Source: http://colleges.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-colleges/national-universitiesrankings

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -31-

Table 4: Cox Proportional Hazard Models of the Transition from Single Sex to Coeducational

Women’s college
Private control
Year of opening
Catholic
Nonsectarian
Land Grant institution
Technology or military institute
Historically black college
South
Midwest
West
Number of observations

(1)
All Colleges
0.267
(0.0339)
0.454
(0.0965)
1.03
(0.00203)
0.453
(0.0664)
0.592
(0.0859)
2.78
(0.670)
0.372
(0.081)
0.499
(0.177)
0.755
(0.103)
1.42
(0.181)
1.10
(0.235)
511

(2)
Men’s Colleges

(3)
Women’s Colleges

0.534
(0.144)
1.02
(0.00225)
0.333
(0.0631)
0.548
(0.979)
3.01
(0.814)
0.416
(0.0982)
0.660
(0.252)
0.688
(0.112)
1.33
(0.218)
1.49
(0.218)
281

0.531
(0.186)
1.05
(0.00503)
0.639
(0.181)
0.647
(0.182)

0.154
(0.158)
1.21
(0.287)
1.48
(0.306)
0.742
(0.300)
230

Sources and Notes: The sample includes all four-year institutions starting as single-sex
institutions in our 1934 and 1980 Coeducation College Databases. In other words, the sample
consists of all originally single-sex schools present in our 1897, 1924, 1934, or 1980 institutional
samples. The estimation uses Cox proportional hazard models for the duration of a spell as a
single-sex school with nonparametric baseline hazards estimated via maximum likelihood using
the “stcox” command in STATA. The time period at risk in the duration models begins in the
year of opening for institutions founded after 1835 and in 1835 for institutions that opened
before 1835. The failure event is the transition to a coeducational institution. Schools that
continue today as single-sex institutions are treated as censored spells with 2010 as the date of
censoring. Schools that closed as single-sex institutions are treated as censored at the date of
closing. The reported coefficients are hazard ratios. The standard errors for the hazard ratios are
in parentheses. The base region is the northeast (New England plus the Middle Atlantic states).
There are no land grant and no technical institutions among the women’s colleges.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -32-

Table 5: Linear Probability Models of Decadal Transitions from Single-Sex to Coeducational

Coeducational share of state
enrollment
Women’s college
Private control
Year of opening

10-2

Catholic
Nonsectarian
Land Grant institution
Technology or military institute
Historically black college
Decade dummies
1850s
1860s
1870s
1880s
1890s
1900s
1910s
1920s
1930s
1940s

(1)
All Colleges
-0.0567
(0.02633)
-0.115
(0.0961)
-0.0658
(0.0165)
0.0394
(0.0114)
-0.0785
(0.0142)
-0.0562
(0.0133)
0.0994
(0.0301)
-0.0555
(0.0178)
-0.0522
(0.0479)

(2)
Men’s Colleges
-0.0807
(0.0327)

(3)
Women’s Colleges
-0.0231
(0.0257)

-0.0744
(0.0300)
0.00287
(0.0130)
-0.121
(0.0176)
-0.0755
(0.0202)
0.108
(0.0376))
-0.0662
(0.0248)
-0.0364
(0.565)

-0.0423
(0.0263)
0.0715
(0.0261)
-0.0236
(0.0193)
-0.0219
(0.0141)

0.0130
(0.00860)
0.0745
(0.0253)
0.0931
(0.0171)
0.0896
(0.0240)
0.110
(0.0220)
0.115
(0.0240)
0.136
(0.0289)
0.124
(0.0247)
0.145
(0.0246)
0.161
(0.0332)

0.00554
(0.00987)
0.0743
(0.0307)
0.105
(0.219)
0.104
(0.319)
0.123
(0.0274)
0.142
(0.341)
0.169
(0.0447)
0.132
(0.347)
0.169
(0.0398)
0.170
(0.0392)

-0.0742
(0.0485)

0.00322
(0.00984)
0.00788
(0.0127)
0.0145
(0.0142)
0.0377
(0.212)

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -33-

1950s
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
Census division dummies
Number of observations
Number of institutions

0.174
(0.0304)
0.504
(.0427)
0.446
(0.0458)
0.328
(0.0439)
0.229
(0.0489)
0.403
(0.0713)
Yes
3,899
511

0.176
(0.417)
0.613
(0.0682)
0.650
(0.817)
0.408
(0.120)
0.599
(0.128)
0.0749
(0.0518)
Yes
2,097
281

0.0523
(0.0247)
0.319
(.0514)
0.225
(0.0416)
0.177
(0.0348)
0.0438
(0.0437)
0.279
(0.0679)
Yes
1,802
230

Sources and Notes: The unit of observation is school decade. All single-sex schools in the
1934 and 1980 Coeducation College Databases are included covering schools present in our
1897, 1924, 1934, or 1980 institutional samples. The base period is the 1830s and 1840s for
columns (1) and (2) and it is the 1830s to the 1900s for column (3). The dependent variable is a
1 if the school switched to coeducational during that decade (e.g., for a school that was single sex
in 1960 a 1 for the dependent variable for the 1960s means it became coed from 1961 to 1970
and a 0 means it remained single sex at the end of the decade or closed during the decade).
Schools leave the sample starting in the decade after they become coeducational. Standard errors
are clustered by state. The variable “Coeducational share of state enrollment” is a time-varying
covariate that varies by state and decade. It measures the share of enrollment in coeducational
schools in the institution’s state at the start of the decade. We use 1934 enrollments for the
1830s to 1930s period and 1980 enrollments for the 1940s to 2000s. There are no land grant and
no technical institutions among the women’s colleges.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -34-

Table 6: Impact on BA Growth of Switching from Single Sex to Coeducational, 1966 to 1978

Growth in BAs from
1966 to 1974 (Freshmen
from 1962 to 1970)
Coeducational always

Initially All Male or Coeducational
(1)
(2)
(3)
All BAs
Male BAs
All BAs
NonCatholic
0.131
0.188
0.180
(0.0533)
(0.0644)
(0.0592)

Initially All Female or Coeducational
(4)
(5)
(6)
All BAs
Female
All BAs
BAs
NonCatholic
0.301
0.408
0.279
(0.0422)
(0.0589)
(0.0467)

Change to coeducational
before 1962

0.139
(0.0534)

0.148
(0.0646)

0.191
(0.0599)

0.245
(0.0720)

0.232
(0.0999)

0.221
(0.0778)

Change to coeducational
from 1962 to 1970

0.263
(0.0647)

0.0975
(0.0782)

0.283
(0.0813)

0.246
(0.0588)

0.223
(0.0819)

0.184
(0.0762 )

0.146
(0.0317)

0.178
(0.0383)

0.156
(0.0326 )

0.0797
(0.0435)

0.0679
(0.0607)

0.0909
(0.0446)

Log (total BAs, 1966)

-0.106
(0.0140)

-0.128
(0.0169)

-0.102
(0.0145)

-0.139
(0.0173)

-0.0784
(0.0241)

-0.126
(0.0177)

Public control

0.388
(0.0314)

0.437
(0.0380)

0.380
(0.0317)

0.427
(0.0373)

0.327
(0.0521)

0.419
(0.0378)

Protestant denomination

-0.0808
(0.0308)

-0.0670
(0.0373)

-0.0802
(0.0313)

-0.0828
(0.0369)

-0.137
(0.0516)

-0.074
(0.0372)

Catholic

-0.0767
(0.0461)

-0.0363
(0.0558)

-0.103
(0.0494)

-0.112
(0.0690)

Constant

-1.79
(0.610)

-2.35
(0.738)

-2.01
(0.628)

-0.482
(0.854 )

-0.462
(1.19)

-0.734
(0.877)

Yes
816
0.389

Yes
816
0.372

Yes
753
0.394

Yes
760
0.370

Yes
753
0.250

Yes
683
0.354

Year open

10 -2

Region dummies
Number of observations
R2

Sources: BAs by sex for 1966 to 1978 from Web CASPAR, https://webcaspar.nsf.gov/ . Other
variables are from the 1980 Coeducation College Database (see Appendix).
Notes: The dependent variable is the growth in BAs (the change in the log number of BAs for all
BAs, male BAs, female BAs, and those in non-Catholic institutions) from 1966 to 1974. The
covariates of greatest interest are whether the school was always coeducational, became
coeducational before 1962, switched from 1962 to 1970, measured relative to schools that did
not switch through 1970 (the omitted group). “Protestant denomination” includes institutions
under any non-Catholic religious control as of 1980 (or as of 1934 for those that failed before
1980). Standard errors are in parentheses.
Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -35-

Table 7: Role of Coeducation in Women’s College Attainment
Dependent variable:

(1)
% Coed
Institutions

Female college attendance rate for
cohort i in year t in state j
Cohort is 25 years old in 1920
Cohort is 25 years old in 1930
Cohort is 25 years old in 1920
Cohort is 25 years old in 1930

Cohort is 25 years old in 1930

0.699
0.661
0.720

0.296
(0.0719)
0.261
(0.0667)
0.265
(0.0690)
0.242
(0.0649)

0.658
(0.124)
0.352
(0.0688)

0.727
0.777
0.746
0.787

0.298
0.208
0.418
0.342

0.520
(0.111)
0.301
(0.0621)

Cohort is 25 years old in 1930

R2

0.621

0.772
(0.134)
0.509
(0.104)

Female/male college attendance
rate for cohort i in year t in state j
Cohort is 25 years old in 1920

Cohort is 25 years old in 1920

0.292
(0.122)
0.427
(0.0933)
0.359
(0.122)
0.472
(0.0963)

(4)
Public High
School
Graduation
Rate or Ratio

0.573
(0.130)
0.363
(0.105)

Cohort is 25 years old in 1930

Cohort is 25 years old in 1930

0.684
(0.0890)
0.697
(0.0717)
0.728
(0.0855)
0.745
(0.0710)

0.0470
(0.179)
0.0414
(0.0181)

Female/male college attendance
rate for cohort i in year t in state j
Cohort is 25 years old in 1920

Cohort is 25 years old in 1920

0.0713
(0.0145)
0.0669
(0.0155)

0.0294
(0.0161)
0.0288
(0.0166)

Cohort is 25 years old in 1930

Cohort is 25 years old in 1930

(3)
Male
College
Rate

0.0901
(0.0158)
0.0806
(0.0167)

Female college attendance rate for
cohort i in year t in state j
Cohort is 25 years old in 1920

Cohort is 25 years old in 1920

(2)
% Enrollment
in Coed
Institutions

0.575
(0.133)
0.635
(0.0680)
0.467
(0.0131)
0.573
(0.0690)

0.505
0.730
0.546
0.740

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -36-

Sources: 1934 Coeducation College Database. See Data Appendix. Public secondary school
graduation rates by sex were computed from data underlying Goldin (1998).
Notes: All regressions are weighted by the number of men in the cohort. Observations number
48 for all regressions; AK, DC, HI, and PR are excluded. Cohorts are 50 to 59 years old at the
time of the census. When t = 1920, the 1950 census is used; when t = 1930, the 1960 census is
used. Col. (4) uses the contemporaneous public secondary school graduation rate for females by
state (that is, the fraction of female 17 year olds graduating secondary school in 1920) or the
ratio of the contemporaneous public secondary school graduation rate of females to males.
Secondary school graduation rates for 1920 are used in all regressions. Individuals who were 50
to 59 years old in 1960 were 17 years old from 1918 to 1927 and those who were 50 to 59 years
old in 1950 were 17 years old from 1908 to 1917.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -37-

Figure 1: Cumulative Number of Schools Opened as Coed and Single-Sex by Year of Opening
and Control (1934 sample)
Part A: Opened coed and single-sex for all schools
350
Open coed
300
Open male-only

250
200
150
100

Open female-only

50
0
1830

1840

1850

1860

1870

open coed

1880

1890

open male-only

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

open female-only

Part B: Opened Coeducational, by Control
250

100

200

80

150

60
Public control

100

40

50

20

0

0

1830

1840

1850

1860

1870

1880

coed private

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

Coeducational Public

Coeducational Private

Private control

1940

coed public

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -38-

Part C: Catholic Schools
60
50
Male-only

40
30

Female-only
20
10
0
1830

1840

1850

1860

1870

1880

male catholic

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

female catholic

Sources: See Appendix. Data are from the 1934 Coeducation College Database and include
institutions that existed in 1897, 1924, or 1934.
Notes: In part B, the data refer to whether the institution opened as a coeducational institution in
the private or public sectors. The private control is graphed with respect to the left axis and
public control is graphed with respect to the right axis. In part C, the data refer to whether the
institution opened as a male-only or female-only Catholic institution.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -39-

Figure 2: Hazard Rate and the Number of Institutions that Switched to Coeducation in the
Decade (full sample)
Part A: All Colleges
117

70

Hazard rate x 100
Switched to coed in decade

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1830

1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

Part B: Non-Catholic Colleges
60
Hazard rate x 100
Switched to coed in decade

50

40

30

20

10

0
1830

1850

1870

1890

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -40-

Part C: Men’s Non-Catholic Colleges
60
Hazard rate x 100
Switched to coed in decade

50

40

30

20

10

0
1830

1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

Sources: See Appendix. The sample used includes all institutions that opened to 1980.
Notes: “Hazard rate 100” is the percentage of all single-sex institutions (all or male only)
existing at the start of the decade that switched during the decade. “Switched to coed in decade”
is the number of single-sex institutions (all or male-only) that switched to coeducational status in
the decade given.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -41-

Figure 3: Fraction of Institutions (Existing in 1934) that Were Coeducational by Year
Part A: Fraction of All and Non-Catholic Institutions
1
0.9
Non-Catholic coed

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

All coed

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1830

1850

1870

1890

1910

% coed colleges

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

% non-Catholic coed

Part B: Fraction of All and Non-Catholic Institutions, Weighted by 1934 Enrollment
1
0.9

Non-Catholic coed

0.8
0.7
0.6

All coed

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1830

1850

1870

1890

1910

% coed college ('34 wts)

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

% non-Cath coed ('34 wts)

Sources: See Appendix
Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -42-

Figure 4: The Evolution of Coeducation for Institutions Existing in 1934
Part A: By number of schools
700
Total colleges
600
500
Total coed
400
300
Switchers to coed
200
100
0
1830

1850

1870

1890

total colleges

1910
total coed

1930

1950

1970

switchers to coed

Part B: By 1934 enrollment
800,000
Total colleges
700,000
600,000

Total coed

500,000
400,000
Switchers to coed
300,000
200,000
100,000
0
1830

1850

1870

total colleges ('34 wts)

1890

1910
coed colleges

1930

1950

1970

switchers to coed

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -43-

Part C: Number of Non-Catholic Schools
600

Non-Catholic
colleges

Non-Catholic
coed colleges

500
400
300

Non-Catholic
switchers

200
100
0
1830

1850

1870

1890

non-Catholic colleges

1910

1930

non-Catholic coed

1950

1970

non-Cath switchers

Part D: Number of Catholic Schools
120
Catholic
coeducational
colleges

100
80
60

Catholic women’s
colleges

Catholic men’s
colleges

40
20
0
1830

1850

1870

1890

male Catholic

1910

1930

female Catholic

1950

1970

1990

2010

coed Catholic

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -44-

2

Figure 5: Coeducation and Women’s College Attainment

WY

1.5

SD
ND

LA

AL
VT

1

NH
MD

GA

VA
MN

SC DE
MA
RI

PA

NC

FL CO
ME
KY
WI
TXMO

TN
ID
AR
NE
NV
WV
NM

OK
OKS
R MI IA
WA

CA

MS

IN UT
MT
OH IL

AZ

CT
NJ

.5

NY

.2

.4
.6
.8
Fraction Institutions Coed in 1930

1

Sources: See Table 6.
Notes: The data in the figure are for individuals 50 to 59 years old in 1960 by state of birth. The
fraction of institutions that were coeducational in 1930 comes from the 1934 Coeducation
College Database (see Appendix) and includes institutions that began coeducational and those
that switched from single-sex.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -45-

Data Appendix: Coeducation College Database
A. 1934 Coeducation College Database
Department of the Interior, Commissioner of Education. 1898. Annual Reports of the
Department of the Interior for… 1897, vol. 2. Washington, D.C., G.P.O.
U.S. Office of Education. 1927. Biennial Survey of Education, 1922-24. Bulletin 1926, No. 23.
Washington, D.C.: G.P.O.
U.S. Office of Education. 1937. Biennial Survey of Education, 1932-34. Bulletin 1935, No. 2.
Washington, D.C.: G.P.O.
Each of the three sources contains relatively similar information on the number of
students in various groups (e.g., by sex; by level such as preparatory, undergraduate, and
graduate; by type such as collegiate and professional) and revenue sources (e.g., student fees,
government grants, private gifts). Total revenues do not include additions to endowment, which
are listed separately. Students exclude those in summer school, correspondence courses,
extension, and military drill. (Institution-level data, similar to those we have used, are also
available in printed form for most years from 1890 to 1938.)
The sample was originally collected for Goldin and Katz (1999) and has been added to
and altered to study coeducation. In the original sample, the 1934 data set included 853
institutions, 711 privately-controlled and 142 publicly-controlled. That for 1924 had 790, with
677 private and 113 public. In the 1897 there were 534 universities and colleges and an
additional 287 professional, theological, and technical schools not connected to any of those on
the original list. The final 1897 sample contains 821 institutions, of which 717 were private and
104 public.
In the 1934 Coeducation College Database, only BA granting institutions are included
and dedicated professional and theological schools are generally excluded. These data set
restrictions reduce the original number of institutions to 443 in 1897, 631 in 1924, and 704 in
1934. A total of 769 institutions are included, of which 10 are “coordinate” institutions (see
below).
When possible, we did not include institutions that were junior colleges in the survey
year; separately listed independent teaching colleges and normal schools were also not included.
In 1897 a list of “colleges for women, division B” contained some that continued as BA granting
institutions and these have been included. More than a hundred of these institutions, however,
were probably not real colleges at the time and were not found in later surveys. They have,
therefore, been omitted in the analyses. The dedicated professional and theological institutions
that did not grant BAs are omitted. It should be noted that a BA granting institution in 1934 may
not have granted a BA before 1897, even though our data set will include the institution from its
Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -46-

opening date.
The 1924 listing contains the “date at first opening,” which can differ slightly from the
date of founding. We checked these dates against the date of first instruction in American
Council on Education (1960). We linked the 1924 schools to those in 1934 and used several
other guides, such as The College Blue Book (1933) and Songe (1978), for the histories of
institutions that changed city or name, or merged with or split off from others. Of the 790
schools in 1924, 695 were linked to institutions on the 1934 list. Among those that were not
theological seminaries and independent professional schools in 1924, the linkage rate was 91.5
percent.
Except in the case of the historically-black institutions, we were able to find virtually all
– if not all – publicly-controlled institutions known to have existed in each of the three years:
1897, 1924, and 1934. In both 1897 and 1924 many of the publicly-controlled, historically-black
institutions of today were not listed, although some were. We have traced the histories of these
institutions and believe they were omitted because they were, correctly, categorized as teaching
colleges or industrial institutes. We used the historical information in American Council on
Education (1960) for our institutional categorization and were helped by the contemporaneous
information in The College Blue Book (1933). There are some anomalies (e.g., Rutgers
University) and these are coded as they were in 1934.
The coeducation date variable was added to the institutions in the 1897, 1924, and 1934
data set in the following manner. We defined a coeducational institution as one that had classes
for men and women together. These classes had to include the central ones in a liberal arts
college and could not be limited to the educational school, for example. We began with lists of
coeducational dates created by several other scholars including Janet Currie and Louis
Galambos. The majority of our institutions were not on these lists and we obtained those dates
using a host of materials. In many cases the date an institution became coeducational was clear.
Many of the public institutions, for example, opened as coeducational colleges and universities.
But in some cases there was ambiguity and we used our best sense for when the majority of
women (or men) could take courses on an equal basis with the men (or women). The date an
institution that opened single-sex became coeducational ranges from 1835 to 2008.
Ten schools reported having a significant number of undergraduate women enrolled in
1934 even though these were male-only institutions at the time. Some of the institutions had true
“coordinate” women’s colleges (e.g., Brown and Pembroke). In other cases, and these are
mainly Catholic colleges and universities, women were admitted to a few undergraduate
programs, such as teaching and nursing. We added these true- or pseudo-coordinate institutions
to the 1934 data and omitted the women’s undergraduate numbers from the male-only
institutions.
Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -47-

B. 1980 Coeducation College Database
We expanded the data set through time by linking the institutions that existed in 1934 to
the Integrated Postsecondary Education Database System (IPEDS). Institutions that were in the
IPEDS but not in the 1934 data were those that opened after 1934. Some institutions merged
after 1934 and we linked both previous institutions to the new one. We attached FICE codes to
the 1934 schools to link the 1980 enrollment figures to the original data set.
The first issue was to match institutions from 1934 to the IPEDS. To maximize the
probability of matching a school in the 1934 survey to the IPEDS, we appended the 1980, 1987,
1997, and 2000-2007 IPEDS surveys (see http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/datacenter/). The institutions
were merged on the basis of name, city, and state. The matches suggested by the algorithm were
checked since some institutions changed city and some even changed state. In various cases
institutional information was checked on the institution’s website to make certain that our match
was correct. Of the 769 schools in the original data set, 717 were matched. Those that did not
match either closed between 1934 and1980, were music conservatories that are not included in
the IPEDS, or had expired before 1934 (but were included in 1924). An additional 766
institutions that opened after 1934 were added to the original data set.
The addition of the 766 institutions to the 1934 list meant that we needed to know when
these institutions became coeducational if they opened as a single-sex institution. We used data
on BA degrees awarded by sex in 1966 (from NCES CASPAR), the first year available. Our
algorithm was that if 95 percent or greater of an institution’s degrees went to individuals of a
particular sex, we identified the school as single sex. If a school appeared to be single sex in
1966, but was listed as coed in 1980, we examined on-line information about the school to learn
when it opened and when it went coed. We did not gather information on the opening dates of
the institutions that opened after 1934 because a comprehensive list is not available.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -48-

References
American Council on Education. 1960. American Universities and Colleges. Mary Irwin, ed.
Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education.
College Blue Book. 1933. The 1933 College Blue Book. Huber William Hurt and HarriettJeanne Hurt, eds. Hollywood by-the-Sea, FL: The College Blue Book.
Conable, Charlotte W. 1977. Women at Cornell: The Myth of Equal Education. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti. 2003. “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics CXVIII (November): 1495-1532.
Department of the Interior, Commissioner of Education. 1898. Annual Reports of the
Department of the Interior for… 1897, vol. 2. Washington, D.C., G.P.O.
Eisenmann, Linda. 1997. “Reconsidering a Classic: Assessing the History of Women’s Higher
Education a Dozen Years after Barbara Solomon,” Harvard Educational Review 67 (Winter):
689-718.
Fletcher, Robert S. 1943. A History of Oberlin College. Chicago: R.R. Donnelley and Sons
Company.
Gleason, Philip. 2001. “A Half-Century of Change in Catholic Higher Education,” U.S. Catholic
Historian 19 (1): 1-19.
Goldin, Claudia. 1998. “America’s Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of
Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Economic History 58 (June): 34574.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1999. “The Shaping of Higher Education: The
Formative Years in the United States, 1890 to 1940,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13
(Winter): 37-62.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press for Harvard University.
Graham, Patricia Albjerg. 1978. “Expansion and Exclusion: A History of Women in Higher
Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -49-

Education,” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society (Summer): 759-73.
Horton Dissent. August 28, 1968. Arthur J. Horton Collection on Coeducation, box no. 4, folder
no. 5. Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.
Karabel, Jerome. 2005. The Chosen: The Hidden History of Admission and Exclusion at
Harvard, Yale, and Princeton. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
McGuigan, Dorothy Dies. 1970. A Dangerous Experiment: 100 Years of Women at the
University of Michigan. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Miller-Bernal, Leslie. 2004. “Coeducation: An Uneven Progression.” In Leslie Miller-Bernal
and Susan L. Poulson, eds., Going Coed: Women’s Experiences in Formerly Men’s Colleges
and Universities, 1950-2000. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press.
Miller-Bernal, Leslie and Susan L. Poulson, eds. 2004. Going Coed: Women’s Experiences in
Formerly Men’s Colleges and Universities, 1950-2000. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University
Press.
Newcomer, Mabel. 1959. A Century of Higher Education for American Women. New York:
Harper and Brothers Publishers.
Oreopoulos, Phillip and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2009. “How Large are Returns to Schooling? Hint:
Money Isn’t Everything.” NBER Working Paper No. 15339, September.
Potts, David B. 1992. Wesleyan University, 1831-1910. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Poulson, Susan. 1995. “From Single-Sex to Coeducation: The Advent of Coeducation at
Georgetown, 1965-1975,” U.S. Catholic Historian (Fall): 117-37.
Radke-Moss, Andrea. 2008. Bright Epoch: Women and Coeducation in the American West.
Lincoln: NE: University of Nebraska
Rosenberg, Rosalind. 1988. “The Limits of Access: The History of Coeducation in America.” In
John Mack Faragher and Florence Howe, eds., Women and Higher Education: Essays from
the Mount Holyoke College Sesquicentennial Symposia. New York: W. W. Norton.
Rossi, Alice S. 1987. “Coeducation in a Gender-Stratified Society.” In Carol Lasser, ed.,
Educating Men and Women Together: Coeducation in a Changing World. Urbana and
Chicago, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -50-

Solomon, Barbara Miller. 1985. In the Company of Educated Women. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Songe, Alice H. 1978. American Universities and Colleges: A Dictionary of Name Changes.
Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press, Inc.
Thomas, M. Carey. 1900. Education of Women. Albany, NY: J.B. Lyon Company.
Turner, Sarah, and William G. Bowen. 1998. “Choice of Major: The Changing (Unchanging)
Gender Gap,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 59 (2): 289-313.
U.S. Office of Education. 1927. Biennial Survey of Education, 1922-24. Bulletin 1926, No. 23.
Washington, D.C.: G.P.O.
U.S. Office of Education. 1937. Biennial Survey of Education, 1932-34. Bulletin 1935, No. 2.
Washington, D.C.: G.P.O.
Woody, Thomas. 1929. A History of Women’s Education in the United States. New York: The
Science Press.

Goldin and Katz, Coeducation -51-

