                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CIGARETTE EXCISE TAXATION:
THE IMPACT OF TAX STRUCTURE ON PRICES, REVENUES, AND CIGARETTE SMOKING

                                       Frank J. Chaloupka, IV
                                            Richard Peck
                                           John A. Tauras
                                               Xin Xu
                                            Ayda Yurekli

                                        Working Paper 16287
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16287


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2010




 We thank the World Health Organization for providing financial support for this research and Frank
 Van-Driessche for providing key data and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
 authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2010 by Frank J. Chaloupka, IV, Richard Peck, John A. Tauras, Xin Xu, and Ayda Yurekli. All
 rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
 permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cigarette Excise Taxation: The Impact of Tax Structure on Prices, Revenues, and Cigarette
Smoking
Frank J. Chaloupka, IV, Richard Peck, John A. Tauras, Xin Xu, and Ayda Yurekli
NBER Working Paper No. 16287
August 2010
JEL No. H2,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

The main purpose of this study is to provide empirical evidence on the effects of the cigarette excise
tax structure on three outcomes: cigarette prices, government revenues, and cigarette consumption.
We composed cross-sectional time-series data for 21 EU countries from year 1998 to 2007 from various
data resources. We provide strong evidence that the price gap between premium and low-priced brands
is larger in countries with a greater share of ad valorem tax. A 10-percent raise in the share of ad valorem
tax in total excise tax leads to about a 4 to 5 percent increase in the price gap, with a smaller impact
in more concentrated markets. Our estimates confirm that greater instability of government tax revenues
from cigarette excise taxes can be attributed to greater reliance on the ad valorem tax and such instability
increases with the growth of manufacturers’ market power. We also find that greater reliance on a
specific tax has greater impact on cigarette smoking, but the impact diminishes with the growth of
manufacturers’ market power.


Frank J. Chaloupka, IV                               Xin Xu
University of Illinois at Chicago                    Institute of Health Research and Policy
Department of Economics (m/c 144)                    University of Illinois at Chicago
College of Liberal Arts and Sciences                 xxu11@uic.edu
601 S. Morgan Street, Room 713
Chicago, IL 60607-7121                               Ayda Yurekli
and NBER                                             World Health Organization
fjc@uic.edu                                          Avenue Appia, 20
                                                     1211 Geneva 27
Richard Peck                                         Switzerland
University of Illinois at Chicago                    yureklia@who.int
Department of Economics (m/c 144)
College of Liberal Arts and Sciences
601 S. Morgan Street, Room 726
Chicago, IL 60607
rmpeck@uic.edu

John A. Tauras
University of Illinois at Chicago
Department of Economics (m/c 144)
College of Liberal Arts and Sciences
601 S. Morgan Street, Room 707
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
tauras@uic.edu
I. Introduction
    Tobacco taxes are the most cost effective tobacco control measure for promoting

smoking cessation, preventing initiation, and reducing consumption.       More than 100

studies from industrialized countries produce consistent evidence that shows that the

higher prices that result from increased tax lead to significant reductions in cigarette

smoking. Most of these studies produce estimates for the price elasticity of demand in

the range from -0.25 to -0.50, implying that a 10% increase in the price of cigarettes will

reduce overall cigarette consumption by between 2.5% and 5.0% (Chaloupka and

Warner, 2000; Chaloupka et al., 2000). A growing number of studies from low and

middle income countries suggest that the same price increase will produce even larger

reductions in consumption (Ross and Chaloupka, 2006).

    Governments impose a variety of taxes on tobacco products, with excise taxes levied

by most countries globally.    The two major excises are specific excise taxes (those

imposed based on quantity or product characteristics) and ad valorem excise taxes (those

imposed based on value). Worldwide, out of 167 countries for which data are available,

60 countries rely solely on specific taxation, 60 on ad valorem, and 48 of them use a

combination of both (the majority of them being in Europe); 19 countries impose no

excise tax on cigarettes (WHO, 2010).

    Given the inelastic demand for tobacco products and the low share of taxes in retail

prices in most countries, increases in tobacco taxes produce sustainable and higher

revenues for the governments. However, the two types of excises can differentially affect



                                                                                              1
prices, revenues and the quality and variety of products available and, as a result,

smoking behavior and its consequences (Sunley et al., 2000; WHO, 2010). The choice

between specific and ad valorem taxes depends on a government’s priorities.

       All European Union countries impose both specific and ad valorem excise taxes

on cigarettes. According to the current European Union council directive (2002/10/CE),

each member state should apply an overall minimum tax (specific tax + ad valorem tax)

of EUR 64 per 1,000 cigarettes for cigarettes of the price category most in demand.

Moreover, the minimum level of total tax should be 57% of retail price (inclusive of all

taxes) for cigarettes of the price category most in demand.

    While many factors affect the final price of cigarettes, the most important

policy-related determinants of tobacco prices are taxes on tobacco products. Tobacco

taxes provide significant revenue to governments with relatively low administrative costs

making tobacco taxes appealing, especially during periods of budget shortfalls.

Moreover, higher tobacco taxes are effective in reducing tobacco consumption and

thereby improving public health. The ability to increase revenues and improve public

health has made tobacco tax increases a popular policy lever to pull in recent decades.

    However, a longstanding debate exists in Europe regarding the harmonization of

cigarette taxes with southern European countries predominantly favoring ad valorem

taxation and northern European countries predominantly favoring a more specific tax

structure (Delipalla and O’Donnell, 2001; Antonanzas and Rodriguez, 2007). The

different tax structures emerge primarily because each country has different fiscal policy


                                                                                             2
objectives with some countries focused more on economic goals and others motivated by

public health and other objectives. The difference in preferred tax structure has hampered

an agreement on harmonization of taxes among EU countries. Evidence on the impacts of

these two types of taxes on cigarette prices, government revenue, and cigarette

consumption will help inform the tax structure debate.

    This paper attempts to inform policy makers on the impact of cigarette tax structure

on the three aforementioned outcomes. We hypothesize that countries that rely more

heavily on ad valorem taxes than specific taxes will have a greater variation in price

between high- and low-priced brands. To the extent that a stronger reliance on ad valorem

tax provides a price advantage to lower-priced domestic brands compared to more

expensive international brands, countries that have a stake in manufacturing and

distributing tobacco would likely prefer ad valorem taxes to specific taxes if one

objective of these taxes is to favor domestic production. We also hypothesize that the

cigarette tax structure will affect the variability of revenue streams over time with

countries that have a greater reliance on ad valorem taxes having greater variability in

revenue streams than countries that rely more heavily on specific taxes due to industry

initiated price changes. Recent evidence from Spain supports this hypothesis. In 2006,

Spain which relies heavily on ad valorem taxes, raised its tobacco tax and witnessed a fall

in tobacco revenues. The unexpected fall in revenues was due to the tobacco producers

reducing the price of their products (Antonanzas and Rodriguez, 2007). Finally, we

hypothesize that the cigarette tax structure will have an impact on overall cigarette


                                                                                           3
consumption. Specifically, we hypothesize that overall cigarette consumption will be less

affected by tax increases in countries that rely more heavily on ad valorem taxes than

specific taxes. If as hypothesized above, countries that rely more heavily on ad valorem

taxes will have a greater variation in price between high- and low-priced brands, then

smokers in heavier ad valorem tax environments will have greater opportunities to switch

down to lower-priced discount brands and thus decrease their overall consumption less

than smokers in relatively lower ad valorem environments. This paper will test the above

mentioned hypotheses using cross-sectional time-series data for twenty-one European

Union (EU) countries for years 1998 to 2007.


II. Background


    Much of the difference in behavioral effects between ad valorem and specific excise

taxes arises because tobacco products are typically available in a wide range of quality

grades. Thus taxes affect consumer decisions about quality and quantity.       A higher tax

may lead consumers to reduce both the quality and the quantity of the cigarettes

consumed. The consumer's decision to lower quality in response to higher taxes is

sometimes referred to as "quality shading". Because of quality shading, specific excise

taxes are a more preferred tobacco control instrument than ad valorem taxes for the

purposes of tobacco control.

     If there are just high quality and low quality cigarettes, then the overall quantity, Q

is the sum of low and high quality cigarettes:



                                                                                               4
              Q=Q1 Q2

If the same specific excise tax T is imposed on both high and low quality cigarettes, the

total revenue collected is

              Tax Revenue = T (Q1 Q2 )

Tax revenue depends on the total amount, high and low quality, purchased and not on the

mix between high and low quality cigarettes. While changes in total quantity can affect

revenue, with a uniform specific excise tax, quality shading has no effect on tax revenue

when total quantity remains constant; this is not true for ad valorem taxes.          Specific

excise taxes also allow tobacco producers less scope to manipulate tax revenues by

altering relative prices.

    For an ad valorem tax, total amount collected is

              Tax Revenue t ( PQ
                               1 1 P2Q2 ) t ( PQ
                                               1 1 P2 (Q Q1 ))

Here, changes in the quality mix alters the amount of revenue, even if total quantity, Q,

remains constant:     A one unit increase in Q1 , holding Q constant, causes revenue to

decline by t ( P1 P2 ) .    If producers alter the mix of prices, P1 and P2 , causing

quantities Q1 and Q2 to change,        tax revenue can vary, even if total quantity remains

unchanged. Our hypothesis that revenues will exhibit more variability with ad valorem

taxes stems from this observation.

    An important determinant of the demand for one good versus another good is relative

price, that is, the ratio P2 / P1 , the price of high quality cigarettes relative to the price of

low quality cigarettes. The effect on relative prices considered here is similar to effect


                                                                                                    5
studied in the "shipping the good apples out" (Hummel and Skiba, 2004).       Ad valorem

and specific excise taxes have very different effects on relative prices.   If the same

specific excise tax T is imposed on high and low quality cigarettes, the relative price falls

and becomes

              ( P2 T ) / ( P1 T ) ;

the relative price of high quality cigarettes has declined which offsets the tendency to

substitute lower quality cigarettes for higher quality cigarettes.   By contrast, a uniform

ad valorem tax leaves relative price unchanged:

              ( P2 (1 t )) / ( P1 (1 t ))   P2 / P1 ,

leading to more substitution away from high priced cigarettes than we would expect to

see with specific excise taxes. This observation supports the other two hypotheses

suggested in the introduction. First, there is greater price variation under ad valorem

taxes because specific excise taxes reduce relative prices. Second, consumption is lower

under specific excise tax regimes because quality shading is attenuated by the reduction

in relative prices, which does not occur with ad valorem taxes.

III. Empirical Specification

    The goal of the empirical analysis is to obtain estimates of the effects of the cigarette

excise tax structure on cigarette prices, consumptions, supply and government revenues.

Specifically, we examine the effects of the tax structure on (a) two cigarette price

variables, annual average cigarette prices and the price gap between premium and

low-priced brands; (b) two government revenue variables, government revenues from


                                                                                              6
excise taxes and the stability of government revenues; (c) two cigarette consumption

variables, cigarette consumptions per capita and the adult smoking prevalence; and (d)

one cigarette supply variable, the total cigarette supply. The multivariate regression

models we used to obtain these estimates are presented in the following sections.

Cigarette Prices

    In this section, we illustrate the empirical specifications exploring the effects of the

tax structure on annual average cigarette prices and the price gap between premium and

low-priced brands.

                   price jt    j    t       X jt    spc jt   1   adv jt   2   v jt (2.1)

In equation (2.1), the average cigarette price in Euros in country j year t ( price jt )

depends on country fixed effects (      j   ) , year fixed effects ( t ) , and time-varying

country-specific economic characteristics denoted by Xjt, such as measures of cigarette

market concentration, real GDP per capita in Euros and unemployment rates. The two

parameters of interest are those associated with specific excise tax rates (spcjt) and ad

valorem tax rates (advjt). We control for the time-varying country-specific economic

characteristics because countries in our samples can differ substantially in these

characteristics that may have significant impacts on cigarette prices and/or excise tax

rates. Country and year fixed effects are included in most specifications so as to control

for permanent differences in cigarette prices across these countries and time-varying

factors that may affect cigarette prices. Equation (2.1) enables us to estimate the effects

of absolute changes in excise tax rates on average cigarette prices.


                                                                                               7
    In addition to exploring the impacts of absolute changes in excise tax rates, we also

adopt an alternative specification to obtain estimates of influences from relative changes

of the ad valorem tax on the price gap between premium and low-priced brands.

                        pricegap jt     ˆj   ˆ   X jt ˆ advp jt ˆ vˆ jt (2.2)
                                             t


In equation (2.2), the price gap between premium and low-priced brands in percentage in

country j year t ( pricegap jt ) is determined by the share of the ad valorem tax in the total

excise tax (advpjt). The share of the ad valorem tax suggests the relative importance of

the ad valorem tax in the total excise tax. It is also a percentage measurement, which is

obtained by dividing the ad valorem tax rates over the total excise tax in Euros.

    Finally, to fully exploit different impacts of the tax structures on the cigarette price

gap across various market concentrations, we further stretch the specification in equation

(2.2) into the following,

          pricegap jt       j    t    X jt   advp jt   1   (advp jt * HHI jt )    2   v jt (2.3)

In equation (2.3), additional to the share of the ad valorem tax in the total excise tax

(advpjt), we also include the interaction terms of the share of the ad valorem tax with

cigarette market concentrations (advp jt * HHI jt ) , which are measured by quartiles of the

Herfindahl -Hirschman Index (HHIjt). In this case, estimates of              2   are able to tell us how

the effects of the tax structure on the price gap would be affected by cigarette

manufactures’ market powers.

Government Excise Tax Revenues




                                                                                                       8
     We also explore the effects of the tax structure on two measures of government

revenues from excise taxes. One is real government revenues in Euros and the other one

is the stability of government revenues, which is indicated by the difference in

government revenues between current and previous years.

                      govrev jt       j    t   X jt   spc jt   1   adv jt   2   v jt (2.4)

     Equation (2.4) presents the empirical model used for real government revenues

( govrev jt ).   1   and   2   in equation (2.4) correspond to the estimated effects of specific and

ad valorem taxes on government revenues from cigarette excise taxes in Euros. In this

case, equation (2.4) is almost identical with equation (2.1) and the only exception is the

dependent variable, where government revenues (govrevjt) are used instead of cigarette

prices ( pricegap jt ).

     The specification investigating the effect of the relative importance of the ad valorem

tax on the government revenue stability ( govrevdiff jt ) is quite different from equation

(2.2). The assumption here is that increases in the relative importance of the ad valorem

tax might raise the instability of government revenues, as cigarette manufactures have

greater potential for abusive “transfer” pricing and cigarette consumers have greater

potential for “switching down” to cheaper brands in such circumstances.

     However, one concern is that increases in excise tax rates themselves might also raise

the instability of government revenues, by increasing the differences in government

revenues between two consecutive years. But such effect of tax changes might be hard to

detect and thus undermine our estimates, if both ad valorem and specific excise taxes


                                                                                                   9
increase by the same proportion. In other words, it is possible that the stability of

government revenues might be affected by the changes in tax rates, while the share of the

ad valorem tax in the total excise tax remains the same.

               govrevdiff jt          ˆj       ˆ     X jt ˆ spcdiff jt ˆ1 advdiff jt ˆ 2
                                               t
                                                                                                           (2.5)
                 spc jt 1 ˆ1 adv jt 1 ˆ2 advp jt ˆ vˆ jt

In order to address this concern, we include additional controls to the specification

presented, changes in excise tax rates between current and previous years (spcdiffjt and

advdiffjt) and excise tax rates in the previous year (spcjt-1 and advjt-1). Therefore, in

equation (2.5), the government revenue stability not only depends on the relative

importance of the ad valorem tax but also relies on the changes in tax rates and excise tax

levels in the previous year, although the latter variables are not what we specifically focus

on in this study.

    Similarly, to explore potential diverse impacts of the tax structures on the stability of

government revenues by various market concentrations, the variable of interest, the share

of the ad valorem tax, is interacted with quartiles of the Herfindahl -Hirschman Index.

This specification is illustrated in equation (2.6).

             govrevdiff jt        j        t       X jt      spcdiff jt   1   advdiff jt       2
                                                                                                            (2.6)
               spc jt   1 1   adv jt   1 2         advp jt   1   (advp jt * HHI jt )       2       vˆ jt



Cigarette Consumptions and Supply




                                                                                                                    10
     This section demonstrates the specifications examining the impacts of the tax

structure on both cigarette consumption and supply, as these specifications are

particularly similar and the only differences are the dependent variables. The dependent

variables involved in these specifications include cigarette consumption per capita, the

adult smoking prevalence and the total cigarette supply.

        cigcon jt / smkpre jt / cigpro jt        j   t    X jt        spc jt   1   adv jt   2      v jt (2.7)

Equation (2.7) presents the basic specifications adopted for cigarette consumptions and

supply. In this empirical model, the cigarette consumption per capita (cigconjt), the adult

smoking prevalence (smkprejt) or the total cigarette supply (cigprojt) in country j year t is

determined by specific tax rates (spcjt) and ad valorem tax rates (advjt), in addition to

other factors.

    Then we take a step further, to investigate the impacts of specific (spcjt) and ad

valorem tax rates (advjt) on cigarette consumption per capita (cigconjt), the adult smoking

prevalence (smkprejt) and the total cigarette supply (cigprojt) by market concentration.

Similar as in equations (2.3) and (2.6), the variables of interest are interacted with

measures of market concentration. But this time, instead of being interacted with the

share of ad valorem tax, quartiles of the Herfindahl -Hirschman Index are interacted with

specific and ad valorem tax rates. A more detailed empirical model is specified in

equation (2.8).

          cigcon jt / smkpre jt / cigpro jt          j        t    X jt
                                                                                                       (2.8)
          spc jt   1   ( spc jt * HHI jt )   1   adv jt   2       (adv jt * HHI jt )    2       v jt


                                                                                                                11
IV. Data and Measures

         In this section, a detailed description of data resources involved and variables

constructed for the purpose of the study are presented. The primary sample for the

empirical analysis was consisted of observations in 21 European Union (EU) countries

from 1998 to 2007. These data were obtained from various sources.1 Cigarette tax

structures and government revenues from cigarette excise taxes came from the European

Commission. Measures of cigarette prices were obtained from the Economist Intelligence

Unit (EIU) and the Tobacco Merchants Association (TMA). Data for cigarette

consumptions and supply came from the ERC Group PLC. Data for country-specific

economic conditions were obtained from the World Economic Outlook published by the

International Monetary Fund (WEO/IMF), and data for market shares of major cigarette

manufacturers of each corresponding EU country came from the TMA. All the monetary

measures in local currencies or U.S. dollars were transformed into Euros in real terms by

using exchange rates and average consumer price indices obtained from the WEO/IMF.

Detailed summary statistics are presented in the next section.

Cigarette Tax Structure

         The information on cigarette excise tax structure of these 21 EU countries from

1998 to 2007 came from the Excise Duty Tables (EDT), which are constructed by the


1
  These 21 countries include Austria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and United
Kingdom.



                                                                                                               12
European Commission.2 These tables were updated at different months of every year. In

each table, the specific excise tax per 1,000 pieces of cigarettes in Euros, the ad valorem

excise tax as the percent of the tax inclusive retail selling price (TIRSP) per 1000 pieces

of cigarettes from the most popular price category (MPPC), and the TIRSP per 1000

pieces of cigarettes from the MPPC were reported. Since the exact dates of implementing

tax regulation changes were unavailable, we generated the annual average specific and ad

valorem excise taxes in Euros for each country in real terms. To measure the relative

importance of the ad valorem tax in the total excise tax of cigarettes, we also constructed

the variable, the share of the ad valorem tax in the total excise tax. This variable was

obtained by dividing the ad valorem tax in Euros by the total excise tax, which is the sum

of both Specific and ad valorem taxes in Euros (i.e. not including VAT).3

Cigarette Prices

     In this study, we adopted two measures of cigarette prices: annual average prices and

the price gap between premium and low-priced brands. The former variable came from

the World Cigarette Guide produced by the TMA, in which the annual average cigarette

prices in U.S. dollars and in the national currency were reported. Using the exchange

rates and the average consumer price index obtained from the WEO/IMF, we generated




2
  For Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia, the tax structure data only
became available after 2003.
3
  Ad valorem tax rates from the EDT were based on the tax inclusive retail selling price (TIRSP) for 1000 pieces of
cigarettes from the most popular price category. Therefore the ad valorem tax in Euros was obtained by multiplying the
tax rates with the TIRSP of the cigarettes from the most popular price category.



                                                                                                                    13
the real annual average retail price of a pack of 20 cigarettes in Euros for each

corresponding EU country from 1998-2007.

     In order to explore the effects of the tax structure on the gap in cigarette prices

between high- and low-priced cigarette brands, the variable, the cigarette price gap, was

constructed by using cigarette prices of the Marlboro brand (or equivalent) and local

brands reported by the EIU. The EIU collected these prices information twice a year at

one or more cities in these 21 EU countries.4 In each survey, the EIU collected cigarette

prices from three survey locations according to their survey intensity, low, middle and

high. All the cigarette prices were reported in local currency units. In this case, we

constructed the semi-annual average prices of the Marlboro brand (or equivalent) and

local cigarette brands in local currency units for each country. These price measures were

obtained as the average prices of three locations within the city if only one city had been

surveyed in the country, or obtained as population weighted average prices if more than

one city of the country had been included in the survey.

     We argue that the price of the Marlboro brand (or equivalent brands) is a reasonable

proxy for that of premium brands, while the price of local brands is also a plausible

substitute for that of the low-priced brands.5 The price gap was obtained by taking price

differences between the Marlboro (or equivalent) brand and the local brands and then


4
  From 1998 to 2003, the survey took place in March and September, while the survey was updated in June and
December from 2004 to 2007.
5
  Among over 97% of our final samples, the prices of Marlboro or equivalent brands are higher or equal to those of
local brands. Among about 86% of our final samples, the prices of Marlboro or equivalent brands are higher than those
of local brands.




                                                                                                                   14
dividing the price difference by the prices of local brands. Therefore the measure of the

price gap was in percentage measurement, rather than in any monetary units.

Government Revenues from Cigarette Excise Tax

     Government revenues from the cigarette excise tax of these 21 EU countries also

came from the EDT tables, which were available from 1998-2007.6,7 Specifically, we

derived two revenue variables, real government revenues from the cigarette excise tax in

Euros and the differences in government revenues between two consecutive years. The

former one was constructed by using government revenues from the cigarette tax in Euros

and the average consumer price index of each corresponding EU country obtained from

the WEO/IMF, while the latter one was obtained by dividing the differences in

government revenues between current and previous years over the government revenue

from the cigarettes excise tax in previous year. So the difference in government revenues

between two consecutive years was also in percentage terms instead of monetary units.

Cigarette Consumption and Supply

     The cigarette consumption and supply information used in this study were obtained

from the World Cigarette Report 2005 presented by ERC Group PLC.8 From the report,

we obtained domestic cigarette production, the amount of cigarette imports and exports of

each corresponding EU country, as well as total cigarette consumption, the cigarette



6
  For Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia, the tax revenue information only
became available after 2003.
7
  The EDT tables published in sequential years might update the government revenue from cigarettes in previous issues.
In this case, we always adopted the latest update.
8
  This information was obtained from the part of Europe and the part of Central and Eastern Europe in the Report.



                                                                                                                   15
consumption per capita, and the adult smoking prevalence from 1998-2004. Specifically,

the adult smoking prevalence was based on the population aged 15 and above. Based on

the information of domestic cigarette production, the amount of cigarette imports and

exports, we constructed the variable, the total cigarette supply, which was obtained by

summing up the domestic production and cigarette imports and subtracting exports.

Market Share Information of Cigarette Manufacturers

     From the World Cigarette Guide, we also obtained the information on market shares

of cigarette manufacturers of each corresponding EU country from 1998 to 2007. Based

on the market share information, we constructed the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)

so as to control for the potential influence of the market structure on cigarette prices

and/or the excise tax structure.9 The HHI is a commonly accepted measure of market

concentration, which is the sum of the squares of the market shares of each individual

manufacturer (each cigarette manufacturer in our case). The HHI increases either as the

number of the cigarette manufacturers in the market decreases or as the disparity in sizes

between those manufacturers increases. Therefore a higher HHI indicates a higher

concentrated (less competitive) market. We also generated a dichotomous variable for the

missing HHI, which equals one if twenty percent or more of the total market share had

not been claimed by any manufacturers in a country. In addition, five HHI indicators

were constructed as an alternative measure of the market concentration to account for the


9
  During the study period 1998-2007, some of EU countries had state-owned tobacco manufacturers (e.g. Italy,
Portugal, Austria). However it is not clear whether the market-structure in these countries was monopoly or not.
Consequently, the HHI captures the market concentration- competitive to monopolistic- structure.



                                                                                                                   16
non-linear effects of the HHI on cigarette related dependent variables. They represented

the first quartile (the least concentrated quartile of the market) of the HHI, the second

quartile, the third quartile, the fourth quartile (the most concentrated quartile of the

market), and the missing category of the HHI.

Country-Specific Economic Conditions

     Data for economic conditions of these countries came from the WEO/IMF. From the

database, we acquired the GDP per capita in U.S. dollars, unemployment rates, and the

average consumer price index from 1998 to 2007 for these 21 EU countries.10 Again, the

GDP per capita in U.S. dollars were converted into real GDP per capita in Euros by using

the exchange rates and the average consumer price index of each corresponding EU

country.


V. Results
     In this section, we present our major findings from the empirical analysis. These

findings are reported in three parts according to the three hypotheses discussed above. In

the first part, we examine how the cigarette tax structure, specifically the balance between

ad valorem and specific excise taxes, affect annual average cigarette prices and the price

gap between premium and low-priced brands. In the second part, we discuss how the

cigarette tax structure affects government revenues from the excise tax and the stability of




10
  Unemployment rates during this time period were not available for Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia.



                                                                                                                  17
the government revenue. In the last part, we present the estimates of the effect of the tax

structure on cigarette smoking.

The Tax structure and Cigarette Prices

    This section discusses the empirical findings on the effects of the tax structure on

annual average cigarette prices and the price gap between premium and low-priced

brands. In general, the estimates suggest that the greater reliance on the ad valorem

excise tax leads to lower average cigarette prices and larger price gaps between premium

and low-priced cigarette brands. In addition, these impacts from the tax structure are

smaller in more concentrated (less competitive) markets. All these findings are consistent

with our hypotheses discussed above. The estimates reported in this section are based on

the annual average prices from the TMA and the cigarette price gaps obtained from the

EIU.

    Table 1 presents summary statistics of the final sample used for the average price

analysis, which suggests that the real annual average prices of these EU countries were

around 4.5 Euros during our sampling period. Table 2 demonstrates summary statistics of

the final sample used for the price gap analysis. On average, the cigarette price of

premium brands was about 20 percent higher than that of low-priced brands. In both

cases, final samples indicate that EU countries generally rely more on the ad valorem

cigarette excise tax, rather than the specific tax. In addition, the market of the cigarette

industry in these EU countries was highly concentrated, with an average HHI of 3,200,




                                                                                               18
which is much higher than the HHI threshold used in the U.S. Department of Justice’s

definition of a highly concentrated marketplace.11

     Table 1: Summary Statistics of Annual Average Cigarette Prices Samples

                      Variables                                                   Mean                 Std. Dev.
Real Annual Average Prices in Euros                                                 4.48                   2.65
Real Specific Excise Tax in Euros (1,000 pieces)*                                  54.87                 217.28
Real ad valorem Excise Tax in Euros (1,000 pieces)*                               261.94                3,179.97
Real GDP per Capita in Euros                                                    28,077.85              12,413.99
Average Consumer Price Index                                                      110.10                  21.29
Country Population (in millions)                                                   50.07                  24.72
Unemployment Rates**                                                                8.01                   2.66
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index                                                       3,181.83               1,732.65
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index Missing Indicator                                        0.13                   0.33
                                          n=168
Notes: Population weighted summary statistics are reported in the table, data are from 1997 to 2008. * The cigarette tax
structure information is not available from 1997-2002 for Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, and Slovenia. ** Unemployment rates are not available for Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia during this time period.

                    Table 2: Summary Statistics of Cigarette Price Gap Samples

                       Variables                                                  Mean                 Std. Dev.
Cigarette Price Gap in Percentage                                                  19.06                  20.11
Specific Tax as % of Total Excise Tax*                                             35.77                  26.43
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax*                                           64.23                  26.43
Real GDP per Capita in Euros                                                    27,547.92              11,624.04
Average Consumer Price Index                                                      109.09                  20.29
Country Population (in millions)                                                   50.78                  24.23
Unemployment Rates**                                                                8.08                   2.69
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index                                                       3,264.51               1,666.77
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index Missing Indicator                                        0.10                   0.30
                                       n=281
Notes: Population weighted summary statistics are reported in the table, data are from 1998 to 2007. * The cigarette tax
structure information is not available from 1997-2002 for Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, and Slovenia. ** Unemployment rates are not available for Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia during this time period.

11
  According to the U.S. Department of Justice, markets in which the HHI is between 1000 and 1800 points are
considered to be moderately concentrated, and those in which the HHI is in excess of 1800 points are considered to be
concentrated. Also available at: http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/public/testimony/hhi.htm



                                                                                                                      19
    The primary estimates of the effects of the tax structure on average cigarette prices

are reported in table 3a and table 3b. In both tables, the estimates in columns 1 and 2

were obtained with the control of unemployment rates, while the results in columns 3 and

4 were estimated without the control of unemployment rates. Since unemployment rates

were always unavailable for 7 EU countries in our sample (Czech Republic, Hungary,

Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia), excluding the control of

unemployment rates leads to a larger number of observations as indicated in columns 3

and 4. The linear specification of the HHI and the HHI missing indicator were adopted in

regression analyses reported in columns 1 and 3, while we relaxed the linear restriction of

the HHI in regression analyses reported in columns 2 and 4, in which the HHI was

measured by five dichotomous variables, one for each quartile of the HHI and another

indicator for the missing category. The real GDP per capita and country fixed effects

were always included in all regressions. However, year fixed effects were only included

in regression analyses presented in Table 3a.

    The estimates in Table 3a suggest that the average price of a pack of 20 cigarettes

would increase for about 0.015-0.02 Euros if the real specific excise tax per 1,000

cigarettes increased by 1 Euro and the real ad valorem fell by 1 Euro. That is to say, the

average price of cigarettes would move at about the same pace as the changes in specific

excise tax. On the other hand, the estimates also suggest that the increases in the real ad

valorem tax might lead to lower average prices. These estimates are consistent with the


                                                                                            20
hypothesis that increases in the ad valorem tax are more likely to lead to “transfer”

pricing.

           Table 3a: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Average Cigarette Prices (I)

                                        TMA Annual Average Prices
COEFFICIENT                             (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)
Real Specific Tax                      0.012                 0.023                0.019                 0.021
                                      (0.021)              (0.020)               (0.019)              (0.015)
Real ad valorem Tax                   -0.001                -0.002               -0.001                -0.001
                                      (0.001)              (0.001)               (0.001)              (0.001)
Unemployment Rates                      Yes                   Yes                  No                    No
HHI + HHI Missing Indicator             Yes                   No                   Yes                   No
HHI Indicators                          No                    Yes                  No                    Yes
Year Fixed Effects                      Yes                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Observations                            135                   135                  168                   168
R-squared                               0.96                 0.97                  0.96                 0.97
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, and country fixed effects. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05, *0.05<p-value<0.10.




       Table 3b: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Average Cigarette Prices (II)

                                        TMA Annual Average Prices
COEFFICIENT                              (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)
Real Specific Tax                      0.030*              0.037**                0.030*              0.034**
                                      (0.015)              (0.014)               (0.015)              (0.013)
Real ad valorem Tax                   -0.002*             -0.002**               -0.002*             -0.002**
                                      (0.001)              (0.001)               (0.001)              (0.001)
Unemployment Rates                       Yes                 Yes                    No                   No
HHI + HHI Missing Indicator              Yes                  No                    Yes                  No
HHI Indicators                           No                  Yes                    No                  Yes
Year Fixed Effects                       No                   No                    No                   No
Observations                             135                 135                    168                 168
R-squared                               0.95                 0.96                  0.96                 0.96
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, and country fixed effects. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05, *0.05<p-value<0.10.




                                                                                                                     21
         Table 4: The Effect of the Tax Structure on the Cigarette Price Gap (I)

                     Price Differences between Premium and Low-Price Brands
COEFFICIENT                                                (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax                  0.701*           0.536           0.262           0.389
                                                         (0.347)         (0.308)         (0.275)         (0.268)
Unemployment Rates                                         Yes             Yes             No              No
HHI + HHI Missing Indicator                                Yes             No              Yes             No
HHI Indicators                                             No              Yes             No              Yes
Observations                                               247             247             281             281
R-squared                                                  0.92            0.92            0.86            0.86
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05, *0.05<p-value<0.10.




         Table 5: The Effect of the Tax Structure on the Cigarette Price Gap (II)

                     Price Differences between Premium and Low-Price Brands
COEFFICIENT                                                                   (1)                      (2)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax                                     1.312                    0.394
                                                                           (1.527)                  (0.279)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax *hhic2                              -0.782                   -0.064
                                                                           (1.473)                  (0.241)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax *hhic3                              -1.081                   -0.032
                                                                           (1.485)                  (0.270)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax *hhic4                              -0.927                   0.071
                                                                           (1.431)                  (0.262)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax *hhic5                              -0.900                   -0.251
                                                                           (1.461)                  (0.280)
Unemployment Rates                                                           Yes                       No
HHI Indicators                                                               Yes                      Yes
Observations                                                                 247                      281
R-squared                                                                    0.93                     0.87
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per



                                                                                                                     22
capita, year and country fixed effects. Hhic1 (the omitted category) represents the first quartile of the HHI (the least
concentrated market), hhic2, hhic3, and hhic4 are second, third and fourth (the most concentrated market) quartile
respectively, and hhic5 denotes the HHI missing category. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05,
*0.05<p-value<0.10.




      The estimates in Table 3a are consistent across all specifications, though they are not

statistically significant. One possible reason for the insignificance is that the year fixed

effects caught up all the variation in tax changes. Therefore, for the estimates in Table 3b,

we left out the control of year fixed effects. The estimates in Table 3b are fairly

consistent with the results in Table 3a and they are all statistically significant. Again, the

evidence in Table 3b confirms that higher specific excise tax increases average cigarette

price, while a higher ad valorem tax as a share of the total tax leads to a lower average

price.

      Table 4 presents the estimates of the effects of the tax structure on the price gap

between the premium and low-priced cigarette brands. The four specifications in this

table are very similar to those in Table 3a, and the only difference is the key independent

variable, the share of the ad valorem tax in the total excise tax was used in this case,

instead of specific and ad valorem taxes in Euros in Table 3a. This means that we are

assuming that the specific excise tax falls when the ad valorem tax increases so that the

total excise tax remains constant. The results in Table 4 provide consistent evidence that

greater reliance on the ad valorem excise tax leads to a larger price gap between the

premium and low-priced cigarette brands and this result is consistent with the conclusions

of previous literature. Specifically, one percentage point increase in the share of ad


                                                                                                                           23
valorem tax would raise the price gap by 0.3-0.7 percentage points. This estimate implies

that a 10-percent raise in the share of ad valorem tax leads to about a 4 to 5 percents

increase in the price gap, on average.

    To further explore the impact of tax structure on the price gap, we included

interaction terms of the share of ad valorem tax and indicators of the market

concentration, the HHI categories. The results are reported in Table 5. The hypothesis

here is that manufacturers in more concentrated (less competitive) markets might benefit

from their monopoly power on cigarette pricing, and thus their prices are less likely to be

affected by the increase in the ad valorem tax. The results in Table 5 provide consistent

evidence to support this hypothesis. Recall that the first quartile of the HHI (hhic1, which

is the omitted group in Table 5) represents the most competitive (least concentrated)

market and the fourth quartile of the HHI (hhic4) represents the most concentrated

market. Table 5 undoubtedly indicates that the impact of the growth in the share of ad

valorem tax on the price gap was much smaller in more concentrated markets, suggesting

that the manufacturers in these markets have the market power to maintain the prices.




The Tax structure and Government Excise Tax Revenues

    This section explores the effect of the tax structure on government revenues from

cigarette consumption (other than VAT) and the stability of this revenue. Given the

evidence presented in the previous section that the higher specific cigarette excise tax as a

share of the total excise tax raises average prices and the higher ad valorem tax as a share


                                                                                           24
of the total excise leads to a lower average price, it is reasonable to make the hypotheses

that, (a) the higher specific tax share would lead to higher government revenues from

cigarettes, while the higher ad valorem tax share might cause a reduction as more

smokers switch down to less expensive cigarettes that generate less tax revenues; (b) as a

result, a country relying more on an ad valorem excise tax might experience larger

variations in government tax revenues from cigarettes as revenues are more subject to

industry-initiated price changes; (c) when the country has a concentrated cigarette

market, the variations in the government revenue might be even greater given the greater

market power of cigarette companies. The evidence presented in this section provides

supporting evidence for these hypotheses. In addition, the estimates presented in this

section are consistent with the conclusion in the previous section. The findings presented

in this section are based on the revenue information provided by the EDT.

    The summary statistics of the final sample used for the investigation are reported in

Table 6. It indicates that the real annual government tax revenue from the cigarette excise

tax was about 7 billion, on average, in these 21 EU countries during this time period and

it increased by about 6 percent per year.

            Table 6: Summary Statistics of Government Revenue Samples

                            Variables                                   Mean      Std. Dev.
Real Government Revenues from Cigarette Tax in Euros (in millions)     7,049.23   4,015.91
Difference in Government Revenues between Current and Previous Years
                                                                         6.17         22.34
(in percentage)
Real Specific Excise Tax in Euros (1,000 pieces)*                       56.57      220.94
Real ad valorem Excise Tax in Euros (1,000 pieces)*                    270.96     3,236.05
Specific Tax as % of Total Excise Tax*                                  35.92       26.74


                                                                                              25
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax*                                                     64.08           26.74
Real GDP per Capita in Euros                                                              28,929.93       11,749.70
Average Consumer Price Index                                                                107.74           13.76
Country Population (in millions)                                                             50.98           24.60
Unemployment Rates**                                                                          8.01            2.66
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index                                                                 3,184.17        1,743.51
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index Missing Indicator                                                  0.13            0.34
                                       n=159
Notes: Population weighted summary statistics are reported in the table, data are from 1998 to 2007. * The cigarette tax
structure information is not available from 1997-2002 for Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, and Slovenia. ** Unemployment rates are not available for Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia during this time period.




             Table 7: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Government Revenue

                               Government Revenues in Euros, Real Term
COEFFICIENT                                     (1)                  (2)                (3)                (4)
Real Specific Tax                             39.871              39.875             25.116             26.528
                                             (65.217)            (63.216)           (53.591)           (52.152)
Real ad valorem Tax                           -2.698               -2.696             -1.703             -1.797
                                              (4.411)             (4.277)            (3.625)            (3.529)
Unemployment Rates                              Yes                 Yes                 No                 No
HHI + HHI Missing Indicator                     Yes                  No                Yes                 No
HHI Indicators                                  No                  Yes                 No                Yes
Observations                                    134                 134                159                159
R-squared                                       0.96               0.96               0.96                0.96
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05, *0.05<p-value<0.10.




     Table 7 presents the estimates on how changes in the specific and ad valorem excise

taxes affect government revenues from the cigarette excise tax in Euros. Estimates from

different specifications are quite consistent, suggesting that increases in the specific tax

would raise government revenues, while increases in the ad valorem tax might reduce the




                                                                                                                      26
revenue. Specifically, a one-Euro increase in the specific excise tax per 1,000 cigarettes

would raise government revenues by 25-40 million. In other words, on average, a 20%

increase in the specific excise tax (about 11 Euros) would raise government revenues

from cigarette consumptions by 4%-6%. In contrast, a one-Euro increase in the ad

valorem excise tax per 1,000 cigarettes would reduce government revenues by 2-2.5

million. That is to say, on average, a 20% increase in the ad valorem excise tax (about 54

Euros) would reduce government revenues from cigarette consumption by 1.5%-2%,

though none of these estimates are statistically significant.

      The rest of the section focuses on the effect of the tax structure on the stability of

government revenues and the cigarette tax structure here is represented by the share of

the ad valorem tax in the total excise tax. The empirical estimates are reported in Tables

8a, 8b and 9.12

     Table 8a: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Government Revenue Stability (I)

            Differences in Government Revenues between Current and Previous Years
COEFFICIENT                                               (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax                  2.916          2.604*           2.741            2.519
                                                        (1.815)         (1.395)         (1.801)          (1.427)
Unemployment Rates                                        Yes             Yes             No               No
HHI + HHI Missing Indicator                               Yes             No              Yes              No
HHI Indicators                                            No              Yes             No               Yes
Changes in Tax                                            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
Tax level in Previous Year                                No              No              No               No
Observations                                              120             120             138              138
R-squared                                                0.32             0.36            0.34            0.38



12
   Because of the availability of the exchange rates, additional controls of indicators of tax changes and excise tax
levels in the previous year are only available from 1999-2007. Therefore, the number of observations in Tables 8a, 8b
and 9 declines, compared to Table 7.



                                                                                                                    27
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05, *0.05<p-value<0.10.




   Table 8b: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Government Revenue Stability (II)

            Differences in Government Revenues between Current and Previous Years
COEFFICIENT                                               (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax                2.696**          2.378**           2.595         2.209**
                                                       (1.141)          (0.809)          (1.491)        (0.949)
Unemployment Rates                                       Yes              Yes              No              No
HHI + HHI Missing Indicator                              Yes               No              Yes             No
HHI Indicators                                            No              Yes              No             Yes
Changes in Tax                                           Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes
Tax level in Previous Year                               Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes
Observations                                             120              120              138            138
R-squared                                                 0.35            0.39            0.37             0.41
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05, *0.05<p-value<0.10.




One concern here is that if ad valorem and specific excise taxes increase by the same

proportion (in this case, the share of the ad valorem tax in the total excise tax would not

change much), the increase in the excise tax itself would raise the difference in the

government revenue between two consecutive years. In order to address this concern, we

included additional controls in the regressions, indicators of tax changes and excise tax

levels in the previous year. Specifically, the estimates reported in Table 8a were obtained



                                                                                                                     28
with the additional controls of tax change indicators, while estimates presented in Table

8b and Table 9 were obtained with all these additional controls, both tax changing

indicators and baseline tax levels.

    The results in Table 8a and Table 8b are consistent with our hypothesis. The positive

association between the importance of the ad valorem tax in the total excise tax and the

variability of government revenues provides strong evidence that the greater reliance on

the ad valorem tax would lead to greater variations in government revenues from

cigarette consumptions. In most of the specifications, these estimated coefficients are

statistically significant. Specifically, if the share of the ad valorem tax in the total excise

tax rose by one percentage point, the variability of the tax revenue would increase by

roughly 2.5 percentage points, which corresponds to a 40% change in revenue variation.

    Similar to what we did in Table 5, we include interaction terms of the share of the ad

valorem tax and the HHI indicators so as to further explore the heterogeneous effects of

tax structures on the stability of government revenues across different market

concentrations. These results are presented in Table 9. Recalling that the omitted HHI

indicator, hhic1, represents the quartile of the most competitive markets and the fourth

indicator, hhic4, stands for the quartile of the most concentrated markets, the positive

coefficients on the interaction terms suggest that such impacts of tax structures on the

government revenue stability are much stronger in more concentrated markets. These

estimates also imply that cigarette manufacturers with stronger monopoly power would

have greater ability in manipulating cigarette prices. More importantly, this conclusion is


                                                                                             29
consistent with our hypothesis and the estimates in the previous section, though the

estimates in Table 9 are not statistically significant. Considering the magnitudes of the

estimates are quite large, one possible reason for insignificant estimates is the sample

size.




Table 9: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Government Revenue Stability (III)

            Differences in Government Revenues between Current and Previous Years
COEFFICIENT                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax                    1.240            1.917            1.993            1.827
                                                          (2.094)          (1.247)          (1.771)          (1.004)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax *hhic2             1.355           -0.176            0.337           -0.172
                                                          (3.042)          (0.135)          (1.686)          (0.109)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax *hhic3             2.566            0.953            1.471            0.849
                                                          (3.066)          (0.755)          (1.273)          (0.761)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax *hhic4             1.238            0.223            0.315            0.162
                                                          (3.035)          (0.256)          (1.644)          (0.211)
ad valorem Tax as % of Total Excise Tax *hhic5             1.652            0.128            0.715            0.203
                                                          (3.120)          (0.083)          (1.651)          (0.191)
Unemployment Rates                                          Yes              No               Yes              No
HHI Indicators                                              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Changes in Tax                                              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Tax level in Previous Year                                  No               No               Yes              Yes
Observations                                                120              138              120              138
R-squared                                                   0.46             0.46             0.46             0.47
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. Hhic1 (the omitted category) represents the first quartile of the HHI (the least
concentrated market), hhic2, hhic3, and hhic4 are second, third and fourth (the most concentrated market) quartile
respectively, and hhic5 denotes the HHI missing category. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05,
*0.05<p-value<0.10.



The Tax structure and Cigarette Smoking




                                                                                                                           30
    This section examines how the cigarette tax structure affects cigarette consumption

and the total supply. Specifically, we empirically test our hypothesis that changes in

cigarette consumption and/or the total cigarette supply would be smaller under a change

in the ad valorem excise tax than under a change of the same magnitude in the specific

excise tax. The underlying rational is that (a) cigarette consumers might have greater

possibility to “switch down” to low-priced brands when facing the increase of the ad

valorem excise tax, as these brands are less affected by such tax changes; (b) cigarette

manufacturers have greater potential to “manipulate” market prices when facing the

increase of the ad valorem excise tax so as to minimize the impact of the tax increase and

(c) the evidence in previous sections of this chapter suggests that this is particularly true

for those firms with monopoly power in the market. Table 10 presents the summary

statistics of the final sample used for the empirical investigation, in which the cigarette

consumption and supply data were obtained from the World Cigarette Report 2005 of the

ERC Group PLC.

        Table 10: Summary Statistics of Cigarette Consumption and Supply

                        Variables                                 Mean          Std. Dev.
Cigarette Consumption Per Capita                                 1,534.30         491.25
Adult Smoking Prevalence (Ages 15+) †                              11.90            5.48
Total Cigarette Supply (in millions) †                          83,016.33       41,263.46
Real Specific Excise Tax in Euros (1,000 pieces)*                  58.21          245.93
Real ad valorem Excise Tax in Euros (1,000 pieces)*               320.75         3,617.21
Real GDP per Capita in Euros                                    25,543.12       10,018.57
Average Consumer Price Index                                      106.46           16.53
Country Population (in millions)                                   50.69           24.56
Unemployment Rates**                                                8.19            2.81
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index                                       3,448.34        1,587.57


                                                                                           31
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index Missing Indicator                                           0.06                 0.24
                                      n=126
Notes: Population weighted summary statistics are reported in the table, data are from 1998 to 2005. * The cigarette tax
structure information is not available from 1997-2002 for Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, and Slovenia. ** Unemployment rates are not available for Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia during this time period. † The variable has some missing values.




     Unlike other samples, the data on consumption and supply were only available from

1998 to 2005. We have two measures of cigarette consumptions. One is on the intensive

margin, the cigarette consumption per capita, and the other one is on the extensive

margin, the adult smoking prevalence. The total supply was obtained by summing up the

domestic production and cigarette imports and subtracting exports. As indicated in Table

10, the average cigarette consumption per capita in these EU countries was about 1,500

pieces per year during this time period, which corresponded to 4 cigarettes a day. The

adult smoking prevalence, which is defined as the smoking prevalence among the

population aged 15 or above, was around 12 percent. The annual average cigarette supply

among these EU countries was roughly 83,000 million pieces per year, equivalent to 230

million per day.

     Table 11 presents primary estimates of the effect of the tax structure on the

consumption per capita, the intensive margin of cigarette consumption. The estimates are

robust across different specifications and all of them are highly significant at 1 percent

level. These results suggest that the annual cigarette consumption per capita would

decline by 7-8 pieces, if the real specific excise tax per 1,000 pieces rose by 1 Euro. That




                                                                                                                      32
is to say, a 10-Euro increase (a 17% increase) in the specific tax would reduce cigarette

consumption by about 5%. On the other hand, the annual cigarette consumption per

capita would rise by about one half cigarette, if the real ad valorem excise tax per 1,000

pieces rose by 1 Euro. The increase in the consumption associated with ad valorem tax

         Table 11: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Cigarette Consumption (I)

                                      Cigarette Consumption Per Capita
COEFFICIENT                                   (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)
Real Specific Tax                         -6.855***            -6.996***           -7.210***            -8.138***
                                            (1.398)              (1.274)             (1.282)              (1.541)
Real ad valorem Tax                        0.463***             0.471***            0.487***             0.548***
                                            (0.094)              (0.086)             (0.086)              (0.104)
Unemployment Rates                            Yes                  Yes                 No                   No
HHI + HHI Missing Indicator                   Yes                  No                  Yes                  No
HHI Indicators                                No                   Yes                 No                   Yes
Observations                                  107                  107                 126                  126
R-squared                                    0.98                 0.98                 0.98                 0.98
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05, *0.05<p-value<0.10.




        Table 12: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Cigarette Consumption (II)

                                                                Cigarette Consumption Per Capita


COEFFICIENT                                                       (1)                                (2)
Real Specific Tax                                            -71.845***                          -65.612**
                                                               (19.577)                           (18.952)
Real Specific Tax *hhic2                                      69.973***                           61.862**
                                                               (19.361)                           (17.915)
Real Specific Tax *hhic3                                      71.207***                          63.603***
                                                               (18.768)                           (17.474)
Real Specific Tax *hhic4                                      58.922**                            53.483**
                                                               (20.950)                           (19.383)
Real Specific Tax *hhic5                                      70.165***                           60.142**
                                                               (19.706)                           (17.667)


                                                                                                                     33
Real ad valorem Tax                                               4.853***                            4.431**
                                                                   (1.322)                             (1.280)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic2                                       -9.149***                           -6.891***
                                                                   (2.514)                             (1.642)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic3                                      -10.028***                           -8.665***
                                                                   (2.221)                             (2.087)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic4                                      -24.190***                          -15.170***
                                                                   (2.394)                             (2.251)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic5                                      -19.578***                          -18.069***
                                                                   (3.784)                             (4.312)
Unemployment Rates                                                   Yes                                 No
HHI Indicators                                                       Yes                                 Yes
Observations                                                         107                                 126
R-squared                                                           0.99                                0.99
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. Hhic1 (the omitted category) represents the first quartile of the HHI (the least
concentrated market), hhic2, hhic3, and hhic4 are second, third and fourth (the most concentrated market) quartile
respectively, and hhic5 denotes the HHI missing category. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05,
*0.05<p-value<0.10.



increase might be because smokers have to consume more cigarettes in order to achieve

the same satisfaction, when they “switch down” to low-priced brands. However, the

magnitudes of these estimates are very small. A similar 10-Euro increase in the ad

valorem tax would only raise the cigarette consumption by 0.3%.

      Further, Table 12 explores the heterogeneous effects of the tax structure on the

cigarette consumption per capita across different market concentrations. Again, the

estimates are statistically significant and robust across different specifications. In the

most competitive market, the increase in the specific excise tax has the strongest impact

on the cigarette consumption. Specifically, one Euro increase in the specific tax of 1,000

pieces would reduce the consumption per capita by 5%. However, such impacts on the



                                                                                                                           34
consumption diminish with the increase of the market concentration. This phenomenon is

consistent with the idea that the burden of a tax increase will be increasingly shared by

cigarette manufacturers in more concentrated markets. Another potential explanation is

that the cigarette manufacturers in more concentrated markets might be willing to invest

more in other mediators, rather than price alone, to moderate the negative impact of tax

increases on sales, for example spending more on advertisement.

    Similarly, the effect of the ad valorem tax on the cigarette consumption we found in

Table 11 is more pronounced in the most competitive market and declines in more

concentrated markets. Actually, in more concentrated markets, increases in the ad

valorem tax would reduce cigarette consumption at the intensive margin. For example, in

the most concentrated markets (the last quartile of the HHI), cigarette consumption per

capita would fall by 0.5-1%, if the ad valorem tax per 1,000 pieces increased by 1 Euro.

These estimates are consistent with our previous finding that the price gap between

premium and low-priced brands is much smaller in more concentrated markets, which

implies that consumers have limited choices in their “switching down” responses.

         Table 13: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Smoking Prevalence (I)

                                 Adult Smoking Prevalence
COEFFICIENT                        (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
Real Specific Tax                 0.004           0.004           0.002            0.001
                                 (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.005)         (0.004)
Real ad valorem Tax              -0.000          -0.000          -0.000           -0.000
                                 (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
Unemployment Rates                 Yes             Yes             No               No
HHI + HHI Missing Indicator        Yes             No              Yes              No
HHI Indicators                     No              Yes             No               Yes



                                                                                            35
Observations                                  88                   88                  100                   100
R-squared                                    1.00                 1.00                 1.00                  1.00
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05, *0.05<p-value<0.10.




     The estimated effects of the tax structure on adult smoking prevalence are reported in

Tables 13 and 14. In both tables, the magnitude of these estimated coefficients is tiny and

all of them are insignificant. The potential reasons might be associated with the facts that

the sample size is too small and the changes in tax rates during this time period are not

large enough to generate substantial changes in the smoking prevalence.

          Table 14: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Smoking Prevalence (II)

                                                                     Adult Smoking Prevalence


COEFFICIENT                                                        (1)                                (2)
Real Specific Tax                                                 0.003                             0.013
                                                                (0.050)                            (0.042)
Real Specific Tax *hhic2                                          0.009                             -0.008
                                                                (0.057)                            (0.041)
Real Specific Tax *hhic3                                          0.008                             -0.008
                                                                (0.056)                            (0.041)
Real Specific Tax *hhic4                                         -0.005                             -0.013
                                                                (0.055)                            (0.046)
Real Specific Tax *hhic5                                          0.011                             -0.009
                                                                (0.059)                            (0.040)
Real ad valorem Tax                                              -0.000                             -0.001
                                                                (0.003)                            (0.003)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic2                                       -0.008                             -0.003
                                                                (0.020)                            (0.006)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic3                                       -0.012                             -0.007
                                                                (0.017)                            (0.005)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic4                                       -0.031                             -0.023
                                                                (0.023)                            (0.018)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic5                                       -0.022                             -0.014


                                                                                                                     36
                                                                  (0.019)                             (0.008)
Unemployment Rates                                                  Yes                                 No
HHI Indicators                                                      Yes                                 Yes
Observations                                                        88                                  100
R-squared                                                           1.00                                1.00
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. Hhic1 (the omitted category) represents the first quartile of the HHI (the least
concentrated market), hhic2, hhic3, and hhic4 are second, third and fourth (the most concentrated market) quartile
respectively, and hhic5 denotes the HHI missing category. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05,
*0.05<p-value<0.10.




                                                                                                                           37
             Table 15: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Cigarette Supply (I)
                         Total Cigarette Supply (Production + Imports - Exports)
COEFFICIENT                                   (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)
Real Specific Tax                         -598.553*            -532.785            -677.158**           -689.195**
                                          (283.141)            (288.738)            (252.636)            (241.302)
Real ad valorem Tax                        40.303*               35.921             45.596**             46.445**
                                           (19.097)             (19.488)             (17.047)             (16.289)
Unemployment Rates                           Yes                  Yes                   No                   No
HHI + HHI Missing Indicator                  Yes                   No                  Yes                   No
HHI Indicators                                No                  Yes                   No                  Yes
Observations                                  91                   91                  102                  102
R-squared                                    0.97                 0.98                 0.98                  0.98
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05, *0.05<p-value<0.10.




     Tables 15 and 16 demonstrate the effects of the tax structure on the total cigarette

supply. These estimates are consistent both internally and externally. Internally, the

estimates are robust across different specifications, while externally, the results presented

in these two tables are consistent with the findings in cigarette consumption. Specifically,

increases in the specific excise tax would also reduce total cigarette supply, while the ad

valorem tax increase might lead to a slight increase in the supply. For example, the

estimates in Table 15 indicate that the total supply would fall by 7% in general if the

specific tax per 1,000 pieces increased by 10 Euros, while a 10-Euro increase in the ad

valorem tax would raise the supply by 0.5%. In both cases, the estimated effect is very

analogous to our findings in cigarette consumptions. More importantly, Table 16 also

suggests that the effect of tax increases disappear as the degree of market concentration

increases. Again the results are consistent with our findings in the consumption in



                                                                                                                     38
magnitude. In the most competitive markets (the first quartile of the HHI), one Euro

increase in the specific tax per 1,000 pieces would reduce the total supply by 5% and a

same increase in the ad valorem tax would increase the supply by about 0.3%.

      Table 16: The Effect of the Tax Structure on Cigarette Supply (II)

                   Total Cigarette Supply (Domestic Production + Imports - Exports)
COEFFICIENT                                                           (1)                                  (2)
Real Specific Tax                                              -4,211.856**                         -3,712.677**
                                                                (1,162.348)                          (1,208.391)
Real Specific Tax *hhic2                                       3,871.975**                           3,168.270**
                                                                (1,228.248)                          (1,240.577)
Real Specific Tax *hhic3                                       3,997.072**                           3,283.024**
                                                                (1,218.787)                          (1,223.332)
Real Specific Tax *hhic4                                       3,782.351**                           3,327.439**
                                                                (1,295.324)                          (1,266.974)
Real Specific Tax *hhic5                                       3,731.409**                            2,983.934*
                                                                (1,258.010)                          (1,235.337)
Real ad valorem Tax                                              284.503**                            250.709**
                                                                   (78.515)                             (81.639)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic2                                         -808.237                             -414.033
                                                                  (658.362)                            (290.363)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic3                                         -284.145                              51.633
                                                                  (547.281)                            (161.345)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic4                                         -621.655                             -456.857
                                                                  (398.294)                            (244.641)
Real ad valorem Tax *hhic5                                       -1,085.119                             -654.750
                                                                  (635.932)                            (404.613)
Unemployment Rates                                                   Yes                                   No
HHI Indicators                                                       Yes                                  Yes
Observations                                                          91                                  102
R-squared                                                           0.99                                 0.99
Notes: Standard errors assuming that observations are not independent within year are reported in parentheses. All
models are estimated using country population as analytical weights. All models also include controls of real GDP per
capita, year and country fixed effects. Hhic1 (the omitted category) represents the first quartile of the HHI (the least
concentrated market), hhic2, hhic3, and hhic4 are second, third and fourth (the most concentrated market) quartile
respectively, and hhic5 denotes the HHI missing category. *** p-value<0.01, ** 0.01<p-value<0.05,
*0.05<p-value<0.10.




                                                                                                                           39
VI. Conclusions

    The main purpose of this study is to provide empirical evidence to policy makers on

the effects of the cigarette excise tax structure on three outcomes: cigarette prices,

government revenues, and cigarette consumption. Specifically, we examined three

hypotheses in this study, (a) countries that have greater reliance on ad valorem taxes

would have a larger price gap between premium and low-priced brands; (b) countries

with greater reliance on ad valorem taxes would experience greater variability in

government revenue streams than countries that rely more heavily on specific taxes, and

finally (c) cigarette consumption would be less affected by an increase in an ad valorem

excise tax than by a comparable increase in a specific excise tax. In addition, we also

explored these hypotheses by market concentrations of cigarette industries, as

manufacturers with strong market power might have substantial influence on the efficacy

of the tax policy.

    Empirically, we composed cross-sectional time-series data for 21 EU countries from

1998 to 2007 from various data sources. Our results are robust across different

specifications and consistent with our hypotheses. We provide strong evidence that the

price gap between premium and low-priced brands is larger in countries with a greater

share of ad valorem tax. A 10-percent raise in the share of ad valorem tax leads to about a

4 to 5 percent increase in the price gap, with a smaller impact change in more

concentrated markets. Our estimates confirm that greater instability of government tax

revenues from cigarette excise taxes can be attributed to greater reliance on the ad


                                                                                           40
valorem tax and such instability rises with the growth of manufacturers’ market power.

We also find that greater reliance on a specific tax has greater impact on cigarette

smoking, but the impact diminishes with the growth of manufacturers’ market power.

    In sum, we conclude that the specific excise tax on cigarettes, compared to the ad

valorem tax, is a more efficient policy device to achieve fiscal policy, as well as public

health objectives. The specific excise tax, however, is more likely to be affected by

inflation. So regular or automatic adjustment might be necessary. As manufacturers’

market power and cigarette consumers’ behavior responses play an important role on the

efficacy of the regulation, a balanced tax structure on all tobacco products and

complementary policies to reduce price manipulation would greatly facilitate the

procedure.




                                                                                             41
References:


Antoñanzas, F. and Rodríguez, R. (2007) Tobacco Policies in the European Union: Need
for State and Continental Harmonisation? European Journal of Health Economics 8(4):
301-4.

Delipalla, S. and O'Donnell, O. (2001) Estimating Tax Incidence, Market Power and
Market Conduct: the European Cigarette Industry. International Journal of Industrial

Organization 19: 885–908.


Chaloupka, F.J. and Warner, K.E. (2000) The Economics of Smoking. In: Handbook of
Health Economics, edited by A.J, Culyer and J.P. Newhouse. Amsterdam, the
Netherlands: Elsevier Science, 1539-1627.

Chaloupka, F.J., Hu T-W., Warner, K.E., et al. (2000) The Taxation of Tobacco Products.
In: Jha, P. and Chaloupka, F.J. eds. Tobacco Control in Developing Countries. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. 237-72.

Ezzati, M and Lopez, A. (2003) Estimates of Global Mortality Attributable to Smoking in
2000. Lancet 362: 847-52.

Hummels D., Skiba A., (2004) Shipping the Good Apples Out? An Empirical
Conformation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture. Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112
(6), page 1384-1402

Jha, P, Chaloupka, F.J., Moore, J.A., et al. (2006) Tobacco Addiction. In: Jamison D.,
Alleyne G.A., Bremen J.E., et al., eds. Disease Control Priorities in Developing
countries, 2nd edition. New York: Oxford University Press, 2006: 869-95.

Ross H, Chaloupka FJ. (2006) Economic policies for tobacco control in developing
countries. Salud Publica Mex. 2006;48 Suppl 1:S113-20.

Sunley, Emil M., Ayda Yurekli, and Frank Chaloupka. (2000) The Design,
Administration, and Potential Revenue of Tobacco Excises: A Guide for Developing and
Transition Countries. In: Jha, P. and Chaloupka, F.J. eds. Tobacco Control in
Developing Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 409-426.

WHO (2010), Technical Manual on Tobacco Tax Administration. World Health
Organization, Geneva.



                                                                                         42
