NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MARKET FOR BORROWING CORPORATE BONDS
Paul Asquith
Andrea S. Au
Thomas R. Covert
Parag A. Pathak
Working Paper 16282
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16282

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2010

We thank seminar participants at the JACF Conference in Honor of Stew Myers, the Harvard Finance
lunch, Talinn Demirjian and Jeri Seidman for comments. In addition, we are grateful to Sharat Alankar,
Joseph Keith, Ted Keith, Patrick Sissman, and Caroline Hane-Weijman for research assistance. We
also thank a number of practitioners for answering our questions about how this market works. Finally,
we thank the Q Group for their financial support. The views and opinions expressed do not necessarily
reflect those of State Street Corporation or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Paul Asquith, Andrea S. Au, Thomas R. Covert, and Parag A. Pathak. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Market for Borrowing Corporate Bonds
Paul Asquith, Andrea S. Au, Thomas R. Covert, and Parag A. Pathak
NBER Working Paper No. 16282
August 2010
JEL No. G12,G14
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the market for borrowing corporate bonds using a comprehensive dataset from
a major lender. The cost of borrowing corporate bonds is comparable to the cost of borrowing stock,
between 10 and 20 basis points per year. Factors that increase borrowing costs are loan size, percentage
of inventory lent, rating, and borrower identity. Trading strategies based on cost or amount of borrowing
do not yield excess returns. Bonds with corresponding CDS contracts are more actively lent than those
without. Finally, the 2007 Credit Crunch did not affect average borrowing cost or loan volume, but
increased borrowing cost variance.

Paul Asquith
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-660
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
pasquith@mit.edu
Andrea S. Au
Massachusetss Institute of Technology
andreau@alum.mit.edu

Thomas R. Covert
Harvard Business School
tcovert@hbs.edu
Parag A. Pathak
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
E52-391C
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
ppathak@mit.edu

1. Introduction
Short selling, where feasible, is an important activity in many asset markets. Constraints
on short selling may lead to mis-valuation because they limit the ability of some market
participants to influence prices. These constraints include various institutional or legal
prohibitions on taking short positions as well as the additional costs and risks associated with
short selling. There is a large theoretical literature on short sale constraints and their impact on
asset prices. The empirical literature on short sales, while also large, has focused almost
exclusively on stocks.
In this paper, we analyze the market for borrowing and shorting corporate bonds. The
corporate bond market is one of the largest over-the-counter (OTC) financial markets in the
world. Between 2004 and 2007, the time period of our study, the value of outstanding corporate
debt averaged slightly over $6 trillion and, according to the Securities Industry and Financial
Market Association (SIFMA), trading activity averaged $17.3 billion per day.
Our analysis of shorting corporate bonds allows us to determine if the empirical findings
on shorting stocks are present in other markets. In addition, unlike stocks, where borrowing
takes place in an OTC market and short selling takes place on an exchange, both borrowing and
shorting activities take place OTC in the corporate bond market. Thus, any effects of short sale
constraints may be amplified in the bond market.
A major issue in the study of any OTC market is the availability of data. Unlike stock
short positions, which are reported monthly by the stock exchanges (the NYSE reports bimonthly beginning September 2007), bond shorting is not regularly reported. In addition, while
a number of studies have access to proprietary databases of stock lending for short periods (e.g.,
D’avolio 2002; Geczy, Musto, Reed 2005), comparable analyses of bond lending do not exist,
with the exception of Nashikkar and Pedersen (2007).
This paper uses a large proprietary database of corporate bond loan transactions from a
major depository institution for the four year period, January 1, 2004 through December 31,
2007. Although our data is only from one lender, the size and coverage of our database allows
us to study the functioning of a relatively opaque, yet large market. Our lender’s par value of
loanable bond inventory averages $193 billion daily and accounts for 2.9% of the overall par
value of outstanding corporate bonds listed by the Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD).

3

From this inventory, our lender loans an average daily par value of $14.3 billion and 64.4% of
bonds which appear in inventory are lent out at some point during our time period 2004-2007.
Our paper uses this database to examine three primary hypotheses about the market for
borrowing corporate bonds. The first is whether the market for borrowing corporate bonds has
higher costs and lower liquidity than the market for borrowing stock. It does not. The borrowing
costs for corporate bonds are usually low and linked to the costs of borrowing stock. In addition,
we estimate that shorting represents 19.1% of corporate bond trades. The second hypothesis is
whether bond shorting is motivated by investors possessing private information. The evidence is
that it is not and bond short sellers do not earn excess returns on average. The third primary
hypothesis we examine is whether bond borrowing activity is affected by the credit default swap
(CDS) market. While it appears that bond shorting and CDS issuance are correlated, bond short
selling has not been replaced by the growth of CDS.
In our database, the mean and median annual borrowing cost, equally-weighted by loan,
are 33 and 18 basis points (bps) for the entire sample period. By 2007, these rates fall to 19 and
13 bps, respectively. This drop is largely because bond loans under 100 bonds have much higher
borrowing costs in the early part of our sample, but are almost identical to bond loans over 100
bonds by the end of our sample. This change occurs in April 2006.
Borrowing costs are related to several factors other than loan size. Three significant
factors are on-loan percentage, which is the fraction of the lender’s inventory already lent, the
bond’s credit rating, and the identity of the borrowing broker. Borrowing costs remain flat until
on-loan percentage reaches approximately 70% and then rise sharply. Lower rated bonds have
higher borrowing costs, and borrowing costs jump at ratings downgrades and bankruptcy filings.
Finally, while our lender lends to 65 brokers, a select few borrow at significantly lower rates.
We also investigate the linkage between borrowing corporate bonds and stocks. Since
our lender has a significant market share of stock shorting, we construct a matched sample of
corporate bonds and stock loans for the same firms. The costs of borrowing the two securities are
usually quite close and 60.1% of matched loans are within 10 bps of each other. When the
borrowing costs of matched loans are not close, the stock is usually more expensive to borrow
than the bond.
We next study whether bond short sellers have private information. Trading strategies
that short portfolios of bonds with a high on loan percentage or with high borrowing costs do not

4

outperform the market portfolio of corporate bonds. In addition, using the beginning and ending
dates of bond loans in our database to mimic the actual positions of bond short sellers, does not
generate positive excess returns.
Credit default swap (CDS) contracts provide an alternative means for investors to profit
from price declines in corporate bonds. This motivates our third hypothesis of whether CDS
activity impacts bond borrowing. Almost half of our shorted bonds also have CDS contracts
available, but these bonds are more actively shorted than those that do not and they represent
over three quarters of our loans. Moreover, borrowing costs of bonds with CDS contracts are
higher than those without; one basis point higher on average and slightly more than two bps
higher adjusting for cross-sectional characteristics in our regression analysis.
The Credit Crunch of 2007 began in the second half of that year. In this period,
borrowing costs became more volatile, primarily because of variability in the credit market.
However, the volume of bond shorting remained stable, as did the average level of borrowing
costs. In addition, the average returns to shorting bonds did not change.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related
literature. Section 3 describes the mechanics of shorting a bond and estimates the market’s size.
Section 4 describes our data sample, Section 5 describes the costs of borrowing, and Section 6
examines the relationship between bond and stock shorting costs. Section 7 examines the
performance of bond short sellers. The next two sections consider how corporate bond shorting
relates to the CDS market and whether it was impacted by the Credit Crunch of 2007. Finally,
Section 10 outlines some implications of our results and concludes.
2. Related Literature
The theoretical literature on the effects of short sale constraints on asset prices is
extensive. One modeling approach examines the implications of heterogeneous investor beliefs
in the presence of short sale constraints and whether this causes mis-valuation. Miller (1977)
argues that short sale constraints keep more pessimistic investors from participating in the
market, so market prices reflect only optimists’ valuations (see also Lintner 1971). Harrison and
Kreps (1978) consider a dynamic environment and provide conditions where short sale
constraints can drive the price above the valuation of even the most optimistic investor. More
recent contributions include Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002) who relate differences of opinion

5

between optimists and pessimists to measures of stock ownership, and Fostel and Geanokoplos
(2008), who consider the additional effects of collateral constraints.
Another approach to studying the effects of short sale constraints focuses on search and
bargaining frictions because investors must first locate securities to short (Duffie 1996, Duffie,
Garleanu, and Pedersen 2002). Finally, there is theoretical literature in the rational expectations
tradition, which examines how short sale constraints can impede the informativeness of prices
(see Diamond and Verrechia 1987, and Bai, Chang, and Wang 2006).
The empirical literature on short sale constraints focuses almost entirely on stocks. An
early strand of this literature examines the information content of short interest (see Asquith and
Meulbroek 1995). This literature advanced in two directions as richer data sets became
available. The first direction examines daily quantities of short sales by observing transactions
either from proprietary order data (Boehmer, Jones and Zhang 2008) or from Regulation SHO
data (Diether, Lee, Werner, and Zhang 2009). Both papers find that short sellers possess private
information and that trading strategies based on observing their trades generate abnormal returns.
The second direction in this literature examines the direct cost (or price) of borrowing
stocks. These papers either use data from a unique time period when the market for borrowing
stocks was public (Jones and Lamont 2002) or proprietary data from stock lenders (D’avolio
2001, Geczy, Musto, Reed 2002, and Ofek et. al 2004). Jones and Lamont (2002) and Ofek et. al.
(2004) find that stocks with abnormally high rebate rates have lower subsequent returns, while
Geczy et. al. (2002) find that the higher borrowing costs do not eliminate abnormal returns from
various short selling strategies. D’avolio (2001) and the other three papers find that only a small
number of stocks are expensive to borrow.
A challenge identified in this literature is that short interest is a quantity and borrowing
costs are a price, both of which are simultaneously determined by shorting demand and the
supply of shares available to short. A high borrowing cost may indicate either a high shorting
demand or a limited supply of shares available to short. As a result, some researchers have
constructed proxies for demand and supply and have tried to isolate shifts in either demand or
supply. Asquith, Pathak, and Ritter (2005) use institutional ownership as a proxy for the supply
of shares available for shorting and find that stocks that have high short interest and low levels of
institutional ownership significantly underperform the market on an equally-weighted basis, but
not on a value-weighted basis. Using richer, proprietary loan-level data, Cohen, Diether and

6

Malloy (2007) examine shifts in the demand for shorting, and find that an increase in shorting
demand indicates negative abnormal returns for the stocks being shorted. Both papers highlight
that their results only apply to a small fraction of outstanding stocks.
The only paper on corporate bond market shorting is Nashikkar and Pedersen (2007),
who describe a proprietary dataset from a corporate bond lender between September 2005 and
June 2006. Their examination of the cross-sectional determinants of borrowing costs
complements ours, although we examine additional determinants of bond borrowing costs such
as borrower identity. Furthermore, our longer time period allows us to examine several timeseries patterns, such as the existence and disappearance of bimodality in the distribution of
borrowing costs and the 2007 Credit Crunch. Finally, we examine the profitability of short
selling corporate bonds and the relationship between bond and stock shorting.
Our paper is also related to the literature which describes the transactions costs and price
impact of trading corporate bonds. Bessembinder, Maxwell, and Venkataraman (2008) develop
a model to test the effect of public transaction reporting on trade execution costs and Edwards,
Harris, and Piwowar (2007) describe transaction costs in the corporate bond market using the
TRACE dataset. That literature finds that transaction costs are higher for bonds than for stocks,
but decrease significantly with trade size. It also finds bonds that are highly rated and recently
issued have lower transactions costs. Using borrowing costs, not transaction costs, we find that
bonds and stocks have similar borrowing costs, but that size and rating do have an effect.
3. Shorting a Corporate Bond: Mechanics and Market Size
The primary purpose of borrowing a corporate bond is to facilitate a short sale of that
bond. Aside from market making activities, investors short bonds for the same reason they short
stocks: to bet that the security will decline in price. Usually, these bets involve views about the
particular credit quality of a corporate bond, rather than views about overall future interest rate
movements. Government bonds allow an investor to take a position solely on the market
movement of interest rates, so we expect that investors who believe interest rates will rise prefer
to short government bonds rather than corporate bonds. Corporate bond shorting may also be
part of an arbitrage strategy involving relative mis-valuations, such as trades related to the capital
structure of a particular firm or trades related to CDS-corporate bond mis-valuations. In
addition, corporate bonds may be borrowed short term to facilitate clearing of long trades in the
presence of temporary frictions in the delivery process.

7

The mechanics of shorting corporate bonds parallel those of shorting stocks. Shorted
bonds must first be located and then borrowed. The investor has three days to locate the bonds
after placing a short order. Investors usually borrow bonds through an intermediary such as a
depository bank. Such banks serve as custodians for financial securities and pay depositors a fee
in exchange for the right to lend out securities. The borrower must post collateral of 102% of the
market value of the borrowed bond, which is re-valued each day. Loans are typically
collateralized with cash although US Treasuries may also be used. In our sample, 99.6% of lent
bonds are collateralized by cash. Investors subject to Federal Reserve Regulation T must post an
additional 50% in margin, a requirement that can be satisfied with any security. The loan is “ondemand” meaning that the lender of the security may recall it at any time. Hence, most loans are
effectively rolled over each night, and there is very little term lending.
The fee that the borrower pays for the bond loan is expressed in terms of a rebate rate.
This is the interest rate that is returned by the lender of the security for the use of the collateral.
For example, if the parties agree to a bond loan fee of 20 bps, and the current market rate for
collateral is 100 bps, then the lender of the corporate bond returns, or “rebates”, 80 bps back to
the borrower undertaking the short position. There can be great variability in the rebate rate for
the same bond even on the same day. It is even possible that the rebate rate is negative, which
means the borrower receives no rebate on their collateral and has to pay the lender. Finally, if a
bond makes coupon payments or has other distributions, the borrower is responsible for making
these payments back to the owner of the security.
There is limited information about the size of the markets for shorting any security. For
stocks, all three major stock exchanges release short interest statistics once monthly.1 Short
interest is the number of shares shorted at a particular point in time. After dividing by total
number of shares outstanding, short interest is often represented as a percentage. In addition,
daily stock shorting information is available from January 2005 through July 2007 when
Regulation SHO was in effect. Regulation SHO required all exchanges to mark stock trades as
long or short. This is no longer the case.
To estimate the size of the market for shorting stocks, most researchers first examine
stock short interest statistics released by the exchanges. Asquith, Pathak, and Ritter (2005)
report that in 2002 the equally-weighted average short interest for stocks is approximately 2.4%
1

As mentioned above, the NYSE reports bi-monthly beginning September 2007.

8

for the NYSE and AMEX combined, and 2.5% for the NASDAQ-NMS. Using Regulation SHO
data, Diether, Lee, and Werner (2007) find that short sales represent 31% of share volume for
NASDAQ-listed stocks and 24% of share volume for NYSE-listed stocks in 2005. Asquith, Au,
and Pathak (2006) report that short sales represent 29.8% of all stock trades on the NYSE,
AMEX, and NASDAQ-NMS exchanges during the entire SHO period.2 Since bonds primarily
trade OTC, comparable information on short interest does not exist and Regulation SHO did not
apply.
To estimate the size of the market for shorting corporate bonds, we assume that our
proprietary lender’s share of the bond shorting market is identical to their share of the stock
shorting market. Asquith, Au, and Pathak (2006) report that our proprietary lender lent 16.7% of
all stocks shorted on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ-NMS markets during the SHO period.
From Table 1, discussed below, the average daily par value of the bonds on loan by our
proprietary lender is $14.3 billion. This measure is comparable to short interest, i.e. it is the daily
average par value of bonds shorted over our sample period. If we assume that our lender
represents 16.7% of the bonds lent, then total bonds lent on an average day is $85.6 billion. This
is 1.3% of the par value of the average amount of corporate bonds outstanding as reported from
the FISD database discussed below. Thus, by this measure, bond shorting is approximately half
as large as stock shorting.
The average daily new loan volume of our proprietary lender is $550.3 million. If we
again assume our proprietary lender is responsible for the same proportion of loans to bond short
sellers as they are to stock short sellers, this implies that the average daily par value of corporate
bonds shorted is $3.3 billion. SIFMA reports that the average daily corporate bond trading
volume for the years 2004-2007 is $17.3 billion. By this measure, bond short selling would
represent 19.1% of all corporate bond trades.
Using these estimates implies that shorting corporate bonds is an important market
activity. The percentage of corporate bonds shorted, 1.3%, is slightly greater than half the
percentage of stocks shorted, 2.5%. Furthermore, the percentage of all daily corporate bond
trades that represents short selling, 19.1%, is almost two-thirds the percentage of stock trades

2

Asquith, Oman and Safaya (2010) find for a sample of NYSE and NASDAQ stocks, that short trades are 27.9% of
trading volume in 2005.

9

that entails short selling, 29.8%. Thus, at any point in time the amount of corporate bonds
shorted is large, and trading in the corporate bond market includes significant short sale activity.
4. Description of Sample
We use four separate databases, two that are commercially available and two that are
proprietary, to construct the sample of corporate bonds used in this paper. All four databases
cover the period from January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007. The commercially available
databases are the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine Database (TRACE) and the Fixed
Income Securities Database (FISD). The two proprietary databases are a bond inventory database
and a bond loan database. These databases were provided to us by one of the world’s largest
custodians of corporate bonds. The bond inventory database contains all corporate bonds
available for lending, and the companion bond loan database describes the loans made from that
inventory. The bond CUSIP is used as the common variable to link these four databases.
TRACE is a database of all OTC corporate bond transactions and was first implemented
on a limited basis on July 1, 2002. TRACE reports the time, price, and quantity of the bond
trade, where the quantity is top-coded if the par value of the trade is $5 million or more for
investment grade bonds and $1 million or more for high yield bonds. Over time, bond coverage
expanded in phases, and the compliance time for reporting and dissemination of bond prices
shortened. Our sample begins between Phase II and III of TRACE. Phase II was implemented
on April 14, 2003, while Phase III was implemented by February 7, 2005. Phase III required
reporting on almost all public corporate bond transactions.3 Since the vast majority of corporate
bonds are traded over-the-counter, TRACE provides the first reliable daily pricing data for
corporate bonds.
The FISD database contains detailed information on all corporate bond issues including
the offering amount, issue date, maturity date, coupon rate, bond rating, whether the bond is
fixed or floating rate, and whether it is issued under SEC Rule 144a. We exclude any corporate
bond in the inventory file that we cannot match to FISD. In addition we also exclude all
convertibles, exchangeables, equity-linked bonds, and unit deals.
3

Phase I of TRACE covered transaction information on approximately 500 bonds. It required users to report
transaction information on covered bonds to the NASD (later changed to FINRA) within 75 minutes. Phase II of
TRACE expanded coverage of bonds to approximately 4,650 bonds. On October 1, 2003 the time to report was
shortened to 45 minutes. A year later, on October 1, 2004, reporting time was shortened again to 30 minutes.
Finally, on July 1, 2005 the reporting time was shortened to 15 minutes. Most reported trades are immediately
disseminated by FINRA.

10

The proprietary bond inventory database contains the number of bonds in inventory and
number of bonds available to lend. From January 1, 2004 through March 30, 2005 we have endof-the month inventory information for all bonds. The database reports daily inventory
information from April 1, 2005 to December 31, 2007. In contrast to the inventory database, the
loan database is updated daily for the entire period January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007.4
For each day, the loan database includes which bonds are lent, the size of the loan, the rebate rate
paid to the borrower, and an indicator of who borrows the bond. The proprietary loan database
identifies 65 unique borrowers for corporate bonds. These borrowers are primarily brokerage
firms and hedge funds.
Table 1 describes the match between the proprietary bond inventory and loan databases
to the overall universe of FISD corporate bonds averaged by day. Panel A shows that from 2004
to 2007, the average number of bonds in the inventory database is 7,752. This represents 20.7%
of all corporate bonds in FISD for an average day. The relationship between the number of bonds
in FISD and the inventory is stable over each of the four years. Although not aggregated in
Table 1, there are a total of 15,493 unique bonds in the bond inventory sample that match to
FISD at some point. In addition, 2,901 or 37.4% of bonds in the lender inventory are on loan on
an average day. There is a slight upward trend in the fraction of bonds lent from inventory during
2004 to 2007. There are 9,971 unique bonds in the merged database that are lent at some point
during the four-year period.
Table 1 Panel B reports similar comparisons using the par value of the bonds. The
average daily par value of corporate bonds outstanding in the FISD database during the period
2004 to 2007 is $6.6 trillion, while the average daily par value of corporate bond inventory in the
database is $193 billion. This represents 2.9% of the total par value of corporate bonds issued
and listed in FISD. Of this inventory, an average $14.3 billion, or 7.4% of the total par value of
the inventory, is on loan each day.
In Figure 1, we plot our proprietary lender’s number of loans outstanding, on the left
hand axis, and the total par value of these loans, on the right hand axis, over time. On an average
day, there are between 7,000 and 11,000 outstanding loans. The total par value of outstanding

4

There are several missing days in the loan database. On these days the file we obtained from the proprietary lender
was either unreadable or a duplicate of an earlier daily file. These days are December 16-31, 2004, all of February
2005, June 7, 2006, and November 27, 2007.

11

loans also fluctuates around the overall mean of $14.3 billion, with a maximum of more than
$16.8 billion in October 2004, and a minimum of about $10.5 billion in January 2004.
Table 1 and Figure 1 clearly demonstrate that the number and value of corporate bonds
and corporate bond loans in the two proprietary databases are large. The bond inventory
database covers 20.7% of the bonds in FISD. The par value of the inventory is $193 billion on
average, representing 2.9% of the $6.6 trillion market. In total, the proprietary database consists
of 367,749 loans, covering 9,971 bonds, and representing an average par value of $14.3 billion
per day. We believe this is of sufficient size to draw inferences about the overall market.
Sample Characteristics
Table 2 compares various bond characteristics from FISD to the proprietary inventory
and loan databases by year and for the entire period. We focus on characteristics that are likely
to affect the demand and supply for corporate bond loans. The characteristics we examine are
the size at issue, maturity, time since issuance, percent defaulted, percent floating rate, and
percent subject to SEC Rule 144a. Rule 144a is a provision that allows for certain private resale
of restricted securities to qualified institutional buyers. Table 2 allows us to determine how
representative the proprietary databases are of the entire corporate bond market.
Table 2 Panel A shows that the average bond in the inventory is much larger at issue
($418.6 million) than the average FISD bond at issue ($175.4 million). The average bond lent is
even larger at issue with a size of $493.8 million. The average maturity at issue of the bonds in
the inventory database (10.7 years) is close to the average maturity at issue of the universe of all
FISD corporate bonds (11.3 years). The average maturity at issue for lent bonds is 12.0 years. A
comparison of time since issuance indicates that lent bonds are not outstanding as long as the
average bond in the inventory or in FISD. There are no year-to-year trends in the values of these
bond characteristics.5
Bonds in the FISD database are less likely to default (0.6%) than bonds in inventory
(1.1%) and the default percentage for lent bonds is between the two (0.8%). Bonds on loan are
much less likely to be floating rate bonds (10.4%) than bonds in either the FISD dataset (22.3%)
or the inventory dataset (17.0%). The fraction of bonds that are subject to SEC Rule 144a is
5

The values for some of the variables, e.g. maturity and time since issuance, over the entire period are outside the
range of the per-year means. This is because each bond is only counted once for the entire period, but may be
counted multiple times when counting the observations in the per-year columns. For example, the number of FISD,
inventory, and lent bonds for the entire sample period is not the respective sums of the four separate years.

12

much higher in the FISD and inventory samples than the bonds on loan. These patterns (except
for Rule 144a data) hold for the yearly comparisons as well.
Panel B of Table 2 reports Standard and Poor’s (S&P) rating characteristics of corporate
bonds. The coverage of the S&P ratings information in FISD is not as extensive as those
characteristics reported in Panel A, however. For instance, there are 57,622 bonds in FISD
where we observe the size at issue, while we observe S&P ratings for only 31,145 of these
bonds. Fortunately, the limited coverage of ratings in FISD has a smaller impact on the
inventory and loan samples. While we have issue size information for 9,971 lent bonds, we have
an S&P rating for 9,025, or 90.5% of lent bonds.
The bond inventory has a lower median rating at time of issue and over our time period
than the universe of FISD corporate bonds. The sample of lent bonds has the same median rating
at time of issue as inventory, but a lower rating over the entire period. The other rows of Panel
B, which show percentage investment grade at issue and percentage investment grade as of the
date of the loan, show a pattern consistent with the lower ratings for lent bonds than for FISD
bonds.6
In summary, Table 2 shows that shorted bonds are much larger at issue, have a slightly
longer maturity at issue, and have a lower median rating at issue than the average FISD bond.
69.0% of the lent bonds are investment grade, while 79.2% of all FISD bonds are. Lent bonds are
also more likely to be fixed rate and less likely to be defaulted.
Properties of Short Positions
Each loan in the loan database has a unique loan number, which allows us to describe the
time series properties of lent positions. Using the loan number, we are able to determine when
the loan is initiated, the duration of the loan, and the number of bonds lent over the duration of
the loan. Table 3 provides descriptive statistics for the new bond loans in the database for the
overall period and by year. While there are 9,971 unique bonds lent in the database, there are
367,749 unique loans or an average of 36.9 loans per bond.
The data in Table 3 indicates that the size and duration of loans are skewed. The mean
loan size (at par value of $1,000) is $1.44 million, but the median loan size is only $350,000.
6

The data on treasury spreads has a different pattern. The lent bonds have a smaller spread to treasuries than do our
inventory or the FISD database. It is important to note, however, that the available information on treasury spreads
is much smaller than that of bond ratings, and therefore these two descriptive are not directly comparable since the
samples are different. The notes in Table 2 give more information on this issue.

13

The mode loan size is $100,000. The mean new loan is outstanding for 32 calendar days while
the median new loan is outstanding for 11 days. The mode duration of new loans is one day.
There is a decrease in mean and median loan size from 2004 to 2007 (the median drops from
$490,000 to $250,000). The distribution of duration of new loans is relatively stable over the four
years.
The last three rows of Table 3 show how loan size changes during the life of the loan.
Changes to loan size may occur if borrowers partially repay the loan or if portions of their loan
are recalled by the lender. In the sample, 31.2% of loans are reduced in size before the loan is
closed. Of the loans which change size, the average decrease is 56.9% of the initial loan size,
and there are on average 1.9 loan decreases. We do not observe increases in loan size,
presumably because a borrower who wishes to borrow more bonds initiates a new loan.
Tables 1, 2, 3 and Figure 1 show that the proprietary inventory and loan databases are
extensive. The inventory database covers over 20% of all corporate bonds issued and the loan
database contains over 367,000 loans on almost 10,000 bonds. The average amount in inventory
per day is $193.3 billion, and the average amount on loan per day is $14.3 billion. The lent bonds
are larger, have a longer duration, and have a lower rating than the average bond in the FISD
database. Loan activity is large throughout the entire period. New bond loans average over $1.4
million and have an average duration of 32 days. Finally, approximately one-third of loans are
partially repaid before being closed out.
5. Costs of Borrowing Corporate Bonds
The borrowing cost for corporate bonds has two major components: the rebate rate paid
by the lender and the market interest rate which the borrower forgoes on the collateral. The
rebate rate is the interest rate the lender pays on the collateral posted by the borrower and is
typically lower than the market rate that the borrower could receive on the same funds invested
at similar risk and duration elsewhere. Thus, we calculate the cost of borrowing as the difference
between the market rate and the rebate rate. The loan database gives the rebate rate paid by the
lender, but not the market rate. We use the one-month commercial paper rate as a proxy for the
market rate.7
7

An alternative to the commercial paper rate is the Fed Funds rate. We use the commercial paper rate because we
think it more properly represents the rate the borrowers could get on their collateral. For most of the period, January
1, 2004 through December 31, 2007, the commercial paper and Fed Funds rates correlate highly (the average
difference across days is 4.9 basis points and the coefficient of correlation is 0.998).

14

Even though most corporate bond loans are short term, as shown in Table 3, borrowing
costs vary frequently over the life of the loan. Overall, 49.3% of the bond loans in the sample
experience a change of at least 5 bps in their borrowing cost before repayment. These changes
are due both to changes in the rebate rate and changes in the commercial paper rate. 42.3% of
bond loans experience a rebate rate change of at least 5 bps, while 21.2% experience a change in
the commercial paper rate of at least 5 bps.
It is possible for the lender to change the rebate rate frequently because all of the loans
are demand loans. In addition, if supply and demand conditions for the bond improve, and if the
lender does not lower the rebate rate, the borrower has the option of closing out the loan and
borrowing from a different lender. For the loan sample, there is an average of 3.5 rebate rate
changes of at least 5 bps per loan, or approximately 8 rebate rate changes for those loans with
changes. Furthermore, rebate rate changes of at least 5 bps go in both directions. 38.4% of all
loans have a rebate rate increase, 29.7% of all loans have a rebate rate decrease, and 25.8% of all
loans have both. Hence, a considerable factor driving changes in the cost of borrowing is
changes in the rebate rate on existing loans by the lender.
The frequent changes in borrowing costs suggest that existing loans should track current
market conditions, although perhaps with a lag. Comparing new and existing loans, the average
absolute difference in the borrowing costs for the same bonds on the same day is 4.3 bps, with a
standard deviation of 27.6 bps. Moreover, for those bonds that have new and existing loans on
the same day, 46.5% of new loans have an average borrowing cost that is more expensive than
existing loans and 35.4% of new loans are cheaper than existing loans. Given these differences,
the analyses below only use the borrowing cost for new loans unless otherwise stated. All loans
start as new loans, and new loans must reflect current market conditions.
Characteristics of Borrowing Costs
Table 4 Panel A presents the borrowing costs on new loans over time, equally-weighted
by loan and value-weighted by loan size. The average borrowing cost, equally-weighted by loan
(EW), is 33 bps and the median borrowing cost is 18 bps over the period 2004 to 2007. When
we weight borrowing costs by the size (or par value) of the loan (VW), the mean drops to 22 bps
and the median to 14 bps. This indicates that smaller loans have higher borrowing costs than
larger loans. Panel A also shows that new loan borrowing costs fall substantially in 2006 and
2007. For example, the equally-weighted median borrowing costs for 2004 to 2007 are 31, 49,

15

16, and 13 bps, respectively. This pattern is also reflected in the mean as well as all the
percentiles shown. This temporal decrease is present for both equally-weighted and valueweighted borrowing costs.
Table 4 Panel B presents borrowing costs over time partitioned by loan size. We divide
loans into those of 100 bonds or less (i.e., $100,000 par value, the mode loan size) and those of
more than 100 bonds. The results show that large loans have lower borrowing costs than small
loans, but this difference diminishes over time. For example, in 2004 the mean borrowing cost
for loans of 100 bonds or less, “small” loans, is 51 bps. For loans of more than 100 bonds,
“large” loans, the mean borrowing cost is 31 bps. By 2007, the mean borrowing cost for small
loans is 19 bps, which is identical to that of large loans.
Thus, Table 4 shows that on average borrowing costs fall over time, and that the
difference between equally-weighted and value-weighted borrowing costs decreases in 2006 and
2007. In addition, this decrease in borrowing cost is steeper for small loans than for large loans.
Small loans are substantially more costly than large loans at the beginning of our sample period,
but the costs are almost equivalent by the end of our period.
Figure 2 plots equally-weighted borrowing cost quintiles for each month of our sample
period. It shows that the distribution of borrowing costs changes abruptly after March 2006.
Before that date, the 60th and 80th percentiles of borrowing costs are usually at or above 50 bps
for each month. After March 2006, the 60th percentile is at or below 20 bps for each month. The
80th percentile drops below 20 bps in August 2006 and is near or below 20 bps until the start of
the Credit Crunch in August 2007. The plot of value-weighted loan borrowing costs, although
not shown, shows a similar if less dramatic pattern during the same time period. This indicates
that there was a substantial change in the pricing of bond loans in early to mid 2006 for both
large and small loans.
Figure 3 presents histograms of equally-weighted borrowing costs pre- and post-April 1,
2006. The lighter ‘before’ histogram shows that the most frequent borrowing cost pre-April 1,
2006 is between 51 and 55 bps, with the second most frequent borrowing cost between 11 and 15
bps. This bimodal distribution pattern is significantly changed in the darker ‘after’ histogram.
The most frequent borrowing cost post-April 1, 2006 is between 11 and 15 bps, and the
percentage of observations in that range is more than twice that of the highest range in the

16

‘before’ histogram. The range between 51 and 55 bps is now the 7th most frequent. Although
not shown, the corresponding value-weighted histograms are similar.
The reasons why borrowing costs are reduced in early 2006 and why small loans began to
be priced closer to large loans after that date are not immediately clear. Table 1, Table 2, and
Figure 1 show that the lender’s inventory of bonds and the amount lent do not change
significantly after 2005. Further, as shown in Table 3, the average size and duration of bond
loans also do not change significantly over time. Therefore, we cannot explain the change in
borrowing costs with simple supply or demand proxies.
Another factor why borrowing costs change over time may be greater transparency in
bond market pricing related to the growth of TRACE during our sample period. The sample
begins between Phase II and III of TRACE. As stated above, Phase II was implemented on April
14, 2003, while Phase III was implemented by February 7, 2005. The last phase required
reporting on almost all public corporate bond transactions. It seems unreasonable, however, that
it would take more than a year, until April 2006, for the effects of this increased coverage to have
an impact. Finally, the growth of the CDS market may have driven improvements in the liquidity
of corporate bonds, and the narrowing of borrowing cost spreads may reflect this trend. We
investigate the impact of the CDS market for the market for borrowing corporate bonds in
Section 8 below.
Determinants of Borrowing Costs
We first investigate how the cost of borrowing is related to the available supply of bonds
in the lender’s inventory. As previously mentioned, we do not have daily inventory data from
January 2004 to March 2005, and thus cannot compute the daily available supply of bond
inventory during this period. Figure 4 plots the relationship between the average borrowing cost
and the amount of inventory on loan for the period April 2005 to December 2007 and for several
sub-periods. The vertical axis displays average borrowing cost and the horizontal axis displays
amount of inventory lent. For the entire period, the average borrowing cost is relatively flat at 30
bps for bonds with less than 70% on loan. After that level, however, there is a steep increase in
the average borrowing cost: each 10% increase in the amount on loan is associated with a greater
than 10 basis point increase in the average borrowing cost.
Also included in Figure 4 are separate plots of average borrowing costs versus available
inventory for the period April 2005 to March 2006 and for the period April 2006 until December

17

2007. Those two plots show that borrowing costs are significantly lower in the latter period,
consistent with the results in Table 4 and Figures 2 and 3. However, a kink at 70% of available
inventory still exists, and although borrowing costs are lower in the latter period, the slope of that
segment is similar. This suggests that the reduction in borrowing costs in the latter half of our
sample period is not due to changes in inventory. Finally, the line for the 2007 Credit Crunch is
also plotted in Figure 4. We will discuss that result below in Section 9.
Second, Table 5 presents the 35 corporate bonds with the highest borrowing costs in the
sample. Each bond is listed once, together with its maximum loan borrowing cost and the date
and borrowing cost corresponding to that maximum. Since there is a great deal of clustering by
firm of the most expensive bonds to borrow, the last column of Table 5 also indicates the number
of bonds from that issuer where the borrowing cost is greater than the 250th most expensive to
borrow bond in the sample. For example, the borrowing cost of the most expensive loan on the
Calpine Corp bond with CUSIP 131347AW6 is 14.50%, but there are 10 other Calpine Corp
bonds which have borrowing costs above the 250th most expensive to borrow bond in the sample.
There are three features of the bonds in Table 5 that are worth noting. First, these bonds
are highly lent out. The average percentage on loan is 79.7%, well above the 70% ‘kink’
observed in Figure 4. Second, most of the firms in Table 5 experienced credit problems around
the date they appeared on our list. Of the 35 firms on the list, 10 are bankrupt as of the date of the
loan, while another 6, while not filing for bankruptcy, were downgraded in the year prior. In
addition, 7 of the firms, while not bankrupt or downgraded, were frequently mentioned in the
press in the previous year as “financially struggling.” Interestingly, 8 of the remaining firms
undertook an LBO during this period. Although we didn’t check explicitly, we infer the
increased leverage from the LBO impacted the bond’s borrowing cost.
A third feature of Table 5 is that a large fraction of the most expensive bond loans take
place during the latter half of 2007. Thirteen out of 35 bond loans in our list are after July 1,
2007, and 8 of these are on one day, October 31, 2007. Importantly, all 8 have negative rebate
rates on that date. This means their inclusion cannot be explained solely by that day’s reported
commercial paper rate.
Calculated borrowing costs are not always positive. A negative borrowing cost is the
result of the lender paying a rebate rate above the commercial paper rate, and it implies that the
lender loses money on the loan. In total, we have 11,971 loans (or 3.3% of the total) with

18

negative borrowing costs in the sample. Most of the loans with negative borrowing costs
coincide with the 2007 Credit Crunch from August 2007 until December 2007. This can be seen
in Figure 2, which shows that the borrowing cost of the bottom quintile becomes negative after
July 2007. Of the 11,971 loans with negative borrowing costs, 8,832 of them occur between
August and December 2007, of which 7,960 are on only 26 different days.
There is more than one possible reason why the cost of borrowing is negative for some
bond loans. It is possible that the reported one-month commercial paper rate, which we take
from the Federal Reserve Board’s website, is not representative of the true market conditions for
all days. This is particularly true for those days with very large intra-day interest rate
movements. During the 2007 Credit Crunch, the Fed eased credit and dropped the Fed Funds rate
several times, causing the commercial paper rate to fall as well. It is also possible that the
proprietary lender is slow to respond to changes in credit conditions.
Finally, it should be noted that during the Credit Crunch in the last half of 2007, the Fed’s
intervention caused short-term rates to fall substantially below medium-term rates. If the
reinvestment rate on collateral received by the lending institution is above short-term rates, the
lender can still make a profit on their bond loans even with negative borrowing costs.8
Alternatively, the Credit Crunch of 2007 may have caused borrowers of the bond to want to
close out their short position and have their collateral returned. If the lender has invested the
collateral in illiquid securities which have lost value, they may have difficulty in returning
collateral on demand. In this instance, they may subsidize borrowers to avoid reducing their
collateral pool. This scenario was reported in the financial press and a number of lenders
reported losses on their collateral during this period.9 To determine if the market for lending
bonds in the period July to December 2007 is different, we examine this time period separately.
We will note in Section 9 differences in any of the results for this time period.
Regression Analysis of Borrowing Costs

8

Our loan database provides a reinvestment rate which the lender estimates they will receive on the collateral. This
rate is not constant across all loans or even across all loans on one particular bond at a point in time. The reason for
this is that the lender invests the collateral in a number of different funds. These funds can have a different duration
and risk than that represented by investing short term at the commercial paper rate. We ignore these reinvestment
rates when calculating borrowing costs since they do not represent the opportunity cost of the borrower’s collateral.
9
See Weiss, “AIG to Absorb $5 Billion Loss on Securities Lending,” Bloomberg News, June 27, 2008 and Karmin
and Scism, “Securities-Lending Sector Feels Credit Squeeze,” Wall Street Journal, October 30, 2008. Also, see
State Street Press Release on July 7, 2010, “State Street Records Second-Quarter After-Tax Charge of $251 Million,
or $0.50 Per Share.”

19

Although we know that borrowing costs are lower in 2006 and 2007 than they are in 2004
and 2005 and that borrowing costs are dependent on the size of the loan and the available
inventory to borrow, it is hard to determine the relative importance of these factors from the
univariate comparisons we have made so far. We next conduct a multivariate analysis, which
allows us to simultaneously control for the factors we have examined that determine a bond’s
borrowing cost.
Bond characteristics may affect borrowing costs in several ways. A bond’s time since
issuance may be important if it affects how widely the bond is held, and thus how difficult it is to
locate, or if investor beliefs become more heterogeneous the longer the bond is outstanding. The
availability to borrow may also be proxied by whether the debt is public or private (Rule 144a),
as private debt may be harder to sell short. Smaller issue size may also make the bonds harder to
find, increasing borrowing costs. Other bond factors that may affect borrowing costs include the
bond’s rating and whether the bond is fixed or floating rate. Bonds with lower ratings might
attract more loans because of their higher probability of default and thus have higher borrowing
costs. Finally, the values of floating rate bonds re-price with interest rate movements and are
thus less likely to deviate from par.
Borrowing costs may also differ for a given bond because of loan characteristics. A larger
percentage of bonds already on loan may lead to higher borrowing costs. In addition, holding
inventory constant, larger loans may have lower borrowing costs if there is a size discount.
Further, borrowing costs may differ by borrower if the lender either gives a discount to large
volume borrowers or if some borrowers are more knowledgeable about the lending market than
others.
Our regression model incorporates the data on bond characteristics from Table 2 as well
as on loan percentage, loan size, and loan initiation day dummies. In some specifications, we
also include dummy variables for each bond’s CUSIP and the identity of the borrowing broker.
The CUSIP controls allow us to examine how pricing varies across loan market variables, while
fixing bond characteristics. Since daily inventory data is only available after March 2005, the
regression analysis covers the period April 2005 through December 2007. The models we
estimate are variations of the following model for the borrowing cost of loan i on bond b on day
t:
Borrowing Costibt = CPratet-RRibt = β1*on loan %bt + β2*loan sizei + β3*ratingbt +

20

β4*issue sizeb + β5*time since issuebt + β6*floating rateb + β7*rule144ab +
δt + λbroker + κb + εibt,
where CPrate is the one month financial commercial paper rate (in our model 100 basis points =
1.00) and RR is the rebate rate (with the same scale as the CPrate). The on loan % is the
percentage of daily inventory already lent, and loan size is the total number of bonds lent in
thousands of bonds (that is, the loan value in $ millions). Rating is the bond’s S&P rating at the
time of the loan (where AAA is given a value of 1, D is given a value of 22, and all intermediate
ratings are given consecutive values between 1 and 22). Issue size is the size of the initial bond
offering (in $100 millions). The time since issue variable is the time since the bond was issued
(in years). The floating rate variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the bond pays a floating
rate coupon and 0 if the bond has a fixed rate coupon. The Rule 144a variable is a dummy
variable equal to 1 if the bond was issued under SEC Rule 144a and 0 otherwise. δt represents a
set of dummies for each trading day in the sample. κb represents a set of dummies for each bond
CUSIP in the sample, and λbroker are a set of dummies for each unique borrower in the sample
who borrows 100 or more times during our sample period.10 We report heteroscedasticity-robust
standard errors.
Table 6 reports estimates from four specifications of the regression: one without broker
or bond CUSIP dummies, one with broker dummies, one with bond CUSIP dummies, and one
with both. The specifications with bond CUSIP dummies do not include issue size, time since
issuance, floating rate, and Rule 144a since these characteristics are completely captured by the
bond-specific and date controls.
In all four specifications the on loan % coefficient is positive and significant. In the two
specifications without CUSIP dummies, the coefficient is 0.2630 without broker dummies and
0.2623 with broker dummies. When we add the bond-specific controls, the estimates fall to
0.0319 and 0.0438. The coefficients are reduced because the bond-specific controls pick up
much of the variation in bond inventory. Still, consistent with the pattern we observed in Figure
4, the larger the percentage of the inventory lent, the higher the borrowing cost. Increasing the

10

Our lender identifies 65 borrowers. 40 make 100 or more loans and 25 make less than 100 loans during our
sample period. The average number of loans made by the largest 40 is 9,178 and the average made by the smallest
25 is 25. Restricting our sample to the period covered by the regression, there are a total of 62 borrowers, 38 of
whom make 100 or more loans.

21

percentage lent by 10% is associated with an increase in borrowing costs by 2.6 bps across the
sample of all bonds. For a specific bond, a 10% increase in on loan percentage is associated with
an increase of 0.3 to 0.4 bps on average.
Loan size is negative and significant in each specification. Our regression results on loan
size show that the larger the loan, the lower the borrowing cost. The magnitude of the
coefficient is economically large and similar across all four regression models, ranging from 0.0136 to -0.0216. This means that adding 1,000 bonds to loan size decreases borrowing costs
by 1.36 to 2.16 bps.
The coefficients on bond ratings are positive and significant in all four specifications.
This implies that the lower rated the bond, the higher the borrowing costs. The magnitude of the
estimate is larger when we include bond-specific controls. For the specification in column (4),
with broker and CUSIP dummies, the estimates imply that a full letter downgrade raises
borrowing costs by 9.69 bps (three times the regression coefficient estimate of 0.0323).
The estimated coefficient for issue size is small, but positive and significant for the first
two specifications. Issue size must increase by $300 million for borrowing costs to increase by 1
basis point. The coefficient on time since issuance is positive and significant in the two
specifications without CUSIP dummies, implying that the longer a bond is outstanding, the
higher the borrowing cost. For every year a bond is outstanding, the borrowing cost increases by
0.7 bps.
The last two bond characteristics from Table 2 are indicators for floating rate bonds and
for whether a bond is Rule 144a. The estimates imply that fixed rate bonds are almost 6 bps
more expensive to borrow than floating rate bonds and that the borrowing costs for Rule 144a
bonds are about 3 bps more expensive.
The identity of the borrower who initiates a loan is also important in determining
borrowing costs. The proprietary database only allows us to observe the initial broker (or hedge
fund); it does not allow us to determine the final party undertaking the loan transaction. In the
database each bond is lent to one of 65 unique brokers who then either delivers the bonds to their
own institutional and retail clients for short selling or keeps them for its own account. The
specifications in Table 6 columns (2) and (4) include 38 broker dummies, each of which
borrowed 100 or more bonds from April 2005 to December 2007. For both specifications, we
can reject the hypothesis that all broker coefficients are zero. The difference between maximum

22

and minimum broker coefficients and the 75th and 25th percentile broker coefficients are also
reported. In column (4), the “best” broker receives borrowing costs 59 bps less than the “worst”
broker. This means that on the same day for the same CUSIP and loan size, the lowest cost
broker is able to borrow at a rate 59 bps lower than the rate for the highest cost broker. This
difference is considerably larger than the average borrowing cost of 33 bps as reported in Table
4. The difference between the 75th and 25th percentiles is 20 bps. Both are statistically
significant.
Table 7 further explores whether some brokers obtain lower borrowing costs. We
examine all days where two or more brokers borrow the same bond. Requiring that a broker
“compete” with another broker on the same day at least 100 times restricts us to consider 26
brokers. For this group, we rank each broker’s “performance” on that day for that bond by
evaluating whether they received a lower, higher, or the same borrowing cost as another
competing broker.11 Those results are summarized in Table 7 and show that some brokers
receive consistently lower borrowing costs. We ran two sets of “competitive” races per
borrower. One set was between two brokers only; the second set was between three or more
brokers. The top-rated broker received the lowest borrowing cost for any given day and bond
92.5% of the time when there were two brokers and 78.9% of the time when there were three or
more brokers for the same bond on the same day.
The two winning percentages of the top-rated broker are both significant using the sign
test. In fact, the top eight brokers all have winning percentages which are significantly greater
than 50% at the 1% level when “competing” with one other broker and significantly greater than
33% when competing with two or more brokers. Furthermore, success in the competitive races
is not dependent on the number of loans or the amount borrowed by the borrower. Rank order
correlations between placement in the competitive races and either the number of loans or the
dollar amount of the bonds borrowed are not significant. Thus it appears that differences in
borrowing costs between borrowers reflect differences in market knowledge and abilities to
negotiate borrowing costs.12
11

The last line of Table 7 with Broker ID “Remainder” is a summary line that consolidates the other 39 brokers as
one competitor. The competitive race results in columns 5-8 represent contests between the combined 39 brokers
and any of the 26 brokers above. It does not include contests that the 39 remaining brokers have with each other.
12
Each unique broker’s identity is available to us from the proprietary database, although we are not allowed, for
confidentiality reasons, to disclose it. The differences in borrowing costs are consistent with our perceptions of
reputation.

23

To summarize, the borrowing cost regression results in Table 6 show that a smaller loan
size, a higher percentage of inventory lent, and a lower bond rating lead to higher borrowing
costs. These results hold for all four specifications of the model, although the coefficients for on
loan percentage are weaker when CUSIP dummies are included. Finally, the identity of the
borrowing broker significantly influences borrowing costs, both in aggregate and when
comparing loans for the same bond, regardless of the broker’s volume.
Borrowing Costs Around Credit Events
We next look at borrowing costs around credit events. The events we examine are
bankruptcy filings and large credit rating changes. We define a large credit rating change as a
movement of three or more S&P ratings, or one full letter or more, e.g. going from an A+ to a
B+ or from a BB- to an AA-. There are 241 bonds in the inventory database of corporate bonds
involved in a bankruptcy, representing 93 unique bankruptcies. However, only 88 bonds have
lending activity during the period from 30 trading days before until 30 trading days after the
bankruptcy, which corresponds to 42 unique bankruptcies.
The average borrowing cost of these bonds for each of the 61 days is plotted in Figure 5.
Since there are new loans for only 2.9 bankrupt bonds per day in the period -30 to +30 days
around bankruptcy, we expand the sample by including old loans (which, as we discussed above,
are re-priced). This expands the number of bonds per day in Figure 5 to an average of 60.
However, each bond does not have a loan outstanding for all 61 days. We have also done the
analysis only on new loans and only on bonds that have loans for all 61 days. Although there are
far fewer observations, the results are qualitatively similar.
Figure 5 shows that bond borrowing costs are high for the entire period from -30 days to
+30 days, where Day 0 is the bankruptcy filing date. The average equally-weighted bond
borrowing cost for firms that file bankruptcy is 173 bps during the 30 days before filing. This is
substantially greater than the average 33 bps reported for all new loans in Table 4 and indicates
that these bonds are difficult to borrow before bankruptcy. After bankruptcy, bond borrowing
costs increase further to an average of 245 bps for the 30 days after the filing. Thus, the
borrowing costs indicate that short sellers identify firms in financial distress prior to bankruptcy,
but the bankruptcy filing is not completely anticipated since borrowing costs rise after that date.
In Figure 6, we report a similar analysis for large bond downgrades and upgrades. There
are 292 full-letter upgrade events on bonds in the inventory, covering 281 unique bonds as some

24

bonds have multiple upgrades. Our loan data covers 125 of these events, which correspond to
122 unique bonds. The plot for these upgrade events shows that the average upgraded bond
borrowing cost is close to the average for all bonds before the upgrade and does not vary much
after the rating change. The average borrowing cost for the 30 days before the upgrade is 29.9
bps, and the average borrowing cost for the 30 days after the upgrade is 32.1 bps.
The bond borrowing costs for downgrades are much lower than those for bankruptcies,
but are above the average of all bonds and increase after the downgrade. There are 381 full-letter
downgrade events during our time period on 356 unique bonds. The data covers 206 of these
events on 193 bonds. The average borrowing cost for the bonds involved in a full-letter
downgrade is 38.4 bps in the 30 days before the downgrade and 52.3 bps in the 30 days after the
downgrade. It is important to remember that all downgrades are included, including those
between investment grades, i.e. from an A+ to a BBB+, and thus all downgrades do not signal
financial distress.
Thus, Figures 5 and 6 show that bankruptcies and large credit downgrades increase a
bond’s borrowing cost, while large credit upgrades do not decrease a bond’s borrowing cost.
6. Relationship between Bond and Stock Shorting
We next investigate how the market for shorting corporate bonds is related to the market
for shorting stocks. If the purpose of borrowing securities is to short the firm, we expect the two
markets to be integrated. Given the priority of claims, the stock of a firm should lose its value
before the debt, suggesting that investors who wish to express a negative view about the firm
may prefer to short stocks. Although investors may short debt if it is easier to access and
cheaper to borrow than stock, the total market for shorting stocks is much larger than that for
shorting bonds. While the proprietary lender made 367,749 bond loans over our sample period,
they made 7,241,173 stock loans during the same time period.
To understand how the market for shorting corporate bonds is related to the market for
shorting stocks, we matched each firm’s bonds to its corresponding common stock. We match
the first 6 digits of the bond CUSIP to the first 6 digits of the common stock CUSIP. This match
was not complete since many of the bonds in the dataset are subsidiaries or private firms and
thus have 6 digit CUSIPs, which do not directly correspond to a common stock CUSIP. To add
the subsidiary bonds (which may have a different 6 digit CUSIP), we hand matched the
remaining bonds using SEC filings. To avoid potential biases that hand matching may introduce,

25

we analyze our results for both methods separately, i.e. those that were matched with a 6 digit
CUSIP versus those which were hand matched. There are 15,493 bond CUSIPs in the inventory
file. We were able to match 5,997 using the 6-digit CUSIP match, and an additional 4,409 were
matched by hand. We found no significant differences in results between the two subsamples.
Another matching problem is that there are many firms with multiple bond issues. For
instance, there are 124 different GM bonds in inventory, and we want to relate the borrowing
costs of all of those bonds to the cost of borrowing GM’s common stock. We group all issues of
bonds together for this analysis. The reason we group in this way is that for any given day,
within the same firm, bond rebate rates are close. When different bonds from the same firm have
a new loan on the same day, the median absolute value of the difference in bond borrowing costs
is zero bps. This means that for more than half the firm-day observations, the borrowing costs
are the same for all bonds of a given firm. Furthermore, the 75th percentile of this distribution is
only 4 bps.
As a result, for our bond and stock analysis, if a firm has more than one new bond loan
on a given day, we aggregate the borrowing costs across all bonds and all new loans by
computing value-weighted median borrowing cost. Likewise, for stocks we take the median
stock borrowing cost for new loans weighted by shares lent. In our matched sample, 29.7% of
new bond loans have a corresponding new stock loan on the same day.
Borrowing Costs for Matched Sample
For most firms, there is a fixed difference in borrowing cost between bond and stock
loans. In particular, 76% of the firms in the matched sample have loans whose bond and stock
borrowing costs differ by one of six distinct values: -10 bps, -5 bps, -1 bp, 0 bps, +35 bps, and
+40 bps. This is seen in Figure 7, which plots the percentage of loans in the matched sample in
each of these six categories over time.
The largest category in Figure 7 is new bond loans with borrowing costs 1 bp below new
stock loans. For the matched loans, this category accounts for an average of 39.6% of
observations. This 1 bp difference is impossible to explain if bond and stock borrowing costs are
not related. There are two other major fixed borrowing cost differences where bonds are cheaper
to borrow than stocks. They are -5 bps and -10 bps, which average 14.0% together.
The second largest category of fixed borrowing cost differences is bond loans with
borrowing costs 35 bps more expensive than stock loans. This relationship changes, however,

26

during our sample period. For the period from December 2004 until March 2006, the mean
number of observations in this category is 22.9%. For the period from April 2006 until
December 2007, the mean number in this category is 6.8%. This drop is clearly shown in Figure
7 and April 2006 appears to be a fundamental shift in the pricing relationship between bond and
stock loans. Moreover, the +40 bps category, where bond loans are 40 bps more expensive than
stocks, disappears by June 2006. These changes coincide with the reduction in the premium
charged for small bond loans in April 2006, as described in Section 4.
There is a category that expands dramatically after March 2006: bond and stock loans
that have the same borrowing cost. Before March 2006, the average percentage of matched
loans in this category is 0.2%, while after March 2006, it is 7.1%. The percentage of loans in
this category expands exactly when the percentage of loans in the +35 bps category decreases,
although not by equal amounts. The -1 bp category also increases after March 2006.
While Figure 7 graphs the differences in bond and stock borrowing costs, it does not
show their levels. This is explored in Table 8 and row 4 shows that 63.8% of loans in the
matched sample have borrowing costs within 10 bps of each other. This percentage rises to
74.6% by 2007. For those matched loans whose borrowing costs are not close to one another, it
is more common for the stock loan to be more expensive. In particular, only 1.2% of all matched
bond loans are over 100 bps, while 6.1% of matched stock loans are over 100 bps. Furthermore,
if a bond loan borrowing cost is more than 100 bps, 14.7% of matched stock loan borrowing
costs also costs more than 100 bps. For the inverse, if a stock loan borrowing cost is more than
100 bps, only 3.0% of the matched bond loan borrowing costs are over 100 bps. This mean that
it is more common for stocks to be hard to borrow (as measured by borrowing costs) than it is for
bonds, and when a bond is harder to borrow, the stock is more likely to be as well.
To summarize, there are three main results on the relationship between bond and stock
market shorting. First, most bond and stock loans for the same firm differ by one of six fixed
amounts, which do not depend on the day of the loan. For example, the most common
differences in borrowing costs between bonds and stocks, which are -1 bps and +35 bps,
constitute 55.5% of the matched sample. Second, bond borrowing costs are very close to stock
borrowing costs for most matched loans. For matched bond and stock loans from the same firm
on the same day, 63.8% of the borrowing costs are within +/- 10 bps of each other, a percentage
which increased to 74.6% by 2007. Finally, if neither the bond nor the stock is hard to borrow,

27

they are priced very similarly. However, on a day when a stock is expensive to borrow, bonds
from the same firm are usually not, and vice versa. This suggests that for low levels of borrowing
costs these two securities lending markets are similar, but when borrowing costs are high they
are fragmented.
7. Returns to Shorting Bonds
In the last two sections, we calculated borrowing costs, described their cross-sectional
and time-series distribution, and examined some of their important determining factors. In this
section, we do a similar analysis on the returns to shorting bonds. As mentioned above, we do
not know if all borrowed bonds are necessarily shorted, but for the purposes of this section we
assume they are. The literature on stock shorting that uses proprietary lending databases makes a
similar, although usually unstated, assumption. The literature on shorting stocks infers that
excess returns from highly shorted stocks implies the existence of private information among
short sellers and/or borrowing constraints. We make the same inference for the market for
shorting bonds.
In order to calculate bond returns over any holding period, it is necessary to have bond
prices at the beginning and end of the period. Following the approach of Bao and Pan (2009) we
match the proprietary databases of bond inventory and loans to the FISD TRACE database,
which provides transaction bond prices. The number of bonds covered in TRACE increased once
during our sample period on February 7, 2005. This increase ostensibly extended TRACE’s
coverage to all US corporate bonds. Even with universal TRACE coverage, there are difficulties
in computing bond returns. (See Bessembinder, Maxwell, Kahle and Yu (2010) for the difficulty
of working with bond returns in general and TRACE in particular.)
We calculate bond returns with the following formula:
return = (sale price – buy price + sale accrued interest – buy accrued interest +
coupons paid) / (buy price + buy accrued interest).13
In this formula, the return is from the point of view of a long holder of the bond. That is, the
returns are positive if the bond prices increase. A short seller of the bond, therefore, benefits if
the return is negative. In the formula, sale and buy prices are “clean”, meaning net of accrued
interest, which is the way prices are reported in TRACE. In some databases bond prices are

13

This is Bessembinder, Maxwell, Kahle, and Yu’s (2010) formula with a correction for a typographical error in that
paper.

28

“dirty”, meaning they include accrued interest, and the above formula has to be modified
appropriately.
Of the 9,971 bonds that are ever loaned in the bond loan database, 8,212 bonds have at
least one TRACE price observation, and 8,033 have at least ten TRACE price observations.
Since a bond must only be delivered to a buyer within three trading days after a short sale, a
bond loan does not always occur on the same day as the linked trade. They can either be located
first and then sold short, or sold short and then located within 3 days after the sale. Of the
367,749 bond loans during the sample period, 301,167 have TRACE prices both within three
days before or after the initiation of the loan and three days before or after the loan’s
termination.14
The fact that bonds do not trade every day and that short sales may occur on different
days than the bond loans complicates calculating holding-period returns. As a result, our
approach to calculating monthly returns for a bond is not precisely over thirty days because the
bond may not trade exactly one month apart. We compute a monthly bond return when a bond
has a trade in two consecutive calendar months. If there is more than one bond trade in a
calendar month, we use the price of the last trade in that month. If there are multiple bond trades
on this day, we use the trade-size-weighted median price for the day. Following Bessembinder,
Maxwell, Kahle, and Yu (2010) we exclude bond trades that are cancelled, modified, or include
commissions. An equally-weighted monthly portfolio return is then calculated by equally
weighting the monthly returns of the individual bonds in the portfolio. We also calculate an
issue-size value-weighted monthly portfolio return by weighting monthly returns by the bond’s
issue amount. Weekly returns are calculated in a similar manner.
Returns to Portfolios of Shorted Bonds
In Table 9, we form monthly portfolios of bonds sorted by either percent of inventory on
loan or borrowing cost. Panel A reports the returns from taking long positions in portfolios of
bonds based on the percentage of inventory lent as of the last day of the month. The first two
rows of Panel A report the monthly returns for portfolios of bonds that are not lent as well as
those that are. In addition for each month, we calculate on loan percentage quintiles and assign
the lent bonds to one of five portfolios. We also construct portfolios of bonds in the 95th and 99th
14

After February 7, 2005 when TRACE’s universal coverage became effective, 245,508 out of 277,220 bond loans
have TRACE prices both three days before or after the initiation of the loan and three days before or after the loan’s
termination.

29

percentiles of the on loan percentage distribution. These portfolios are formed conditional on the
bonds being lent; that is, e.g, the 95th percentile portfolio is only selected from the universe of
lent bonds. We report four different one-month returns for these portfolios.
In column 1, we report the number of bonds in each portfolio. Quintile sizes are not
exactly equal because some values of on loan percentage are identical. Column 3 reports the
equally-weighted raw portfolio return, while column 7 reports equally-weighted excess portfolio
returns. Columns 5 and 9 report issue-size value-weighted raw and excess portfolio returns.15
We calculate excess returns by subtracting equally-weighted and issue-size value-weighted
TRACE index returns from the corresponding portfolio’s raw returns.16
The results in Table 9 Panel A show that there is no significant difference in the raw or
excess returns between portfolios of bonds that are not lent and those that are lent. In fact, the
mean issue-size value-weighted excess return in column 9 for the portfolio of lent bonds is 0.05%. Moreover, Panel A does not support the hypothesis that bonds which have higher on
loan percentage are more likely to have lower returns in the future. In fact, both the equallyweighted and issue-size value-weighted returns for the 5th quintile, which has the highest amount
lent, are larger than those for all of the other quintiles in columns 3, 5, 7, and 9. Across quintile
portfolios, the equally-weighted portfolio excess returns in column 7, though mostly negative,
are small, and the issue-size value-weighted portfolio excess returns in column 9 are all within 8
bps of zero. Finally, the standard deviations of all portfolios returns, both equally- and issue-size
value-weighted, are much larger than the means. As a result, none of the excess returns are
significantly different from zero or from each other.
In Panel B, we form monthly portfolios based on the borrowing cost of the bonds. The
first row of the Panel reports returns for all new loans. Each bond is then assigned a borrowing
cost equal to the borrowing cost of the last new loans in the month, median-weighted by loan
size. Then, for each month we calculate borrowing cost quintiles and assign bonds to one of the

15

We calculated value-weighted returns several ways including using the bond price times issue size as the weight.
This results in no significant differences relative to the discussion below.
16
It is customary to use the Lehman Brothers (now Barclays) Corporate Bond Index when calculating bond excess
returns (see, e.g., Bessembinder, Maxwell, Kahle, and Yu (2010) and Bao and Pan (2009)). While we also used this
benchmark, we calculated a separate TRACE bond index using corporate bond prices from TRACE that were also in
our FISD sample. We do this for two reasons. First, the Lehman Index uses matrix pricing while our TRACE index
uses transaction prices. Second, the Lehman Index is a single aggregate number and does not match as closely our
sample, e.g., the Lehman Corporate Bond Index does not include high yield bonds, but we include them in our
TRACE index, since they are in our sample.

30

five portfolios. As in Panel A, we report one-month returns for these portfolios as well as for
portfolios that include only bonds in the 95th and 99th percentiles of borrowing costs. Panel B
has fewer observations than Panel A because it includes only new loans, whereas Panel A
includes all existing loans.
The results in Panel B do not support the hypothesis that bonds which are more expensive
to borrow are more likely to have lower returns in the future. The 95th and 99th percentile
portfolios have the highest borrowing costs, but they also have the highest average returns across
all measures. Furthermore, the returns for the quintiles are not monotonic. Overall, the results in
Panel B parallel those in Panel A: there are no significant results for any of the portfolios or any
of the differences between the portfolios.
Table 9 shows none of the portfolio returns or differences in Panels A or B are
statistically significant. That is, neither the bond’s on loan percentage nor the borrowing cost
predicts future returns. Although not shown, we also calculated one week, two week, and threemonth returns for all of the portfolios in Table 9. In no instances were any of the portfolio
returns significantly different from zero.
Profitability to Short Sellers of Corporate Bonds
Table 9 indicates that shorting portfolios of bonds with high on loan percentage or high
borrowing costs are not strategies that yield abnormal returns to short sellers. These results are
based on shorting portfolios of bonds that are already highly shorted. They may indicate, but do
not accurately measure, whether short sellers made money on their short positions. To evaluate
the profitability of actual short trades, we must know the period the short position was held, and
we must net out the borrowing costs and the overall movements in the bond market. The lent
bond database, which has the start and end date of bond loans and their borrowing costs, allows
us to undertake this analysis.
To calculate short sellers’ profitability, we compute a return on capital net of coupons
paid, accrued interest, and borrowing costs. We assume that the beginning and ending dates of a
short position are the same as the beginning and ending dates of a bond loan. Since corporate
bonds do not necessarily trade every day, we take as the starting price a bond price in the period
three trading days before until three trading days after the loan’s initiation. The ending price is
from a bond trade in the period three days before until three days after the loan’s termination. If
there are multiple trades within an allotted period, we take the one closest to the loan date. If

31

there are multiple trades in one day, we take the trade-size-weighted median price of all trades
that day.
Loans where the nearest trades are more than three days removed from either the loan
start or end date are eliminated. We also eliminate loans where the starting and ending dates are
matched to the same TRACE trade. This can occur if the loan is short term and there is only one
reported TRACE trade during the time period from three days before the initiation until three
days after loan termination. The profit from each loan, net of borrowing costs, accrued interest,
and coupon payments, is then summed to obtain aggregate short sellers’ profits over some
period. This amount is then divided by the average capital invested during that period. Average
capital invested is the summed daily par value of new and old outstanding loans divided by the
number of days in the time period. Thus, the net return on capital is calculated as total net profit
divided by average capital invested over a time period.
As an example, for the entire four-year period, the total profit assuming all borrowed
bonds were shorted is -$2.421 billion. The borrowing cost for all loans over the same period
totaled $112 million. The average amount of bond loans outstanding per day is $12.380
billion.17 Thus, the average monthly return over the four-year sample period is -48 bps. This is
consistent with positive monthly returns to long portfolios of shorted bonds in Table 9. For
example, in Panel A, the raw portfolio returns for equally-weighted and issue-size valueweighted for all lent bonds are 40 and 39 bps, respectively, and in Panel B, the comparable
returns for all new loans are 43 and 42 bps. These values would be even closer if Table 9
accounted for the average 2.8 basis point monthly borrowing cost.
We next evaluate short seller profits by several loan characteristics, including loan size,
duration, and borrowing cost. Loan size and duration do not substantively change the result
reported above, but borrowing costs appear to be responsible for some variation in short seller
profits. The return on capital for loans where the borrowing cost is greater than 100 bps is
substantially lower than the return on loans where the borrowing cost is less than 100 bps. The
return on capital is -123 bps per month for the more expensive loans and -46 bps per month for
the less expensive loans. Even though borrowing costs are higher for the more expensive loans,
they only account for 31 bps of the difference. This finding of larger losses for high borrowing
17

This number differs from the average daily par value of bonds on loan in the lender inventory in Table 1 because
we only compute profits when we have both beginning and ending TRACE prices, and the loan must begin and end
during our four-year period.

32

cost loans parallels the finding of high positive returns for the 95th and 99th borrowing cost
portfolios in Table 9.
Table 9 shows that portfolios formed on the basis of bond shorting activity do not earn
significant excess returns. Examining realized profits from the actual short trades indicate that
short sellers do not have private information. In fact, the average monthly return for short sellers
is negative and almost the inverse of the returns from holding the bond market. Thus, short
selling corporate bonds appears to take place in an efficient market, with a small cost. This
result is consistent with short selling being used as a hedging activity with short sellers paying
for the hedge.
8. Relationship between the Market for Shorting Bonds and the CDS Market
Rather than shorting a bond, another way for an investor to profit from a bond price
decline is to purchase a credit default swap (CDS). This is similar to a stock investor purchasing
a put. Unlike the options market for equities, which is smaller in notional amount than the stock
market, the notional amount of the CDS market has become larger than the market value of
corporate bonds. In mid 2009, the par value of corporate bonds was $6.8 trillion, while the
notional principal amount of CDS on corporate debt was $12.1 trillion.18
There is a documented link between shorting stocks and the equity options market. Many
dealers who write equity puts hedge their positions by shorting stocks. There is also a link
between option put-call parity and shorting constraints in the stock market (see, for example,
Figlewski and Webb (1993) and Ofek, Richardson, and Whitelaw (2004)).
We use Markit as the source for the CDS data. Markit collects data from various
financial institutions, inter-dealer brokers, and electronic trading platforms. The data consist of
daily CDS spreads for reference securities. Each CDS contract is assigned a REDCODE number
by Markit, which we then map to individual bond CUSIPs. Because of cross-default provisions,
CDS contracts can correspond to more than one bond for any given firm. As a result, we
ultimately match individual CDS to multiple bonds based on the first six digits of the bond
CUSIPs.

18

Corporate bond value is from Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA), and CDS market
value is from Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation (DTCC). This data is from 2009 because we are unable to
find the breakout of corporate debt CDS during our sample period. The par value of outstanding corporate bonds in
2007 is $7.2 trillion.

33

Of the 15,493 bonds in the lender’s inventory, we are able to match 7,033 (45.4%) to a
CDS. The percentage of bonds lent with a CDS is higher: of the 9,971 bonds ever lent, 5,540
(55.6%) had a corresponding CDS at some point during our sample period. Furthermore, of the
367,749 new loans in the sample, 77.8% are of bonds with CDS. Thus, inventory bonds matched
with CDS are more likely to be lent and constitute a much larger fraction of new loans. This
suggests that there are common factors that determine which bonds have CDS contracts and
which bonds are lent.
We next use the bond characteristics in Table 2 to examine the differences between bonds
with CDS and those without. Lent bonds with CDS tend to be larger and have much higher
credit quality than lent bonds without CDS. For example, 70.7% of the lent bonds with CDS are
investment grade at the time of the loan, while only 50.4% of the lent bonds without CDS are.
Examining loan size and duration in a manner similar to Table 3, we find that loans on bonds
with CDS have similar sizes and median duration to those without. Importantly, the distribution
of borrowing costs is almost identical between bonds with CDS and those without. For example,
the mean and median equally-weighted borrowing costs for bonds with CDS are 33 and 19 bps,
while they are 32 and 18 bps for bonds without CDS.
When we include an indicator for CDS in the borrowing cost regression presented in
Table 6, we find that the presence of a CDS results in a significant increase in borrowing costs of
1.5-2.0 bps and has no discernible impact on the relative importance of the other factors we
previously examined. This cross-sectional comparison does not imply that the presence of CDS
causes higher borrowing costs; rather it may reflect the fact that bonds that are most likely to be
shorted and are thus more expensive to short, are also most likely to have a CDS contract.
To look at the impact of CDS on borrowing costs, we next examine the introduction of a
CDS contract. We plot the borrowing cost on individual bonds for the 30 days before and after
Markit first lists a CDS on those bonds. This time series comparison holds fixed all other bond
attributes unlike the previous cross-sectional comparisons. There are 332 new CDS
introductions during our sample period, representing 1,589 lent bonds. 820 of these bonds have
borrowing cost data in the 61-day window. There is no noticeable change in borrowing costs
over this period. The average borrowing cost for the 30 days prior to the introduction of a CDS
contract is 27.2 bps, while the average for the 30 days after is 25.3 bps. There is also no
noticeable increase or decrease in the amount lent. Since Markit does not collect information

34

from all dealers, there is the possibility that CDS contracts exist for some bonds before they first
appear in Markit.
In summary, bonds with CDS tend to have higher loan activity than bonds without. In
addition, borrowing costs for loans with CDS are slightly higher than those without. Finally, the
introduction of a CDS contract does not materially affect borrowing costs in the short term. All
of these facts suggest that CDS are correlated with bond shorting, but do not substantially replace
it.
9. The 2007 Credit Crunch
The Credit Crunch of 2007-2008 started in late July or early August 2007. The 3-month
LIBOR-OIS rate, the difference between LIBOR and the overnight indexed swap rate, increased
from 12.25 bps on August 1st to 39.95 bps on August 8th. By September 10th, the rate was 94.90
bps. The LIBOR-OIS rate is considered by many to be a “barometer of fears of bank
insolvency.”19 This increase occurred shortly after Bear Stearns announced they were
liquidating two hedge funds investing in mortgage-backed securities on July 31, 2007. The
Federal Reserve Bank took immediate action, reducing interest rates starting in mid-August
2007.
We examine the impact of this turmoil in the credit markets on the market for borrowing
corporate bonds. Although we do not have data from the entire Credit Crunch of 2007-2008 in
our sample period, we are able to investigate the first six months, from July – December 2007.
In particular, we investigate the impact of the 2007 Credit Crunch on lending activity, borrowing
costs, and their determinants.
Figure 1 indicates that there was no distinguishable change in the number or par value of
outstanding loans during the period July 2007 to December 2007 compared to the first half of
2007. Moreover, in Table 1, the average daily par value of bonds on loans in 2007 is $14.4
billion, and the percentage of inventory lent is 7.3%. Although not shown, the average daily par
value of bonds on loan for the first and second half of 2007 are both $14.4 billion, and the
percentage of inventory lent changes from 7.1% to 7.5%. Both measures of loan activity are
greater than those in 2006, but below the activity in 2005. The average characteristics of bonds
lent reported in Table 2 also do not change between the first and the second half of 2007. The
size and duration of lent bonds reported in Table 3 also do not change in any meaningful way.
19

Alan Greenspan quoted in Thornton (2009).

35

While the number of bonds lent, their characteristics, and loan size do not change in the
second half of 2007, borrowing costs do. Figure 2 shows that following the March 2006 period,
the distribution of borrowing costs is compressed. During the first half of 2007, the spread
between the 20th and the 80th percentile borrowing cost averages 6 bps per month. In the second
half, the spread expands and the average difference between the 20th and the 80th percentile is 28
bps per month. This increase in spread is due to both an increase and decrease in borrowing
costs. As seen in Figure 2, the borrowing costs for the 80th percentile climbs from an average of
14 bps to 28 bps. At the same time, the borrowing cost for the 20th percentile falls from an
average of 8 bps to 0 bps with three months showing negative borrowing costs.
This increase in volatility of borrowing costs does not affect the mean or median
borrowing costs substantially. The mean equally-weighted and value-weighted borrowing costs
for the first half of 2007 are 19 and 13 bps, respectively. The comparable mean borrowing costs
for the second half of 2007 are 20 and 13 bps. The median equally-weighted and valueweighted borrowing costs behave similarly: they are 13 and 8 bps in the first half of 2007 and 13
and 7 bps in the second.
Borrowing costs becomes more volatile in the second half of 2007 because both
components of borrowing costs, the commercial paper rate and the rebate rate, are more volatile.
Although not shown, in the first half of 2007, only 6.7% of loans experienced commercial paper
rate changes of at least 5 bps, while in the second half, 59.0% of loans experienced commercial
paper rate changes of at least 5 bps. There is also a large increase in the percentage of loans that
have a change in their loan rebate rate during the second half of 2007. For the first half of 2007
the percentage with rebate rate changes is 29.4%, while for the second half it is 63.4%. Thus,
during the Credit Crunch of 2007 borrowing costs are reset more frequently than previously.
There is also a large number of loans with negative borrowing costs during the 2007
Credit Crunch period. This is different from the earlier sample period. During the second half of
2007, 17.6% of the loans have negative borrowing costs as compared to 3.4% during the first
half of 2007. Interestingly, 90% of the loans with negative borrowing costs in the second half of
2007 occur on only 26 days. As discussed in Section 5, these negative borrowing costs may
occur for two reasons. First, during this period short-term rates fell substantially below medium-

36

term rates and, as a result, reported commercial paper rates may not reflect market conditions.20
Second, these negative borrowing costs may arise if the lender is subsidizing borrowers to
maintain collateral pools.
This large number of loans with negative borrowing costs is the reason why in Figure 4,
where we plot borrowing costs against inventory lent, the line for the July 2007 to December
2007 period is below the other plotted lines for most of the range. However, the slope of the line
from this period continues to have a kink at 70%, and the slope is similar to that of lines from
earlier periods.
Since the distribution of borrowing costs widens during the second half of 2007, we reestimate the borrowing cost regression presented in Table 6 using only data from the second half
of 2007. For all four specifications of the model, the coefficients for the second half of 2007
have similar magnitudes as the entire period presented in Table 6. All coefficients also remain
significant.
In summary, the Credit Crunch of 2007 affected the market for borrowing corporate
bonds primarily by widening the distribution of borrowing costs. The number of loans, the types
of bonds lent, the size of loans, and the average borrowing costs all remained relatively stable in
the second half of 2007 compared to the prior period. Thus, the change we document in March
2006 appears to be more of a structural change than that occurring during the Credit Crunch of
2007.
10. Conclusion and Implications
This paper presents the first complete examination of short selling for securities traded in
an OTC market. It does this by utilizing a detailed proprietary database of corporate bond loans
from 2004 to 2007. It estimates that short selling constitutes 19.1% of the trading activity in the
corporate bond market. This is about two-thirds of the percentage of short selling in equity
markets.
The average borrowing cost of loans in the sample is 33 bps per year on an equallyweighted basis and 22 bps per year on a value-weighted basis for the entire period. These costs
decline over time and by 2007 are 19 and 13 bps, respectively. Small loans, fewer than 100
bonds, are more expensive than large loans early in our sample period, but by the end the mean

20

Our use of commercial paper rates as the market rate is not responsible for these negative borrowing costs. If we
use the Fed Funds rate, loans with negative borrowing costs are still prevalent.

37

and median borrowing costs are identical. There was a structural change in the pricing of
corporate bond loans in April 2006 that we cannot explain by either market or institutional
factors. At that date not only do small loans become cheaper, but the entire distribution of
borrowing costs, irrespective of loan size, is compressed.
Two other important factors, in addition to loan size, that determine borrowing costs are
the lender’s inventory and the bond’s credit rating. When the lender has greater than 70% of its
available bonds lent out, borrowing costs rise sharply. Furthermore, lower rated bonds are more
expensive to borrow, and borrowing costs increase substantially immediately following
bankruptcy. Bonds with credit downgrades not involving bankruptcy also experience borrowing
cost increases, albeit less dramatic.
Another factor impacting borrowing costs is the identity of the borrower. Broker effects
are significant both in our regression analysis and in multiple-broker contests. Moreover, our
results do not indicate that this pricing differential is due to volume.
The market for borrowing corporate bonds appears to be linked closely to the market for
borrowing stock. The borrowing costs for 78% of the matched bond and stock loans for the
same firm on the same day differ by one of six fixed amounts. Furthermore, the differences
between borrowing costs for corporate bonds and stocks are reduced after April 2006. By 2007,
69.0% of the matched borrowing costs are within +/- 10 bps of each other, and 39.4% are within
1 basis point.
The changes in bond borrowing costs in April 2006 involve three structural components.
First, borrowing costs for all loans are reduced. Second, the relatively higher borrowing costs for
small loans are reduced, and third, there is a reduction in the difference in borrowing costs
between stock and bond loans. Since we are only dealing with data from one lender, we do not
know if these changes are idiosyncratic or market-wide. Given the size and importance of our
proprietary lender in this market, however, we assume any changes our lender made in
borrowing costs would have a market-wide impact.
There is no evidence that, on average, bond short sellers have private information.
Portfolios formed on the basis of corporate bond borrowing costs or levels of borrowing activity
do not generate excess returns. Moreover, in aggregate, bond short-sellers do not realize a profit
from their trades. In addition, borrowing costs have a very small influence on overall trade
performance. Finally, there is strong evidence that short sellers, on average, pay a small cost for

38

shorting corporate bonds. This is consistent with shorting corporate bonds as a hedging activity
for which users pay a price.
These results are in contrast to some of the literature on stock short selling. That
literature demonstrates that some short portfolios, based on selection criteria such as a high level
of shorting activity and/or high borrowing costs, significantly underperform the market. In the
sample of bond short selling, short portfolios based on these criteria do not underperform. This
may be due to the fact that we are only examining bonds available in inventory from the lender.
As such, there may not be many bonds in the sample that are analogous to “hard to borrow”
stocks, which underperform in the stock literature.
Another important caveat to our work is that we only examine data from one lender. Still,
given the number of bonds and the size of lending activity, the conclusions that borrowing costs
for corporate bonds are small and that bond short sellers do not earn positive excess returns
applies to a large portion of this market.
We investigate the impact of the CDS market on the market for borrowing corporate
bonds tangentially. We find that bonds that have higher lending activity are more likely to have
CDS contracts. Furthermore, we find that these bonds have small, but significantly higher
borrowing costs (one or two bps) than bonds without CDS contracts. These differences are after
controlling for other factors such as percent on loan, loan size, and bond rating. We conclude
that the CDS market is correlated with bond shorting and is not a perfect substitute.
Finally, we examine the first six months of the 2007 Credit Crunch and compare it to the
remainder of our period. We find that the volume and average pricing of corporate bond loans
do not change. We do find, however, that the distribution of borrowing costs widen substantially
during this period. There may be effects of the 2007 Credit Crunch on this market that do not
appear until 2008, which our analysis will not capture.
Our results speak to the larger literature on short sale constraints and their effects on asset
prices. This literature has argued that short sale constraints may generate mis-valuation, and
short selling takes place primarily for speculative reasons. At least for the sample of bonds
covered by our lender, we find that while short selling is a large and important market activity,
constraints, as measured by borrowing costs, do not have a measurable impact on corporate bond
pricing. In addition, we find that shorting securities that are traded in an over-the-counter market
is very similar to shorting exchange-listed securities. Moreover, the fact that portfolios of heavily

39

shorted bonds do not generate excess returns suggests that speculation is not driving shorting
activity. Finally, our results indicate that short selling is not responsible for the growth of the
CDS market, nor is it being replaced by it.

40

References
Asquith, Paul, Andrea Au, and Parag A. Pathak (2006): “Short Sales Constraints.” Unpublished
mimeo, MIT Sloan.
Asquith, Paul and Lisa Meulbroek (1995): “An Empirical Investigation of Short Interest.”
Unpublished MIT Working paper.
Asquith, Paul, Rebecca Oman, and Chris Safaya (2010): “Short Sales and Trade Classification
Algorithms.” Journal of Financial Markets, forthcoming.
Asquith, Paul, Parag A. Pathak, and Jay Ritter (2005): “Short Interest, Institutional Ownership
and Stock Returns.” Journal of Financial Economics, 78(2), 243-276.
Bai, Yang, Eric C. Chang, and Jiang Wang (2006): “Asset Prices Under Short-Sales
Constraints.” Working paper, MIT Sloan School of Management.
Bao, Jack and Jun Pan (2009): “Excess Volatility of Corporate Bonds.” Working paper, MIT
Sloan School of Management.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, William Maxwell, Kathleen Kahle, and Danielle Xu (2009): “Measuring
Abnormal Bond Performance.” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 4219-4258.
Bessembinder, Hendrik and William Maxwell (2008): “Transparency and the Corporate Bond
Market.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, William Maxwell, and Kumar Venkataraman (2006): “Market
Transparency, Liquidity Externalities, and Institutional Trading Costs in Corporate
Bonds.” Journal of Financial Economics, 82(2), 251-288.
Boehmer, Ekkehart, Charles Jones, and Xiaoyan Zhang (2008): “Which Shorts Are Informed?”
Journal of Finance, 63(2): 491-527.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy C. Stein (2002): “Breadth of Ownership and Stock
Returns.” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 171-205.
Cohen, Lauren, Karl Diether, and Christopher Malloy (2007): “Supply and Demand Shifts in the
Shorting Market.” Journal of Finance, 62: 2061-2096.
D’avolio, Gene (2002): “The Market for Borrowing Stock.” Journal of Financial Economics,
66, 271-306.
Diamond, Douglas and Robert Verrechia (1987): “Constraints on short-selling and asset price
adjustment to private information.” Journal of Financial Economics, 18, 27-311.

41

Diether, Karl, K.-H Lee, and Ingrid M. Werner (2009): “Short-Sale Strategies and Return
Predictability.” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 575-607.
Duffie, Darrell (1996): “Special Repo Rates.” Journal of Finance, 51(2), 493-526.
Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Pedersen (2002): “Securities Lending, Shorting,
and Pricing.” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 307-339.
Edwards, Amy, Larry Harris, and M. Piwowar (2006): “Corporate Bond Market Transparency
and Transaction Costs.” Journal of Finance, 62, 1421-1451.
Figlewski, Stephen and Gwendolyn P. Webb (1993): “Options, Short Sales, and Market
Completeness.” Journal of Finance, 48, 761-777.
Fostel, Ana and John Geanakoplos (2008): “Leverage Cycles and the Anxious Economy.”
American Economic Review, 98(4), 1211-1244.
Harrison, J. Michael and David M. Kreps (1978): “Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock
Market with Heterogeneous Expectations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 92(2), 323336.
Geczy, Chris, David K. Musto, and Adam Reed (2002): “Stocks are Special Too: An Analysis
of the Equity Lending Market.” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 241-269.
Jones, Charles M. and Owen Lamont (2002): “Short Sale Constraints and Stock Returns.”
Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 207-239.
Lintner, John (1971): “The Effects of Short Selling and Margin Requirements in Perfect Capital
Markets.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 6(5), 1173-1195.
Miller, Edward M. (1977): “Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion.” Journal of Finance,
32, 1151-1168.
Nashikkar, Amrut and Lasse Pedersen (2007): “Corporate Bond Specialness.” Working paper,
New York University.
Ofek, Eli and Matthew Richardson (2003): “DotCom Mania: The Rise and Fall of Internet Stock
Prices.” Journal of Finance, 58, 1113-1138.
Ofek, Eli, Matthew Richardson, and Robert Whitelaw (2004): “Limited Arbitrage and Short Sale
Restrictions: Evidence from the Options Market.” Journal of Financial Economics, 74,
305-342.
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (2009): Report on Outstanding U.S. Bond
Market Debt

42

Thornton, Daniel L. (2009): “What the LIBOR-OIS Spread Says” Economic Synopsis, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

43

Table 1. Number and Par Value of Bonds in Corporate Bond Databases
Table 1 reports the number and par value of bonds in the FISD Corporate Bond, Proprietary Bond Inventory, and Proprietary Bond Loan databases for the overall period and by
year. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or
"EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007. All data is daily except for data from the proprietary
inventory database which is only available monthly from January 1, 2004 to March 31, 2005.

Panel A: Daily Average Number of Bonds
2004 - 2007
2004
2005

2006

2007

Number of Corporate Bond CUSIPs in FISD

37,535

32,919

35,796

37,471

39,163

Number of Corporate Bond CUSIPs in Both
Lender Database and FISD

7,752

7,592

7,669

7,750

7,827

Percent of FISD Represented in Lender
Database

20.7%

23.1%

21.4%

20.7%

20.0%

Number of Corporate Bond CUSIPs in
Lender Database and FISD That Go on Loan

2,901

2,612

2,797

2,841

3,054

Percent of Corporate Bond CUSIPs in Lender
Database and FISD That Go on Loan

37.4%

34.4%

36.5%

36.7%

39.0%

2005

2006

2007

Panel B: Par Value of Bonds
2004 - 2007
2004
Average Daily Par Value of Existing FISD
Bonds (Billions of $)

6,619

5,649

6,105

6,530

7,159

Average Daily Par Value of Existing FISD
Bonds in Lender Inventory (Billions of $)

193.3

183.4

186.7

195.5

196.8

Lender Inventory as a % of FISD Par Value

2.9%

3.2%

3.1%

3.0%

2.7%

Average Daily Par Value of Bonds On Loan
in Lender Inventory (Billions of $)

14.3

14.2

14.7

13.9

14.4

Lent as a % of Lender Inventory

7.4%

7.7%

7.9%

7.1%

7.3%

Figure 1. Number and Par Value of Outstanding Loans

12,000

Figure 1 plots the evolution of the corporate bond loans from the Proprietary Bond Inventory and Loan databases the over time. The left-hand
axis reports the number of loans outstanding, while the right-hand axis shows the total par value of these loans. Convertibles, exchangeables,
unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or
"EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007.

$18
$16

Numb
ber of Loans Outstanding

$14
$12

8,000

$10
6,000
$8
4,000

$6
$4

2,000

0

Number of Loans Outstanding
Par Value of Loans Outstanding

$2
$0

Par Value of Loans Outstanding (Billions of $)

10,000

Table 2. Characteristics of Bonds in the Corporate Bond Databases
Table 2 reports bond characteristics from the FISD Corporate Bond, Proprietary Bond Inventory, and Proprietary Bond Loan databases. All ratings are S&P Ratings. Ratings data is missing for some FISD bonds.
Therefore, the FISD dataset in Panel B is a subset of the overall FISD dataset in Panel A. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and
all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007. Time series variables are daily averages.
"Rating at Issue" is defined as the first S&P rating. For rating and rating at issue, we report the median. The treasury spread variable is available over the entire sample period for 15,724, 8,601, and 6,034 bonds
in FISD, Lender Inventory, and Lent, respectively. In 2004, it is available for 13,187, 5,960, and 3,157 bonds. In 2005, it is available for 12,879, 5,605, and 3,509 bonds. In 2006, it is available for 12,686,
5,523, and 3,835 bonds. In 2007, it is available for 12,576, 5,584, and 3,834 bonds.
Panel A: Non-rating Characteristics of Corporate Bonds

Number of Observations:

2004 - 2007
FISD (57,622), Inventory
(15,493), Lent (9,971)
Standard
Average
Deviation

2004
FISD (37,978), Inventory
(9,730), Lent (4,852)
Standard
Average
Deviation

2005
FISD (40,611), Inventory
(9,534), Lent (5,609)
Standard
Average
Deviation

2006
FISD (43,189), Inventory
(9,909), Lent (6,344)
Standard
Average
Deviation

2007
FISD (44,807), Inventory
(9,884), Lent (6,262)
Standard
Average
Deviation

Size At Issue (Millions of $)
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent

$175.4
$418.6
$493.8

$325.1
$461.1
$484.7

$168.0
$374.3
$488.5

$288.6
$408.0
$476.8

$168.5
$402.7
$489.9

$296.2
$431.7
$475.4

$175.4
$435.7
$504.8

$314.0
$460.7
$477.5

$183.8
$474.9
$555.6

$339.1
$496.5
$518.5

Maturity at Issuance (years)
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent

10.7
11.3
12.0

10.1
10.1
10.2

12.5
12.0
12.0

10.5
10.1
9.3

12.3
12.1
12.1

10.4
10.3
9.6

12.0
12.0
12.2

10.5
10.7
10.4

12.1
12.4
12.8

10.7
11.1
10.9

Time Since Issuance (years)
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent

5.3
4.4
3.7

5.6
4.0
3.2

5.5
4.3
3.4

5.8
3.8
2.9

5.3
4.3
3.5

5.7
3.9
3.0

5.4
4.4
3.7

5.6
4.0
3.2

5.4
4.4
3.8

5.6
4.1
3.4

% Defaulted
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent

0.6%
1.1%
0.8%

0.8%
1.4%
0.9%

0.7%
1.1%
0.7%

0.6%
1.0%
0.7%

0.5%
1.0%
0.6%

% Floating Rate
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent

22.3%
17.0%
10.4%

15.8%
10.3%
4.6%

17.1%
11.5%
6.5%

19.5%
15.2%
9.1%

19.5%
16.0%
10.0%

% Rule 144a
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent

20.6%
23.0%
14.3%

17.0%
16.0%
6.2%

17.8%
16.1%
8.6%

19.8%
18.1%
10.1%

19.6%
18.8%
10.4%

Table 2. Characteristics of Bonds in the Corporate Bond Databases
Table 2 reports bond characteristics from the FISD Corporate Bond, Proprietary Bond Inventory, and Proprietary Bond Loan databases. All ratings are S&P Ratings. Ratings data is missing for some FISD bonds.
Therefore, the FISD dataset in Panel B is a subset of the overall FISD dataset in Panel A. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and
all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007. Time series variables are daily averages.
"Rating at Issue" is defined as the first S&P rating. For rating and rating at issue, we report the median. The treasury spread variable is available over the entire sample period for 15,724, 8,601, and 6,034 bonds
in FISD, Lender Inventory, and Lent, respectively. In 2004, it is available for 13,187, 5,960, and 3,157 bonds. In 2005, it is available for 12,879, 5,605, and 3,509 bonds. In 2006, it is available for 12,686,
5,523, and 3,835 bonds. In 2007, it is available for 12,576, 5,584, and 3,834 bonds.
Panel B: Rating Characteristics of Corporate Bonds

Number of Observations:

2004 - 2007
FISD (31,145), Inventory
(11,897), Lent (9,025)
Median /
Standard
Average
Deviation

2004
FISD (24,637), Inventory
(8,487), Lent (4,559)
Median /
Standard
Average
Deviation

2005
FISD (26,587), Inventory
(8,156), Lent (5,284)
Median /
Standard
Average
Deviation

2006
FISD (29,805), Inventory
(8,319), Lent (5,954)
Median /
Standard
Average
Deviation

2007
FISD (30,532), Inventory
(8,396), Lent (5,841)
Median /
Standard
Average
Deviation

Median Rating at Issue
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent

A
BBB
BBB

ABBB+
BBB+

ABBB+
BBB+

A
BBB+
BBB+

A
BBB+
BBB+

Median Rating over Period
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent

ABBB+
BBB

BBB+
BBB
BBB

ABBB+
BBB

ABBB+
BBB

ABBB+
BBB

79.2%
69.0%
68.4%

78.1%
72.4%
71.5%

78.7%
73.8%
70.9%

79.0%
74.5%
71.6%

79.1%
74.3%
72.1%

70.6%
70.7%
64.5%

71.0%
69.8%
64.1%

69.0%
69.6%
61.5%

70.2%
71.1%
64.8%

72.0%
71.3%
66.4%

% Investment Grade at Issue
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent
% Investment Grade when Lent
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent
Treasury Spread (bps)*
FISD
Lender Inventory
Lent

178.2
178.4
165.5

181.7
155.2
138.0

170.7
163.4
148.9

181.8
145.0
119.3

179.4
156.3
147.6

184.2
133.3
116.7

185.5
155.6
152.4

185.4
130.2
123.0

191.8
161.3
157.7

185.7
130.0
123.9

Table 3. Loan Size, Loan Duration, and Changes in Loan Size
Table 3 provides descriptive statistics for the new bond loans in the Proprietary Bond Inventory and Loan databases for the overall period and
by year. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with
"KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31,
2007. Size of New Loans is reported as the number of bonds lent. Duration of New Loans is reported as the number of days that bonds are
lent. New loans are only defined when we have loan data for the previous day. That is, for the first day of data or the first day after missing
data, no loans classified as new. Similarly, duration and changes in loan size are only defined when the last day of a loan is not the day before
a missing day. Thus, in the duration and loan size calculations, there are only 359,754 loans over the entire sample period, and 78,448, 86,440,
93,667 and 101,199 loans in 2004, 2005, 2006 and 2007, respectively.

Year
Number of New Loans
Size of New Loans (Bonds)
Mean
Median
Mode
10th percentile
25th percentile
75th percentile
90th percentile
Duration of New Loans (Days)
Mean
Median
Mode
10th percentile
25th percentile
75th percentile
90th percentile
Changes in Loan Size
Percentage of loans that decrease in
size
Average total decrease in loan size
(for loans that decrease)
Average number of decreases (for
loans that decrease)

2004-2007
367,749

2004
82,119

2005
88,921

2006
94,320

2007
102,389

1444.1
350
100

1558.5
490
100

1498.9
453
100

1411.9
325
100

1334.3
250
100

73
100
1,435
4,000

85
100
1,600
4,100

100
100
1,554
4,000

60
100
1,436
3,975

55
100
1,066
3,515

32.4
11
1

34.8
11
1

32.1
10
1

35.4
12
1

28.4
11
1

1
3
34
83

1
3
34
84

1
2
33
82

1
3
37
92

1
3
33
76

31.2%

33.1%

30.5%

32.6%

29.0%

56.9%

58.1%

58.5%

56.6%

54.7%

1.9

1.8

1.8

2.0

1.8

Table 4. Distribution of New Loan Borrowing Costs
Table 4 Panel A reports borrowing costs on new loans over time, equal-weighted by loan (EW) and value-weighted by loan size (VW). Panel B presents borrowing costs over
time partitioned by loan size. Data is from the Proprietary Bond Loan database for the overall period and by year. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds,
bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period
analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007. Loan Borrowing Costs are defined as the One-month Commercial Paper Rate minus the Rebate Rate. Loans are
allocated to the year in which they are initiated, even if they extend into subsequent years. New loans are only defined when we have loan data for the previous day. That is,
for the first day of data or the first day after missing data, no loans classified as new.

Panel A: Borrowing Costs (bps) Equally Weighted by Loan (EW) and Weighted by Par Value of Loan (VW)
Year
Number of New Loans

2004-2007
367,749
EW
VW

2004
82,119

2005
88,921

2006
94,320

EW

VW

EW

VW

EW

VW

2007
102,389
EW
VW

Mean
Median
Mode

32.6
18.0
13.0

22.2
14.0
13.0

36.7
31.0
51.0

21.5
16.0
51.0

45.0
49.0
49.0

28.0
18.1
49.0

31.6
16.0
13.0

26.3
14.0
13.0

19.3
13.0
13.0

13.1
8.0
13.0

10th percentile
25th percentile
75th percentile
90th percentile

7.0
12.0
51.0
64.0

3.5
8.8
23.0
40.0

11.0
15.0
53.0
67.0

8.0
14.0
25.0
39.0

12.0
18.0
59.0
72.0

7.1
13.0
28.0
53.0

8.0
12.0
48.0
58.0

4.0
9.0
22.0
48.0

-5.0
7.8
17.0
49.0

-3.0
3.0
14.0
26.1

Panel B: Borrowing Costs (bps) by Loan Size
Year
Number of Loans

2004-2007
109,124
258,625
≤100
>100

2004
23,127
58,992
≤100
>100

2005
24,067
64,854
≤100
>100

2006
27,126
67,194
≤100
>100

2007
34,804
67,585
≤100
>100

Mean
Median
Mode

39.0
48.0
13.0

29.9
16.0
13.0

50.9
52.0
51.0

31.1
22.0
51.0

62.6
56.0
49.0

38.5
27.0
14.0

33.0
20.0
13.0

31.1
15.0
13.0

19.4
13.0
13.0

19.2
13.0
13.0

10th percentile
25th percentile
75th percentile
90th percentile

9.0
13.0
54.0
69.0

6.0
12.0
49.0
59.0

12.0
50.0
65.0
76.0

11.0
15.0
51.0
58.0

24.5
50.0
67.0
74.0

11.0
16.0
54.0
69.0

9.0
13.0
50.0
61.0

8.0
12.0
35.0
56.0

3.0
9.0
21.8
50.0

-1.0
5.5
15.0
49.0

Figure 2. Equally-Weighted Monthly Distribution of Loan Borrowing Costs
Figure 2 plots the equally-weighted borrowing cost quintiles monthly from the Proprietary Bond Inventory and Loan databases over time.
Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK",
"REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007.

80
70

Loa
an Borrowing Costs (bps)

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10

Percentiles
80th
60th
40th
20th

Figure 3. Histogram of Equally-weighted Loan Borrowing Costs by Time Period
Figure 3 plots histograms of equally-weighted borrowing costs pre- and post- April 2006. Data is from the Proprietary Bond Inventory and Loan
databases over time. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds
with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007.
Loans with negative borrowing costs are not included and loans with borrowing costs greater than 100 basis points are aggregated at 101+ category.

40%
Before April 1, 2006
After April 1, 2006
35%

Borrowingg Cost Frequency

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
0-5

6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 31-35 36-40 41-45 46-50 51-55 56-60 61-65 66-70 71-75 76-80 81-85 86-90 91-95 96-100 101+

Borrowing Cost (in bps)

Figure 4. Relationship Between Borrowing Cost and Percent of Inventory On Loan
Figure 4 plots the relationship between the average borrowing cost and the amount of inventory on loan for the period April 2005 to December 2007 and for
several sub-periods. Data is from the Proprietary Bond Inventory and Loan databases. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with
missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded.

80
4/1/2005 to 12/31/2007
4/1/2005 to 3/31/2006
70

4/1/2006 to 12/31/2007
7/1/2007 to 12/31/2007

Borrowingg Cost (in bps)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
0%

5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 55% 60% 65% 70% 75% 80% 85% 90% 95% 100%
On Loan Percentage

Table 5. Corporate Bonds with the Highest Borrowing Costs
Table 5 presents the 35 corporate bonds with the highest borrowing costs in our sample. Data is from the Proprietary Bond Loan database for the overall period and by year. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit
deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period analyzed is
January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007. Each bond is listed once with corresponding date, rebate rate, maximum loan borrowing cost, and on loan percentage. Number of Bonds is the number of bonds
issued by a given firm that ever had borrowing costs greater than the 250th most expensive to borrow bond in our sample.

CUSIP

Issuing Company Name

13134VAA1
131347AW6
26632QAK9
247126AC9
07556QAN5
45661YAA8
729136AF8
909279AW1
256605AD8
15101QAC2
800907AK3
194832AD3
001765AU0
370442BT1
35687MAP2
984756AD8
85375CAK7
978093AE2
624581AB0
256669AD4
179584AG2
767754AD6
156503AH7
373200AT1
667281AM1
640204AH6
651715AD6
75040KAC3
872962AD7
247361XY9
420029AD2
721467AF5
79546VAF3
87971KAA5
682391AC1

CALPINE CDA ENERGY FIN ULC
CALPINE CORP
DURA OPER CORP
DELPHI AUTOMOTIVE SYS CORP
BEAZER HOMES USA INC
INEOS GROUP HLDGS PLC
PLIANT CORP
UNITED AIR LINES INC
DOLE FOOD INC
CELESTICA INC
SANMINA - SCI CORP
COLLINS & AIKMAN PRODS CO
AMR CORP DEL
GENERAL MTRS CORP
FREESCALE SEMICONDUCTOR INC
YANKEE ACQUISITION CORP
STANDARD PAC CORP NEW
WOLVERINE TUBE INC
MOVIE GALLERY INC
DOLLAR GEN CORP
CLAIRES STORES INC
RITE AID CORP
CENTURY COMMUNICATIONS CORP
GEORGIA GULF CORP
NORTHWEST AIRLS INC
NEIMAN MARCUS GROUP INC
NEWPAGE CORP
RADIOLOGIX INC
TECHNICAL OLYMPIC USA INC
DELTA AIR LINES INC DEL
HAWAIIAN TELCOM COMMUNICATIONS INC
PILGRIMS PRIDE CORP
SALLY HLDGS LLC / SALLY CAP INC
TEMBEC INDS INC
155 EAST TROPICANA LLC / 155 EAST TROPICANA FIN CORP

Date

Rebate Rate (in
bps)

Borrowing Cost
(in bps)

5/10/06
2/15/06
2/28/07
2/2/06
10/31/07
10/31/07
10/31/07
12/13/05
10/31/07
10/31/07
10/31/07
6/23/06
3/14/07
10/31/07
9/6/07
8/7/07
10/31/07
2/1/06
10/24/06
10/16/07
12/26/07
8/2/06
7/31/06
9/11/07
8/1/06
7/18/06
7/27/06
7/18/06
6/26/07
7/17/06
7/26/06
8/7/07
9/6/07
12/12/06
6/29/06

-1,000
-1,000
-700
-700
-479
-479
-479
-500
-413
-400
-400
-300
-250
-288
-200
-200
-200
-200
-100
-100
-75
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1,501
1,450
1,223
1,150
932
932
932
927
866
853
853
824
775
741
728
728
653
648
625
583
539
532
531
531
531
530
530
530
530
529
529
528
528
528
527

On Loan %
100.00%
75.87%
21.62%
51.59%
100.00%
65.26%
100.00%
90.18%
38.82%
100.00%
76.75%
99.46%
76.26%
88.29%
84.32%
100.00%
100.00%
64.29%
34.69%
99.89%
99.00%
10.73%
73.22%
100.00%
80.00%
97.22%
84.70%
98.81%
100.00%
99.66%
82.81%
99.76%
85.02%
14.27%
99.45%

Number of
Bonds
1
10
2
3
2
1
3
1
1
1
1
2
1
6
2
2
3
1
1
1
2
2
3
2
4
1
1
1
1
4
5
2
2
3
1

Table 6. Regression Analysis of Determinants of Borrowing Costs
Table 6 reports estimates of the following equation:
Borrowing Costibt = β1*OnLoan%bt +β2*loan sizei + β3*ratingbt + β4*issue sizeb + β5*time since issuebt + β6*floating rateb + β7*rule144ab +
δt + λbroker + κb + εibt
where CPrate is the one month financial commercial paper rate (in bps) and RR is the rebate rate (in bps). The on loan % is the percentage
of daily inventory already lent, and loan size is the total number of bonds lent in thousands of bonds (that is, the loan value in $ millions).
Rating is the bond’s S&P rating at the time of the loan (where AAA is given a value of 1, D is given a value of 22, and all intermediate
ratings are given consecutive values between 1 and 22). Issue size is the size of the initial bond offering (in $100 millions). The time since
issue variable is the time since the bond was issued (in years). The floating rate variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the bond pays a
floating rate coupon and 0 if the bond has a fixed rate coupon. The Rule 144a variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the bond was
issued under SEC Rule 144a and 0 otherwise. δ represents a set of dummies for each trading day in the sample. κ represents a set of
dummies for each bond CUSIP in the sample, and λ are a set of dummies for each unique borrower in the sample who borrows 100 or more
times during our sample period. Subscripts i, b, and t correspond to loan i, bond b, and day t. There are 62 brokers that borrow from the
lender during the period covered by the regression, 38 make 100 or more loans and 24 make less than 100 loans. Standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and t-statistics are reported in parenthesis. The data is from the FISD Corporate Bond, Proprietary Bond
Inventory, and Proprietary Bond Loan databases. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or
nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time
period analyzed is April 1, 2005 through December 31, 2007. * significant at 0.10; ** significant at 0.05; *** significant at 0.01.

[1]
26.30 ***
(47.42)

[2]
26.23 ***
(48.33)

[3]
3.19 ***
(6.10)

[4]
4.38 ***
(8.58)

-2.16 ***
(-49.10)

-1.74 ***
(-39.30)

-1.67 ***
(-48.91)

-1.36 ***
(-40.20)

Bond Rating
(where AAA=1, …, D=22)

1.12 ***
(35.12)

1.41 ***
(40.64)

3.33 ***
(16.30)

3.23 ***
(16.05)

Bond Issue Size ($100M)

0.31 ***
(22.15)

0.31 ***
(22.46)

Bond Time Since Issuance
(years)

0.74 ***
(17.90)

0.72 ***
(17.87)

-5.86 ***
(-13.32)

-5.72 ***
(-13.10)

Bond Rule 144a

3.34 ***
(4.31)

3.05 ***
(3.94)

Broker Dummies
CUSIP Dummies

N
N

Y
N

N
Y

Y
Y

On Loan %
Loan Size (thousands)

Bond Floating

Broker effects
F-test
p-value
max - min
p-value
p_75-p_25
p-value
R2
N

n/a
n/a

F = 969.21 ***
p < 0.0001

n/a
n/a

F = 1172.05 ***
p < 0.0001

n/a

59.28 ***
p < 0.0010
23.72 ***
p < 0.0010

n/a

59.14 ***
p < 0.0010
19.76 ***
p < 0.0010

n/a
0.3924
258,060

0.4328
258,060

n/a
0.5486
258,060

0.5888
258,060

Table 7. Competitive Races between Brokers
Table 7 uses data from the Proprietary Bond Loan database and compares broker borrowing costs by examining all days where two or more brokers borrow the
same bond. 26 identified brokers have at least 100 competitive races. Success in 2 Broker and 3+ Broker Competitive Races is defined as having the lowest
borrowing cost for a new loan in the same bond on the same day. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical
offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004
through December 31, 2007. *** indicates Percentage of Wins that are significantly different than 50% and 33.33% at 0.01 one tailed probability for 2 and 3+
brokers, respectively.

Broker ID
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
Remainder

# of Loans
40,994
2,595
12,773
5,816
11,132
1,755
4,190
35,258
972
2,209
3,767
3,011
11,762
21,355
5,428
87,612
6,633
14,339
43,344
2,662
2,244
10,638
14,407
2,646
3,460
11,813
4,934

# of Bonds
Borrowed
41,714,394
2,075,390
42,175,029
24,283,893
28,620,944
7,944,398
12,189,596
90,905,175
2,639,919
5,404,871
11,597,273
8,902,543
26,925,386
38,973,071
6,060,740
84,174,639
18,783,575
23,432,851
22,503,842
1,787,228
535,303
3,875,297
5,641,386
1,213,004
1,323,795
5,726,357
11,640,326

Total Lending
Fees Paid
$13,090,277
$63,271
$6,994,331
$7,006,490
$4,632,767
$2,764,846
$3,043,453
$22,738,674
$189,152
$1,420,770
$9,623,957
$2,063,986
$3,697,178
$10,798,318
$1,565,975
$40,545,662
$7,711,792
$15,138,170
$4,825,499
$260,718
$88,309
$858,456
$1,195,550
$253,763
$272,237
$1,701,179
4,764,471

2 Broker Races
# Competitive Percentage of
Races / Wins
Wins
6,478 / 5,993
92.5% ***
546 / 479
87.7% ***
1,780 / 1,423
79.9% ***
790 / 622
78.7% ***
1,668 / 1,261
75.6% ***
257 / 189
73.5% ***
556 / 406
73.0% ***
3,444 / 2,128
61.8% ***
125 / 76
60.8%
345 / 194
56.2%
366 / 195
53.3%
399 / 206
51.6%
1,444 / 695
48.1%
2,323 / 976
42.0%
503 / 177
35.2%
6,992 / 2,399
34.3%
645 / 217
33.6%
1,404 / 403
28.7%
2,951 / 839
28.4%
287 / 41
14.3%
237 / 29
12.2%
996 / 113
11.3%
1,464 / 94
6.4%
309 / 19
6.1%
518 / 24
4.6%
1,577 / 54
3.4%
682 / 291
42.7%

3+ Broker Races
# Competitive Percentage of
Races / Wins
Wins
1,561 / 1,231
78.9% ***
164 / 127
77.4% ***
719 / 476
66.2% ***
361 / 239
66.2% ***
574 / 328
57.1% ***
118 / 59
50.0% ***
252 / 151
59.9% ***
1,246 / 534
42.9% ***
55 / 25
45.5%
129 / 46
35.7%
183 / 68
37.2%
184 / 77
41.8%
584 / 226
38.7%
861 / 332
38.6%
195 / 50
25.6%
2,057 / 519
25.2%
318 / 83
26.1%
607 / 144
23.7%
1,109 / 241
21.7%
136 / 19
14.0%
139 / 4
2.9%
395 / 25
6.3%
442 / 26
5.9%
136 / 4
2.9%
175 / 11
6.3%
458 / 29
6.3%
256 / 90
35.2%

Figure 5. Borrowing Costs Around Bankruptcies
Figure 5 plots borrowing costs around bankruptcy filings. Data is from the Proprietary Bond Inventory and Loan databases. Convertibles,
exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or
"EQUITY" in their description are excluded. There are 241 bonds in the inventory database involved in a bankruptcy, representing 93 unique
bankruptcies. However, only 88 bonds have any lending activity (either new or existing loans) during the period from 30 trading days before until 30
trading days after the bankruptcy,. These bonds correspond to 42 unique bankruptcies.

300
280
260

Borrowing Cost (bps)

240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
-30

-20

-10
0
10
Days Relative to Bankruptcy Announcement

20

30

Figure 6. Borrowing Costs Around Credit Events
Figure 6 plots borrowing costs around credit rating changes. Data is from the Proprietary Bond Inventory and Loan databases. Convertibles,
exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or
"EQUITY" in their description are excluded. We define a large credit rating change as a movement of three or more S&P ratings, or one full letter or
more, e.g. going from an A+ to a B+ or from a BB- to an AA-. There are 292 full-letter upgrades on bonds in the inventory database, which
correspond to 281 unique bonds. Our data covers 125 of these upgrades, corresponding to 122 unique bonds. There are 381 full-letter downgrades
during our time period on 356 unique bonds. Our data covers 206 of these downgrades, corresponding to 193 bonds.

70

60

Borrow
wing Cost (bps)

50

40

30

20

10
Full Letter Downgrades
Full Letter Upgrades
0
-30

-20

-10
0
10
Days Relative to Credit Rating Change

20

30

Figure 7. Bond and Stock Borrowing Cost Differences
Figure 7 examines differences in borrowing costs between matched corporate bonds and stocks. Data is from the Proprietary Loan databases for the
overall period and by year. Only bonds that can be matched to a unique stock for a given loan and date are included. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit
deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their
description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007.

90%
80%

Precentaage of Matched Firms

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

bonds 40 bps more expensive than equity
bonds 1 bp cheaper than equity

bonds 35 bps more expensive than equity
bonds 5 bp cheaper than equity

bonds and equity are the same
bonds 10 bp cheaper than equity

Table 8. Bond and Stock Borrowing Relationship

Table 8 examines differences in borrowing costs between matched corporate bonds and stocks. Data is from the
Proprietary Loan databases for the overall period and by year. Only bonds that can be matched to a unique stock
for a given loan and date are included. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with
missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK", "REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their
description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007.
2004-2007
111,903

2004
26,345

2005
28,056

2006
28,433

2007
29,069

% bond > stock
% bond = stock
% bond < stock
% bond and stocks within +/- 10 bps
% bond > stock by more than 10 bps

28.8%
3.3%
67.9%
63.8%
25.7%

37.1%
0.2%
62.6%
58.2%
34.5%

39.9%
0.2%
59.9%
53.8%
37.9%

23.5%
4.5%
72.0%
67.6%
20.3%

15.8%
7.9%
76.3%
74.6%
11.3%

# bond > 100 bps
% of all matched loans
# stocks > 100 bps
% of all matched loans

1,390
1.2%
6,860
6.1%

170
0.6%
827
3.1%

581
2.1%
1,448
5.2%

397
1.4%
2,158
7.6%

242
0.8%
2,427
8.3%

if bond > 100 bps, % stock > 100 bps
if stock > 100 bps, % bond > 100 bps

14.7%
3.0%

17.6%
3.6%

11.0%
4.4%

18.4%
3.4%

15.7%
1.6%

# bond > 75 bps
% of all matched loans
# stock > 75 bps
% of all matched loans

3,074
2.7%
7,442
6.7%

947
3.6%
1,140
4.3%

1,128
4.0%
1,530
5.5%

637
2.2%
2,244
7.9%

362
1.2%
2,528
8.7%

if bond > 75 bps, % stock > 75 bps
if stock > 75 bps, % bond > 75 bps

11.0%
4.5%

9.2%
7.6%

9.0%
6.6%

14.0%
4.0%

16.9%
2.4%

N

Table 9. Monthly Returns to Long Bond Portfolio Positions
Table 9 uses the TRACE database and computes returns for portfolios of bonds that are borrowed. Equally-weighted and issue-size value weighted returns are computed for each month,
both raw and excess (net of TRACE). Portfolio quintiles are calculated at the beginning of each period based on the set of bonds that go on loan in that period. Equally-weighted raw
returns are the unweighted average of (end of period sell - start of period buy + coupons paid + change in accrued interest) / (start of period buy + initial accrued interest). Equallyweighted excess returns are the unweighted average of raw returns minus the TRACE portfolio return. The TRACE portfolio return is the return from holding a portfolio of all bonds in
TRACE. The issue-size value-weighted raw returns are the average of raw returns, weighted by the bond's issue size. Issue-size value-weighted excess returns subtract the issue-size value
weighted TRACE portfolio return. Convertibles, exchangeables, unit deals, perpetual bonds, bonds with missing or nonsensical offering amount data, and all bonds with "KNOCK",
"REVERSE", or "EQUITY" in their description are excluded. The time period analyzed is January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2007.

Panel A: Bond Portfolios Which Are Formed According To Percent of Inventory On Loan

Portfolio
Not Lent
Lent
1st Quintile
2nd Quintile
3rd Quintile
4th Quintile
5th Quintile
95th Percentile
99th Percentile

# of Bonds in
Portfolio
Mean
[1]
5013.5
2821.5
564.8
564.3
564.3
564.3
563.9
141.5
57.7

# of Bonds
with TRACE
Coverage in
All Months
Mean
[2]
2574.1
2246.9
478.4
466.8
454.1
442.0
405.6
93.9
35.4

Equally-weighted
Raw Returns
Mean
Std. Dev
[3]
[4]
0.40%
0.70%
0.40%
0.98%
0.37%
0.92%
0.39%
0.93%
0.40%
0.99%
0.41%
1.03%
0.47%
1.32%
0.44%
1.97%
0.37%
2.38%

Issue-size Valueweighted Raw
Returns
Mean
Std. Dev
[5]
[6]
0.37%
0.69%
0.40%
0.96%
0.37%
0.91%
0.38%
0.93%
0.39%
1.02%
0.40%
1.02%
0.48%
1.28%
0.47%
1.98%
0.43%
2.64%

Equally-weighted
Excess Returns (Net
of TRACE)
Mean
Std. Dev
[7]
[8]
-0.04%
0.32%
-0.04%
0.39%
-0.08%
0.48%
-0.06%
0.43%
-0.05%
0.43%
-0.03%
0.46%
0.03%
0.82%
0.00%
1.68%
-0.07%
2.21%

Issue-size Valueweighted Excess
Returns (Net of
TRACE)
Mean
Std. Dev
[9]
[10]
-0.05%
0.17%
-0.02%
0.17%
-0.05%
0.28%
-0.03%
0.24%
-0.02%
0.27%
-0.01%
0.26%
0.07%
0.79%
0.06%
1.72%
0.02%
2.51%

Panel B: Bond Portfolios Which Are Formed According To Borrowing Cost

Portfolio
All New Loans
1st Quintile
2nd Quintile
3rd Quintile
4th Quintile
5th Quintile
95th Percentile
99th Percentile

# of Bonds in
Portfolio
Mean
[1]
2360.9
536.0
469.6
509.7
451.7
403.5
163.3
26.4

# of Bonds
with TRACE
Coverage in
All Months
Mean
[2]
1937.3
432.2
373.3
417.3
380.5
342.1
134.0
19.5

Equally-weighted
Raw Returns
Mean
Std. Dev
[3]
[4]
0.43%
0.89%
0.45%
0.93%
0.45%
0.90%
0.40%
0.92%
0.38%
0.85%
0.46%
0.96%
0.56%
1.36%
0.81%
3.60%

Issue-size Valueweighted Raw
Returns
Mean
Std. Dev
[5]
[6]
0.43%
0.90%
0.44%
0.92%
0.45%
0.91%
0.40%
0.92%
0.38%
0.86%
0.46%
0.94%
0.56%
1.38%
1.12%
4.67%

Equally-weighted
Excess Returns (Net
of TRACE)
Mean
Std. Dev
[7]
[8]
-0.06%
0.40%
-0.05%
0.46%
-0.04%
0.42%
-0.09%
0.41%
-0.10%
0.44%
-0.03%
0.50%
0.07%
0.96%
0.33%
3.39%

Issue-size Valueweighted Excess
Returns (Net of
TRACE)
Mean
Std. Dev
[9]
[10]
-0.03%
0.17%
-0.02%
0.23%
-0.01%
0.22%
-0.06%
0.20%
-0.06%
0.22%
0.00%
0.30%
0.10%
0.91%
0.67%
4.48%

