                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         FROM BEIJING TO BENTONVILLE:
                   DO MULTINATIONAL RETAILERS LINK MARKETS?

                                           Keith Head
                                            Ran Jing
                                       Deborah L. Swenson

                                       Working Paper 16288
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16288


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2010




We appreciate the helpful comments of David Green, Beata Javorcik, Emek Basker, and workshop
participants at UBC, EITG, AIB, and WEAI. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Keith Head, Ran Jing, and Deborah L. Swenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
From Beijing to Bentonville: Do Multinational Retailers Link Markets?
Keith Head, Ran Jing, and Deborah L. Swenson
NBER Working Paper No. 16288
August 2010
JEL No. F13,F23,F39,O19,O32

                                                 ABSTRACT

Each of the world's largest retailers---Walmart, Carrefour, Tesco, and Metro---entered China after
1995. Their subsequent expansion in China may have influenced Chinese exports through two channels.
First, they may have enhanced bilateral exports between the retailers' Chinese operations and destination
countries also served by stores in the retailers' networks. Second, Chinese city-level exports to all destinations
may have grown if multinational retailer presence enhanced the general export capabilities of local
suppliers. Evidence from Chinese city-level retail goods exports supports the capability hypothesis
as the expansion of Chinese city exports follows the geographic expansion of the retailers' Chinese
stores and global procurement centers.


Keith Head                                              Deborah L. Swenson
Sauder School of Business, UBC                          Department of Economics
2053 Main Mall                                          University of California, Davis
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2                                   Davis, CA 95616
CANADA                                                  and NBER
keith.head@commerce.ubc.ca                              deswenson@ucdavis.edu

Ran Jing
School of International Trade and Economics
University of International Business and Economics
ran.jing1@gmail.com
1         Introduction

In its 2006 negotiations with the Indian government, Walmart argued that India would
benefit from future export expansion if it allowed Walmart to expand its retail presence
in India. The story as reported by The Economist (April 15, 2006) was that Walmart’s
procurement of goods in India would familiarize local suppliers with the requirements their
products needed to meet if they were to be sold in export markets. To support its case,
Walmart highlighted its previous experience in China. Walmart is said to account for about
10% of all Chinese exports to the United States.1 They might also have quoted the People’s
Daily Online (April 22, 2002), an official newspaper in China, which commented that “the
direct supply of ‘made in China’ products to foreign chain groups had become a key channel
for their entry into the global market.” This paper turns to data on the Chinese experience
to subject these claims to stringent econometric tests and analysis.
        Each of the largest multinational retailers established operations in China in the 1990’s.
France-based Carrefour (the second largest retailer worldwide and the largest in Europe)
moved first, entering China in 1995. It was followed by US-based Walmart (the largest
retailer in the world) and German-based Metro AG (fourth-ranked) in 1996. UK-based
Tesco (fifth-ranked) was the last of the giant generalist retailers to enter in 1998.2 Locating
in China serves dual purposes; these retailers operate stores selling products to Chinese
consumers while they also use China as an important global purchasing base.
        We investigate whether the presence of multinational retailers increases China’s exports;
and if so, what mechanisms tie retailer presence to the promotion of China’s exports. Two
potential mechanisms are proposed and tested. First, multinational retailers could increase
    1
        Fishman (2006, p. 103) reports that Walmart and its suppliers exported $18 billion to the US in 2004.



    2
        Deloitte 2006 Global Retailing Powers Study provides the ranking. The fourth largest retailer Home
Depot, is classified as a specialist retailer and is not included in this study.




                                                        1
the bilateral exports of a Chinese city to foreign country destinations in which the retailers
operate stores. We call this mechanism the multinational retailers’ “linkage effect.” Second,
the presence of retailers could stimulate multilateral exports of a city to all destinations,
perhaps by raising local supplier productivity. We call this mechanism the “capability effect.”
It predicts that the presence of multinational retailers in a city will increase the Chinese city’s
exports to all destination countries, regardless of whether the destination countries host retail
outlets.
   To test these hypotheses our paper studies the exports of 35 Chinese major cities to
50 countries over the period 1997–2005. We confine the analysis to exports of retail goods
because we expect the pro-trade effect of multinational retailers to be limited to the types
of goods that are sold in stores such as Walmart. In addition to retail stores in China, each
of the multinational retailers, i.e. Walmart, Carrefour, Metro and Tesco, has set up global
procurement centers (GPC) in China. Thus, to measure the intensity of retailer connections,
we create city-level linkage variables that reflect the number of retailer stores in each city
and the proximity of each city to the nearest GPC.
   Using standard gravity models and models with origin-destination dyadic fixed effects
we test whether multinational retailer expansion is related to growth of Chinese city-level
exports of retail goods. We find that the presence of multinational retailers is associated with
bilateral trade above the level predicted by gravity models. Furthermore, since we control for
dyadic fixed effects, this means that the identification of retailers’ pro-trade effects is based
solely on variation in the intensity of retailer activity within city-country dyads over time.
To test the robustness of multinational retailer linkage effects, we apply the stringent gravity
specification proposed by Baldwin and Taglioni (2006) which includes dyadic, origin-year,
and destination-year fixed effects. Notably, the positive and significant association between
retailer presence and city exports disappears when we control for city-year fixed effects.
   To understand why origin-year fixed effects absorb the apparent linkage effects of multi-
national retailers, we investigate whether retailer presence more generally enhances a city’s


                                                2
multilateral export capability. We test this possibility by examining how the origin-year
fixed effects from the linkage regression are related to the origin city’s proximity to global
procurement centers and to the number of retailer outlets in the origin city. After including
origin and year fixed effects to control for the current level of city development, we find that
a city’s general export capability increases by 2.7% as the city’s distance to global procure-
ment centers decreases by 10%. Similarly, an origin city’s export capability increases by
2.55% when the number of outlets in the city increases by 10%.
   Our work contributes to the newly emerging research that explores the effects of multi-
national retailers on international trade. In this area, Basker and Van have developed theory
and evidence regarding the impact of multinational retailers on the imports of retailers’ home
countries. The model in Basker and Van (2008) demonstrates how multinational retailers’
economies of scale in both retailing and importing increases the incentives for large retailers
to import from distant, low-cost countries. Accompanying empirical work, Basker and Van
(2010) finds evidence suggesting that large US retailers have a higher marginal propensity
to import relative to small US retailers for every one dollar’s increase in sales. In contrast,
our paper takes the perspective of the countries hosting multinational retailers and focuses
on the retailers’ impact on the exports from retailers’ host countries.
   More broadly, our paper is related to recent work in international trade evaluating the role
of intermediaries in trade. Analysis in this area including Ahn, Khandelwal, and Wei (2010),
Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2010), and Blum, Claro, and Horstmann (2010) find
that intermediaries appear to connect firms to export markets that are more difficult to
serve due to distance or smaller size. In general, this evidence suggests that intermediaries
facilitate trade connections in a fashion that is consistent with reduced fixed costs of entering
markets. Similarly, our finding that retailer presence is associated with enhanced city export
capability could arise if multinational retailers, and their GPCs in particular, will perform a
similar intermediary function in their promotion of Chinese products overseas.
   A final strand of research is related to our project, as it implies that multinational retailers


                                                3
generate spillovers that benefit local firm productivity in host countries. For example, Javor-
cik and Li (2008) discover that Walmart’s entry in Romania was associated with productivity
gains by Romanian supplier firms. The mechanisms for such productivity improvements are
described in Javorcik, Keller, and Tybout (2008)’s case study which chronicles the effects of
Walmart’s entry on the soap, detergent and surfactant industry in Mexico. Iacovone, Javor-
cik, Keller, and Tybout (2009) incorporate these mechanisms in a dynamic industry model.
One prediction of their model is that the presence of Walmart increases the productivity of
the supplying industry as a whole. In contrast with this work, which focuses on productivity
spillovers, our work focuses on another potential channel of influence in studying whether
the presence of multinational retailers affects host country exports.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. To provide context and to motivate
the analysis, the next section describes the procedures Metro and Walmart follow when they
export Chinese products to their outlets outside China. It also describes the key develop-
ments in China’s recent deregulation of its retail markets. In section 3 the background on
Chinese retail developments is used to propose two potential hypotheses about the effects of
retailer presence on Chinese city exports: a linkage hypothesis that forecasts trade expansion
between bilateral city-country pairs that have retailer presence on both ends, and a capa-
bility hypothesis which proposes that retailer presence expands exports to all destinations.
Section 4 provides the specifications that are used to test these two hypothesis, and describes
the key data, while the broader data are described in section 5. Sections 6 and 7 show and
discuss the econometric results. We conclude in section 8.



2     China’s Retail Market

In this section, we provide some background information on the nature of and developments
in China’s retail market. First, to characterize the potential avenues for retailer effects
on exports we present an overview of the purchasing procedures followed by Metro and



                                              4
Walmart in China. Next, we describe important elements of China’s deregulation of its
retail market. The deregulation history highlights why the four multinational retailers chose
distinct locations within China as the initial bases for their operations, and the points from
which they spread. The resulting geographical and time diversity of the retailers’ networks
is the key source of variation we utilize to identify how multinational retailer linkages affect
international export development.3


2.1        Procurement Procedures

The export procedures of Metro and Walmart are discussed below. While there is little
public information on the other two retailers, there is no strong reason to believe that their
procurement practices should differ dramatically from those of Metro and Walmart.
       Metro uses the Chinese domestic market as a testing ground to evaluate the suitability of
Chinese products for export. “Metro AG emphasizes the quality of products. The products
which have entered Metro’s procurement system will be sold in Chinese regional markets first.
If they sell well, the products will be sold in all stores within China. At last they will be sold
globally” (Wu, 2004, p. 74). This statement suggests that the number of Chinese products
exported through Metro’s procurement system is likely to increase as Metro expands its store
presence in China.
       Walmart Global Procurement (WMGP), established in Shenzhen in 2001, facilitates the
purchase of Chinese goods by Walmart’s outlets outside of China. WMGP regularly looks
for new products and inquires about prices.4 After WMGP classifies the products, it sends
information by email to the buyers at all Walmart outlets. The outlet buyers then decide
   3
       Further differences in the retailers’ geographic span arises because the four retailers have stores in
different countries.



   4
       The following procedures are summarized from an article on www.jamoo.net.




                                                       5
what kind of products their stores may need and which should be explored during their
“buying trips.” This procedure is time consuming. Outlet buyers routinely meet two to
three times each year in China. Before the buyers arrive in China, WMGP prepares the
required samples. The staff at WMGP mark the product’s price and features on the sample
but cover the manufacturer’s name. In other words, when outlet buyers make their initial
purchasing decision they do not know which firms manufacture the samples they are viewing.
During the meeting, the buyers decide which products to buy. The staff at WMGP do
not provide much input as the buyers make their decisions. Afterwards, the buyers and
the WMGP staff privately discuss the price and other order details. Next, since WMGP
contacts the manufacturing firms and starts negotiations, the outlets’ buyers have little or
no direct contact with the manufacturers. Finally, once the order is placed, WMGP handles
the order’s logistics. They check the factory to verify that there are no problems such as
child workers, or excessive overtime. They also check product quality at least two times—
once during production and once after production. In addition, WMGP contacts shipping
companies and prepares export documents, including letters of credit.
   These procurement procedures suggest that Chinese local suppliers may benefit from the
presence of global procurement centers of multinational retailers. In particular, it appears
that local Chinese firms may benefit from having their products introduced to purchasers
in multiple foreign markets, with no advance payment of market-specific fixed costs. In
addition, through the interaction with global procurement centers, Chinese suppliers will
gain an understanding about international quality or safety standards. They may also learn
about the general preferences of foreign consumers. All these benefits suggest that the
presence of global procurement centers in China may stimulate China’s exports of retail
goods.




                                             6
2.2       Deregulation of Retailing in China

Since our identification strategy exploits differences in the location and timing of retailer
presence across Chinese cities to identify the importance of retailer linkages, it is important
to understand why the retailers chose distinct entry locations in China. To this end, we
summarize the elements of China’s deregulation in retail markets that caused the retailers to
differentially enter Chinese regions. Carrefour’s 1995 placement of a hypermarket5 in Beijing
made it the first multinational retailer to enter China. In 1996, Walmart established its first
super-center in Shenzhen, while Metro opened its first cash and carry in Shanghai. Finally,
Tesco entered the Chinese retail market when it set up its first store in Shanghai in 1998.
      Wang and Zhang (2006, p. 295) list important policy changes in the Chinese retail mar-
ket, which we summarize in Table 1. Two points in the table are worth emphasizing. First,
during the period 1992–1995, foreign retailers were allowed to operate in only 11 designated
areas, and each area was permitted to host only one or two foreign retailers (including the
retailers with headquarters in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Macau, which were treated as foreign
by the government). This restriction helps explain why Walmart, Tesco, Metro and Car-
refour chose different entry locations when they first entered China. The second important
point highlighted in Table 1 is that majority foreign-owned joint ventures of retailer chains
were only conditionally permitted to enter between 1999 to 2004. The condition was that
large quantities of domestically-made goods be exported through the retailer’s distribution
channels. This requirement meant that multinational retailers had another direct incentive
to export Chinese products through their procurement systems, since exports helped them
to gain the right to more freely operate their stores in Chinese retail market. All these
restrictions were lifted after 2005.
  5
      A hypermarket or superstore is a retail self-service establishment offering a broad range of food and
non-food products. (source: http://stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=6250)




                                                     7
                Table 1: Deregulation of Foreign Retailers in China’s Retail Market
 Restrictions          1992–1995          1995–1999           1999–2004               After 20053
 Geographic            6 cities and 1     –                   provincial              lifted
                       5 Special 2                            capitals
                       Economic Zones
 Operational
  retail/wholesale     retail only        wholesale allowed   –                       lifted
  single/chain         single only        chain only          chain                   lifted
                                          allowed
                                          in Beijing
    Percentages of     ≥ 70%              –                   –                       lifted
    Goods purchased
    within China
 Equity                joint venture      –                   joint venture chains    lifted
                       minority stake                         with majority
                                                              stake as
                                                              conditionally allowed
 Permission            entry must be       –                   –                      only local
                       approved by both                                               gov’t permit
                       state and local                                                is needed
                       governments
 “–” implies no regulation is changed. 1.Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, Guangzhou, Dalian, and Qingdao.
 2. Shenzhen, Zhuhai, Shantou, Xiamen, and Hainan. 3. Since December 11, 2004.


3     Two Mechanisms

Two potential mechanisms may cause the presence of multinational retailers to increase
China’s exports. First, multinational retailers could increase China’s exports by creating in-
formation linkages with distant markets. For example, when managers in the multinational
retailers’ purchasing centers or retail stores learn about local Chinese suppliers they could
convey information about newly discovered products to their stores outside China. Because
information related to suppliers or products is shared systematically only with other affiliates
in the retailer’s global operations, this mechanism suggests that the presence of multinational
retailers will increase the exports only for city-country dyads which are populated by affil-
iates of the same retailer at each end. In other words, if firm-specific network linkages
are important, we predict that multinational retailers will facilitate exports from Chinese
cities where these retailers have stores or nearby global procurement centers, to destination
countries where the multinational retailers have established stores. We call this mechanism


                                                   8
the multinational retailers’ “linkage effect.” It can be seen as analogous to trade-increasing
impact that Rauch and Trindade (2002) find for overseas Chinese populations. Here retail
stores are the equivalent of Chinese ethnics. They are hypothesized to increase exports of
the areas that host them, but only to countries that host their counterparts.
   A second potential mechanism by which multinational retailers increase China’s exports
operates if multinational retailers stimulate the productivity growth of local Chinese suppli-
ers, thus improving the general export capabilities of the Chinese suppliers. There are several
reasons why multinational retailer presence may increase the productivity of local suppliers.
As Javorcik et al. (2008) and Javorcik and Li (2008) emphasize, the entry of multinational
retailers is likely to increase the competitive pressures facing suppliers in host countries.
This is generally true, since multinational retailers often have more bargaining power rela-
tive to other retailers in host countries. When multinational retailers require suppliers to
lower prices and/or upgrade products, high-cost suppliers are driven out of the market, while
suppliers that remain in operation improve their productivity by labor-shedding and innova-
tion. Javorcik and Li (2008) suggest the entry of multinational retailers may further increase
supplier productivity, if the entry of multinational retailers introduces advanced retail tech-
nologies and international management practices. Local firm productivity is enhanced by
this mechanism if suppliers reallocate their savings in distribution costs to production. The
third channel for local supplier productivity increases comes into play if the activities associ-
ated with the multinational retailer allow local suppliers to achieve economies of scale. Each
of these points support the argument that the presence of multinational retailers increases
the productivity of local Chinese suppliers.
   Iacovone et al. (2009) introduce a dynamic model which formalizes these ideas. One
element of their model is a sorting mechanism which implies that high productivity suppliers
sell their products through Walmart, while low productivity firms continue to sell their
products through traditional retailers. The highest productivity suppliers choose to work
with Walmart since the efficiency gains and increase in market share benefits of working with


                                               9
Walmart exceed losses due to Walmart’s pressure on profit margins. Once Walmart enters
the local retail market, its presence changes the price menu faced by all suppliers. Some
who previously sold their products through traditional retailers then find it less costly to
sell through Walmart. Through a cumulative process, the competitive pressure introduced
by Walmart could drive some marginally profitable suppliers to exit the market entirely.
Ultimately, overall industry productivity increases as the lowest productivity suppliers exit.
       If multinational retailer presence improves Chinese supplier productivity, the improve-
ments in productivity may imply that a larger number of suppliers will achieve a productivity
level that enables them to export profitably given the fixed costs of exporting. Notably, since
productivity improvements lower costs of serving all markets, this channel implies that an
affected city will increase its exports to all destination countries through the capability effect.
       Multinational retailers may also affect information and search costs in a way that en-
hances retailer export ability. In particular, while China has a reputation for providing low
cost products, informational frictions of the sort modeled in Rauch and Trindade (2003)
may prevent buyers outside of China from identifying the particular Chinese suppliers that
carry products with the attributes, quality and reliability they seek.6 For this reason, multi-
national retailers may reduce the fixed costs of export by expanding local firms’ knowledge
about export opportunities and export practices. Alternatively, if the salient fixed costs are
borne by international purchasers outside of China, as large multinational retailers purchase
goods from China, firms in other foreign countries may learn how to identify Chinese sup-
   6
       Thus, if the presence of multinational retailers in China provides information which reduces the Chinese
supplier uncertainty about foreign market opportunities, or foreign purchasers’ uncertainty about the location
and availability of suitable Chinese producers, the new information may increase the frequency of successful
matches and may even increase the intensity of searches in China. In related work, Hausman and Rodrik
(2003)’s comparison of country-product export profiles suggests the importance of information in trade,
by demonstrating that countries that are similar in their sources of comparative advantage, nonetheless
specialize in exporting very different product portfolios.




                                                       10
pliers who produce high quality goods at reasonable prices and also start importing them
from China.
    Ultimately, if information gained from multinational retailer activities in China reduces
the fixed cost of exporting, a greater number of local Chinese suppliers will be able to export,
even if their productivities are unchanged. Thus, this mechanism would also generate a
capability effect, which predicts that the presence of multinational retailers in a Chinese city
will increase the city’s exports to all countries.



4     Estimation Strategies

In this section, we discuss the empirical methods we use to test the linkage and capability
effects. In each case, we discuss the regression specification and key multinational retailer
presence variables that are used to test for these effects.


4.1    Method for Testing Linkage Effects

To underpin our examination of multinational retailer linkage effects, we turn to the gravity
equation for bilateral trade. Our benchmark begins with Baldwin and Taglioni (2006)’s rep-
resentation of the gravity model, which relates the log of exports from origin o to destination
d as given by


              ln Xod,t = ln Yo,t − ln Ωo,t + ln Ed,t + (σ − 1) ln Pd,t − (σ − 1) ln τod,t .       (1)


    Xodt is the total export value from origin o to destination d in year t. τ refers to trade
costs, and σ is the elasticity of substitution among varieties in the CES utility function. Yo is
the exporting country’s production output of traded goods. Ed is the importing country’s ex-
                                                                                          
                                                                                  1−σ Ed
penditure on traded goods. Pd is country d’s CES price index. The term Ωo = Σ τod    P 1−σ
                                                                                              d

is characterized by Baldwin and Taglioni as an index of the exporter’s openness.



                                                  11
   Equation (1) decomposes log bilateral exports into three components. The first compo-
nent, ln Yo,t − ln Ωo,t , is origin-year specific. The second component, ln Ed,t + (σ − 1) ln Pd,t , is
destination-year specific. The final component, (σ − 1) ln τod,t , is a time-varying dyadic term.
Standard gravity equations model the origin and destination effects with the GDPs and per
capita incomes for the origin and destination countries while omitting the Ω and P terms.
These terms, often referred to as “remoteness” before Anderson and van Wincoop (2003)
labeled them “multilateral resistance”, depend on the Y and E of all other countries, dis-
counted by trade costs. When these terms are omitted we expect the coefficient estimates to
be inconsistent since it is likely that the omitted multilateral resistance terms are correlated
with GDP and trade costs.
   The final term in equation (1) encompasses both time-invariant trade costs between the
origin and destination, and time-varying costs. In this paper, we propose that retailer linkage
effects will affect the time-varying component of this term, and create multinational retailer
variables to test this hypothesis. Remaining time-varying costs are assumed to be iid, and
therefore, absorbed by the error term. In the standard gravity equation, distance is always
used as a proxy for trade costs. Most studies add other proxies such as dummies for a
common language or a prior colonial relationship to control for the time-invariant portion
of the dyadic term. However, since the list of potential proxies is long, and few proxies
are well-measured, we include a dyadic fixed effect to capture all time-invariant trade costs.
Ultimately, we implement the specification advanced by Baldwin and Taglioni (2006), thus
embedding our linkage hypothesis within their framework which controls for origin-year,
destination-year, and dyadic fixed effects.




                              lnXodt =αot + βdt + δod + λLodt + εodt                               (2)


                      o : origin            d : destination             t : year



                                                  12
In this specification origin-year and destination-year fixed effects which influence the total
value of exports Xodt are represented by αot and βdt respectively. δod controls for origin-
destination pair dyadic fixed effects.7
       Since the variable Lodt measures linkages formed by multinational retailer networks, our
coefficient of interest is λ. We expect λ to be positive and significant if linkage effects created
by the expansion of retailer presence in China increase China’s exports of retail goods between
the Chinese city-origin and country-destination pairs that experience expansions in retailer
presence.
       We construct two variables to capture the linkage effects that arise from changes in the
retail presence of the four multinational retailers in our study. The first linkage variable is
based on the locations of the four retailers’ global procurement centers in China; the second is
based on the retailers’ store counts by region. Due to the characteristics of retail operations in
China, as discussed in section 2, we predict that Chinese regions that experienced expansions
in retailer procurement and in retailer store presence may have benefitted from subsequent
increases in exports.
       When we create the two linkage variables we select functional forms that reflect the way
global procurement centers and stores connect distant markets. To begin, suppose that each
each city has so retail products it could offer for distribution. While GPCs scour cities in
their regions in search of product ideas and suppliers, search and communication frictions
will impede the transfer of information about each city’s so retail product list from city o
to its nearest global procurement center. Thus, we assume that global procurement centers
only become aware of some proportion of so retail items that are available from the city, and
that the fraction of the so retail items that the GPCs learn about is decreasing with distance
Do between city o and the GPC. If we apply the standard functional form for distance
                                                                                                             so
costs found in gravity equations,8 this implies that GPCs learn about the availability of                    Do

   7
     The technical issues associated with this specification are discussed in our supplemental materials located
at http://strategy.sauder.ubc.ca/head/sup/.
   8
     Refer to Disdier and Head (2008)



                                                      13
products offered by a city. Next, managers from the retailers’ overseas stores will select
items from the pool of products identified by the GPC. To represent this process, we assume
that all products face a probability π ∈ [0, 1] of being selected by any particular store of
the retailers’ network outside China. However, since retailer r has a number of stores ndr in
country d, the probability that a product is selected for export will rise with the retailer’s
presence in the destination market. When these items are combined, they imply that the
                                                       P ndr
activities of a retailer’s GPC in China will cause so π r D or
                                                               products produced in city o to
be identified and selected for export to country d.
   While retailer GPC presence creates formal procedures which link Chinese suppliers with
their purchasers in destination countries, the expansion of retailer store networks in China
provides an additional channel by which Chinese suppliers may be linked to overseas pur-
chasers in the retailer’s international network. To capture this idea, we assume that the
retailers’ stores may also bring product lists to their stores overseas. As before, we assume
that the overseas purchasers in the retailers’ networks will select items off these lists with
probability π. If retailer r has ndr stores located in country d, this implies that so πndr items
proposed by a single store are expected to be picked up by the retailer’s purchasing managers
in country d. If the retailer has nor stores in city o, all of which generate information on pro-
curement opportunities, and the product lists are non-overlapping, we predict that retailer
r’s stores in country d will pick up a total number of so πndr nor items that are produced in
city o. Finally, if we sum over the the full set of retailers in the city, the number of city o
                                                   P
products selected by retailers in country d is so π r ndr nor .
   We need to address three issues before we construct our measures of multinational retailer
activity. First, the assumption of non-overlapping lists is unrealistic. In addition, we expect
some products would be chosen for export, even in the absence of any stores. We incorporate
these ideas by adding one and raising the sum to a power that is presumably less than
one, to reflect diminishing returns due to redundancy of products across lists. With these
changes, the number of products linked by global procurement centers and by retailer stores


                                               14
                      ndr ζ
                                                      ndr nor )η , respectively. Second, when we apply these
                 P                            P
are (1 + so π       r Dor )   and (1 + so π       r

two measures to panel data, so is absorbed by the city fixed effects while π is co-linear the
                                                             P ndr                P
regression constant. Thus, these two expressions become ln(1+ r D  or
                                                                      ) and ln(1+   r ndr nor ).

       Third, procurement is a time-consuming process. As in the example of Walmart, there
are many steps that must be taken before any sales contracts are formed. Walmart’s pro-
curement centers need to accumulate manufacturers’ information, send the product list to
the buyers in overseas stores, get feedback from potential buyers, and arrange business trips.
A spokeswoman with Carrefour China notes that “it usually takes us half a year, even a year,
to clinch a deal.”9 After the contracts are signed, manufacturers also need time to manufac-
ture the products. Due to the time-intensity of these activities, and the sequential aspect of
the process, we expect a time lag between the opening of retailer global procurement centers
or stores and the time when new trade arises due to these connections. To reflect the time
delays that are inherent in the process, our regressions lag the retailer presence variables by
one period.10
       To capture the linkage effects generated by global procurement centers in China, we
create the variable GPC as follows:

                                                        4
                                                                          !
                                                       X    ndrt
                                     GPCodt   = ln 1 +                        .
                                                       r=1
                                                           Dor,t−1

This reflects the network effects generated by the expansions by the four major retailers.
The number of stores retailer r has in country d in year t is ndrt . Dor,t−1 is the geographic
distance from city o to its nearest global procurement center of retailer r in the previous
   9
       www.chinadaily.com.cn, October 14, 2006.



  10
       We also performed tests which lag the retailer variables by one or two periods in case the effects of
retailer procurement centers or stores require more time to manifest themselves in trade flows. The results
are provided at http://strategy.sauder.ubc.ca/head/sup/.




                                                           15
year.11 The variable GPCodt increases when the retailer expands its number of stores in
the destination country, or when the distance of the city to the nearest global procurement
center decreases.
       Since retail stores could also create linkage effects, we capture the expansion of retailer
store networks through                                                        !
                                                         4
                                                         X
                                        RSodt = ln 1 +         ndrt nor,t−1       .
                                                         r=1

The number of stores of retailer r in origin city o in the previous year is given by nor(t−1) ,
while ndrt is the number of stores of retailer r in destination country d in year t.
       When we construct the two linkage variables, we use lagged values of the variables that
reflect the retailers’ presence in China, while we use contemporaneous store counts to measure
the intensity of the retailers’ presence in the destination countries. Our choice of timing
convention is motivated in part by the desire to maximize the size of the data set available
for estimation. Since the data on the worldwide store distribution for the four multinational
retailers begins with 1996, our data panel would be reduced by one year in length if we lagged
the retailer destination variables by one period. However, our use of contemporaneous data
for the retailers’ destination activities may be reasonable as we expect that stores need to
purchase products before they start operation. For this reason, the number of stores set to
open could also affect the links formed by multinational retailers.12
  11
       For cities that have a global procurement center, the distance is calculated by inner distance using the
                                    1
formula D = 0.376∗(area in sqm) 2 , where the variable area refers to the total area of the city.



  12
       To check whether the timing conventions affect the results, we formed alternative measures that lag the
origin and destination components of retailer exposure simultaneously. While the new variables reduce the
sample size, they do not alter the qualitative conclusions.




                                                       16
4.2    Method for Testing Capability Effects

The second half of our analysis tests whether exposure to expanding retailer networks in-
creased Chinese cities’ general export capabilities. In contrast with linkage effects, which
strengthen exports only along bilateral pathways connecting the retailers in Chinese cities
with the retailers’ stores in overseas destinations, the capability effect increases the worldwide
exports of Chinese cities that experience an increase in multinational retailer presence.
   To perform this analysis, we first run specification (2), and extract the estimated coef-
ficients for each city-year fixed effect, i.e. α̂ot . We interpret the city-year fixed effects as
measures of the cities’ time-varying export capabilities. Each city-year coefficient can thus
be used as unit of observation as we create a data panel of city-year export capabilities, which
we analyze in a second stage regression. In our second stage regressions, which test whether
retailer activity enhances future city export capability, we also control for city and year fixed
effects, as well as other time-varying city-level variables, i.e. gross value of industrial output
per capita and population.
   We are most interested in learning whether the export capabilities of Chinese cities are
influenced by access to global procurement centers or the number of retail stores in the city.
To evaluate the effects of GPCs, a city’s access to GPCs is defined as:

                                                 4
                                                              !
                                                X    1
                                 cityGPCot = ln                   ,
                                                r=1
                                                    Dort

where Dort refers to the distance from city o to the nearest GPC of retailer r. The number
of multinational retailers’ stores available in a city is the sum of stores of the four retailers
in the city. It is defined as

                                                     4
                                                               !
                                                     X
                                 cityRSot = ln 1 +          nort ,
                                                      r=1


in which nort is the number of stores of retailer r in city o in year t. In contrast with the



                                               17
variables we used to test for linkage effects, these new measures do not include the retailers’
stores outside China. This is due to the hypothesis that capability effects enhance a city’s
exports to all destinations.
    We use the following specification to test for the influence of retailer presence on city
export capability:


                       α̂ot =θ + γcityGPCo,t−1 + ηcityRSo,t−1 + ζ ln popot

                             + ι ln gviopaot + φo + φt + ot                                (3)


The estimated city-year fixed effects from the linkage regression, α̂ot , are used as the de-
pendent variable. To maintain the timing convention we use in the previous regression
framework, we use values of cityGPC and cityRS that are lagged one period. The estimat-
ing equation also includes each city’s population and gross value of industrial output per
capita, or popot and gviopaot , respectively. Finally, the estimation framework includes city
fixed effects, φo , and year effects, φt . The error term is ot .



5     Data

To study retailer effects, we combined three longitudinal data sets to create variables reflect-
ing developments in multinational retailer exposure: a data set tracking information on the
four retailers’ store distributions in China, a data set following the retailers’ store networks
outside of China, and a data set compiling the distribution of global procurement centers in
China.
    The worldwide store distributions for each of the four multinational retailers were col-
lected from the retailers’ annual financial reports. Each retailer typically manages a number
of store formats. In addition to the big-box retail format that sells the widest range of retail
goods, many of the four retailers also operate specialty stores that are limited to sales of
products such as electronics or apparel. In constructing our explanatory variables, the re-

                                                  18
tailer store variables are based solely on the retailers’ operation of their main format stores.13
We exclude the specialty stores from the retailer variables since the goods sold in the spe-
cialty stores often differ from those sold in the large-format retail stores. In addition, the
sales areas in the main format stores are usually much larger than those handled by the
other formats.14
       The changing geographic presence of the four retailers in China was collected from the
Chinese web site linkshop.15 This site provides the location and the opening date of each
new retail store they established.16 The large majority of Carrefour, Metro, and Walmart’s
stores in China are the main format.17 Information on the opening of the four retailers’
global procurement centers in China were collected from Chinese and English language media
reports. The sources for these data are available in our online supplemental materials. When
we classify the timing of GPC presence, all GPCs established in July or later are coded as
  13
       In their annual reports the retailers use different names to refer to their main format stores: Carrefour—
hypermarket; Metro—cash and carry; and Walmart—super-center and Sam’s Club. Tesco’s financial reports
do not provide a clear description of their store formats, and only the total number of stores are provided.
Hence, when generating the key variables for Tesco, we use the total number of Tesco stores in the formula.



  14
       These issues are particularly relevant for a large number of convenience stores operated by the retailers.



  15
       http://www.linkshop.com.cn



  16
       This data source does not provide similar information on the time and location of store closings. However,
over the period of 1996–2005, on average, only 7.6% of the store numbers documented in retailers’ financial
reports are missing from the data generated from the linkshop website. Since the financial reports do not
provide information on store locations, we can not use the financial reports to construct our key variables.



  17
       The one exception is Walmart, which opened a few neighborhood stores in Guangdong province in the
later years of our sample.




                                                        19
present from the subsequent year and onward.
       The Chinese export data for 1997–2005 are collected from the eight-digit product data of
the Customs General Adminstration of the People’s Republic of China.18 The export data
identify the origin city in China as well as the destination country. We began by aggregating
the city-country export data to the four-digit harmonized system level. The HS4 data were
then classified as retail or non-retail based on whether products of the HS4 industry are
typically available at retailer stores such as Walmart. The retail component of the data were
then aggregated to form our dependent variable — city-country retail exports by year. The
data sources for the remaining control variables are reported in the data appendix.
       The maps in Figure 1 illustrate the retail footprints for the four retailers in 1996 and
2005, respectively. In 1996, the retailers were concentrated in China’s three large cities —
Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenzhen. By 2005, the retailers had expanded their store operations
to China’s second-tier cities, and their procurement centers had expanded inland from their
original coastal locations. These changes in the retailers’ geographic footprint greatly reduced
the distances of major Chinese cities to the global procurement centers of the four retailers.
       Over our sample period, average city exports of retail goods increased at a rapid and
sustained pace. At the same time, the expansion of retailer presence in China was more
rapid yet. To show the coevolution of these series, Figure 2 illustrates the changes over time
in Chinese cities’ proximity to global procurement centers, the number of retailer stores, and
average city exports of retail goods.19 Each series, expressed as an index relative to its 1997
value (set equal to 1), grew substantially during the sample period. Moreover, the figure
shows that there was a positive association between Chinese cities’ exports and the presence
of multinational retailers in China.
  18
    This data set was used under the license to the Center for International Data at the University of
California, Davis.
                                                                   4            4
 19
                                                                  X    1       X
    Procurement center and retail store proximity are measured by          and     nort .
                                                                  r=1
                                                                      Dort     r=1




                                                 20
                                                                                     1996                                                                                                                                                                            2005




                                                                                                                                                   Harbin                                                                                                                                                                       Harbin
                                                                                                                                                       ●                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●

                                                                                                                                           Changchun                                                                                                                                                                    Changchun
                                                                                                                                               ●                                                                                                                                                                            ●




                                                                                                                                    Shenyang                                                                                                                                                                     Shenyang
                                                                                                                                       ●                                                                                                                                                                            ●

                                                       Hohhot                                                                                                                                                                            Hohhot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                         ●                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                       Beijing                                                                                                                                                                         Beijing
                                                                                            ●                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                            ●                                                                                                                                                                               ●

                                                                                                Tianjin                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Tianjin
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●     ●
                        Yinchuan                                                                                                                                                                          Yinchuan
                           ●
                                                             Taiyuan
                                                                    Shijiazhuang                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Taiyuan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Shijiazhuang                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                 ●                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                ●                                                                                                                                                                                 ●


Xining                                                                                          Jinan                                                                              Xining                                                                                       Jinan
  ●                                                                                              ●                                                                                   ●                                                                                           ●
             Lanzhou                                                                                                                                                                           Lanzhou
               ●                                                                                                                                                                                 ●                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                    Zhengzhou                                                                                                                                                                         Zhengzhou
                                                                            ●                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●


                                                                                                          Nanjing                                                                                                                                                                         Nanjing
                                                                                                 Hefei                                                                                                                                                                           Hefei
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●    ●●         ●
                                                                                                                         Shanghai                                                                                                                                                                     Shanghai
              Chengdu                                                                                                    ●●●                                                                    Chengdu                                                                                             ● ●●   ●
                                                                            Wuhan                                                                                                                                                                           Wuhan                                        ●
                   ●

                        Chongqing
                                                                                ●                               Hangzhou
                                                                                                                     ●                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                          Chongqing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hangzhou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●●
                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                     Nanchang                                                                                                                                                                        Nanchang
                                                             Changsha                   ●                                                                                                                                                      Changsha                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●



                          Guiyang
                               ●                                                                            Fuzhou
                                                                                                                                                   C stores                                                 Guiyang
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●                                                                            Fuzhou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C stores
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●●
      Kunming
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                           ●       M stores                              Kunming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●       M stores
      Haikou                                                                                                                                                                             Haikou
         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                         ●●●
         ●
                                                                                                                                                   W stores                                                                                                                                                                     W stores
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                              Guangzhou                                                                                                                                                                         Guangzhou
                                    Nanning                                                                                                                                                                           Nanning                             ●
                                      ●
                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                             ●                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                            ●                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                             ●                                                             ●       C GP                                                                                                      ●                                                          ●       C GP
                                              Haikou
                                                                                                                                           ●       M GP                                                                         Haikou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●       M GP
                                                ●                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                           ●       W GP                                                                                                                                                                 ●       W GP




                                               Figure 1: Operations of The Four Multinational Retailers in China




                                                                                                                                                            Figure 2: City Trend


                                                                                                                                                                    21
 Figure 3: Correlations between Global Procurement Centers and Retail Stores in China

    Each of the retailer linkage variables shares a common component, which is the number
of stores outside China. If retailer expansion implied a constant geographic spread of retail
store and of retail global procurement centers, our variables for stores and GPCs would
be collinear. For this reason, we checked the correlation between our two retailer variables
before we proceeded with estimation. The simple correlation between GPCodt and RSodt
over all years is 0.208. The correlations between cityGPot and cityRSot is 0.599. For the
years 2000 and 2005, Figure 3 displays individual city values of cityRSot and the inverse of
cityGPot , which is labeled minD. Each point in the figure is labeled with the city’s name. In
both years, the correlation of the two key variables is not especially high, which alleviates
concerns about collinearity. Figure 3 also shows that as time progresses, the plots shift to
the right and downwards, which implies that cites served by an increasing number of retailer
stores tended to become closer to procurement centers over time.



6     Tests for Linkage Effects

In this section, we investigate the linkage channel by studying how multinational retailer
presence in Chinese cities is related to the expansion of Chinese city-level exports to desti-



                                             22
nation countries where the retailers operate outlets. While we find that retailer city-country
networks have a positive correlation with Chinese city-level exports, the influence of such
retailer linkages is not robust to the most stringent gravity specification, which allows for
time-varying city-origin fixed effects.
       Though our preferred regression specification (2) allows for greater heterogeneity at the
city origin, country destination, and partner dyad level, we begin our analysis with the
standard gravity model specification to provide a direct comparison with other research on
linkage effects and trade. The gravity regressions displayed in Table 2 introduce retailer
linkage effects through the inclusion of controls for retailers’ general procurement centers
GPCodt and for retailers’ stores in China RSodt . Additionally, since China’s earliest liber-
alization efforts through its “open door policy” targeted China’s coastal cities, we expect
that a city’s distance to the nearest port will play a role in determining city exports. To
account for this effect, a variable which measures the city’s distance to its nearest port intDot
is added to the traditional gravity specification.
       The coefficient on the retailer procurement center variable, GPCodt , displayed in column
1 of Table 2 indicates that retailer procurement activities were positively associated city-level
exports of retail goods. The estimated GPC coefficient suggests that a 10% increase in GPC
linkages boosts city-level retail goods exports by 2.5%. In contrast, retailers’ Chinese-based
stores do not appear to have a significant influence on Chinese cities’ retail goods exports.20
       The coefficients on the traditional gravity variables enter with the expected signs and
  20
       To examine the effects of our timing conventions, we repeated the regressions, entering the retailer
variables with different lags. In particular, we replaced the retailer variables with (GPCod,t−1 and RSod,t−1 )
and then with (GPCod,t−2 and RSod,t−2 ). The use of more distant lags is appropriate if the effect of retailer
proximity requires a longer time to manifest itself in trade flows. Indeed, before we control for city-year
fixed effects, the estimated coefficients on the retailer variables are larger in magnitude than those displayed
in Table 2. Nonetheless, the retailer coefficients have the same qualitative pattern as those we report in
Table 2.




                                                      23
magnitudes. In implementing the gravity model, we measure the economic mass of Chinese
cities through the gross value of industrial output per capita at the city level gviopaot . As
expected, cities that produce more also export more. Interestingly, the coefficient in column 1
exhibits a more than one-for-one effect.
   In column 2 of Table 2, we add city and country fixed effects to control for the unobserved
time-invariant city and country characteristics that affect exports. These fixed effects also
capture the permanent component of the multilateral resistance terms. The inclusion of city
and country fixed effects causes the coefficient on GPCodt to fall slightly to 0.229, though
the coefficient remains significant at the 1% level. Consistent with Disdier and Head (2008),
who report that the mean effect of distance on trade is −0.9, the distance coefficient in this
regression, extDod , is estimated as having value −0.916.
   In column 3 of Table 2, we replace the city and country fixed effects, with fixed effects
for each city-country partner dyad. This set of fixed effects controls not only for the fea-
tures captured in column 2 but also for all observed and unobserved permanent features of
the city-country pair, including geographic distance, common border, etc. The inclusion of
dyadic fixed effects removes inconsistency from the regression that arises if the global pro-
curement center linkage variable is correlated with dyadic characteristics of the city-country
pairs. When we include dyadic fixed effects, the identification of the coefficient for general
procurement centers is based on the variation in the presence of GPCodt within the dyad over
time. The new estimates imply that a 10% increase in GPC linkages are associated with a
1.39% increase in the exports of retail goods. In sum, the first three columns of Table 2 show
that global procurement centers are positively associated with bilateral trade above the level
predicted by both the standard gravity and dyadic fixed effects models.
   In columns 4 and 5 of Table 2, we first add country-year fixed effects and then city-year
effects. These dummies capture the time-varying components of the multilateral resistance
terms. Perhaps more importantly, they control for unobserved influences (e.g. trade policy of
country d, manufacturing quality in city o) that change over time. When only the country-


                                              24
                       Table 2: Linkage Effects Test, City-level
                                           (1)        (2)         (3)                      (4)      (5)
Fixed                                       t           t          t                     dyadic   dyadic
effects                                            country      dyadic                 country-t country-t
controlled                                            city                                         city-t
GPCodt                                   0.250a     0.229a      0.139a                   0.400 a
                                                                                                  -0.0705
global procurement centers              (0.0615) (0.0489) (0.0392)                      (0.0526) (0.0643)

RSodt                                            0.00115      0.0260b     0.0277a      0.0495a            0.0121
retailer stores                                  (0.0156)    (0.0113)    (0.00978)     (0.0100)          (0.0122)

ln(gviopaot )                                     1.380a      0.225a       0.224a       0.181a
gross value of indust. output per capita         (0.0442)    (0.0408)     (0.0394)     (0.0391)

ln(popot )                                        0.901a      -0.384a      -0.398a      -0.321a
population of the origin                         (0.0425)     (0.125)      (0.125)      (0.117)

ln(gdppadt )                                      0.936a      1.026a       1.064a
GDP per capita of the destination                (0.0252)    (0.0881)     (0.0848)

ln(popdt )                                        0.918a      2.479a       2.977a
population of the destination                    (0.0293)     (0.734)      (0.731)

ln(extDod )                                       -0.802a     -0.916a
external distance                                (0.0463)     (0.119)

ln(intDod )                                       -0.386a
internal distance                                (0.0254)
N                                                  14022      14022        14022         14141             14141
R2                                                 0.661      0.820        0.156         0.244             0.305
groups                                                                     1714           1716             1716
S.E of ui                                                                  3.537         2.941             3.592
S.E.of eit                                                                 0.915         0.880             0.854
RMSE                                              1.609        1.174       0.857         0.823             0.798
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the dyadic level with a , b , and   c
                                                                                                     respectively
      denoting significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                  25
year effects are added (in column 4), the GPCodt coefficient remains significant and its
estimated magnitude grows. Column 5 reports the preferred specification (2) which includes
both city-year and country-year fixed effects. Now the coefficient on GPCodt declines in
magnitude and becomes statistically insignificant.21
       The coefficient on retailer stores RSodt also exhibits the same pattern. While the coeffi-
cients on retailer store presence both appear to be positive and significant in columns 2 to 4
of Table 2, they lose their significance in the last column. In sum, while we still need to test
for broad export capability spillovers, the results from the most stringently specified trade
regression in Table 2 do not support the hypothesis that multinational retailers increase
China’s exports via linkage effects.
       To test whether our results are sensitive to the decision to use of cities as our geographic
unit of analysis, we also created provincial measures of retailer exposure and ran the regres-
sions on province-level exports. The province-level export data is more comprehensive than
the data of the 35 major Chinese cities. Nonetheless, estimation results at the provincial
level, shown in the online supplemental material, exhibit the same pattern as the ones at
the city level. Once the origin-year fixed effects are included—in this case for provinces—the
positive and significant coefficients on GPCodt and RSodt disappear.
       The fact that the estimated retailer effects are dramatically altered when we include time-
varying city fixed effects suggests that changes in unobserved local (city or province) factors
underpinned recent developments in China’s export of retail goods. Notably, the regressions
  21
       We examined whether our results for global procurement centers were sensitive to the functional form
used to construct GPCodt . In particular, to learn whether the export results are driven by more than the
nearest procurement center of each retailer, we generated SGPCodt , which captures a city’s exposure to all
procurement centers of these four retailers in China. Results with SGPCodt (along with the formula used
to calculate it) are shown in the online supplemental materials. In this estimation, the estimated coefficient
and significance levels are similar to those estimated using GPCodt . Similarly, once we control for city-year
fixed effects, the significant coefficient on SGPCodt disappears.




                                                      26
which control for city-time effects cast doubt on the importance of retailer linkage effects
that are confined to the export pathways connected by retailers. These results suggest that
multinational retailer presence may have had a broader impact, enabling cities to increase
their exports to all country destinations.



7        Capability Effects Test

In this section, we test whether the evolving presence of multinational retailers in China
helps explain the patterns in city-year effects from the export regressions that we attribute
to unobserved developments in city export capabilities. In other words, we seek to test
whether the growing presence of multinational retailers in China exerted a direct effect on
the time-varying export capabilities of Chinese cities.
       As discussed in section 2, we use specification (3) to test whether city proximity to
multinational retailers’ global procurement centers, or to a large number of retailer stores in
the city, improves the city’s multilateral exports. For this test we take the city-year fixed
effects obtained by estimating specification (2) as our measure of each city’s time-varying
export capability. City proximity to retailers’ global procurement centers are captured by
the variables cityGPCo,t−1 while the concentration of retail stores is denoted by cityRSo,t−1 .22
       As we examine the connection between retailer presence and city export capabilities, we
control for other economic factors including the gross value of industrial output per capita,
population, city fixed effects, and year effects. These controls alleviate the potential for en-
dogeneity caused by location choice decisions. When retailers select city locations for their
new stores, we expect them to seek cities that offer profitable opportunities due to high
disposable income and a large population of middle class customers. If we fail to control
  22
       When we run robustness checks that test whether changes in retailer presence at the provincial level can
explain changes in province-year export capabilities, retailer variables are constructed in the same fashion
as the one for cities.




                                                       27
for factors influencing retailer city selection motives, a positive and significant coefficient
on cityRSot , might reflect the economic characteristics of the local market that affect ex-
porting rather than providing support for our hypothesis of multinational retailer capability
effects. Similarly, we need to control for economic factors at the city level, as we expect that
multinational retailers may seek locations with strong export capability, when they choose
the geographic location for their global procurement centers. City fixed effects capture the
time-invariant component of heterogeneity across cities, which may include the existence of
harbors or other waterways, the degree and extent of government preferential policies to-
wards foreign direct investment and exports, and the consumption habits of local consumers.
The year effects capture nationwide policy changes that affect the export capabilities of all
Chinese cities.
       Because this section uses the city-year fixed effects from the linkage regression as the
dependent variable, the data set used here has a unique structure. While the data set is
based on the retail exports of N cities and t years, specification (2) is capable of estimating
No × (t − 1) city-year dummies, not No × t. This is due to the perfect collinearity between
city-year and dyadic fixed effects. Our online supplemental materials demonstrate this issue
with a simple example. In the following regressions, we set the earliest city-year dummy
for each city as the default. Therefore, in total, 280 (= 35 × (9 − 1)) city-year dummies
are estimated in specification (2). In the following analysis, zeros are plugged in as the
estimated parameters for the 35 first years of city-year dummies since they are taken as
default groups.23
       Table 3 contains the estimation results for our regressions relating the time-varying city-
level export capabilities to city-level retailer developments and changes in the city’s economic
environment. To explore the time dimension for retailer effects, the retailer measures are
  23
       In a robustness test with estimated standard errors as regression weights, only the 280 estimated coeffi-
cients are utilized.




                                                        28
            Table 3: Capability Effects Robustness Tests, City, Unweighted
                                            (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)                           (5)
Lagged t                                   t=1      t=2      t=3       All                        With F.1
cityGPCo,t−1                             0.253a                      -0.026                        -0.032
LAG−1, global procurement centers        (0.083)                    (0.058)                       (0.061)
cityRSo,t−1                                          0.102                            -0.113b      -0.154c
LAG−1, retail stores                                (0.074)                           (0.056)      (0.079)
cityGPCo,t−2                                                   0.268a                  0.085        0.147b
LAG−2, centers                                                 (0.091)                (0.064)      (0.062)
cityRSo,t−2                                                     0.203b                 0.048        0.119
LAG−2, stores                                                  (0.081)                (0.071)      (0.072)
cityGPCo,t−3                                                               0.270a     0.179a        0.294b
LAG−3, centers                                                             (0.081)    (0.060)      (0.130)
cityRSo,t−3                                                                0.255a      0.184b       0.090
LAG−3, stores                                                              (0.081)    (0.069)      (0.064)
cityGPCot                                                                             0.173a        0.097
Contemporaneous centers                                                               (0.057)      (0.075)
cityRSot                                                                               0.118        0.051
Contemporaneous stores                                                                (0.070)      (0.070)
cityGPCo,t+1                                                                                        0.085
FWD+1 centers                                                                                      (0.060)
cityRSo,t+1                                                                                         0.030
FWD+1 stores                                                                                       (0.068)
ln(popot )                                           -0.292     -0.271     -0.309c     -0.130       -0.135
population                                          (0.218)    (0.204)     (0.178)    (0.205)      (0.202)
ln(gviopaot )                                        0.154b     0.136c      0.073      0.058        0.057
gross value of indust. output per capita            (0.072)    (0.074)     (0.099)    (0.080)      (0.073)
N                                                     315        315         315        315          280
W ithinR2                                            0.870      0.876       0.880      0.890        0.875
RMSE                                                 0.241      0.236       0.231      0.224        0.207
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the city level with a , b , and c respectively
      denoting significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. City and year fixed effects are included in
      all specifications.




                                                     29
lagged one, two, and three periods with respect to general export capabilities, and the results
are reported in first three columns of Table 3. To alleviate concerns about autocorrelation,
column 4 provides estimates from a specification that includes contemporaneous measures
of cityGPC and cityRS. In the final column, future cityGPC and cityRS are added to the
regression to test whether the significant and positive coefficients shown in the first four
columns are driven by multinational retailers locating their stores or procurement centers in
the cities with the highest export potential. However, our primary focus is on the regressions
that are based on lagged measures of cityGPC and cityRS. Econometrically, this is beneficial
since lagged measures are pre-determined with respect to the dependent variable. More
importantly, this specification is economically appropriate as long as retailer entry is not
determined by the market’s future retail export potential.
       The estimated retailer effects displayed in the first three columns of Table 3 indicate that
proximity to global procurement centers has a positive and significant effect on city general
export capabilities.24 In addition, the effect of global procurement centers grows over time.
The results show that the presence of retail stores also have a positive association that grows
in size over time. The positive and significant coefficients on the retailer variables such
as cityGPCo,t−1 provide direct evidence that city time-varying effects absorb the positive
impacts of multinational retailers on exports. The coefficients shown in column 3 predict
that a city’s general export capability will increase by 2.7% in response to a 10% increase in
procurement center activity three years prior; the same specification predicts that general
export capability will increase by 2.55% three years following a 10% expansion in the number
  24
       Since the dependent variable in the capability tests consists of estimated coefficients, there is a potential
                                                                                                        2
efficiency gain from using the Saxonhouse (1976) procedure of weighting each observation by 1/s.e.(αc
                                                                                                    ot ) .

Under this approach, less precisely estimated city effects are given lower weights in the second stage analysis.
The results, shown in the online supplemental materials, confirm our previous findings: lagged cityGPC and
cityRS remain significant at the 5% level.




                                                         30
of retail stores.25
       To evaluate whether our results are driven by reverse causation and time-series correla-
tions, the fourth column of Table 3 adds contemporaneous cityGPCot and cityRSot to the
regression. If our results are due to reverse causation, and current values of the retail vari-
ables are correlated with the past values of the retail variables, positive coefficients on the
retailer variables may arise in estimation, even if retail activity does not enhance city export
capability. Fortunately, the results in column 4 show that this issue is not a big concern.
Each of the three lags of cityGPC and cityRS are significant even though contemporaneous
cityGPC is significant as well. Since these changes in retailers’ presence predate the changes
in cities’ export capabilities, this result suggests the relationship is causal.
       As a final robustness check, we also ran tests to rule out the possibility that our results are
driven by retailers locating their stores or procurement centers in anticipation of cities’ export
potential. If so, it is possible that large multinational retailers, due to their sophistication
and experience, may be able to predict which Chinese cities are likely to experience the
biggest jumps in their future export capabilities. If retailers’ locations choices are also
positively affected by a city’s export potential, the variables cityGPC and cityRS will be
positively correlated with error terms in future periods, and fixed effect estimates will be
inconsistent. To assess the relevance of this concern, we implement the “strict exogeneity
test” of Wooldridge (2002, p. 285) by adding future measures of cityGPC and cityRS to the
regression framework. If cityGPC and cityRS are strictly exogenous to export capabilities,
the coefficients on cityGPCo,t+1 and cityRSo,t+1 should not be statistically different from zero.
Reassuringly, the results which are displayed in column 5 of Table 3 demonstrate that this is
  25
       If multinational retailers primarily contribute information from abroad to local suppliers, then capability
effects might be larger for exports of domestic firms. In estimates available upon request, we find that the
effects of retailer presence have the same signs and statistical significance for exports by foreign and domestic
firms, but the effects for foreign firms are slightly stronger.




                                                        31
the case; neither of the coefficients on future retailer activity are statistically significant, and
the p-value for the F-test of joint significance for these two variables is 0.339. Thus, the timing
indicates that changes in centers and stores occur prior to changes in multilateral exports,
supporting the causal story, rather than a model of endogenous locations by forward-looking
retailers.
       To evaluate the robustness of our results, we also repeated the analysis of Table 3 using
province-level data, since province-level export data provides a comprehensive measure of
Chinese exports. The results from the province-level regressions corroborate the findings
we note at the city-level. In particular, the economic effects implied by the provincial data
analysis indicate that after global procurement centers have been operating for three years,
a 10% increase in provGPCo,t−3 will boost provincial general export capability by 1.41%.
After the stores have been operating for three years, a 10% increase in provRSo,t−3 induces
a 1.91% increase in general export capabilities.26
       In summary, this section provides evidence from the geographic and time series devel-
opments in multinational retailer presence that supports the capability hypothesis. In par-
ticular, the regression results suggest that the presence of multinational retailers increases
future exports by improving the general export capabilities of the Chinese cities where they
locate.
  26
       The dependent variable for the province-level analysis are the province-year fixed effects that are esti-
mated when specification (2) is applied to provincial export data. The robustness checks also yield similar
results to those found with city-level data. In the provincial regressions the p-value for the F-test of the
joint significance for the two future variables, i.e. provGPCo,t+1 and provRSo,t+1 , is 0.47. The p-value for
the F-test of the joint significance for current and lagged measures of provGPC and provRS is smaller than
0.002.




                                                        32
8       Conclusion

Our paper evaluates an argument offered by Walmart to the government of India in its bid to
expand in that country: “Were it to have outlets in India, its procurement would naturally
increase. Suppliers would become familiar with its requirements, and exports would also
climb.”27 Our results shed light on a number of elements of Walmart’s claim. First, estimates
from the standard gravity model show that cities near retailer purchasing centers export
significantly more to countries with stores in the retailers’ networks than do other cities of
similar size and distance from international markets. However, this positive effect does not
seem to arise directly due to retailers procuring Chinese products for sale in their retail
stores outside of China. Rather, retailer presence (proximity to purchasing centers and the
placement of stores in a city) is correlated with the city’s export capabilities. In other words,
we find that cities with an expanding multinational retailer presence subsequently experience
more rapid multilateral export growth in retail sectors. The export expansion is not limited
to destination countries that host large number of the retailers’ stores. Finally, the evidence
that changes in retailer presence occur prior to changes in city export capabilities supports
the idea that the effect is causal.
      One lesson of our econometric analysis is that the estimation of linkage effects is highly
sensitive to the choice of econometric specification. In our analysis, estimates from simple
gravity or dyadic fixed effects specifications both suggest that linkages have a significant
effect on bilateral exports. However, the estimated linkage effects disappear once we control
for the general export capabilities of origins, as captured by origin-time fixed effects. The
next step in this research agenda is to devise methods to uncover the economic mechanisms
by which proximity to multinational retailers enhances city export capabilities.




 27
      Economist (2006), April 15.




                                                33
References

Ahn, J., A. K. Khandelwal, and S.-J. Wei (2010). The Role of Intermediaries in Facilitating
  Trade. Working Paper 15706, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Anderson, J. E. and E. van Wincoop (2003). Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
  Border Puzzle. The American Economic Review .

Baldwin, R. and D. Taglioni (2006). Gravity for Dummies and Dummies for Gravity Equa-
  tions. NBER Working Paper No. 12516.

Basker, E. and P. H. Van (2008). Wal-Mart as Catalyst to U.S.–China Trade. University of
  Missouri Research Papers 07-10.

Basker, E. and P. H. Van (2010). Imports “R” us: Retail chains as platforms for developing-
  country imports. American Economic Review 100 (2), 414–18.

Bernard, A., B. Jensen, S. Redding, and P. Schott (2010). Wholesalers and retailers in us
  trade. American Economic Review 100 (2), 408–13.

Blum, B. S., S. Claro, and I. J. Horstmann (2010). Facts and Figures on Intermediated
  Trade. American Economic Review 100 (2), 419–23.

Disdier, A.-C. and K. Head (2008). The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on
  Bilateral Trade. The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (1), 37–48.

Economist (2006). Coming to Market—Retailing in India. The Economist, U.S. Edition.

Hausman, R. and D. Rodrik (2003). Economic Development as Self-Discovery. Journal of
  Development Economics 72 (2), 603–633.

Iacovone, L., B. Javorcik, W. Keller, and J. Tybout (2009). Walmart in Mexico: The Impact
  of FDI on Innovation. Mimeo, University of Colorado, April.



                                            34
Javorcik, B., W. Keller, and J. R. Tybout (2008). Openness and Industrial Responses in a
  Walmart World: A Case Study of Mexican Soaps, Detergents and Surfactant Producers.
  World Economy 31 (12).

Javorcik, B. S. and Y. Li (2008). Do the Biggest Aisles Serve Brighter Future? Implications
  of Global Retail Chains’ Presence for Romania. World Bank Working Paper No. 4650.

Rauch, J. E. and V. Trindade (2002). Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade. The
  Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (1), 116–130.

Rauch, J. E. and V. Trindade (2003). Information, International Substitutability, and Glob-
  alization. American Economic Review 93 (3), 775–791.

Saxonhouse, G. R. (1976). Estimated parameters as dependent variables. American Eco-
  nomic Review 66 (1), 178–83.

Wang, S. and Y. Zhang (2006). Penetrating the Great Wall, Conquering the Middle King-
  dom: Wal-Mart in China. Wal-mart World—The World Biggest Corporation in the Global
  Economy (New York, NY: Routledge,Taylor & Francis Group, 2006), 293–313.

Wooldridge, J. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.

Wu, K. (2004). The Happiness of Carrefour in China. (translated), China Economy Pub-
  lishing House.




                                            35
Data Appendix

                   Table 4: Data Sources for Control Variables
Variable                                       Source
Countries’ GDP and populations                 World Bank Development Indicators
Chinese provinces’ GDP and populations              China Data Online
The longitudes and latitudes of country capitals    CEPII
The longitudes and latitudes of province capitals   Map of World website
Chinese city land areas                             China Data Online
Chinese ports                                       Lloyd’s ports of the world (1995)




                                          36
