NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL PRICE INDICES FOR TARGETING INFLATION UNDER INCOMPLETE
MARKETS
Rahul Anand
Eswar S. Prasad
Working Paper 16290
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16290

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2010

We are grateful to Kaushik Basu, Gita Gopinath, Karel Mertens, Parul Sharma, Viktor Tsyrennikov
and Magnus Saxegaard for helpful comments and discussions. We received helpful comments from
seminar participants at Cornell University, the IMF and the Reserve Bank of India. This research was
supported by a grant from the International Growth Centre's Macroeconomics Program. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Rahul Anand and Eswar S. Prasad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimal Price Indices for Targeting Inflation Under Incomplete Markets
Rahul Anand and Eswar S. Prasad
NBER Working Paper No. 16290
August 2010
JEL No. E31,E52,E61
ABSTRACT
In models with complete markets, targeting core inflation enables monetary policy to maximize welfare
by replicating the flexible price equilibrium. In this paper, we develop a two-sector two-good closed
economy new Keynesian model to study the optimal choice of price index in markets with financial
frictions. Financial frictions that limit credit-constrained consumers’ access to financial markets make
demand insensitive to interest rate fluctuations. The demand of credit-constrained consumers is determined
by their real wage, which depends on prices in the flexible price sector. Thus, prices in the flexible
price sector influence aggregate demand and, for monetary policy to have its desired effect, the central
bank has to stabilize price movements in the flexible price sector. Also, in the presence of financial
frictions, stabilizing core inflation is no longer equivalent to stabilizing output fluctuations. Our analysis
suggests that in the presence of financial frictions a welfare-maximizing central bank should adopt
flexible headline inflation targeting—a target based on headline rather than core inflation, and with
some weight on the output gap. We discuss why these results are particularly relevant for emerging
markets, where the share of food expenditures in total consumption expenditures is high and a large
proportion of consumers are credit-constrained.
Rahul Anand
IMF, Asia and Pacific Department
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431 U.S.A.
ranand@imf.org
Eswar S. Prasad
Department of Applied Economics and
Management
Cornell University
440 Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
eswar.prasad@cornell.edu

1

1. Introduction
The global financial crisis has led to a vigorous debate about the appropriate objectives for
monetary policy. For instance, it has been posited that a narrow version of inflation targeting
(IT) could pose risks if it implies that potential asset bubbles are ignored by central banks.
The emerging consensus appears to be that the IT framework has delivered price stability
and should be retained but that central banks should use prudential regulation and other
policy tools to counteract asset price bubbles. Whether or not IT is the chosen framework,
central banks around the world view low and stable inflation as a primary, if not dominant,
objective of monetary policy.
What is the right price index that should be the focus of the inflation objective? This is a
central operational issue in implementing not just IT but any version of monetary policy.
Two key issues about the choice of price index are--determining the level of inflation that is
consistent with the notion of price stability and determining the appropriate price index. In
this paper, we focus on the task of analytically determining the appropriate price index for
markets with financial frictions in general and emerging markets in particular.
In the literature, the choice of price index has been guided by the idea that inflation is a
monetary phenomenon. It has been suggested that core inflation (excluding food, energy
and other volatile components from headline CPI) is the most appropriate measure of
inflation (Wynne, 1999). The logic is that fluctuations in food and energy prices represent
supply shocks and are non-monetary in nature. Since these shocks are transitory and
volatile and do not reflect changes in the underlying rate of inflation, they should not be a
part of the inflation targeting price index (Mishkin, 2007, 2008).
Previous authors have used models with price and/or wage stickiness to show that the
choice of this price index is consistent with a welfare maximization objective. Existing
models have looked at complete market settings where price stickiness is the only source of
distortion (besides monopoly power). Infrequent price adjustments cause mark-ups to
fluctuate and also distort relative prices. In order to restore the flexible price equilibrium,
central banks should try to minimize these fluctuations by targeting sticky prices
(Goodfriend and King, 1997, 2001). Using a variant of a New Keynesian model, Aoki
(2001) has shown that under complete markets targeting inflation in the sticky price sector
leads to welfare maximization and macroeconomic stability. Targeting core inflation is

2
equivalent to stabilizing the aggregate output gap as output and inflation move in the same
direction under complete markets.
Appropriateness of the core price index in these models relies heavily on the assumption
that markets are complete (allowing households to fully insure against idiosyncratic risks)
so that the central bank only needs to tackle the distortions created by price stickiness.
However, there is compelling evidence that not all agents in the economy may be able to
smooth their consumption (Campbell and Mankiw, 1989, 1990, 1991).1 This observation is
also consistent with the findings of a number of papers rejecting the permanent income
hypothesis. It has been shown that, in the presence of credit-constrained consumers,
policymakers’ welfare objectives are altered and the Taylor rule becomes too weak a
criterion for stability (Amato and Laubach, 2003; and Gali, Lopez-Salido and Valles, 2004) .
Our main objective in this paper is to develop a model to study the welfare implications of
targeting different price indices in an incomplete markets setting and to analytically
determine the appropriate price index to target. A major contribution of this paper is to
study the implication of financial frictions (modeled by the presence of credit constrained
consumers) on the choice of the optimal price index.
Financial frictions that result in credit-constrained consumers have not received much
attention in models of inflation targeting. To examine the significance of financial frictions,
we develop a model with heterogeneous agents, where a fraction of consumers cannot
smooth their consumption—that is, they simply consume their current labor income.2 When
markets are not complete and agents differ in their ability to smooth consumption, their
welfare depends on the nature of idiosyncratic shocks. Thus, this modeling choice also
allows us to look at the welfare distribution under alternative choices of the price index.
Under complete markets, the income distribution following a sector-specific shock does not
matter for the choice of consumption and, hence, welfare. However, under incomplete
markets, household income, which is influenced by the nature of shocks and the price
1

Campbell and Mankiw estimate that in the U.S. nearly 50 percent of income accrues to
consumers who do not smooth their consumption. Muscatelli, Tirelli and Trecroci (2004) find
that about 37 percent of consumers are rule-of-thumb consumers and they account for 59 percent
of total employment. For further evidence on the proportion of credit-constrained consumers in
the U.S., see Jappelli (1990), Shea (1995), Parker (1999), Souleles (1999), Fuhrer (2000), and
Fuhrer and Rudebusch (2004).
2
We introduce this friction in a manner similar to that of Gali, Lopez-Salido and Valles (2004).

3
elasticity of demand for goods, matters for the consumption choice.3 Price elasticity of the
demand for food, which has not attracted much attention in complete market settings,
becomes important under incomplete markets. We show that, through its impact on a
household’s income and expenditure, the low price elasticity of the demand for food is an
important determinant of the optimal choice of price index under incomplete markets.4
We also incorporate other important features relevant to emerging markets into the model.
The share of food in total household expenditures is much higher in emerging markets,
constituting nearly 40-50 percent of household expenditures compared to 10-15 percent in
advanced economies. Low price and income elasticities of food, and low income levels make
the welfare of agents in emerging markets more sensitive to fluctuations in food prices.
Since expenditure on food in total household expenditure is high and demand for food is
relatively inelastic, agents may factor in food price inflation while bargaining over wages.
Through this channel, food price inflation feeds into inflation expectations. Thus, in
emerging markets even inflation expectation targeting central banks have to be concerned
about food price inflation. 5
The key finding of the paper is that in the presence of financial frictions targeting core
inflation (i.e., inflation in the sticky price sector) may not be optimal. Lack of access to
financial markets makes the demand of credit-constrained consumers insensitive to
fluctuations in interest rates. Since their demand depends only on real wages, a link is
established between aggregate demand and real wages. Thus, in the presence of financial
frictions, the relative price of the good produced in the flexible price sector not only affects
aggregate supply but, through its effects on real wages, also influences aggregate demand.
This result is at variance with the prior literature based on complete markets settings. For
instance, in Aoki’s (2001) model, relative prices of the flexible price sector only appear as a
shift parameter of inflation in the sticky price sector. Under incomplete markets, by contrast,
the central bank cannot ignore fluctuations in the price of the good produced in the flexible
3

A negative productivity shock related to a good with a low price elasticity of demand could
increase the income of net sellers of that good and raise the expenditure of net buyers on that
good.
4
A survey by the U.S. Department of Agriculture suggests that the average price elasticity of
food is -0.34 in a sample of 114 countries; this estimate is smaller in absolute terms than the
elasticity normally used in other models, most of which assume a unitary price elasticity.
5
Walsh (2010) documents the high pass-through from food price inflation to non-food inflation in
middle- and low-income countries.

4
price sector if it wants to affect aggregate demand. Financial frictions break the comovement
of inflation and output (as inflation and output may now move in opposite directions).
Stabilizing core inflation is no longer sufficient to stabilize output. Thus, in the presence of
financial frictions targeting flexible headline inflation is a better policy choice.
Since our model exhibits monetary super-neutrality, we limit our analysis to noninflationary steady states (long-run price stability) and do not have anything to say about the
optimal level of inflation. We also do not attempt to define optimal policy rules but focus on
evaluating welfare outcomes of different policy rules using alternative measures of inflation.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present some empirical facts to
further motivate the analysis. In Section 3, we develop a two-sector, two-good model with
heterogeneous agents that encapsulates the features discussed above. In Section 4 we
discuss the main results and in Section 5 we conduct various sensitivity experiments to
check the robustness of our baseline results and also present some extensions of the basic
model. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2.

Basic Stylized Facts

We begin by presenting some stylized facts about the share of household consumption
expenditures on food and also various measures of the elasticity of food expenditures. In a
cross-country comparison, emerging markets and advanced countries differ markedly on
these measures. Next, we present data on credit constraints in emerging markets. We also
look at the features of core and headline CPI inflation measures in some emerging and
advanced economies.
Engel’s law states that as average household income increases the average share of food
expenditure in total household expenditure declines. When this idea is extended to
countries, we expect poor countries to have a high average share of food expenditure in
total household expenditure. Figure 1 plots the expenditure on food (as a percentage of
total expenditure) against log real per capital income for the year 1996.6 It shows that
countries with lower per capita income levels have a higher share of expenditure on food
in total household expenditure. In order to examine how emerging markets differ from
6

We use data for 1996 for illustrative purposes since data for a large number of countries were
available for that year.

5
advanced countries, in Table 1 we present recent data on shares of food expenditure in
total expenditure for selected emerging and advanced economies.7 As expected,
expenditure on food constitutes a much larger share of total household expenditure in
emerging markets relative to advanced economies.
Income and price elasticities of the demand for food are important for our analysis.
Figure 2 plots the income elasticity of food against real per capita GDP for the year 1996.
The income elasticity of food is low, suggesting that food is a necessary good. Since
expenditure on food is not a major share of household expenditure in rich countries, the
income elasticity of food is much lower.8 We present the income elasticity of food for
selected emerging market and advanced economies in Table 2. The income elasticity of
food in emerging markets is on average twice as large as that in advanced economies.
Figure 3 plots, for a large sample of countries, the Slutsky own price elasticity of food
against the log real per capita GDP for the year 1996.9 The price elasticity of food
demand is nonlinear, decreasing at low income levels, and then increasing, with a range
from -0.4 to -0.1. We also present data on the Slutsky own-price elasticity of food for
selected countries in Table 2.10 The price elasticity of food is very low (suggesting that
the demand for food is inelastic). As the share of expenditure on food is high in emerging
markets, the price elasticity of food is higher in these economies. However, the overall
value of the price elasticity of food is much lower than what is used in the literature on
inflation targeting. Low price and income elasticities of the demand for food have
considerable significance for the choice of price index.
In order to examine the extent of credit constraints in emerging markets, in Table 3 we
present data on the percentage of the adult population with access to formal finance
7

We looked at household surveys for each country in this table rather than the weight of food in
each country’s CPI index since those weights are changed only occasionally. However, data from
household surveys are available for only a few emerging markets. These data typically cover
expenditure on food consumed at home and don’t include expenditures on beverages and tobacco.
8
A low income elasticity of demand also means that, as family income increases, consumption of
the commodity will not increase by much.
9
The Slutsky own price elasticity is estimated by keeping real income constant.
10
Frisch elasticity values lie between Slutsky and Cournot values and can be considered as an
average own price elasticity.

6
(measured by the share of the population using financial services) in emerging markets.
On average, more than half of the population in emerging markets does not have access
to the formal financial system.
Next, we examine the characteristics of core and headline inflation. We plot the levels
and volatility of inflation for selected advanced and emerging market economies (Figure
4-5). Values of average inflation, average volatility and the persistence of inflation (for
the period March 1991 – September 2009) are reported in Table 4. The two measures of
inflation have very different characteristics in advanced and emerging market economies.
Average inflation (both headline and core) has been higher in emerging market
economies during the period reported. Headline inflation is more volatile than core
inflation in both advanced and emerging market economies. However, the volatility of
both inflation measures is much higher in emerging markets. Core inflation has on
average been more than twice as volatile in emerging market economies compared to
advanced countries. The two measures of inflation exhibit a high degree of persistence in
both sets of economies.11
We also look at the evolution of two price indices over time. It is expected that they
would deviate from each other in the short run (as the core measure is constructed to
eliminate the fluctuations which do not reflect the underlying inflation developments).
However, since transitory shocks (shocks to food and energy) do not change the
underlying trend, headline inflation should return to its original level in a short period
(Mishkin, 2007). In other words, the headline inflation measure should not remain above
the core inflation measure for an extended period.

11

In a cross-country study, Walsh (2010) finds that food price inflation is in fact more persistent
than non-food price inflation. This holds for both advanced and emerging market economies,
although he finds that food price inflation is more persistent in emerging markets.

7
To verify this, we examine the two measures of inflation for two representative core
inflation targeting countries – Canada and Thailand.12 In Canada, in the period from the
spring of 1999 to the fall of 2001, headline inflation remained above core inflation for 30
months in succession (Figure 4a). In Thailand, headline inflation has remained above
core inflation for more than 5 consecutive years (Figure 5a). The core inflation measure
excludes a number of expenditure items and is less representative of the cost of living.
Thus, differences in the behavior of headline inflation (ostensibly a more accurate
measure of the cost of living) and core inflation over an extended period may have
important welfare implications.

3.

The Model

Our model builds upon a large literature that has developed and analyzed dynamic sticky
price models (Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 1999; Woodford, 1996; Rotemberg and
Woodford, 1997, 1999; Aoki, 2001). The model is rendered more realistic by
incorporating two features that are relevant to all economies but are particularly
important for emerging markets--a fraction of consumers who are credit constrained and
a subsistence level of food consumption. The model has two sectors and two goods—one
type of flexible price good, food ( C F ), whose prices adjust instantaneously, and a
continuum of monopolistically produced sticky price goods,

c( z ) indexed in z ! (0,1) which we call non-food and whose prices adjust sluggishly.13 In
the subsequent discussion, we interchangeably use the term food sector for the flexible
price sector and the term non-food sector for the sticky price sector.
3.1

Households

The economy is populated by a continuum of 1 + λ infinitely lived households,
where ! > 0 , is the continuum of households in the flexible price sector (food sector).
Each household owns a firm and produces one good. They provide labor to the firms in
their respective sector (we assume that labor is immobile across sectors) and consume
12

Canada is an advanced economy that adopted IT in 1991 while Thailand, an emerging market
economy, adopted IT in 2000. Canada targets core inflation excluding food, energy and indirect
taxes. Thailand targets core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices.
13
We model the sticky price sector by a continuum of monopolistic firms so that these firms have
market power and they can set prices. This is done to introduce price stickiness in this sector.

8
both the flexible price good (food) and all of the differentiated sticky price goods (non
food).14 The representative consumer, i, is indexed by f (flexible price sector) and s
(sticky price sector). Household i maximizes the discounted stream of utility

"

E0 ! # t [u (Cti , N ti )]

(1)

t =0

where " ! (0,1) is the discount factor. The utility function takes the form:

(Cti )1$#
( N ti )1+!
u (C , N ) =
$ "n
1$#
1 +!
i
t

i
t

(2)

where the argument Cti is the composite consumption index of household i in period t.
Cti includes the flexible price good and the entire continuum of the differentiated goods.

It is defined as

1
!

)
Cti = '" C if ,t # C
'(

(

1
* 1#!

)

1

1
1#
!

+ (1 # " )! (Csi ,t )

&
$
$%

1
1
1#
!

(3)

where

' 1 i ))!1 $
C = % ( ct ( z ) dz "
&0
#
i
s ,t

)

) !1

(4)

The elasticity of substitution between the flexible price and sticky price goods is given
by# " [0, !] and " ! [0,1] is the weight on food in the consumption index. The parameter
14

We have assumed the immobility of labor for simplicity and to capture the large inter-sectoral
wage differential in emerging markets. Gali, Lopez-Salido and Valles (2004) have demonstrated
in their model that, even with free labor mobility, financial frictions lead to similar results as ours
(aggregate demand going up even when the central bank raises the policy interest rate).

9
θ >1 is the elasticity of substitution between any two differentiated goods, N ti is the
aggregate labor supplied by household i in period t and ! is the risk aversion factor
(inverse of elasticity of inter temporal substitution). The parameter ! is the inverse of
Frisch elasticity and ! n is a scaling factor.
The utility function used here is of a generalized Klein-Rubin form.15 This form is
selected to model the role of food in the economy. Since food is a necessity, households
must consume a minimum amount C* of food for survival.16 We assume that all
households always have enough income to buy the subsistence level of food. Even
though the subsistence level food consumption does not bind, it plays a vital role by
altering the elasticity of substitution between food and non-food and the marginal utility
of food and non-food consumption.
3.1.1 Flexible Price Sector (Food Sector) Households
Households in the flexible price sector (food sector) do not have access to financial
markets and they consume their wage income in each period.17 So these households are
akin to the “rule of thumb” consumers. Each household in the sector owns one firm and
produces food by linear technology in labor, given by
y f ,t = A f ,t N t f

(5)

Af,t is a random productivity shock. Since we are interested in analyzing the effects of
sector-specific shocks rather than household-level idiosyncratic shocks, we assume that
all the households in the food sector face the same shock.

15

Expenditure system corresponding to Klein-Rubin utility function is referred to as the StoneGeary linear expenditure system; Stone (1954) and Geary (1949).
16
This is also similar to habit persistence with C* being independent of time.
17
There is no storage technology in the model. So consumers in the flexible price sector cannot
smooth their consumption by saving their output. We have made this restrictive assumption to
keep the model tractable. Moreover, Table 3 shows that more than 50 percent of individuals in
emerging markets lack access to formal finance. Basu et al. (2005) have documented that 80
percent of individuals in India’s agricultural sector have no access to formal finance.

10
3.1.2 Sticky Price Sector (Non Food Sector) Households
Households in this sector can buy one period nominal bonds and smooth their
consumption. Each household owns a firm and provides labor to each firm in the sector.
They hold one share in each firm of the sector. Each firm uses a linear technology in
labor given by
yt ( z ) = As ,t N ts ( z )

(6)

where yt (z ) is a sticky price good and N ts (z ) is the labor used in the firm producing
good indexed by z ( where z ! [0,1] ). As,t is a random productivity shock. We assume that
the shock is identical for all households in the non-food sector.
3.2

Consumption Decision

3.2.1 Food Sector Households (Credit Constrained Consumers)
All households in this sector face an identical budget constraint every period (as their
wage income is the same in every period). A representative household maximizes its
lifetime utility given by equation (1) subject to the budget constraint
Pf ,t C ff ,t + Ps ,t Csf,t = Wt f N t f

(7)

where Pf,t is the market price of food, Ps ,t is the price index of non-food (defined below)
and Wt f is the nominal wage in the food sector. The optimal allocation for a given level
of spending between food and all the differentiated non-food goods leads to a DixitStiglitz demand relation. The total expenditure to attain a consumption index C t f is given
by Pt C t f where Pt is defined as

P = [" ( P
t

f ,t

1#!

)

1
1#! 1#!

+ (1 # " )( Ps ,t )

]

(8)

11

The budget constraint can be written as:
Pt Ct f = Wt f N t f ! Pf ,t C *

(9)

Demand for the flexible price good is given by

f
f ,t

C

& Pf ,t
= ) $$
% Pt

'(

#
!! Ct f + C *
"

(10)

Demand for the sticky price good is given by

)P
C = (1 # " )'' s ,t
( Pt
f
s ,t

#!

&
$$ Ct f
%

(11)

where Ps ,t is the Dixit-Stiglitz price index defined as

1

(1
% 1"!
Ps ,t = & ) X t ( z )1"! dz #
'0
$

(12)

X t (z ) is the price of differentiated good indexed on z at time t. Demand for each

differentiated good is given by
"!

( X ( z) %
c t ( z ) = && t ## Csf,t
' Ps ,t $
f

(13)

The labor supply decision is given by the usual first order condition with respect to N t f :

$n

( N t f )# Wt f
=
(Ct f ) !"
Pt

(14)

12
3.2.2 Non Food Sector households (Unconstrained Consumers)
Each household in this sector provides labor to each one of the firms in the sector and
also holds one share in each firm. This setting is the one followed by Woodford (2003).18
In this setup, each household faces the same budget constraint each period and hence
chooses the same consumption stream. A representative household maximizes the
lifetime utility given by equation (1) subject to the following budget constraint
1

1

Pt C ts + Bt = # Wt s ( z ) N ts ( z )dz + # " ts ( z )dz + Rt !1 Bt !1 ! Pf ,t C *
0

(15)

0

where Bt represents the quantity of one-period nominal riskfree discount bonds bought in
period t and maturing in period t+1 and Rt is the gross nominal interest rate between
period t and t+1. Wt s (z ) and N ts (z ) represent the nominal wage prevalent in firm z and
the amount of labor supplied to firm z by the household, respectively. ! ts (z ) is the profit
of firm z. Maximization with respect to C ts yields the Euler equation

&
R #
(Cts ) () = *Et %(Cts+1 ) () t "
' t +1 !
$

where " t =

(16)

Pt
is gross headline inflation. The labor supply decision of the household
Pt !1

to a firm indexed by z is given by

$n

18

( N ts ( z ))# Wt s ( z )
=
(Cts ) !"
Pt

(17)

Alternatively, we could use the other set up specified in Woodford (2003) in which each
household produces one of the differentiated products and there exist a complete range of
securities through which they can insure fully against idiosyncratic risks. In that formulation also,
each household will choose the same consumption stream and therefore the analysis will be the
same as in the present setting.

13
Demand for the flexible price good is given by

s
f ,t

C

& Pf ,t
= ) $$
% Pt

'(

#
!! Cts + C *
"

(18)

Demand for the sticky price good is given by

)P
C = (1 # " )'' s ,t
( Pt
s
s ,t

#!

&
$$ Cts
%

(19)

and the demand for each differentiated good is given by

"!

( X ( z) %
# Css,t
c t ( z ) = && t
#
' Ps ,t $
s

3.3

(20)

Firms

3.3.1 Firms in the Flexible Price Sector (Food Sector)
Firms are assumed to be price takers. Given a market price Pf ,t they set their price such
that
Wt f
Pf ,t =
A f ,t

(21)

The supply function for the flexible price firm is obtained by combining equations (5),
(14) and (21), and is given by:

"

* y f ,t
'
(
%
A
Pf ,t
f ,t &
)
= #n
Pt
A f ,t (Ct f ) $!

(22)

14
The market-clearing condition for food implies

) Pf ,t
= " ''
( Pt

*#

&
$$ Ct + (1 + ! )C *
%

(23)

where we have defined !C t f + C ts = C t = Yt

(24)

Y f ,t = ! y f ,t = C f ,t

It can be considered as the total composite demand and hence equal to supply in
equilibrium.
3.3.2 Firms in the Sticky Price Sector
We follow Calvo (1983) and Woodford (1996) in modeling price stickiness. A fraction

" ! (0,1) of firms cannot change their price in each period. Firms are free to change the
price at time t; they choose a price X t to maximize the following objective function:

&(
#
Max Et $) (*+ ) j Qt ,t + j X t ( z ) yt ,t + j ( z ) ' TCt ,t + j ( yt ,t + j ( z )) !
Xt ( z)
% j =0
"

[

where Qt ,t + j

' Cts+ j
=) % s
% C
& t
i

$
"
"
#

]

!(

(25)

Pt
is the stochastic discount factor and yt ,t + j ( z ) is the output
Pt + j

of firm in period t+j when it has set its price in period t that is given by

!(

' X ( z) $
" Ys ,t + j
yt , t + j ( z ) = % t
"
% P
s
,
t
+
j
#
&

(26)

where we have made use of the market clearing conditions

& X ( z) #
yt (z) = ct ( z ) = (ct ( z ) + c ( z ) = $$ t !!
% Ps ,t "
f

s
t

')

((C

f
s ,t

+ Css,t

)

(27)

15

&P
*C + C = Cs ,t = (1 ' ) )$$ s ,t
% Pt
f
s ,t

s
s ,t

"!

'(

#
!! Ct = Ys ,t
"

(28)

"!

( X ( z) %
(
%
# Cs ,t = & X t ( z ) # Ys ,t
yt ( z ) = && t
#
& P #
' Ps ,t $
' s ,t $

(29)

The sticky sector price index is expressed by

[

]

1

Ps ,t = " ( Ps ,t #1 )1#! + (1 # " ) X t1#! ( z ) 1#!

(30)

The price X t (z ) solves the following first order condition

&.
0
,
)#
Et $/ (12 ) j Qt ,t + j y t ,t + j ( z )+ X t ( z ) MCtr+ j ( z )(! = 0
0 -1
*
'"
% j =0

(31)

where
"

'
* yt , t + j ( z )
(
%
A
MCt + j ( z )
s ,t + j &
= MCtr+ j ( z ) = #n )
Pt + j
As ,t + j (Cts+ j ) $!

and

(32)

"
is the constant markup over the marginal cost.19
" !1

Equations (8), (9), (16), (22), (23), (28), (30), (31) and (32), coupled with a monetary
policy rule to choose the nominal interest rate, jointly determine the equilibrium path of
consumption, output and price index in both the sectors.

19

Since the technology is linear, MCt,t+j = MCt+j That is, marginal cost is independent of the level
of production.

16
3.4

Inflation and Relative Prices

We define the relative prices as follows:
Pf ,t
Pt

= x f ,t , relative price of food,

Ps ,t
Pt

= xs ,t , relative price of non-food; and

Xt
= xt ,
Ps ,t

relative price charged by firms which are free to choose the price in time t. We define the
gross headline inflation as " t =

" s ,t =

Ps ,t
Ps ,t !1

Pt
, and gross inflation in the sticky price sector as
Pt !1

. The relationship between headline and core inflation (inflation in the sticky

price sector) is given by:

x s ,t =

Ps ,t Ps ,t "1 Pt "1 ! s ,t x s ,t "1
=
Ps ,t "1 Pt "1 Pt
!t

(33)

The system of equations in terms of stationary variables is presented in Appendix I.
3.5

Steady State

We characterize the steady state with constant prices (zero inflation) and no price
stickiness in the economy.20 This implies that ! t = 1 and ! s ,t = 1 for all t. Under
symmetric equilibrium, each firm faces the same demand and sets the same price. Thus,
X t = Ps ,t and xt = 1 . Therefore, xs ,t =

"
MCtr . In the steady state, all firms set a price
" !1

which is a constant markup over the real marginal cost.21 We assume that productivity is
the same in both the sectors and normalize it to one.

20

Our model exhibits monetary super-neutrality. Therefore, the level of steady state inflation does
not affect steady state values of real variables.
21
We also compute the welfare gains when the steady state involves a tax rate which is set such
that the steady state level of output in the sticky price sector is efficient. All our results go
through under this alternative characterization of steady state.

17
3.6

Monetary Policy Rule

We assume that the monetary authority sets the short term nominal interest ( Rt )
according to a simple Taylor (1993) type rule of the following form
_

_

_

_

log( Rt / R ) = ! i log( Rt $1 / R) + !" log(# t / # ) + ! y log(Yt / Y )
_

_

(34)

_

where Y , ! and R are the steady state values of output, inflation and the nominal interest
rate, respectively. The term ! i represents the Central Banker’s preference for interest rate
smoothing. " ! and ! y are the weights on inflation and output gap assigned by the policy
makers.22 We characterize core inflation as the inflation in the sticky price sector, ! s,t ,
and headline inflation as the over all inflation, ! t , for our policy experiments.
We evaluate our model under the following monetary policy regimes:
Strict Core Inflation Targeting: The central bank cares only about interest rate smoothing
and stabilizing inflation in the sticky price sector.
_

_

_

log( Rt / R ) = $ i log( Rt "1 / R) + $# log(! s ,t / ! s )

(35)

Strict Headline Inflation Targeting: The central bank cares only about interest rate
smoothing and stabilizing headline inflation.
_

_

_

log( Rt / R ) = $ i log( Rt "1 / R) + $# log(! t / ! )

22

(36)

We include an interest rate smoothing parameter in our monetary policy rule as the benefits of
such smoothing are well documented in the literature (see, e.g., Lowe and Ellis, 1997; Sack and
Wieland, 1999). Various authors have argued that moving interest rates in small steps increases
its impact on the long-term interest rate; it also reduces the risks of policy mistakes and prevents
large capital losses and systemic financial risks. Mohanty and Klau (2004) find that all emerging
market central banks put substantial weight on interest rate smoothing. Clarida et al.(1998) find
that central banks of advanced economies also put a large weight on interest rate smoothing.

18
Flexible Core Inflation Targeting: The central bank cares about interest rate smoothing
and in addition to stabilizing sticky price inflation also tries to stabilize output by
assigning a weight to the output gap (deviation of output from trend).
_

_

_

_

log( Rt / R ) = ! i log( Rt $1 / R ) + !" log(# s ,t / # s ) + ! y log(Yt / Y )

(37)

Flexible Headline Inflation Targeting: The central bank cares about interest rate
smoothing and in addition to stabilizing headline inflation also tries to stabilize output.
_

_

_

_

log( Rt / R ) = ! i log( Rt $1 / R) + !" log(# t / # ) + ! y log(Yt / Y )

3.7

(38)

Exogenous Shock Process

We assume that the productivity in the flexible price sector and sticky price sector follow
AR(1) processes
A f ,t +1 = " af A f ,t + ! t

, ! t ~ i.i.d. (0, ! af )

(39)

As ,t +1 = " as As ,t + !t

, !t ~ i.i.d. (0, ! as )

(40)

In the literature, exclusion of food prices from the price index has been justified on the
ground that shocks to food (and energy) prices represent supply shocks. In order to
compare our model with those in the prior literature and also to highlight the role of
adverse supply shocks on the choice of price index, we focus on productivity shocks.
3.8

Competitive Equilibrium

A stationary competitive equilibrium is a set of processes
C tf , Cts , x f ,t , xs ,t , y f,t , ys, t , yt , ! s ,t , ! t , Rt , xt , mct for t = 0,1,… that remain bounded in

some neighborhood around the deterministic steady state and satisfy equations (52) – (62)
of Appendix I, given the exogenous stochastic processes A f ,t , As ,t and the monetary
policy rule given by equation (34).

19
3.9

Complete Markets Specification

We follow the setting of Aoki (2001) to study the choice of price index under complete
markets. In this setting all households can insure one another against idiosyncratic
income risks completely. It implies that given same initial wealth each household will
choose an identical consumption sequence.23 Thus, under this complete markets setting

Ct f = Cts =

Ct
Y
= t
1+ ! 1+ !

(41)

and aggregate demand is given by

- Yt *
+
(
,1+ 0 )

./

&- Y * ./ Rt #
= 1Et $+ t +1 (
!
$%, 1 + 0 ) ' t !"

(42)

Equations (53), (55)-(61) of Appendix I and (41)-(42) define the system of equations that
combined with the monetary policy rule and exogenous stochastic processes A f ,t and As ,t
determine the equilibrium path of the economy in the complete markets setting.
3.10

Welfare Evaluations

We are interested in the choice of policy rule that yields the highest level of lifetime utility
within the class of policy rules considered.24 In particular, we evaluate policy rules
according to the value of lifetime utility:
!

Vt i # Et " $ jU (Cti+ j , N ti+ j ) for i = f,s

(43)

j =0

We compute the total welfare of the economy as a weighted sum of households’ welfare
23

Insurance contracts are assumed to be written before households know which sector they are
assigned to. The insurance contracts make the marginal utility of nominal income identical across
the households at any time t.
24
We study the policy rule which is implementable and optimal as defined by Schmitt-Grohe and
Uribe (2007). Implementability refers to the local uniqueness of rational expectations equilibrium
while optimality means that it yields the highest lifetime utility within the class of policy rules
considered.

20
Vtotal = ! *Vt f + Vt s . Formally, we compute Vtotal associated with each policy rule and look

for a policy rule that yields the highest value of Vtotal .
3.11

Solution Method

Following Kydland and Prescott (1982) and King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988), it has
become commonplace to characterize the solution of nonlinear models using
approximation methods, with first-order approximation techniques being the norm.
However, it is now widely accepted that first-order approximation techniques are illsuited for the comparison of different policy environments using aggregate utility as a
welfare criterion.25 To enable accurate welfare comparisons across alternative policy
environments, we need at least a second-order approximation of the equilibrium welfare
function (Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe, 2004; Woodford, 2003).26
In recent years, scholars have come up with various methods to produce second-order
accurate approximation to the solutions of DSGE models. Jin and Judd (2002), Collard
and Juillard (2000) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004) have used the perturbation
method for second-order and higher-order approximations. Kim and Kim (2003) and
Sutherland (2002) have developed the bias correction method that produces similar
results as the second order perturbation method.
We compute the second-order accurate consumer welfare measure with different
monetary policy regimes as in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004). To produce an accurate
second-order approximation of the welfare function, we use a second-order
approximation to the policy function. The policy function is approximated using the
perturbation method by employing a scale parameter for the standard deviations of the
exogenous shocks as an argument of the policy function and taking a second-order Taylor
expansion with respect to the state variables as well as the scale parameter. We use an
25

Up to a first-order approximation, lifetime utility, Vt, is equal to its non-stochastic steady state
value. Hence, given the same non-stochastic steady state, all policy rules yield the same amount
of welfare up to a first-order approximation (Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe, 2007).
26
See Kim and Kim (2003). However, if one is sure that nonlinearity is small in certain
dimensions one can justify using a first-order approximation by making specific assumptions,
Woodford (2003).

21
approximation algorithm developed by Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004) with suitable
modifications.
3.12

Measuring Welfare Gains

Strict core inflation targeting is regarded as the welfare maximizing policy rule in the
literature. Therefore, we evaluate the welfare gains associated with a particular policy
regime by comparing it to the strict core inflation targeting rule allocation. Let the strict
core inflation targeting rule allocation be denoted by r, and an alternative policy regime
be denoted by a. We define the welfare associated with the core allocation conditional on
the economy being at its non-stochastic steady state at time zero:

"

V0r = E0 ! # tU (Ctr , N tr )

(44)

t =0

where Ctr and N tr are the consumption and hours of work under the strict core inflation
targeting policy rule. Similarly, the conditional welfare under the alternative regime a is
defined as

"

V0a = E0 ! # tU (Cta , N ta )

(45)

t =0

The use of the conditional rather than unconditional expectation is consistent with the
approach followed by Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2007) and Kollman (2004). The use of
the conditional expectation is preferable in our framework given that different policy
regimes will typically have different stochastic steady states even though their nonstochastic states are identical. Hence, as pointed out by Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2007),
the unconditional expectation of utility ignores the transitional dynamics leading to the
stochastic steady state. As a result, we follow the procedure of conditioning our
calculation of expected utility on the fact that the economy starts from its non-stochastic
steady state.

22
In order to evaluate the welfare implications of a particular policy regime, we calculate
the fraction of a consumer’s consumption that would make them indifferent between
regimes. Let ! be the welfare gain of adopting an alternative policy rule other than strict
core inflation targeting. We define ! as a fraction of additional strict core inflation
targeting regime’s consumption process that would make a household as well off under
regime a as under strict core inflation targeting regime. Then

$

V0a = E0 # " tU ((1 + ! )Ctr , N tr )

(46)

t =0

Under this specification, a positive value of ! means that welfare is higher under the
alternative policy rule. Rearranging equation (46), the welfare gain ! is given by
1

'V a + D0r $ 1!(
) = % 0r
!1
r "
& V0 + D0 #

(47)

'! N r 1+* $!
where D = E0 ) , &+n t
#
!% 1 +* !"
t =0
r
0

(

t

( )

(48)

A value of ! *100 = 1, represents a one percentage point of permanent consumption gain
under the alternative policy regime.
We study the choice of the optimal price index under two market settings–(i) complete
markets (similar to Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997; Aoki, 2001) and (ii) an incomplete
market structure characterized by the presence of ‘rule of thumb’ consumers (similar to
Gali, Lopez-Salido and Valles, 2004). We compute the welfare gains associated with the
four monetary policy regimes defined by equations (35)-(38).

23
3.13

Parameter Selection

Parameter selection for the model is a challenging task. There is no consensus on the
values of some parameters. Moreover, most of the parameters used in the literature are
based on micro data from advanced countries. Hence, our approach will be to pick
baseline parameters from the existing literature and to then do extensive sensitivity
analysis with respect to the choice of key parameters.
We choose ! =0.9902, which amounts to an annual real interest rate of 4 percent
(Prescott, 1986). We assume that ! =1 (that is, we have one representative consumer in
each sector, similar to Aoki, 2001). We use ! =2 as the baseline value of the risk
aversion parameter, (i.e., the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is 0.5). This is in the
range of values usually assumed in DSGE models and is also the most common value
used in the literature on emerging markets (Aguair and Gopinath, 2005; Schmitt-Grohe
and Uribe, 2007; Devereux, Lane and Xu, 2004).27
Following Chari, Kehoe and MacGrattan (1999), Basu and Fernald (1994, 1995), Basu
and Kimball (1997) and Basu (1996), we choose ! =10 (elasticity of substitution between
different differentiated goods), which implies a markup of 11 percent. Next, we set the
probability that a price does not adjust in a given period ( ! ) at 0.66 (Ferrero, Gertler,
Svensson, 2008; Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997). This implies that prices remain fixed
for a mean duration of 3 quarters, which is consistent with the micro evidence.

The appropriate value of the Frisch elasticity (

1
) is both important and controversial.
!

The range of values used in the literature goes from 0.25 to 1.28 For our benchmark case
we assume it to be 0.33 (! =3). We choose the scaling parameter ! n such that the average

27

Friend and Blume (1975) present empirical evidence suggesting that its value is around 2 for
industrial countries. Other estimates for these countries suggests that it lies between 0 and 5 (e.g.,
Hansen and Singleton, 1983; Dunn and Singleton, 1986).
28
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996) estimate it to be 0.25 while Rotemberg and
Woodford (1997) estimate it to be 0.40. Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) estimate the intertemporal
elasticity of labor supply to be in the range of [0.5, 1].

24
hours worked in the steady state is 0.38. The elasticity of substitution between food and
non-food goods, ! , is another parameter for which we don’t have a good approximation.
As the demand for food is inelastic, we set ! = 0.6 for the baseline case.29
One important feature of emerging markets is the high share of expenditure on food in
total household expenditure. Based on the household surveys from emerging markets,
the average expenditure on food is around 42 percent (see Table 1). In addition, we
assume that on average half of the households’ steady state food consumption is required
for subsistence.30 To match these values in the baseline model we choose subsistence
level food consumption parameter, C * =0.1013 and the weight on food in the
consumption index, ! equal to 0.3050 so that the steady state average household
expenditure on food is 42%. For the monetary policy parameters, we follow Woodford
(2003), Gali et al. (2004) and Mohanty and Klau (2004) and choose ! i = 0.7, " ! = 2 and

! Y = 0.5.
The major argument in favor of excluding food from the core price index is that the
shocks in that sector are seasonal and transient. We choose the value of AR(1) coefficient
of the food sector shock at 0.25 (implying that the shock lasts for four quarters, which
seems reasonable given the heavy dependence of agriculture on weather conditions in
emerging markets). Following the literature, we set the value of the AR(1) coefficient of
the non-food sector shock at 0.95 (Aguair and Gopinath, 2007; Schmitt-Grohe and
Uribe, 2007). Volatility of productivity shocks in emerging markets is higher than in
advanced countries (Pallage and Robe, 2003; Aguair and Gopinath, 2007). We choose the
standard deviation of food productivity shock, ! af =0.03 and the standard deviation of
non-food productivity shock, ! as =0.02.31 Table 5 shows a full set of baseline parameter
values for the calibrations.
29

With the subsistence level of food consumption, this parameter choice implies a price elasticity
of demand for food of about -0.3 in the steady state, which is close to the USDA estimate.
30
Naik and Moore (1996) find that about 50 percent of current consumption is due to habit
formation in food consumption.
31
For advanced countries like the U.S., the values typically used in the literature are in the range
of 0.005 to 0.009.

25

4.

Baseline Results

We present the results in terms of the conditional welfare gains associated with each
policy choice. Welfare gains are defined as additional lifetime consumption needed to
make the level of welfare under strict core inflation targeting identical to that under the
evaluated policy. Thus, a positive number indicates that welfare is higher under the
alternative policy than under strict core inflation targeting policy. The choice of strict
core inflation targeting as a benchmark for comparison is motivated by the fact that in the
literature it is considered the optimal policy choice for maximizing welfare. We present
the results for three alternative policy regimes – strict headline inflation targeting,
flexible headline inflation targeting and flexible core inflation targeting as defined by
equations (35)-(38).
Table 6 shows the welfare gains from targeting different price indices under complete
and incomplete market settings. Under complete markets, the choice of targeting strict
core inflation is the best policy. Figure 6 plots the impulse responses of various
macroeconomic variables to a one percent negative food productivity shock under
complete markets. Each variable’s response is expressed as the percentage deviation from
its steady state level. Impulse responses under strict core inflation targeting rule are
shown in red. The dashed lines (in blue) are impulse responses under the strict headline
inflation targeting rule.32 As evident, strict headline inflation targeting regime results in a
higher volatility of consumption and output. Also, the policy response is more aggressive
under strict headline inflation targeting which leads to a further decline in output. These
results are similar to the ones documented in the existing literature on inflation targeting.
Following an increase in inflation, the central bank raises interest rates, reducing
aggregate demand (as consumers postpone their consumption following an increase in
interest rates) and, thus, inflation. So, under complete markets, inflation and output move
in the same direction and therefore stabilizing inflation is equivalent to stabilizing output

32

We only plot the impulse responses under strict core inflation targeting and strict headline
inflation targeting rules as the welfare losses are much higher under other two policy regimes
(Table 6).

26
(Aoki, 2001). It also implies that there are no additional welfare gains by adopting
flexible inflation targeting. Thus, under complete markets, strict core inflation targeting is
the welfare maximizing policy choice for the central bank.
However, in the presence of credit constrained consumers, flexible headline inflation
targeting appears to be a better policy choice. Figure 7 plots the impulse responses of
various macroeconomic variables to a one percent negative food productivity shock.33
Aggregate demand responds differently to monetary tightening under the two policy
regimes. The central bank is able to reduce aggregate demand by increasing interest rates
only when it targets headline inflation. Aggregate demand, instead of going down, goes
up if central bank follows strict core inflation targeting. Thus, headline inflation targeting
(both strict and flexible) outperforms strict core inflation targeting. Since in the presence
of financial frictions inflation and output may move in opposite directions in response to
interest rate changes, stabilizing output results in welfare gains. Thus, flexible headline
inflation targeting is the optimal policy choice when markets are not complete.
In order to examine the mechanics behind this result, we look at the properties of
aggregate demand under incomplete markets. In the presence of financial frictions, the
consumption choices of different households vary (as opposed to complete markets,
where the consumption choice of each household is identical). While consumption
demand of unconstrained households is responsive to interest rates (as they optimize
inter-temporally), consumption demand of credit-constrained households is independent
of interest rate changes (their horizon is static and they consume their entire income each
period) and depends only on their current period wage income. Since only a fraction of
aggregate demand is influenced by interest rate changes, a monetary tightening does not
automatically result in the decline of aggregate demand. The response of aggregate
demand crucially depends on the behavior of credit-constrained households.

33

We only plot the impulse responses under strict core inflation targeting and flexible headline
inflation targeting rules. The welfare gains relative to core inflation targeting are also positive but
lower under the other two policy rules (Table 6).

27
Figure 7 shows that, following a negative shock to food productivity, the central bank
raises the interest rate which lowers the demand of unconstrained households (as it is
optimal for them to postpone consumption). However, it has no bearing on the demand of
credit-constrained consumers. An increase in the relative price of food following a
negative food productivity shock increases the wage income and, therefore, consumption
demand of credit-constrained households. Thus, the demand of the two types of
households moves in opposite directions following a negative shock to food productivity.
Which of the two demands dominates is determined by the policy regime. Since core
inflation targeting ignores food price inflation, the increase in food prices (and, therefore,
the wage income of the food sector households) is higher than the increase under headline
inflation targeting. This higher wage income translates into higher consumption demand
by credit-constrained consumers (as they consume all of their current wage income),
which more than compensates for the lower consumption demand of unconstrained
consumers. Consequently, aggregate demand rises. By contrast, when the central bank
targets headline inflation, price increases in the food sector are much lower and the rise in
income and, therefore, the increase in consumption demand in that sector is not enough to
compensate for the decline in the demand of unconstrained consumers. Thus, monetary
intervention is effective in achieving its objective of reducing aggregate demand only
when the central bank targets flexible headline inflation.
To formalize the above arguments, we examine the log-linearized aggregate demand
equation, which is given by34

^

ct = "

^
^
)s ( ^ ^ %
Et & R t " * t +1 # + Et c t +1 " ) f Et ! c f ,t +1
+ '
$

(49)

!

where " s =

34

Cs
!

is the steady state share of the sticky price households’ consumption,

C

Aggregate demand is the sum of the log-linearized consumption demand of food and non-food
households. Variables with a hat denote log deviations from the corresponding steady state
values.

28
!

#f =

^

c f ,t

"Cf

is the steady state share of flexible price households’ consumption and

!

C

a
&
$ 1+ (
=$
$1 + a)
(
%$

&
#
! ^ f $ a '1
!W t + $
$1 + a)
!
(
%$
"!

x f ,t * y f ,t

where a =

'

#
!^
! A f ,t
!
"!

(50)

>1

Cf
^ f

^

^

and W t = x f ,t + A f ,t

(51)

Equations (50) and (51) suggest that, in the presence of credit-constrained consumers, a
link is established between aggregate demand and the relative price of food. This is
because, in the presence of financial frictions, relative prices affect aggregate demand in
addition to aggregate supply.35 Thus, the presence of financial frictions implies that
managing aggregate demand requires the central bank to choose a policy regime that
would limit the rise in wages of credit-constrained consumers (and, therefore, the
increase in their demand).
4.1

Welfare Distribution

The focus of our paper is on average welfare but the incomplete markets setting allows us
to look at the welfare distribution in the economy. We do not report those results in detail
here but note that in our model flexible headline inflation targeting is better for both the
credit-constrained households and unconstrained households. Since there is no tradeoff
involved in terms of welfare of the two groups, the central bank is not likely to face any
political pressures in implementing this policy.

5.

Sensitivity Analysis

Our main result is that in the presence of financial frictions flexible headline inflation
targeting is the welfare-maximizing policy choice. In this section, we evaluate the

35

Under complete markets, relative prices only affect aggregate supply (Aoki, 2001).

29
robustness of this result to changes in some of the key parameters – the elasticity of
substitution between food and non-food goods (! ), inverse of Frisch elasticity (! ), the
degree of price stickiness ( ! ), the elasticity of substitution between different non-food
goods which determines the mark-up in the sticky price sector ( ! ), and the proportion of
credit-constrained households in the economy ( ! ). We conduct additional sensitivity
analysis with respect to the persistence and volatility of the food productivity shock and
Taylor rule coefficients. When interpreting the results it should be noted that, since the
steady state values of the models differ, it is only possible to make a comparison across
regimes and not across different models.
Our key results are driven by the behavior of credit-constrained consumers. Since the
wage income of constrained consumers depends crucially on the price elasticity of the
demand for food, we first conduct sensitivity analysis with respect to parameters
influencing the price elasticity of demand. The presence of a subsistence level for food
expenditures affects the marginal utility of food and non-food consumption. It also
lowers the elasticity of substitution between food and non-food. The demand for food is
given by equation (23), which is the sum of an iso-elastic term " ( x f ,t ) #! Ct and a price
inelastic term (1 + ! )C * . The price elasticity of demand is a weighted sum of these two
terms (the weights are ! and zero, respectively). Thus, the presence of subsistence food
consumption lowers the price elasticity of the demand for food. Table 7 shows welfare
gains from different policy rules in the absence of a subsistence level of food
consumption. Clearly, our main result does not depend on the presence of subsistence
level of food consumption.
Next, we examine the sensitivity of the results to the elasticity of substitution between
food and non-food goods, denoted by ! (Table 8). Under complete markets, core
inflation targeting is the most appropriate policy choice for any value of the elasticity of
substitution. However, under incomplete markets, flexible headline inflation targeting
continues to dominate other policies for values of the elasticity as high as ! = 0.8. For
higher values of this elasticity, strict core inflation targeting seems to do marginally better

30
than strict headline inflation targeting. The difference between strict core inflation
targeting and strict headline inflation targeting is almost negligible for higher values of
this elasticity.
The elasticity of substitution is an important parameter determining the income of creditconstrained households. For low values of the elasticity of substitution, following a
negative shock to productivity of food the demand for food does not go down
substantially and leads to a large increase in the wage income of food-producing (creditconstrained) households. Increased demand of credit-constrained consumers is enough to
counteract the decline in the demand of unconstrained households. However, when the
elasticity of substitution is high, demand for food goes down substantially and the
increase in the income and demand of credit-constrained households is no longer
sufficient to compensate for the decline in the demand of unconstrained households. In
fact, for sufficiently high values of the elasticity of substitution, the wage income of
credit-constrained households may even go down.
Again, even though we cannot strictly compare the impulse responses, it is instructive to
plot them for different values of the elasticity of substitution to understand how varying
the elasticity of substitution affects various macroeconomic variables. Figure 8 shows the
impulse responses of various macroeconomic variables to a 1 percent negative food
productivity shock under flexible headline inflation targeting for a high value of the
elasticity of substitution (! = 2 ) and also a low value ( ! = 0.6). For low values of the
elasticity of substitution, a positive deviation (from the respective steady state) in the food
price and wage of credit-constrained households is large. When the elasticity of substitution
is high, the wage of credit-constrained consumers in fact declines relative to the steady state
value (as the increase in the price of food is significantly lower).
In Tables 9-12, we present the results of sensitivity analysis with respect to the inverse of
the Frisch elasticity (! ), price stickiness ( ! ), fraction of credit-constrained households
( ! ) and the mark-up in the sticky price sector ( ! ). We have selected the most common
values of these parameters used in the literature to carry out the sensitivity experiments.

31
Our results appear robust to the selection of parameter values around their baseline
values.
Following Gali et al. (2004), we conduct sensitivity analysis with respect to the coefficients
of the Taylor rule (Table 13). Flexible headline inflation targeting performs better than other
regimes irrespective of the choice of Taylor rule coefficients. We also compute the Taylor
rule parameters associated with optimal strict core inflation targeting under the baseline case
and compare the welfare gains associated with adopting flexible headline inflation
targeting.36 We find that the welfare gains are still positive.
Shocks to productivity in the food sector are regarded as transitory and highly volatile. So
we do additional sensitivity analysis for various combinations of the degrees of persistence
and volatility of these shocks. From the results shown in Table 14, it is evident that our
results are robust to various combinations and also that welfare gains from adopting flexible
headline targeting are even higher if shocks are less persistent and highly volatile. Of
course, in the case of an advanced economy like the U.S. where the volatility of these
shocks is an order of magnitude smaller than in typical emerging markets, the potential
welfare gains are considerably smaller.
5.1 Extensions of the Model
We consider two extensions of our baseline model. The first extension looks at an
alternative characterization of complete markets. Most existing models with complete
markets assume that agents can insure against income risks ex ante. In other words,
insurance contracts are written before households know which sector they are in (see,
e.g., Aoki, 2001). This assumption implies that, given the same initial wealth, consumers
will choose identical consumption streams. A more realistic way of characterizing
complete markets is to assume that consumers can insure against income risks but only
after being assigned to a particular sector. One could regard this as a complete market

36

For computing optimal parameters, we restrict our search to [0,3] for "! and [0,1] for ! i . We
find that the best rule requires "! = 3 and ! i = 0.95. The value of "! is the largest value that we
allow for in our search. If we left this parameter unconstrained, then optimal policy would call for
an arbitrarily large coefficient on inflation. The reason is that in that case, under the optimal
policy, inflation would in effect be forever constant so that the economy would be characterized
by zero inflation volatility (Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe, 2007).

32
setting conditional on worker assignment to sectors, which is determined ex-ante (before
insurance contracts are written). In other words, a household cannot insure against crosssector income risk. Under this alternate market structure, each type of household chooses
a consumption stream to maximize its lifetime utility subject to its idiosyncratic budget
constraint (see Appendix III for more details). In Table 15, we present the welfare gains
under this market structure and with flexible headline inflation targeting. It appears that,
for our baseline model, flexible headline inflation targeting does better than strict core
inflation targeting. However, for higher values of the elasticity of substitution between
food and nonfood goods, the welfare gains are essentially zero.
A second extension of our baseline model looks at a more general case where agents in
both sectors can be credit constrained. We assume that a fraction !1 > 0 and !2 > 0 of
households in the flexible price sector and sticky price sector, respectively, can insure
against income risks ex post.37 We look at combinations of !1 and !2 such that 50 percent
of the households in the economy are credit constrained.38 Table 16 presents the welfare
gains of pursuing flexible headline inflation targeting for some possible combinations of

!1 and !2 . It is clear that even under this general setting targeting flexible headline
inflation outperforms a strict core inflation targeting rule.

6.

Concluding Remarks

Inflation targeting, which had become widely popular in both advanced and emerging
market economies over the last two decades, has come under attack after the global
financial crisis as it is believed to leave no room for central bankers to pay attention to
asset price bubbles. Whatever the outcome of that broader debate, the reality is that the
primary objective of most central banks, whether or not they explicitly target inflation, is
still to keep inflation low and stable. To achieve this objective, the choice of the
appropriate price index to measure inflation remains a key operational issue. Previous
research has indicated that central banks should only focus on stabilizing core inflation.
37

This implies that 1 + ! " (!1 + ! 2 ) fraction of households are credit constrained.
This is consistent with the empirical evidence that only about 42 percent of households in
emerging markets have access to formal finance (Table 3).
38

33
However, these results rely heavily on the assumption that markets are complete and that
price stickiness is the only source of distortion in the economy.
In this paper, we have developed a more realistic model with the following key features –
incomplete markets, characterized by the presence of credit-constrained consumers;
households requiring a minimum subsistence level of food to survive; low price elasticity
of demand for food items and a high share of expenditure on food in households’ total
expenditure. These features, particularly the last one, are especially relevant for emerging
market economies.
We show that, in the presence of credit-constrained consumers, targeting core inflation is
no longer welfare maximizing. Also, stabilizing inflation is not sufficient to stabilize
output when markets are not complete. Under these conditions, flexible headline inflation
targeting—which involves targeting headline inflation and putting some weight on the
output gap--is the optimal monetary policy rule.
Our results differ from those of traditional models due to the presence of financial
frictions in the economy. Lack of access to finance makes the demand of creditconstrained households insensitive to interest rate fluctuations. Their demand is
determined by real wages, which depend on prices in the flexible price sector. Thus, if the
central bank ignores fluctuations in the flexible price sector, aggregate demand may in
fact move in the opposite direction to what is intended by the monetary policy
intervention. To have the desired effect on aggregate demand, the central bank has to
target a price index that would dampen the response of credit-constrained consumers. In
our setting, this means that the central bank should target headline inflation.
Our results have special significance for central banks in emerging markets, where food
consumption remains a major component of household consumption expenditures and the
share of the population that is credit-constrained is large. While our model is a simple
one, it amply highlights the significance of financial frictions for the choice of optimal
price index and the optimal monetary policy rule. The widely accepted result of focusing

34
on core CPI in order to stabilize inflation and output needs a careful re-examination in the
presence of financial frictions.39

39

In related work, Catao and Chang (2010) show that, for a small open economy that is a net buyer of food,
the high volatility of world food prices implies that headline CPI inflation targeting is welfare improving
relative to core CPI targeting.

35

References
Amato, Jeffery D., and Thomas Laubach, 2003, “Rule-of-Thumb Behavior and Monetary
Policy,” European Economic Review, Vol. 47, No. 5, pp. 791-831.
Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath, 2007, “The Role of Interest Rates and Productivity
Shocks in Emerging Market Fluctuations,” Working Paper No. 445, Central Bank
of Chile.
Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath, 2007, “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle
Is the Trend,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 115, pp. 69-102.
Aoki, Kosuke, 2001, “Optimal Monetary Policy Responses to Relative Price Changes,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 48, No. 1, pp. 55-80.
Basu, Priya, and Pradeep Srivastava, 2005, “Scaling-up Microfinance for India’s Rural
Poor,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3646.
Basu, Susanto, 1996, “Procyclical Productivity: Increasing Returns or Cyclical
Utilization?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, No. 3, pp.719-751.
Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald, 1994, “Constant Returns and Small Markups in U.S.
Manufacturing,” International Finance Discussion Paper 483, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System.
--------------, 1995, “Are Apparent Productivity Spillovers a Figment of Specification
Error?” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 36, No. 1, pp.165-188.
Basu, Susanto, and Miles S. Kimball, 1997, “Cyclical Productivity with Unobserved
Input Variation,” NBER Working Paper No. 5915.
Bernanke, Ben S., Tomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen, 1999,
Inflation Targeting: Lessons from International Experience (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press).
Blundell, Richard, and Thomas MaCurdy, 1999, “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, eds. Orley Ashenfelter,
and David Card (The Netherlands: Elsevier Science), pp.1559-1695.
Calvo, Guillermo A., 1983, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 383-398.
Campbell, John Y., and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1989, “Consumption, Income, and Interest
Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence,” NBER Macroeconomics

36
Annual, Vol. 4, eds. Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press), pp. 185-216.
----------------, 1990, “Permanent Income, Current Income, and Consumption,” Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics, Vol. 8, No. 3, pp. 265-279.
----------------, 1991, “The Response of Consumption to Income: a Cross-country
Investigation,” European Economic Review, Vol. 35, No. 4, pp. 723-767.
Catao, Luis, and Roberto Chang, 2010, “World Food Prices and Monetary Policy,” IMF
Working Paper No. WP/10/161, International Monetary Fund.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans, 1996, “The Effects of
Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 78, No. 1, pp. 16-34.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, 1998, “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice:
Some International Evidence,” European Economic Review, Vol. 42, No. 6, pp.
1033-1067.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, 1999, “The Science of Monetary Policy:
A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 37, No. 4,
pp. 1661-1707.
Collard, Fabrice, and Michel Juillard, 2001, “Accuracy of Stochastic Perturbation
Methods: the Case of Asset Pricing Models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, Vol. 25, No. 6-7, pp. 979–999.
Devereux, Michael B., Philip R. Lane, and Juanyi Xu, 2004, “Exchange Rates and
Monetary Policy in Emerging Market Economies,” Economic Journal, Vol. 116,
No. 511, pp. 478-506.
Dunn, Kenneth B., and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1986, “Modeling the Term Structure of
Interest Rates Under Non-separable Utility and Durability of Goods,” Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 27-55.
Ferrero, Andrea, Gertler, Mark, and Lars E.O. Svensson, 2008, “Current Account
Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper No. 13906.
Friend, Irwin, and Marshall E. Blume, 1975, “The Demand for Risky Assets,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 65, No. 5, pp. 900-922.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., 2000, “Habit Formation in Consumption and Its Implications for
Monetary Policy Models,” American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 3, pp. 36790.

37
Fuhrer, Jeffery C., and Glenn D. Rudebusch, 2004, “Estimating the Euler Equation for
Output,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 51, No. 6, pp. 1133-1153.
Gali, Jordi, Lopez-Salido, David J., and Javier Valles, 2004, “Rule-of-Thumb Consumers
and The Design Of Interest Rate Rules,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 739-763.
Geary Roy C., 1949, “A Note on A Constant Utility Index of the Cost of Living,” Review
of Economic Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 65-66.
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert King, 1997, “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the
Role of Monetary Policy,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 12, eds. Ben
S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), pp. 231-83.
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert King, 2001, “The Case for Price Stability,” in The First
ECB Central Banking Conference: Why Price Stability? Eds. Alicia G. Herroro,
Vitor Gaspar, Lex Hoogduin, Julian Morgan, and Bernhard Winkler (Frankfurt,
Germany: European Central Bank), pp. 53-94.
Gordon, Robert J., 1975, “Alternative Responses of Policy to External Supply Shocks,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1, No. 75, pp. 183-206.
Jappelli, Tullio, 1990, “Who is Credit Constrained in the U.S. Economy?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 105, No. 1, pp. 219-234.
Jin, He-Hui, and Kenneth L. Judd, 2002, “Perturbation Methods for General Dynamic
Stochastic Models,” Manuscript, Stanford University.
Kim, Jinill, and Sunghyun H. Kim, 2003, “Spurious Welfare Reversals in International
Business Cycle Models,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 60, No. 2, pp.
471-500.
King, Robert G., Plosser, Charles I., and Sergio T. Rebelo, 1988, “Production, Growth,
and Business Cycles I: the Basic Neoclassical Model,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 21, No. 2-3, pp. 191–232.
Kollmann, Robert, 2004, “Welfare-Maximizing Operational Monetary and Tax Policy
Rules,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4782.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott, 1982, “Time to Build and Aggregate
Fluctuations,” Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 6, pp. 1345–1370.
Larsen, Lars P., and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1983, “Stochastic Consumption, Risk
Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 91, No. 2, pp. 249-265.

38
Lowe, Philip, and Luci Ellis, 1997, “The smoothing of official interest rates,” Monetary
Policy and Inflation Targeting, Reserve Bank of Australia, pp. 287-312.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, 2001, “One Decade of Inflation
Targeting in the World: What do We Know and What do We Need to Know?”
NBER Working Paper No. 8397.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 2007, “Inflation Dynamics,” Speech delivered at the Annual Macro
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23,
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.
------------------------, 2008, “Does Stabilizing Inflation Contribute to Stabilizing
Economic Activity,” Speech delivered at East Carolina University’s Beta Gamma
Sigma Distinguished Lecture Series, Greenville, North Carolina, February 25.
Mohanty, Madhusudan S., and Marc Klau, 2004, “Monetary Policy Rules in Emerging
Market Economies: Issues and Evidence,” BIS Working Paper No. 149, Bank of
International Settlements.
Muscatelli, Anton V., Patrizio Tirelli, and Carmine Trecroci, 2004, “Fiscal and Monetary
Policy Interactions in a New Keynesian Model with Liquidity Constraints,”
Centre for Dynamic Macroeconomic Analysis Conference Paper Series No. 0402.
Narayan, Y. Naik, and Michael J. Moore, 1996, “Habit Formation and Intertemporal
Substitution in Individual Food Consumption,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 78, No. 2, pp. 321-328.
Pallage, Stephane, and Michel A. Robe, 2003, “On the Welfare Cost of Economic
Fluctuations in Developing Countries,” International Economic Review, Vol. 44,
No. 2, pp. 677-698.
Parker, Jonathan A., 1999, “The Response of Household Consumption to Predictable
Changes in Social Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, pp. 959973.
Ravn, Morten Overgaard, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Martin Uribe, 2008, “The
Macroeconomics of Subsistence Points,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, Vol. 12,
April 2008, pp. 136-147.
Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, 1997, “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in NBER Macroeconomics
Annual, Vol. 12, eds. Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press), pp. 297-346.
---------------------, 1999, “Interest-Rate Rules in an Estimated Sticky-Price Model,” in
Monetary Policy Rules, ed. John B. Taylor (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago),
pp. 57-126.

39
Sack, Brian, and Volker Wieland, 1999, “Interest-rate Smoothing and Optimal Monetary
Policy: A Review of Recent Empirical Evidence,” Finance and Economics
Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board, Washington DC.
Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe, 2004, “Solving Dynamic General
Equilibrium Models Using a Second-Order Approximation to the Policy
Function,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 28, pp. 755-775.
------------------------, 2007, “Optimal Simple and Implementable Monetary and Fiscal
Rules,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54, No. 6, pp. 1702-1725.
Seale, James, Jr., Regmi, Anita, and John A. Bernstein, 2003, “International Evidence on
Food Consumption Patterns,” Technical Bulletin No. 1904, United States
Department of Agriculture.
Shea, John, 1995, “Union Contracts and the Life-Cycle/Permanent-Income Hypothesis,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 1, pp. 186-200.
Souleles, Nicholas S., 1999, “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax
Refunds,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 4, pp. 947-958.
Stone, Richard, 1954, “Linear Expenditure System and Demand Analysis: An
Application to the Pattern of British Demand,” Economic Journal, Vol. 64, pp.
511-527.
Sutherland, Alan, 2002, “A Simple Second-Order Solution Method for Dynamic General
Equilibrium Models,” Discussion Paper No. 0211, Department of Economics,
University of St. Andrews.
Taylor, John B., 1993, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214.
Walsh, James, P., 2010, “Food Prices and Inflation,” Manuscript, IMF.
Woodford, Michael, 1996, “Control of the Public Dept: A Requirement for Price
Stability?” NBER Working Paper No. 5684.
-------------------------, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
World Bank, 2008, “Finance for All? Policies and Pitfalls in Expanding Access,” World
Bank Policy Research Report.
Wynne, Mark A., 1999, “Core Inflation: A Review of Some Conceptual Issues,”
Research Department Working Paper No. 9903, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Expenditure on Food (as % of Total Expenditure)

40

80

Figure 1. Share of Expenditure on Food,1996
(as percent of total household expenditure)
NGA

AZE
ARM

60

TJK
MDG

VNM

SLE

ZMB

ALB

LKA
YEM
MNG

NPL
GD
BB
EN
MWI

SEN

MLI

KAZ
IDN
BLR
PHL SYR
EGY

TKM

40

ZAR

KGZ

UZB
GEO
PAK
UKR
CIV
CMR

KEN

20

GIN
MDA

MAR
BOL

ZWE

GAB
LCA

ROM
LVA GRD
LTU

LBN
DMA
JOR
KNAATG
TUNFJI
MKD
JAM
RUS
EST
B
WA
ARG
IRN
TUR
SVK
KOR
BLZ POL
BGR
PER
V
EN
ECU
THA
BHR
MUS
SWZ
PRY
MEX
URY
CZE
OMN
PRT
BRA
CHL
HUN
TTO
SVN GRC

BHS

ESP
NZL

BMU

0

BRB

ISR
LUX
IRL GBR
NOR
FRA
AUS
FIN
JPN
BEL
DNKCHE
AUT
SWE
SNLD
GP
DEU
CAN
HKG USA

4

6

8

10

12

(log) Real GDP per capita

Source: WDI and International Food Consumption Patterns Dataset, Economic Research
Service, USDA.
Note: Expenditure on food includes expenditure on food prepared at home and consumed
plus beverages and tobacco.

TJK MWI

.6

ZAR

NGA
ZMB MNG
YEM
BEN
KEN
TKM
BGD
VNM SEN
PAK
A
ZE CMR
CIV
PRY
KGZ MDA
UZB
BOL
ECU
ARM
LKA
JOR
ALB
ZWE IDN
JAM
GIN
SYR
GEO
UKR
PHL
PER
THA BWA
MAR
VEN
EGYMKD
BLZ
BLR
KAZ SWZ
DMA LBN
BGR
LV
A
BRA
LCA
RUS FJI
GRDTUR
LTU
ROM
IRN
MEX
CHL
ATG
POL
TTO
EST
GAB
TUN
URY
KNA
SVK
HUN

MDG
MLI
SLE
NPL

CZE

BHR

ARG
OMN
SVN

.4

GRC
KRT
OR ESP
P
MUS

IRL
SGP

NZLBHS ISR
FIN
SWE
NLD

.2

FRA
GBR
BEL
AUT
DEU
AUS
CAN

NOR
JPN

CHE
HKG
DNK

BRB

BMU

LUX
USA

0

Income elasticity of food

.8

Figure 2. Income Elasticity of Demand for Food, 1996

4

6

8

10

12

(log) Real GDP per capita

Source: WDI and International Food Consumption Patterns Dataset, Economic Research
Service, USDA.
Notes: These country-specific income-elasticity values represent the estimated percentage
change in demand for food if total income increases by 1 percent. Food includes food prepared
at home and consumed plus beverages and tobacco.

-.1

Figure 3. Slutsky Own-Price Elasticity of Demand for Food, 1996
USA

-.2

LUX

DNK
HKG CHE

BRB

CAN
AUS
DEU
AUT
BEL
GBR
FRA

BMU

JPN
NOR

-.3

NLD
SWE
NZL BHS

FIN
ISR

MUS
PRT ESP
KOR
GRC

NGA
TJK
MWI

MDG
MLI

ZMB

BEN
SLE
NPL
ZAR

-.4

Compensated own price elasticity of food

41

YEM
MNG

CZE

SVN
OMN
ARG

KEN

TKM
HUN
BGD
VNM SEN
SVK
TUN
KNA
PAK
EST
GAB URY
AZE
CIV
POL CHLTTO
PRY
UZBCMR
ATG
IRN ROM
MEX
ARM
LKA BOL ECU
JORFJI LVA
LTUGRD
TUR
ALB
RUS
ZWE IDN
BGR
JAM
BRA
LCA
GEOUKR
BLR
KAZ
SYR
DMA
LBNVEN
EGYMKD PER
SWZ
BLZ
PHL MAR
THA BWA

KGZ MDA
GIN

4

6

SGP
IRL

8

BHR

10

12

(log) Real GDP per capita

Source: WDI and International Food Consumption Patterns Dataset, Economic Research
Service, USDA.
Notes: Country-specific elasticity value represents a percentage change in demand for food
if food prices increase by 1 percent (keeping real income constant). Food includes food
prepared at home and consumed plus beverages and tobacco.

42
Figure 4. Levels and Volatility of Inflation
Core and Headline Inflation
(USA)

Volatility of Core and Headline Inflation
(USA)

6
5

2
Headline Inflation

Headline Inflation

Core Inflation

1.5

4
3

Core Inflation

1

2
0.5

1
0

-2

0
Ma
r-9
1
Ma
r-9
3
Ma
r-9
5
Ma
r-9
7
Ma
r-9
9
Ma
r-0
1
Ma
r-0
3
Ma
r-0
5
Ma
r-0
7
Ma
r-0
9

Ma
r-9
1
Ma
r-9
3
Ma
r-9
5
Ma
r-9
7
Ma
r-9
9
Ma
r-0
1
Ma
r-0
3
Ma
r-0
5
Ma
r-0
7
Ma
r-0
9

-1

Core and Headline Inflation
(Canada)

Volatility of Core and Headline Inflation
(Canada)

5

1.2
Headline Inflation

4

Core Inflation

3
2
1

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
Headline Inflation

0.2

Core Inflation

0
Mar-96 Mar-98 Mar-00 Mar-02 Mar-04 Mar-06 Mar-08
-1

0
Dec-00

Dec-02

Dec-04

Dec-06

Dec-08

Source: CEIC and authors’ calculations.
Notes: Core index for USA is defined as CPI excluding food and energy while for Canada it is
defined as CPI excluding food, energy and indirect taxes. Inflation is year-on-year inflation
calculated using quarterly price index. Volatility is measured as the standard deviation of inflation
using a rolling 20-quarter (5-year) window. We also computed the volatility using 8-year and 10year rolling windows and the results were similar.

43

Figure 5. Levels and Volatility of Inflation
Core and Headline Inflation
(Korea)
10

6

Headline Inflation
Core Inflation

2
1.5

4

1

0

0

-2

M
ar
-9
1
M
ar
-9
3
M
ar
-9
5

0.5

M
ar
-9
1
M
ar
-9
3
M
ar
-9
5
M
ar
-9
7
M
ar
-9
9
M
ar
-0
1
M
ar
-0
3
M
ar
-0
5
M
ar
-0
7
M
ar
-0
9

2

Core and Headline Inflation
(Thailand)
12

8

Volatility of Core and Headline Inflation
(Thailand)
3.5

Headline Inflation
Core Inflation

6
4
2
0
M
ar
-9
1
M
ar
-9
3
M
ar
-9
5
M
ar
-9
7
M
ar
-9
9
M
ar
-0
1
M
ar
-0
3
M
ar
-0
5
M
ar
-0
7
M
ar
-0
9

-2
-4

3
2.5

Headline Inflation
Core Inflation

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
M
ar
-9
1
M
ar
-9
3
M
ar
-9
5
M
ar
-9
7
M
ar
-9
9
M
ar
-0
1
M
ar
-0
3
M
ar
-0
5
M
ar
-0
7
M
ar
-0
9

10

Headline
Inflation
Core Inflation

2.5

M
ar
-9
7
M
ar
-9
9
M
ar
-0
1
M
ar
-0
3
M
ar
-0
5
M
ar
-0
7
M
ar
-0
9

8

3

Volatility of Core and Headline Inflation
(Korea)

Source: CEIC and authors’ calculations.
Notes: Core index for Korea is defined as CPI excluding agricultural products and oil while for
Thailand it is defined as CPI excluding unprocessed food and energy. Inflation is year-on-year
inflation using quarterly price index. Volatility is measured as the standard deviation of inflation
using a rolling 20-quarter (5-year) window. We also computed the volatility using 8-year and 10year rolling windows and the results were similar.

44

Figure 6. Impulse Responses to a 1% Negative Food Productivity Shock
(Complete Markets, with subsistence level food consumption)

Notes: Each variable’s response is expressed as the percentage deviation from its steady state
level. Strict core inflation targeting means that central bank follows the policy regime given by
equation (35). Strict headline inflation targeting means that central bank follows the policy
regime given by equation (36).

45

Figure 7. Impulse Responses to a 1% Negative Food Productivity Shock
(Incomplete Markets, with subsistence level food consumption)

Notes: Each variable’s response is expressed as the percentage deviation from its steady state
level. Strict core inflation targeting means that central bank follows the policy regime given by
equation (35). Flexible headline inflation targeting means that central bank follows the policy
regime given by equation (38).

46

Figure 8. Impulse Responses to a 1% Negative Food Productivity Shock under Flexible
Headline Inflation Targeting Rule
(Incomplete Markets with different elasticity of substitution of food)

Notes: Each variable’s response is expressed as the percentage deviation from its steady state
level. These impulse responses are generated with central bank following the flexible headline
inflation targeting given by equation (38).

47

Table 1. Share of Food Expenditure in Total Household Expenditure
Emerging Markets

Advanced Economies

Indonesia

53.0

Japan

14.7

Vietnam

49.8

Germany

11.5

India

48.8

Australia

10.8

China

36.7

Canada

9.3

Russia

33.2

United Kingdom

8.8

Malaysia

28.0

USA

5.7

Average

41.6

Average

10.1

Source: Household Surveys, CEIC, International Food Consumption Patterns Dataset, Economic
Research Service, USDA and authors’ calculations.
Notes: Data for emerging markets are for 2005 while for advanced economies it is for 2006.
Expenditure on food includes expenditure on food consumed at home only and does not include
expenditure on beverages and tobacco.

48

Table 2. Income (Expenditure) Elasticity and Slutsky Own-Price Elasticity of Food
(1996)
Emerging
Income
Price
Advanced
Income
Price
Economies
Elasticity
Elasticity
Economies
Elasticity
Elasticity
Vietnam
0.73
-0.37
New Zealand
0.39
-0.29
Pakistan

0.72

-0.38

Finland

0.39

-0.29

Jordan

0.70

-0.39

Sweden

0.36

-0.27

Indonesia

0.69

-0.39

Netherlands

0.36

-0.27

Philippines

0.66

-0.39

0.33

-0.25

Peru

0.66

-0.39

0.33

-0.25

Thailand

0.65

-0.39

France
United
Kingdom
Belgium

0.33

-0.25

Egypt

0.64

-0.39

Norway

0.32

-0.24

Brazil

0.62

-0.39

Austria

0.31

-0.24

Russia

0.62

-0.39

Germany

0.31

-0.23

Turkey

0.61

-0.39

Australia

0.30

-0.23

Iran

0.60

-0.39

Japan

0.29

-0.22

Mexico

0.59

-0.38

Canada

0.28

-0.22

Chile

0.59

-0.38

Switzerland

0.26

-0.20

Poland

0.58

-0.38

Denmark

0.25

-0.19

Hungary

0.54

-0.37

Luxembourg

0.13

-0.10

Argentina

0.52

-0.36

United States

0.10

-0.08

0.63

-0.38

0.30

-0.22

Average

Average

Source: WDI and International Food Consumption Patterns Dataset, Economic Research Service,
USDA.
Notes: These country-specific income-elasticity values represent the estimated percentage change
in demand for food if total income increases by 1 percent. Country-specific price-elasticity value
represents a percentage change in demand for food if food prices increase by 1 percent (keeping
real income constant). Food includes food prepared at home and consumed plus beverages and
tobacco.

49

Table 3. Composite Measure of Access to Financial Services in Emerging Markets
(2008)
Percent with
access
28

Mexico

Percent with
access
25

Brazil

43

Nigeria

15

Chile

60

Pakistan

12

China

42

Peru

26

Egypt

41

Philippines

26

India

48

Poland

66

Indonesia

40

Russia

69

Iran

31

South Africa

46

Korea

63

Thailand

59

Malaysia

60

Turkey

49

Average

42

Argentina

Source: “Finance for All? Policies and Pitfalls in Expanding Access,” World Bank, 2008.
Note: The composite indicator measures the percentage of the adult population with access to an
account with a financial intermediary.

50

Table 4. Average Inflation, Volatility and Persistence of Inflation
(March 1991 – September 2009)a
Average Inflation

Average Volatility

Headline
Inflation

Core
Inflation

Headline
Inflation

Core
Inflation

USA

2.67

2.58

0.80

0.45

Canada

1.96

1.78

0.80

0.43

Korea

4.23

3.85

1.54

1.32

Thailand

3.62

2.87

1.78

1.24

Persistence
Headline
Inflation
0.84***
(0.09)
0.75***
(0.13)
0.85***
(0.05)
0.90***
(0.06)

Core
Inflation
0.92***
(0.04)
0.77***
(0.10)
0.88***
(0.03)
0.95***
(0.05)

Source: CEIC and authors’ calculations.
Note: Core price index in USA excludes food and energy from the CPI while in Canada it
excludes indirect taxes in addition to food and energy. Thailand’s core index excludes
unprocessed food and energy while in Korea it excludes agricultural products and oil. Inflation is
year-on-year inflation rate calculated using a quarterly price index. Volatility is measured as the
standard deviation of inflation using a rolling 20 quarter (5 year) window. Persistence parameter
is the estimated co-efficient from a simple AR(1) model. The symbol *** indicates statistical
significance at the 1% level. Newey-West corrected standard errors (for MA(3) correction) are
reported in brackets.
a. Data for Canada is for the period March 1996 – September 2009.

51

Table 5. Parameter Calibration: Baseline Model
Parameters

Definitions

Values

!

Risk aversion

!

Subjective discount factor

0.9902

!

Inverse of Frisch elasticity

3

!

Probability of firm not changing price

0.66

!

Elasticity of substitution between food and
non-food

0.60

!

Weight on food in the price index

!

!

Households with credit constraints
(unconstrained households have measure 1)
Elasticity of substitution between different
non-food goods

2

0.3050
1
10

!Y

Weight on output gap in Taylor rule

"!

Weight on inflation gap in Taylor rule

!i

Weight on interest rate smoothing in Taylor
rule

0.70

! af

Persistence of food productivity shock

0.25

! as

Persistence of non-food productivity shock

0.95

! af

! as

Standard deviation of food productivity
shock
Standard deviation of non-food productivity
shock

0.5
2

0.03
0.02

52
Table 6. Welfare Gains from Alternative Inflation Targeting Rules
Complete Markets

Incomplete Markets

Strict
Flexible Flexible Strict
Flexible Flexible
Headline Headline Core
Headline Headline Core
Targeting Targeting Targeting Targeting Targeting Targeting
Welfare gain
(in % of strict
core inflation
targeting
consumption)

-0.07

-0.22

-0.19

3.21

4.18

1.58

Notes: Welfare gains ( ! *100) are defined as the percent increase in the strict core inflation
targeting consumption process necessary to make the level of welfare under strict core inflation
targeting policy identical to that under the evaluated policy. Thus, a positive number indicates
that welfare is higher under the alternative policy than under the strict core inflation targeting
policy. Targeting policy rules are defined in equations (35) - (38).

Table 7. Welfare Gains from Alternative Inflation Targeting Rules
Without Subsistence-Level Food
Welfare gain (in percent of strict core inflation targeting consumption)
Complete Markets

Incomplete Markets

Strict
Flexible
Flexible
Strict
Flexible
Flexible
Elasticity of
Headline Headline Core
Headline Headline Core
Substitution
Targeting Targeting Targeting Targeting Targeting Targeting
0.4

-0.10

-0.16

-0.12

1.15

1.42

0.77

0.5

-0.10

-0.16

-0.13

0.12

0.24

0.16

0.6a

-0.09

-0.16

-0.14

-0.03

0.02

0.02

See notes to table 6.
a. Baseline value of this parameter.

53
Table 8. Welfare Gains from Alternative Inflation Targeting Rules
for Different Values of Elasticity of Substitution (! )
Welfare gain (in percent of strict core inflation targeting consumption)
Complete Markets

Incomplete Markets

Elasticity of Strict
Flexible
Flexible
Strict
Substitution Headline Headline Core
Headline
Targeting Targeting Targeting Targeting

Flexible
Flexible
Headline Core
Targeting Targeting

0.6a

-0.07

-0.22

-0.19

3.21

4.18

2.10

0.7

-0.07

-0.22

-0.20

0.19

0.54

0.23

0.8

-0.06

-0.22

-0.20

-0.02

0.09

0.02

0.9

-0.05

-0.22

-0.20

-0.04

-0.03

-0.05

1.5

-0.03

-0.22

-0.22

-0.01

-0.11

-0.11

2.0

-0.02

-0.22

-0.22

0.00

-0.12

-0.12

See notes to table 6.
a. Baseline value of this parameter.

Table 9. Welfare Gains from Alternative Inflation Targeting Rules
for Different Parameter Values of Inverse of Frisch Elasticity (! )
Inverse of Frisch
Elasticity

Strict Headline
Targeting

Flexible Headline
Targeting

Flexible Core
Targeting

2

0.00

0.38

0.38

3a

3.21

4.18

1.58

4

1.32

2.12

1.01

Notes: See notes to table 6. Parameter value of 2 implies labor elasticity of 0.5 while
parameter value of 4 implies labor elasticity of 0.25.
a. Baseline value of this parameter.

54
Table 10. Welfare Gains from Alternative Inflation Targeting Rules
for Different Degrees of Price Rigidity ( ! )
Probability of
firms not
changing prices

Strict Headline
Targeting

Flexible Headline
Targeting

Flexible Core
Targeting

0.50

2.30

2.90

1.24

a

0.66

3.21

4.18

1.58

0.75

3.64

5.24

2.89

Notes: See notes to table 6. Parameter value of 0.5 implies that the mean duration prices remain
fixed is 2 quarters while value of 0.75 implies the mean duration prices remain fixed is 4 quarters.
a. Baseline value of this parameter.

Table 11. Welfare Gains from Alternative Inflation Targeting Rules
for Different Shares of Credit-Constrained Consumers in Population ( ! )
Credit constrained
consumers

Strict Headline
Targeting

Flexible Headline
Targeting

Flexible Core
Targeting

1.00a

3.21

4.18

1.58

2.00

0.05

0.89

0.73

3.00

-0.03

0.75

0.73

Notes: See notes to table 6. Parameter value of 2 implies that two-thirds of households are in the
flexible price sector and are credit constrained. Parameter value of 3 implies that three-quarters of
households are in the flexible price sector and are credit constrained.
a. Baseline value of this parameter.

55

Table 12. Welfare Gains from Alternative Inflation Targeting Rules
for Different Degrees of Elasticity of Substitution Between Different Non-Food Goods
(! )
Elasticity of
Strict Headline
Flexible Headline
Flexible Core
substitution
between different
Targeting
Targeting
Targeting
non-food goods
5

2.65

3.27

1.55

10a

3.21

4.18

1.58

15

3.36

4.85

2.54

Notes: See notes to table 6. The parameter ! also determines the markup in the sticky price
sector. A parameter value of 5 implies a markup of 25 percent and a value of 15 implies a mark
up of 7 percent.
a. Baseline value of this parameter.

Table 13. Welfare Gains from Alternative Inflation Targeting Rules
for Different Taylor Rule Parameters
(a) Changing Coefficient on Inflation Gap in Taylor rule ( "! )
Weight on inflation
gap

Strict Headline
Targeting

Flexible Headline
Targeting

Flexible Core
Targeting

0.50

-2.74

5.32

3.76

1.00

2.40

4.94

2.95

1.50

3.12

4.53

2.45

2.00a

3.21

4.18

1.58

2.50

3.15

3.87

1.84

3.00

3.04

3.62

1.65

Notes: See notes to table 6. Other Taylor rule parameters have been kept at their baseline values
( ! i =0.7, ! Y =0.5).
a. Baseline value of this parameter.

56

(b) Changing Coefficient on Output Gap in Taylor Rule ( ! Y )
Weight on output
gap

Strict Headline
Targeting

Flexible Headline
Targeting

Flexible Core
Targeting

0.00

3.21

0.50a

4.18

1.58

1.00

4.25

2.72

1.50

2.26

3.03

2.00

4.25

3.23

2.50

4.25

3.36

Nots: See notes to table 6. Other Taylor rule parameters have been kept at their baseline values
( ! i =0.7, "! =2).
a. Baseline value of this parameter.

(c) Changing Interest Smoothing Parameter in Taylor Rule ( ! i )
Weight interest
rate smoothing

Strict Headline
Targeting

Flexible Headline
Targeting

Flexible Core
Targeting

0.00

-5.58

3.79

2.73

0.10

-3.11

4.01

2.71

0.20

-1.20

4.16

2.66

0.30

0.26

4.25

2.59

0. 40

1.36

4.28

2.48

0.50

2.18

4.27

2.36

0.60

2.78

4.23

2.23

0.70a

3.21

4.18

2.10

0.80

3.52

4.11

1.97

0.90

3.73

4.05

1.86

Notes: See notes to table 6. Other Taylor rule parameters have been kept at their baseline values
( "! =2, ! Y =0.5).
a. Baseline value of this parameter.

57
Table 14. Welfare Gains of Flexible Headline Inflation Targeting for Different
Combinations of Persistence and Volatility of Food Productivity Shock

Persistence

Volatility of Shocks
0.02

0.03

0.04

0.10

2.27

4.62

7.99

0.25

2.08

4.18

7.18

0.50

1.81

3.55

6.04

0.95

0.77

1.19

1.75

Notes: See notes to table 6. Persistence of food productivity is the estimated coefficient of AR(1)
process in equation (39). Volatility of food productivity shock is the standard deviation of random
shocks to productivity. Persistence and volatility of non-food shocks is held constant at 0.95 and
0.02, respectively, in the above welfare cost calculations.

Table 15. Welfare Gains from Flexible Headline Inflation Targeting
under Alternate Complete Market Structures
Elasticity of Substitution

Flexible Headline Inflation Targeting

0.6a

0.24

0.7

0.05

0.8

-0.02

Notes: See notes to table 6.
a. Baseline value of this parameter, which represents the elasticity of substitution between food
and nonfood goods.

58

Table 16. Welfare Gains from Flexible Headline Inflation Targeting
under General Model
Fraction of households in
sticky price sector with
access to formal finance
0.10

Fraction of households in
flexible price sector with
access to formal finance
0.90

Welfare gains from
flexible headline inflation
targeting
0.38

0.20

0.80

0.22

0.30

0.70

0.21

0.40

0.60

0.22

0.50

0.50

0.24

0.60

0.40

0.26

0.70

0.30

0.28

0.80

0.20

0.29

0.90

0.10

0.30

Notes: See notes to table 6. We have chosen combinations of !1 and !2 such that overall 50
percent of households in the economy are credit constrained.

59

Appendix I
Competitive Equilibrium with Incomplete Markets
This appendix gives the system of equations (in terms of stationary variables)
characterizing the competitive equilibrium under the incomplete market settings.
Demand equation for flexible price sector household
Ct f = x f , t y f , t ! x f , t C *

(52)

Supply equation of flexible price sector (food sector) firm
x f ,t = #n ( y f ,t )! (Ct f )" ( A f ,t ) $ (1+! )

(53)

Demand equation for sticky price sector household
&
R #
(Cts ) () = *Et %(Cts+1 ) () t "
't !
$

(54)

Supply equation of sticky price sector (non-food sector) firm
-/
&1
#
, Ps ,t )
,P )
j
' Ys ,t + j * t + j ' MCtr+ j ( z )!
Et $. (01 ) Qt ,t + j *
* P '
*P '
$ j =0
!
+ t (
+ s ,t + j (
/
%
"
xt xs ,t =
-/
/ -1
&1
#
, P )
Et $. (01 ) j Qt ,t + j * s ,t ' Ys ,t + j !
*P '
$ i =0
!
+ s ,t + j (
%
"

(55)

Price index in sticky price good sector

[

1 = " ($ s ,t ) #(1#! ) + (1 # " ) xt1#!

1
1#!

]

(56)

Real marginal cost in the sticky price sector
MCtr ( z ) = $n ( ys ,t ( z ))! (Cts )" ( As ,t ) % (1+! ) = $n (( xt ) %# Ys ,t )! (Cts )" ( As ,t ) % (1+! )

Market clearing equation for flexible price good

(57)

60
Y f ,t = !y f ,t = C f ,t = " ( x f ,t ) $# Ct + (1 + ! )C *

(58)

Market clearing condition for sticky price good
(59)

Ys ,t = Cs ,t = (1 # " )( xs ,t ) #! Ct

Aggregate Price Index

[

1 = " ( x f ,t )1#! + (1 # " )( xs ,t )1#!

1
1#!

]

(60)

Relation between headline and sticky price index

x s ,t =

! s ,t xs ,t "1
!t

(61)

Aggregation equation

!C t f + C ts = C t = Yt

(62)

61

Appendix II
Derivation of Welfare Gains Associated with Different Targeting Rules
Welfare gain is given by
$

V0a = E0 # " tU ((1 + ! )Ctr , N tr )
t =0

1(.

)
$!
' N r 1++ $!
t!
t
# ( E0 * - &,n
#
+
1
+ !"
!"
!%
t =0

'! C r 1(.
E0 * - & t
!% 1 ( .
t =0

)
$!
' N r 1++ $!
t!
t
# ( E0 * - &,n
#
+
1
+ !"
!"
!
t =0
%

( )

'! (1 + / )1(. C r
t
V = E0 * - &
(
1
.
!%
t =0
)

a
0

t

1(.

= (1 + / )

)

( )

t

( )

( )

V0a = (1 + # )1!" U 0r ! D0r

where
'! C r 1(.
U = E0 * - & t
!% 1 ( .
t =0
r
0

)

t

( )

)
$!
' N r 1++ $!
r
t!
t
# and D0 = E0 * - &,n
#
+
1
+ "!
!"
!%
t =0

Using V0r = U 0r ! D0r we can solve for
1

'V a + D0r $ 1!(
) = % 0r
!1
r "
& V0 + D0 #

( )

62

Appendix III
Alternative Market Structures
A. Alternative Structure of Complete Markets
We consider a setting in which consumers can write contracts to insure against
idiosyncratic income risks but only after being assigned to a particular sector. One could
regard this as a complete market setting conditional on worker assignment to sectors,
which is determined ex-ante (before insurance contracts are written). In other words, a
household cannot insure against cross-sector income risk.

Households in the Flexible Price Sector
A representative household in the flexible price sector maximizes its lifetime utility given
by equation (1) subject to the following budget constraint40
Pt Ct f + Bt f +

2
" f
(
Bt ! B f ) = Wt f N t f + Rt !1 B tf!1 ! Pf ,t C *
2

(63)

where Bt f is the quantity of one-period nominal riskfree discount bonds bought in period t
and maturing in period t+1. Maximization with respect to Ct f yields the Euler equation
&
R #
(1 + + ( Bt f ( B f ))(Ct f ) () = *Et %(Ct f+1 ) () t "
' t +1 !
$

(64)

Households in the Sticky Price Sector
A representative household in the sticky price sector maximizes its lifetime utility given
by equation (1) subject to the following budget constraint41

40

In order to solve the model by linearizing it around the steady state with available techniques

we assume that households face a small quadratic adjustment cost,

2
" f
(
Bt ! B f ) , where ! is a
2

f

parameter and B is the steady state value of the bond holding.
41
In order to solve the model by linearizing it around the steady state with available techniques
we assume that households face a small quadratic adjustment costs,
s

parameter and B is the steady state value of the bond holding.

2
" s
(
Bt ! B s ) , where ! is a
2

63
1

Pt Cts + B ts +

1

$ s
( B ! B s ) 2 = # Wt s ( z ) N ts ( z )dz + # " t ( z )dz + Rt !1 B ts!1 ! Pf ,t C *
2 t
0
0

(65)

where Bts represent the quantity of one period nominal riskless discount bond bought in
period t and maturing in period t+1. Maximization with respect to Cts yields the Euler
equation
&
R #
(1 + + ( Bts ( B s ))(Cts ) () = *Et %(Cts+1 ) () t "
' t +1 !
$

(66)

Bond markets clear: !Bt f + Bts = 0

(67)

Equations (53), (55)-(62) of Appendix I and (63)-(67) expressed in terms of stationary
variables define the system of equations that, combined with the monetary policy rule and
exogenous stochastic processes for A f ,t and As ,t , determine the equilibrium path of the
economy under this setting.

B. General Case with Credit-Constrained Households in Each Sector
We consider a more general case where households in each sector can be credit
constrained. Let !1 > 0 and !2 > 0 be the fractions of households that have access to
financial markets in the flexible price sector and in the sticky price sector, respectively.
So in this general setting there are four different kinds of agents in the economy based on
the sector of economy and access to financial markets. Here again we assume that
households with access to financial markets can only insure against income risks ex post.

Households in the Flexible Price Sector
Unconstrained Households
A representative household that has access to financial markets in the flexible price sector
maximizes its lifetime utility given by equation (1) subject to the following budget
constraint42
Pt C1ft + Bt f +

42

2
" f
(
Bt ! B f ) = Wt f N1ft + Rt !1 B tf!1 ! Pf ,t C *
2

(68)

In order to solve the model by linearizing it around the steady state with available techniques

we assume that households face a small quadratic adjustment cost,
f

parameter and B is the steady state value of the bond holding.

2
" f
(
Bt ! B f ) , where ! is a
2

64
Maximization with respect to C1ft yields the Euler equation
&
R #
(1 + + ( Bt f ( B f ))(C1ft ) () = * Et %(C1ft +1 ) () t "
' t +1 !
$

(69)

The labor supply decision of the household is given by

$n

( N1ft )# Wt f
=
(C1ft ) !"
Pt

(70)

Constrained Households
The representative credit-constrained consumer in the flexible price sector maximizes
lifetime utility given by equation (1) subject to the following budget constraint
Pt C2ft = Wt f N 2ft ! Pf ,t C *

(71)

The labor supply decision of the household is given by

$n

( N 2ft )# Wt f
=
(C2ft ) !"
Pt

(72)

Households in the Sticky Price Sector
Unconstrained Households
A representative household in the sticky price sector that has access to financial markets
maximizes its lifetime utility given by equation (1) subject to the following budget
constraint43
1

1

$
Pt C + B t + ( B ts ! B s ) 2 = # Wt s ( z ) N1st ( z )dz + # " t ( z )dz + Rt !1 B ts!1 ! Pf ,t C * (73)
2
0
0
s
1t

s

Maximization with respect to C1st yields the Euler equation

43

In order to solve the model with available techniques by linearizing it around the steady state,

we assume that households face a small quadratic adjustment costs,
s

parameter and B is the steady state value of the bond holding.

2
" s
(
Bt ! B s ) , where ! is a
2

65
&
R #
(1 + + ( Bts ( B s ))(C1st ) () = * Et %(C1st +1 ) () t "
' t +1 !
$

(74)

The labor supply decision of the household to a firm indexed by z is given by
( N1st ( z ))# Wt s ( z )
$n
=
(C1st ) !"
Pt

(75)

Constrained Households
A representative credit-constrained household in the sticky price sector maximizes its
lifetime utility given by equation (1) subject to the following budget constraint
1

1

Pt C = # Wt ( z ) N ( z )dz + # " t ( z )dz ! Pf ,t C *
s
2t

s

s
2t

0

(76)

0

Labor supply decision of the household to a firm indexed by z is given by

$n

( N 2st ( z ))# Wt s ( z )
=
(C2st ) !"
Pt

(77)

Firms
Flexible Price Sector
Firms in the flexible price sector are price taking and therefore the price of the flexible
price good is given by equation (21). Combining this with the labor supply decision of
households given by equations (70) and (72) and recognizing that
y f 1,t = A f ,t N1ft and y f 2,t = A f ,t N 2ft , the supply function of firms in flexible price sector are
given by
"

* y f 1,t
'
(
A f ,t %&
Pf ,t
)
= #n
Pt
A f ,t (C1ft ) $!

(78)

"

* y f 2 ,t
'
(
%
A
Pf ,t
f ,t &
= #n )
Pt
A f ,t (C2ft ) $!

(79)

66

Sticky Price Sector
Since firms are symmetric, in equilibrium they will all choose the same price.44 The
marginal costs of firms held by unconstrained and constrained households are therefore
given by
"

* ys1t ( z )
'
(
%
A
MCt ( z )
s ,t &
= MCtr ( z ) = #n )
Pt
As ,t (C1st ) $!

(80)

"

* ys 2t ( z )
'
(
%
A
MCt ( z )
s ,t &
= MCtr ( z ) = #n )
Pt
As ,t (C2st ) $!

(81)

where we have used the fact that ys1t ( z ) = As ,t N1st (z) and ys 2t ( z ) = As ,t N 2st ( z )

Aggregation
Household demand for flexible price and sticky price goods is given by expressions
similar to equation (10), (11), (18) and (19) with C t f and C ts replaced by Citf and Cits
where i =1, 2. Total demand for the flexible price good is given by
C f ,t

) Pf ,t
= " ''
( Pt

*#

&
$$ Ct + (1 + ! )C *
%

where Ct = !1C1ft + (! " !1 )C2ft + !2C1st + (1 " !2 )C2st

(82)

(83)

And the total demand for the sticky price good is given by

)P
Cs ,t = (1 # " )'' s ,t
( Pt

#!

&
$$ Ct
%

(84)

Market Clearing
The market for the flexible price good clears
Y f ,t = "1 y f 1,t + (" ! "1 ) y f 2,t = C f ,t
44

(85)

Those who can change prices will choose the same price while others will continue with the prices fixed
earlier.

67

where
y f 1,t = A f ,t N1ft and y f 2,t = A f ,t N 2ft
The market for the sticky price good clears
Ys ,t = "2 ys1,t + (1 ! "2 ) y s 2,t = Cs ,t

(86)

where
ys1,t = As ,t N1st and ys 2,t = As ,t N 2st

The bond market clears

!1 Bt f + ! 2 Bts = 0

(87)

Equations (55), (56), (60), (61) of Appendix I and (68), (69), (71), (73), (74), (76), (78)(87) expressed in terms of stationary variables define the system of equations that,
combined with the monetary policy rule and exogenous stochastic processes for A f ,t
and As ,t , determine the equilibrium path of the economy under this general setting.

