NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GIVING MOM A BREAK:
THE IMPACT OF HIGHER EITC PAYMENTS ON MATERNAL HEALTH
William N. Evans
Craig L. Garthwaite
Working Paper 16296
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16296

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2010

The authors thank the Russell Sage Foundation for financial support, Ron Mariutto and Andrew Kenney
for excellent research assistance, and Joe Doyle, Heidi Williams, Jonathan Meer, and seminar participants
at Dartmouth College and the University of Notre Dame for their helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by William N. Evans and Craig L. Garthwaite. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of Higher EITC Payments on Maternal Health
William N. Evans and Craig L. Garthwaite
NBER Working Paper No. 16296
August 2010
JEL No. I1,I12
ABSTRACT
The 1993 expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit created the first meaningful separation in the
benefit level for families based on the number of children, with families containing two or more children
now receiving substantially more in benefits. If income is protective of health, we should see improvements
over time in the health for mothers eligible for the EITC with two or more children compared to those
with only one child. Using data from the Behavioral Risk Factors Surveillance Survey, we find in
difference-in-difference models that for low-educated mothers of two or more children, the number
of days with poor mental health and the fraction reporting excellent or very good health improved
relative to the mothers with only one child. Using data from the National Health Examination and
Nutrition Survey, we find evidence that the probability of having risky levels of biomarkers fell for
these same low-educated women impacted more by the 1993 expansions, especially biomarkers that
indicate inflammation.
William N. Evans
Keough-Hesburgh Professor of Economics
Department of Economics and Econometrics
447 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
wevans1@nd.edu
Craig L. Garthwaite
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu

I.

Introduction
From its relatively humble beginnings in the 1970s as a $400 reimbursement for payroll taxes, the

federal Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) has grown to be the nation‘s largest anti-poverty program. The
EITC is a refundable tax credit that provides cash payments to poor families and individuals with the
most generous payments for families with children. In 2008, the program accounted for $49 billion in
payments to 24 million people.1 This is approximately the same level of spending for Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP)
programs combined.2 Families earning the maximum credit could see their adjusted gross income
increased by as much as 15 percent.
This study exploits a unique feature of the 1993 EITC expansion to examine the impact of income
on health of mothers in low income families. Unlike previous expansions of the EITC, the 1993 law
created the first meaningful separation in benefit levels for families based on the number of children, with
families of two or more children receiving substantially more in payments. If income is protective of
health, we should see improvements over time in the health for mothers eligible for the EITC with two or
more children compared to those with only one child. This empirical methodology has been used by Hotz
and Scholz (2006) in their analysis of the 1993 expansions on female employment.
Using data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), we replicate earlier
findings that EITC benefits expansion increased the labor supply of mothers. We also find evidence that
the higher EITC payments increased the self-reported health of eligible women with two children
compared to similar women with only one child. For example, we find decreases in the probability of
having a bad mental health day in the previous month and increases in the probability of reporting
excellent or very good health, results that are statistically significant at a p-value of 0.1. Using count data

1

http://www.eitc.irs.gov/central/press/
SNAP payments total $34.6 billion in calendar year 2008 (http://www.fns.usda.gov/FSP/faqs.htm) while assistance
payments under TANF totaled $14.5 billion in fiscal year 2008
(http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofs/data/2008/overview.html).

2

1

models, we also find statistically significant reductions in the number of poor mental health days (pvalue<0.05).
Despite the fact that self-reported measures of health are predictive of objective medical
outcomes such as mortality, a number of authors have noted the limitations of this class of variables. As a
result, researchers in the health disparities literature have recently begun focusing more closely on
biomarkers and other measured health indicators as the outcome of interest. In this spirit, we use data
from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) to estimate the effect of the
EITC expansion on health indicators that are measured by blood and medical tests. We utilize data on
eight biomarkers that indicate whether the respondent has problems associated with cardiovascular
diseases (diastolic and systolic blood pressure and resting heart rate), metabolic disorders (total
cholesterol, HDL and glycated hemoglobin) and inflammation (albumin and c-reactive protein levels).
The expansion of the EITC is associated with a large and statistically significant decrease in the counts of
risky biomarkers, especially for the measure of inflammation. These inflammation biomarkers have been
shown to be independently predictive of a wide range of conditions including heart attacks and strokes
(Colhoun, Hemingway, and Poulter, 1998; Crimmins, Kim and Seeman, 2009; Danesh et al., 1998; Gabay
et al., 1999; Ridker, 2003; Onat, 2008).
The results and methods in this paper contribute to two distinct literatures. The first is a literature
that examines the economic consequences of the EITC. Given its scope and rapid increase in size, it is
not surprising that the EITC has attracted the attention of academics and policymakers. Analysts have
examined the impact of the EITC on outcomes as diverse as labor supply (Scholz, 1996; Eissa and
Liebman, 1996; Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001; Eissa and Hoynes, 2004; Keane and Moffitt, 2004),
fertility (Baughman and Dickert-Conlin, 2009), marriage (Dickert-Conlin, 2002), living arrangements
(Ellwood, 2000), poverty (Scholz, 1994; Neumark and Wascher, 2001), educational attainment (Dahl and
Lochner, 2008), and spending patterns (Barrow and McGranahan, 2000; Smeeding et al., 2000). Even
with this breadth of outcomes, little attention has been paid to the effect of these large increases in income
on the health of recipients. This is despite the fact that improving the living conditions of low-income
2

individuals and their children is an explicit objective of the EITC. Then-First Lady Hillary Clinton
commented on the program, ―a small investment in working parents [through the EITC], even just several
hundred dollars a year, means stronger families, healthier children, more dependable employees, and a
more stable future for America‖ (Clinton, 1993). To the extent that the size of federal income support
programs are determined based on net benefits, ignoring this important dimension will lead to suboptimal
program sizes.
Currently, considerations of the health effects generated by government programs are largely
concentrated on those programs that directly affect the provision of medical services such as Medicaid
(Currie and Gruber, 1996a,b) and Medicare (Card et al., 2009), influence the ability to obtain health
insurance coverage or care (Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes, 2005), or increase access to food and nutrition
through the Women, Infants and Children program (Hoynes, Page, and Stevens, 2009). When the noneconomic impacts of income support programs are considered, they tend be focused on non-health
outcomes. Adler and Newman (2002, p. 63) noted that there is ―…little research in the United States
examining how redistributive policies or other income distributions changes affect health outcomes.‖
This current work advances the understanding of the causal relationship between income and health.
Currently, there is a voluminous literature concerning socioeconomic status and health. This literature,
with contributions from a variety of disciplines, has established that health outcomes are much better
among individuals with higher socioeconomic status. A relationship between health and socio economic
status (SES) has been documented for virtually all measures of health and health habits including
mortality (Backland, Sorlie and Johnson, 1996), self-reported health status (House, Kessler, and Herzog,
1990), measures of child health (Case, Lubotsky and Paxson, 2002), smoking (Chaloupka and Werner,
2000), obesity (Chang and Lauderdale, 2005) exercise (Brownson et al., 2001), incidence of disease
(Banks et al., 2006), a variety of cardiovascular risk factors (Karlamangla et al. 2005) and a variety of
biomarkers (Steptoe et al., 2002a and 2002b; Muenning, Sohler and Mahato, 2007; Seeman et al., 2008).
Despite the robust correlations, the literature has failed to definitively answer whether the
income/health gradient represents a causal mechanism or whether low income reflects some other
3

underlying root cause that cannot be rectified with more income. Those with more income or higher
education are not a random sample of people and the factors that lead one to have higher socioeconomic
status (patience, persistence, parents with resources, etc.) may also play a role in improving health
outcomes (Fuchs and Farrell, 1992). Likewise, health shocks reduce both health status and income so
poor health may cause lower income rather than the other way around (Bound, 1989; Haveman et al.,
1995; and Smith, 1999). Given this possibility of reverse causation and the lack of an obvious causal
pathway from income to health, Deaton (2003, p. 118) notes that ―…much of the economics literature has
been skeptical about any causal link from income to health, and instead tends to emphasize causality in
the opposite direction…‖.
Economists have attempted to identify whether SES is a casual factor in health by exploiting
quasi-experimental variation in income and education. For example, authors have examined whether the
increase in education generated by policies such as compulsory schooling (Adams, 2002; Lleras-Muney,
2005), an increase in access to colleges (Currie and Moretti, 2003) and the Vietnam Draft (de Walque,
2007; Grimand and Parent, 2007) have altered health outcomes. These papers all find improved health
outcomes from greater education. In contrast, Royer and Clark (2009) showed that a large change in
education produced by an increase in compulsory education in the U.K. had no impact on adult mortality.
Similar work exploits variation in income produced by such factors as winning the lottery
(Lindahl, 2005), German reunification (Frijters, Haisken-DeNew and Shields, 2005), receipt of an
inheritance (Meer, Miller and Rosen, 2003), a drop in income caused by a phylloxera outbreak in the wine
growing regions of France in the 1800s (Banerjee et al., 2007), a rise in South African pensions (Case,
2004), changes in Social Security payments (Snyder and Evans, 2005), and permanent changes in cohort
earnings brought about by technological shocks (Adda et al., 2009).
Unfortunately, the results from these papers are much less consistent concerning the role that
income plays in health with some finding large benefits (e.g., from lottery winnings and South African
pension expansions) some finding no impact (from inheritances) and others finding an increase in
mortality from higher income (in the case of higher Social Security payments in the US). The disparity in
4

the results for this literature is best illustrated in Adda et al. (2009) who found that an increase in the
permanent income for cohorts has no impact on predictors of mortality such as self-reported health status,
self-reported chronic conditions, but it increased smoking and reduced mortality.
In general, the conflicting evidence regarding the causal impacts of income on health is possibly
due to at least two factors: the primary focus on mortality as the outcome of interest and/or the use of
uncommon sources of variation in income. The problem of using mortality as an outcome is that, while it
is an easily verifiable and obviously not self-reported outcome, it is rare among many demographic
groups. Therefore, failing to detect a causal effect of income on mortality could be a Type-II error. This
is of particular concern for the relatively young groups under consideration in this analysis. The second
concern about previous work on the effect of income on health is the use of unique sources of quasiexperimental variation. Authors have used shocks to income such as winning the lottery (Lindahl, 2005),
being awarded the Nobel Prize (Rablan and Oswald, 2008), receiving inheritances (Meer, Miller, and
Rosen, 2003), and living through the reunification of Germany following the Cold War (Frijters, HaiskenDeNew and Shields, 2007). While these events may have the benefit of being uncorrelated with
underlying characteristics of beneficiaries, some are not particularly replicable and the results might
therefore have limited external validity. In contrast, the source of variation in this paper is a change in
income resulting from a large income maintenance program—an event affecting tens of millions of low
income Americans every year.
To the extent that the results of this analysis of the health effects of the 1993 EITC expansion can
be generalized to individuals on similar income support programs, they could provide valuable
information regarding optimal policy decisions in this area. As Lindahl (2005) stated ―if income causally
determines health, an evaluation of a policy affecting people‘s income should take into account its effect
on their health.‖ Any existence of a causal relationship between health and income will be useful for
understanding the full effect of a broad range of income support programs.

5

II.

The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1993
The federal EITC is the nation‘s largest anti-poverty program. Unlike traditional cash assistance

programs, the EITC is a refundable tax credit available only to individuals with positive earnings. The
program began in 1975 as a small credit—up to $400—to reimburse low-income families for their payroll
tax contributions. By 2008, this program had grown and the federal government transferred $49 billion
through the EITC in income to 24 million American families.
The general structure of the EITC is as follows. For low levels of income, EITC recipients are in
a ―phase-in‖ region where the amount of their benefit increases along with their income. After the
maximum benefit level is reached, recipients are in a plateau region where the size of the EITC benefits
neither increases nor decreases with income. Finally, after a certain level in earned income, recipients
enter the ―phase-out‖ region where the size of their benefit is decreasing in income. Policymakers can
change the generosity of the EITC by altering the phase-in/phase-out rate, the maximum allowable credit,
and/or the income points at which these regions begin and end.
Since its creation there have been several large expansions to the EITC. As part of the Tax
Reform Act of 1986, the generosity of the EITC was greatly increased. Subsequently, as part of the
Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1990, the credit was expanded and a slightly larger benefit was created for
families with two or more children. This marked the first time that benefit levels depended on family
size—though this difference was small in both absolute and relative terms. In 1993, President Clinton
signed the Omnibus Reconciliation Act (OBRA93)3 that roughly doubled the size of the credit and
dramatically increased the differences between the maximum available benefit available to families with
two or more children as compared to families with only one child.
As a result of the OBRA93 expansion, the subsidy during the phase-in range for families with
two or more children increased from 19.5 percent to 40 percent, and the maximum benefit increased from

3

Public Law 103-66, http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c103:H.R.2264.ENR:

6

$1,511 to $3,556. The impact of the 1993 expansions on families with two or more children is illustrated
in Figure 1 where the horizontal axis represents adjusted gross income and the vertical axis is the size of
the credit. The effect of the expansion of families with only one child is detailed in Figure 2. OBRA93
increased the size of the credit in the phase in range from 18.5 percent to 34 percent, increased the
maximum benefit from $1,434 to $2,152, and decreased the phase-out rate from 21 to just under 14
percent—which extended the maximum AGI that will receive the credit from $23,000 to roughly
$25,000.
Of particular interest to this analysis are the differences in the size of the credit between families
based on the number of children that are generated by the expansion. In Figure 3, we note the difference
in the EITC between 1993 and 1996 at various levels of AGI for one and two plus children families.
Following OBRA93, families with two or more children had an 18 percent greater subsidy rate and were
eligible for 65 percent more in maximum benefits As a result, between $8,900 and $23,050 in AGI, the
OBRA93 expansions increased the maximum benefit by between $800 and $1,327. With respect to
income, the difference in the maximum benefit for individuals earning $8,900 amounted to nearly 15
percent of family income.

III.

Existing Literature on the Earned Income Tax Credit
There is a large literature that examines the effects of the EITC and its expansions on a wide

variety of economic outcomes and an excellent review of this literature is contained in Hotz and Scholz
(2003). The most studied outcome is the effect of the EITC on labor supply. In many of these papers,
authors utilize difference-in-difference models and exploit changes in the structure of the program over
time. To isolate the EITC effects from secular changes, the authors typically use data from a comparison
sample that is composed of people unlikely impacted by the reform but a group that is expected to have
similar trends in outcomes in the absence of the reform. For example, Eissa and Liebman (1996)
estimated the effect of the 1986 EITC expansion on the labor supply of single women by comparing the
time series changes in labor supply for women with and without children. Eissa and Hoynes (2004) used
7

a similar methodology to examine the effect of the EITC on the labor supply of married couples. Meyer
and Rosenbaum (2001) examine the labor supply consequences of the EITC and other federal transfer
programs by comparing single women with and without children.
The results from this literature suggest that the EITC raises the labor supply of single women
(Eissa and Liebman, 1996; Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001) while depressing the labor supply of married
women (Eissa and Hoynes, 2004). The results tend to be larger for women with lower years of education
and the estimates in Meyer and Rosenbaum suggest that the EITC expansions were responsible for a 10.7
percentage point increase in the probability of working for single women over the 1984-1996 period.
Despite the consensus results on labor force participation for single women, the evidence for
change in hours worked is less clear with Liebman (1997) and Eissa and Leibman (1996) finding little
evidence that EITC expansions altered this measure of labor supply which Dickert, Houser, and Scholz
(1995), Keane and Moffitt (1998), and Meyer and Rosenbaum, (2001), finding modest impacts of EITC
expansions on hours of work.
The most salient article for our purposes is Hotz and Scholz (2006) who used administrative data
from California to estimate the labor supply effects of the 1993 EITC expansions on families on welfare.
As we do in this paper, the authors compared the changes in labor supply of women with two or more
children to those of women with one child—two groups that have arguably more similar pre-expansion
trends in labor force participation than the typical comparisons which are women with and without
children. These authors found large, positive effects of the EITC expansions on employment.
Due to the fact that the size of credit is based upon family income and size, it is possible that
EITC expansions also impacted other family outcomes, but in general, there is little empirical evidence
that the EITC has altered marriage or family formation rates (Dickert-Conlin and Hauser, 2003; Eissa and
Hoynes, 1998; Ellwood, 2000) or fertility (Baughman and Dickert-Conlin, 2003 and 2009).
The large amount of cash transferred to working families as a result of the EITC has been
demonstrated to have reduced poverty for this group (Scholz, 1994; Neumark and Wascher, 2001).
Because EITC benefits are usually paid as a lump sum when recipients receive their tax refund checks,
8

the infusion of income from the EITC has been demonstrated to affect consumption patterns among
beneficiaries. Using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, Barrow and McGranahan (2000)
estimated that one-fifth of the EITC benefits are spent during the month of receipt. In a sample of EITC
recipients from Chicago, Smeeding et al. (2000) found that 50 percent of the EITC is spent on
investments in social mobility, such as transportation or a residential move.

IV. Identifying the Effects of Income on Health
In many of the papers that utilize quasi-experimental variation in income or education to assess
the causal impact of socioeconomic status on health, the primary outcome of interest has been mortality.
Since most beneficiaries of the EITC are relatively young, mortality rates are low and as a result, there is
little hope of finding an impact of income on mortality even for large changes in income. For example,
using data from the National Health Interview Survey Multiple Cause of Death data for the 1997-1999
period for women aged 21-50, we find a one-year mortality rate for this group of 0.184 percent. In a
regression where the dependent variable is a dummy that equals one if a person died within one year of
the survey and the covariates include controls for age, race/ethnicity status and marital status plus the
natural log of family income, the coefficient (standard error) on this last variable is -0.00064 (0.00024).
Given the small one-year mortality rate for this age group, the elasticity of mortality with respect to
family income is -0.36 (-0.00064/0.0018) which is fairly large. However, the impact on mortality from
even large changes in income is small in aggregate.
Consider an experiment that would increase income by 20 percent for a randomly selected group
of N people with an equally large control group. If the OLS estimate above were a ‗causal‘ impact of
income on mortality, the reduced-form regression of one-year mortality on treatment assignment would
generate a difference in mortality between the two groups of only 0.000128 and a simple power
calculation indicates that one would need a sample of 836,000 in the treatment group (and a total sample
of 1.672 million observations) to detect a statistically significant (α=0.05) reduced-form difference in
mortality between the two groups.
9

As these results suggest, identifying a relationship between income and health for a younger
population requires thinking more broadly about the set of health outcomes. Existing research examining
correlations in health disparities by socioeconomic status provides some guide as to where to look for
such outcomes. Most of this literature to date has demonstrated that some of the likely mechanisms (e.g.,
poor health habits, environmental conditions, health insurance) explain only a small fraction of the
SES/health gradient (Lantz et al., 1998; Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2008). A more promising line of
research has focused on the potential physiological linkages between SES and health. This line of
literature notes that stress has been demonstrated to produce dysfunction in the body‘s regulatory systems
such as fight-or-flight, metabolic, immune and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal systems (Sterling and
Eyer 1988; McEwan and Stellar, 1993; McEwen, 1998) and this stress may accelerate cell aging (Epel et
al., 2004; Cherkas et al., 2006). Research has also demonstrated that those in lower socioeconomic
groups have higher levels of biochemicals associated with stress such as cortisol, C-reactive protein,
fibrinogen, low density lipoproteins and blood pressure (Steptoe et al., 2002a and 2002b; Muennig et al.,
2007; Seeman et al., 2008). This work is therefore suggestive that stress-induced physiological
responses may partly explain the health/SES gradient.
As a result, we focus on outcomes that are pre-cursors for later negative health events such as
self-reported health, mental health status, as well as biomarkers that measure stress and other
physiological characteristics.

V.

Constructing a Sample from the Behavioral Risk Factors Surveillance Survey
Initially, we utilize data from the Behavioral Risk Factors Surveillance Survey (BRFSS), which is

an annual, state-based telephone survey designed to measure the health and health habits of the U.S.
population. The survey is administered by individual states and data is them aggregated into a single
annual file by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). The program began in 1984, and in that year only
15 states participated in the survey. By 1994, BRFSS was collecting data from all states, DC, and three
US territories. It is a very large annual survey with the survey size increasing from 102,263 in 1994 to
10

212,510 in 2001 and 414,509 observations in 2004. BRFSS is an excellent survey for our purposes
because it has detailed demographic data including the number of children in the household plus a host of
health outcomes and health habits. BRFSS contains measures of self-reported health status as well as
indicators of bad physical and mental health days in the past month.
The initial econometric model we utilize is similar to that employed by Hotz and Scholz (2006) in
their analysis of the EITC on female labor supply in California. Specifically, as we note in Figure 3, the
1993 expansions increased in absolute and relative terms the size of the benefit for low income families
with two or more children compared to families with one child. Therefore, if income is protective of
health, we should find an increase in the health of families with two or more children over time relative to
the same time series change for families with one child. The EITC expansion was passed in 1993 and
became effective with tax year 1995, but because so few people collect their EITC benefits as the
advanced EITC4 and nearly all take the EITC as a refund on their federal taxes (which is received in the
following calendar year), we consider 1996 as the first year when eligible families with two or more
children were receiving dramatically greater EITC payments.
A key question within this research framework is how to restrict the sample to include people
likely to be eligible for the EITC? Although the EITC is an income-based benefit, the literature
summarized above indicates that there are important labor supply consequences of the program so an
income-based criteria would select the sample based on an outcome that would potentially contaminate
results due to a sample selection bias. A strategy used in the past it to select likely eligible recipients by
level of education and this is the method employed here.
The other consideration concerns the age range of the mothers in the sample. According to the
enabling legislation, qualifying children for the EITC must be under age 19 or under 24 for full time
students. Within BRFSS, respondents are asked to identify the number of children in the household less

4

The Advance EITC (AEITC) allows taxpayers to collect their EITC throughout the year in the form of lower tax
withholdings in their paycheck (http://www.irs.gov/individuals/article/0,,id=96515,00.html). The GAO (2007)
estimates that only 3 percent of eligible taxpayers in the 2002-2004 period collected the AEITC.

11

than 18 years of age. As we increase the maximum age of the mothers in the sample, we increase the
likelihood of including families that have children older than 18 but potentially qualifying children and
hence misplacing mothers in one versus two or more children families. At the same time, reducing the
maximum age eliminates women potentially ―treated‖ by the EITC and increases the chance of a Type II
error. To balance these two interests, we restrict the sample to women 21 to 40 years of age with reported
children in the household. This sample reduces the chance of having families with qualifying older
children in the sample. In the 2000 Census One-Percent Public Use Micro Sample, the fraction of
mothers aged 21-40 with a high school degree or below in families with older qualifying children (e.g.,
children aged 19-24 and in school) was only 1.8 percent.
Table 1 reports data from the Annual Demographic file from the 1994-1996 and 1999-2002
March Current Population Survey (CPS) regarding the percentage of women aged 21-40 who received the
EITC, categorized by their education status and number of children, and pre and post 1996 time periods.5
Because the March CPS asks about income earned in the previous year, data from the 1994-1996 CPS
presents data for the 1993-1995 tax years. The estimated amount of the credit received by each CPS
respondent is generated by the United States Census Bureau tax model and the calculation assumes that
all those eligible for the credit actually applied.6 The results in Table 1 demonstrate that the probability of
receiving any EITC benefit is decreasing in education, holding the number of children constant.
Furthermore, the group that received the largest increase in benefits between the tax years 1993-1995 and
the years 1998-2001 were women with two or more children and a high school diploma or less in
education. The fraction of women who were eligible for any EITC benefit increased by approximately 20
percent during the two time periods. At the other end of the spectrum, women with a college degree
received little benefit from the program regardless of the number of children in their family.

5

The March CPS data was downloaded from www.ipums.org, King et al. (2010).
This is an assumption that previous research has established is clearly wrong. Data from the 1996 tax year suggest
that the between 12.8 and 17.8 of those eligible for the program never applied (Tax Policy Center, 2002). At the
same time, the IRS (2000) estimates that approximately 30 percent of the benefits paid out by the EITC in 1998
went to individuals who were not eligible for the benefit

6

12

Table 1 also contains information about the estimated amount of the benefit received, again
assuming all women eligible applied. The numbers in these tables are in nominal terms. As would be
expected given the structure of the OBRA93 expansion, women with two or more children received much
larger increases in their estimated EITC payment. For example, in last two rows of Table 1, women with
two or more children and no high school diploma had experienced an increase in their estimated EITC
payment of roughly $820 (59%). On the other hand, women of a similar educational background but with
only one child had an increase of only approximately $300 (25%). The numbers in Tables 1 indicate that
among those with children, the most likely recipients of the EITC are low-educated women this group
will represent the population eligible for the program in our econometric models.
In order to estimate the simple difference-in-difference model outlined above, at a minimum, we
need information on mother‘s age, education and the number of children in the household. Since 1993,
BRFSS has asked respondents how many children under the age of 18 are living in the household. Prior
to that year, the survey asks respondents the number of children in grades K-8 and the age of the youngest
child, eliminating any pre-1993 surveys from use. Because the first checks under the new EITC schedule
for families with two or more children are distributed in 1996, we look at data from the 1993 through
2001, giving us three years pre and six years post-EITC expansion.
Sample means from the BRFSS data set for the pre-EITC expansion period are reported in Table
2. In the first two columns, we report estimates for women, age 21-40 with a high school education or
less with one and two plus kids respectively. In the next column, we report the p-value on the test of the
null hypothesis that the means are the same across the two columns allowing for observations within a
state to be correlated. In the final three columns of the table, we repeat the same basic structure but for
mothers with a college degree. We utilize this final group in a difference-in-difference-in-difference
model and for completeness, report basic sample means for this group as well.
Although our primary interest in this paper is to examine the impact of higher EITC payments on
health outcomes of mothers, as we noted above, the bulk of the empirical work on the EITC in the past
has examined the impact of the program on female labor supply. To place our estimates in this broader
13

literature, we are interested in estimating some models with labor supply measures as outcomes.
Unfortunately, information on labor supply in the BRFSS is limited to a single question that identifies
whether someone is currently working for a wage, self-employed, out of work for less than a year or more
than a year, a homemaker, a student, retired, or unable to work. Because the out of work questions do not
identify whether a person is currently looking for work, the only measure of labor supply we can
construct from the BRFSS is whether a respondent is ―currently employed.‖ As is discussed below, this
variable is similar to a measure of labor supply that can be generated from other standard datasets.
In the sample with high EITC eligibility, there are noticeable differences in the observed
characteristics of the mothers with one versus two plus children. Women with two plus children tend to
be slightly older, have higher fraction minority, are more likely to be married and have lower incomes.
Not surprisingly, women with more children are less attached to the labor force as well. Most of these
differences are statistically significant.
In the bottom of the table, we report sample means for the measures of health status and health
habits. The first outcome we consider is a dummy that equals 1 if a person self-reports they are in
excellent or very good health.7 Next are two dummy variables that indicate whether the respondent
reported any bad mental health or physical health days in the past 30 days.8 The fourth and fifth variables
are, respectively, the number of bad mental and physical health days reported in the past 30 days.
Mothers with two or more children are less likely to report excellent or very good health, more
likely to report any bad mental health days and have more bad mental health days. These same women
are however less likely to have any bad physical health days and have lower counts of bad physical health
days. Interestingly, unlike the demographic variables, there are much smaller differences in the reported
health characteristics between women with only one child and those with two children. For women with
a high school degree or less there are only statistically significant differences in the number of bad mental

7

The original question in the survey is the standard one where respondents report whether their current health is
excellent, very good, good, fair or poor.
8
The original question in the survey asks respondents how many bad mental health or bad physical heath days they
had in the past month.
14

health days in the past month and the propensity to report any bad mental health days—and these
differences are small in magnitude.

V. Econometric Models
Our initial econometric model exploits the fact that after tax year 1995, low income mothers with
two or more children received a substantial rise in income relative to similar women with only one child
due to the EITC expansions. As we outline below, the model is a straightforward difference-in-difference
specification. Later, we also outline a difference-in-difference-in-difference specification where women
likely ineligible for the EITC form a comparison sample. We construct notation that will incorporate both
of these specifications.
We begin by letting Yji be an outcome of interest for mothers i from group j. There are two
groups of people: those likely eligible for the EITC (j=e) and those not typically eligible (j=n). Initially,
within the eligible group, consider a data structure where there are two time periods (before and after
expansion) and two family sizes (people with only one child versus those with two or more). These two
variables are measured by dummy variables Expandji (which equals 1 after the EITC has expanded and
zero otherwise) and Twoji (which equals 1 if a family has two or more children and zero otherwise). The
dependent variable is defined as Yei, which includes outcomes only for the eligible population. We can
obtain a difference-in-difference estimate with the simple equation:

(1)

yei    Twoei  Expand ei  (Twoei Expand ei ) dd   ei

where εei is an idiosyncratic error and the reduced-form impact of additional income generated by the
EITC is captured by δdd. We can enhance the explanatory power of the model by adding a set of
covariates that describe the individual (represented by the vector Xei), replace Expandei with a set of year
effects that allows a more flexible time series pattern, and allow for persistent differences in outcomes
across states by adding in a set of state dummy variables. These last two sets of variables are represented
by the dummy variables T(t) that equals 1 if an observation is from year t and S(m) that equals 1 if the

15

observation is from state m. The year and state effects are important in this context because this is a time
period of rapidly changing labor supply for low skilled women, especially low educated single mothers.
Welfare reform efforts and the robust economy of the 1990s could have potentially altered outcomes for
women in our EITC eligible sample. Many of these differences should be captured by the state and year
effects. These additions to the model lead to the following equation:

(2)

yei    Twoei 

2000



t 1993

50

T (t ) t  X ei   S (m)m  (Twoei Expand ei ) dd   ei
m 1

where again δdd is the difference-in-difference estimate of the impact of EITC expansions on health. In
our results, we call the estimates from equation (1) as the simple difference-in-difference estimates and
the results from equation (2) as the regression-adjusted difference-in-difference estimates.
As in any difference-in-difference model, the key identifying assumption is that the trends in the
comparison sample provide an estimate of the time path of outcomes that would have occurred in the
treatment sample had there been no intervention. If there are unmeasured forces in the mid 1990s that
differentially impacted low educated mothers with two kids more than mothers with one child (and vice
versa) then the estimate δdd will be biased.
We can potentially reduce this bias by increasing the dimensions of the problem and exploit data
on a group of mothers with similar fertility experiences but not subject to the EITC shocks. Specifically,
noting the results in Table 1 that few college educated mothers are EITC recipients, differential trends in
health outcomes for college-educated mothers with two plus children versus one child can be used to
control for parity-specific trends in the lower educated and higher EITC eligible populations. In this case,
we use data for both EITC eligible (j=e) and not eligible (j=n) households and therefore the dependent
variable is Yji. Enrollment in the eligibly group is defined by the dummy variable Eligji which equals 1 if
mothers are in the lower education group. In this case, the difference-in-difference-in-difference model
requires controls for group eligibility (Eligji), time period (Expandji) and treatment group (Twoij), the
three unique cross terms for all these variables, and the final third-order term that identifies potentially

16

treated mothers (Two=1) who are eligible for EITC (Elig=1) in the post treatment period (Expand=1).
The equation of interest is therefore:

(3) Y ji   0  Two ji 1  Elig ji  2 

2000



t 1993

T (t ) 1t  (Two ji Elig ji )  4 

2000



t 1993

T (t ) Elig ji 2t 

2000

 T (t )Two 

t 1993

ji

3t

50

 X ei   S (m)m (Two ji Expand ji Elig ji ) ddd   ji
m 1

where Xji is a vector of covariates, S(m) are state effects, and T(t) are year effects. We also allow for the
unique year effects for those eligible for the EITC and those with two or more children.
The triple difference estimate is the parameter δddd. Under the assumptions that the health status
of mothers with a college degree has a similar pre-treatment trend as those for women with a high school
degree or less and that this group will react similarly to post-expansion shocks, the DDD estimate will
provide an unbiased estimate of the effect of the EITC on health outcomes. A tradeoff is that in small
samples such as those below this identification strategy may lead to relatively imprecise results.

VI.

Labor Supply Results From the Current Population Survey and the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System
The primary purpose of the paper is to examine the impact of higher EITC payments on maternal

health. The bulk of the empirical literature concerning the EITC has, to date, examined the impact of the
program on the labor supply of low educated women. As we noted above, there is only one question on
the BRFSS about employment and from that question, we can construct a single measure of labor supply:
whether the mother is currently employed. In this section, we briefly outline a companion sample
constructed from the March Current Population Survey (CPS), a standard labor market data set that can
be used to examine the role of the EITC on labor market decisions.9 These results are presented for two
primary reasons. First, obtaining similar labor supply responses to the EITC expansions in the CPS to the
9

The data were downloaded from www.ipums.org and information about the data set can be found in King et al.
(2004).
17

existing literature on these outcomes will provide validation of our proposed empirical strategy. Second,
obtaining similar estimates for labor supply between respondents to the CPS and our BRFSS sample
confirms that our sample is representative of those used in the existing literature estimating more
traditionally studied outcomes.
The CPS is a monthly survey of about 50,000 households and it is the primary data set for labor
force characteristics of the US civilian non-institutionalized population. Household are surveyed for the
same four months in a two year cycle and one-quarter of the sample exits the survey temporarily or
permanently each month. For this section, we construct a sample from the March CPS that parallels the
sample from the BRFSS used in the previous section. Therefore, we use data from the 1993 through 2001
March CPS and restrict the sample to women aged 21-40 with 12 or fewer years of education and children
in the home. The CPS asks respondents the number of your own children (biological, foster or step
children) of any age living in this house which is similar in scope to the question used to identify eligible
mothers in the BRFSS.
We use the ―employment status‖ variable from the regular CPS survey to construct the labor
supply variables.10 This question asks about the labor market status at the time of the survey which
matches the employment question in the BRFSS. From the employment status variable, we construct two
variables: one that measures whether the respondent is currently in the labor force, and another that
measures whether they are currently employed. The variable for currently employed is most directly
comparable to the labor market outcome we are able to generate in the BRFSS. Unweighted descriptive
statistics from the full 1993-2001 samples from both the March CPS and the BRFSS are reported in the
first two columns of Table 3 with the final column being the p-value for the null hypothesis that the
means are the same across the two samples.11 The samples look similar on many dimensions and very
different on others. The average age and fraction of respondents with two or more children in their
10

Each month, the CPS asks respondents a fixed set of questions and in some months, households are asked to
complete a supplemental survey. Each March, respondents complete the Annual Demographic File which has
detailed data about labor supply, earnings, and insurance status from the previous year. In our models, we use data
from the basic March CPS survey and not the annual demographic file.
11
Again, for these tests we allow for arbitrary correlation in the errors within a state.
18

household are very similar across the two samples. The BRFSS sample contains a smaller fraction lowereducated, lower fraction married and much lower fraction Hispanic mothers than the CPS. This last
number is expected given the fact the BRFSS is a telephone based survey and the CPS is an in-home
survey. Note that the fraction of mothers in the sample that are currently employed is 4.5 percentage
points higher in the BRFSS compared to the March CPS. This may also be expected given the different
survey design.
In Table 4, we report difference-in-difference estimates for labor supply outcomes using models
based on equations (1) and (2). Following the previous literature on the labor supply effects of the EITC,
we produce estimates for three samples: single women, married women and then a pooled sample that
includes both groups. For the CPS sample, we estimate models for the outcomes ―currently in the labor
force‖ and ―currently employed‖ and these estimates are reported in the first two columns. In the final
column, we report estimates from the BRFSS using the ―currently employed‖ outcome. For each
outcome, we estimate two models: a simple difference-in-difference model (equation 1) and a regressionadjusted version (equation 2). In these regression-adjusted models, we endeavor to make the covariates
as similar as possible between the two data sets. In each of these regressions, we include indicator
variables for all unique values of age, education, marital status, race, the number of children, year and
state of residence. In the BRFSS model we also include survey month effects. We estimate models as
linear probability equations and estimate standard errors that allow for an arbitrary correlation in errors
within a state.
In both data sets, we estimate that the EITC expansions had a large impact on the labor supply of
single women. For example, in the regression-adjusted difference-in-difference models with the CPS
data, we estimate that the expansions increased labor force participation by 5.8 percentage points and
increased current employment probabilities by 5.3 percentage points. Both of these estimates are
statistically significant. This final number is very close to the estimate that we generate supply for the
same outcome but with the BRFSS sample. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that these two estimates
are equal. Hotz and Scholz (2006), the first study to utilize this particular empirical methodology to
19

evaluate the 1993 expansions, found an increase in employment from this EITC expansion for women
with two or more children of 3.4 percentage points. Differences between the magnitude of our estimate
using the CPS and this earlier estimate are due, at least in part, to the fact that the sample for Hotz and
Scholz (2006) is composed of women on welfare and that the authors specifically focus on single parent
cases. For the currently employed outcome in the CPS and BRFSS samples, controlling for demographic
covariates does not change the results much.
In contrast to the results for single women, there is a modest labor supply response among
married women to the 1993 EITC expansions. Within the CPS samples, we find approximately a onepercentage point increase in labor force participation and current employment in the regression-adjusted
models, but neither of these estimates is statistically significant at conventional levels. In contrast, in the
BRFSS sample, we find a 1.8 percentage point increase in current employment rates for married women
that is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. As with single women, in no case can we reject the
null that the estimated impact of the EITC in the current employment models is the same for the two
samples.
The disparity in the estimates for single and married women is in line previous work. Eissa and
Hoynes (2004) examined the effect of the EITC on labor supply by marital status. Their theoretical
model and empirical results suggest that increases in labor force participation from the EITC should be
primarily experienced by single women. Furthermore, they found that the labor supply of married woman
decreased following the EITC expansion. This counterintuitive result is caused by the fact that the EITC
combines income from both spouses into family income for the purposes of calculating benefit levels.
While we do not find a negative result for married women, our labor force results are much larger and
more precisely estimated for single mothers. Overall, the results of equations (1) and (2) using CPS data
provide qualitatively similar results to the existing literature – specifically that the EITC is associated
with an economically and statistically significant increase in labor supply and that this labor supply
response is concentrated among single women.

20

A second point of interest concerning the results in Table 4 is that the fraction currently working
among ―treated‖ mothers in the pre-EITC expansion period is similar. This is in contrast to the entire
sample described in Table 3, where the fraction currently working among all BRFSS mothers is much
higher than in the March CPS. In addition, the estimated impact of the EITC expansion on current
employment for mothers with two or more children is very similar in the CPS and BRFSS samples. In
the CPS sample, the EITC expansions are estimated to have increased employment rates for single,
married and all women (standard error) by 5.3 (1.3), 1.0 (1.1), and 1.4 (0.9) percentage points. The
corresponding numbers from BRFSS are 4.6 (1.1), 1.8 (1.1), and 2.0 (0.7). Within all three subsamples in
the March CPS data, the increase in labor force participation is captured fully by an increase in
employment. The pre-expansion mean of current employment for the treatment group in the BRFSS
sample is 58 percent—suggesting that the EITC increased labor supply by approximately 3.4 percent.
Taken together, the fact that the estimates from our models applied to the CPS finds a
qualitatively similar pattern of labor supply results to the existing literature and finds exceptionally
similar results between the CPS and the BRFSS samples provides evidence that the health results
presented below are not due to any particular characteristics of the BRFSS sample or our proposed
identification strategy.

VII.

Maternal Health Results from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey Samples
Table 5 contains both the simple and regression-adjusted difference-in-difference coefficients

from equations (1) and (2) for a variety of outcomes. As in Table 4, we calculate standard errors allowing
for within-state correlation in errors. The first row of estimates repeats the ―currently employed‖ results
from the BRFSS sample reported in Table 4 and the next five rows we report results for various selfreported health outcomes in the BRFSS. The second row of results reports estimates for the outcomes
that indicates whether the respondent reports any bad mental health days in the previous 30 days. The
regression-adjusted coefficient shows that following the expansion of the EITC, women with two or more
children had a 1.4 percentage point decrease in the probability of reporting a bad mental health day. This

21

result is statistically significant at a p-value of 0.10. In addition to data on any mental health days, the
BRFSS contains data the total number of bad mental health days over the last 30 days. The second to last
row of results contains the estimates for a negative binomial model with the number of bad mental days as
the dependent variable. The regression-adjusted coefficient shows that following the expansion of the
EITC, women with two or more children and a high school degree or less experienced a 7.5 percent
reduction in the number of bad mental health days compared to similarly educated women with only one
child.12 This estimate is statistically significant at a p-value of 0.05. The fourth and sixth columns of
results contain a similar set of estimates for the presence of bad physical days. These results, however,
are generally small, positive, and imprecisely estimated. The third row of results are for a dependent
variable that equals one if an individual reports being in either excellent or very good health. The
regression-adjusted coefficient suggests that the EITC increased the probability of women with a high
school degree or less and with two or more children reporting these high levels of health by 1.35
percentage points. This estimate is statistically significant at a p-value of 0.10.
Although the estimates in Table 5 are in most cases of marginal statistical significance, they are
very large responses to the EITC expansion. From Table 1, we see that in the post-1993 expansion
period, the average difference in EITC payments between mothers with two children versus one is
roughly $200. In a sample of low educated women, what would we expect an extra $200 in income to
raise self-reported health? To calculate a baseline, we used data from the 1996 through 2002 March CPS.
This data set over the period in question is excellent for our purposes because it has much higher quality
income data than BRFSS and starting in 1996, this survey began asking a question on self-reported health
status. Using a sample of women aged 21-40 with a high school degree or less and at least one child, we
regress a dummy for excel or very good health on a complete set of year, age, race, and marital status
12

A potential concern with the negative binomial model in this case is that the PDF is defined over all counts from 0
to infinity but by construction, our counts vary only from 0 to 30. We can easily adjust for this fact in any
econometric estimation. If f(β|xi ,yi ) is the PDF of the negative binomial for person i and F(β|xi ,30) is the CDF
evaluated from 0 to 30, the actual value of the likelihood for individual i is then f(β|x i ,yi )/ F(β|xi ,30). Programming
a maximum likelihood version of this censored negative binomial, the estimated coefficient on the EITC expansion
variable and the standard error are unchanged out to three decimal places.

22

effects plus a linear term in family income. The results from this model suggest that each additional
$1,000 in income raises the probability of reporting excellent/very good health by 0.2 percentage points
(standard error of 0.009 percentage points). The results we‘ve obtained in the second column of Table 5
suggest that post-expansion, the EITC raised the probability of being in excellent/very good health for
women with two or more children by 1.35 percentage points, so the results in our model are an order of
magnitude larger than what we would expect if the basic OLS model were an estimate of the true causal
impact of income on health in this example.
The key assumption in the difference-in-difference model is that the comparison sample (low
educated mothers with one child) provides an estimate of the time path of outcomes that would have
occurred for low-educated mothers two children had the EITC not been expanded for this group. We can
never directly test this hypothesis but we can provide some evidence that the trends for these two groups
were similar in the pre-treatment period. Specifically, we take model (2), restrict the sample to include
data from the pre-treatment period only and allow the year effects to vary across mothers with one and
two children. We can then test the null hypothesis that the year effects are the same across the two
groups. Since there are only two year effects in this regression, the degrees of freedom in the numerator
of this F-test are two. In the currently employed, any bad mental health and excellent/very good self
reported health equations, the p-values on the test of the null hypothesis that the trends are the same
across the two groups are 0.65, 0.85 and 0.32 respectively.
Table 6 contains the estimated coefficients for a number of robustness checks to the above
discussed results. The first column reprints the regression-adjusted estimates from Table 5. The second
column of results attempts to account for the potentially confounding effects of changes in other state
based policies. For example, given our sample characteristics (low educated mothers), a large fraction in
the sample are single mothers with low income and therefore, many will be eligible for welfare assistance.
The 1990s witnessed tremendous changes in welfare policies as the Personal Responsibility and Work

23

Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PWRORA)13 replaced the existing welfare program (Aid for Families
with Dependent Children) with Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). The changes in the
welfare program ushered in by PWRORA include placing limits on welfare, instituting family caps on
benefits, mandating work requirements, increasing earnings limits and providing more generous asset
limits for eligibility (Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001; Blank, 2002; Bitler et al., 2005). Welfare reform was
accomplished piecemeal across states with many states adopting some characteristics of TANF prior to
1996 through waivers. Likewise, the PWRORA reforms were instituted in roughly half the states in 1997
and the other half in 1998. Using the same data set as we use below, Bitler et al. (2005) found that
welfare reform reduced insurance coverage, reduced preventive care such as pap smears and breast exams
but had no impact on self-reported health status or the number of poor physical or mental health days.
The variation in the implementation time of welfare reform across states could potentially
contaminate our estimates. We guard against this to some degree by using low-educated moms with one
child as a comparison sample. Welfare reform should in general impact low-income mothers with one
and two children to similar degrees. To examine this issue to a greater degree, we estimate models that
include state-specific year effects—which should capture any effect that is common to all low-educated
mothers within a unique state/year cell. These results are contained in the second column of Table 6.
The inclusion of these state-specific year effects does materially change some of our results. The
estimates for currently employed, being at work, reporting excellent or very good health, and the negative
binomial estimates for the total number of bad mental health days are all of similar magnitude to the
original specification. However, the inclusion of state-specific year effects increases the p-values on the
treatment effect in the self-reported health status and bad mental health days linear probability models to
values above 0.10. The negative binomial estimate for the total number of bad mental health days now
has a p-value of 0.059.
The third and fourth columns of results are for samples split by marital status and the results for
the currently employed outcome by marital status are repeated from Table 4 and were discussed in the
13

Public Law 104-193.
24

previous section. The estimated effect on the probability of reporting a bad mental health day is
statistically insignificant for both samples. The estimate, however, is similar in magnitude across the two
groups and is nearly identical in size to the statistically significant estimate for the whole sample. The
negative binomial result for the total number of bad mental health days reported by married women is
large and statistically significant at a p-value of 0.05. The estimated effect for single women is
statistically insignificant but is negative and relatively large in magnitude. Similarly, while the estimate
on reported excellent or very good health is small in magnitude and statistically in significant for single
women, the result among married women is large (a 2.1 percentage point increase) and statistically
significant at a p-value of 0.05. Across both columns, we cannot reject the null coefficient that the single
and married results are different in magnitude. The relatively more precise estimates for the married
sample may be caused by the fact that the sample of married mothers is nearly fifty percent larger than the
sample of single mothers.
The final column of Table 6 contains the estimates for the D-D-D identification strategy in
equation (3). These results provide no statistically significant estimates—though this is not surprising.
The basic results in the first column of Table 6 are of marginal statistical significance at best. Because the
DDD models absorb additional dimension of the data, the model is using much smaller variation in the
covariate of interest. Comparing the first (DD estimates) and last column (DDD estimates) of results in
Table 6, the standard errors double in size. Holding the coefficient estimates constant from the first
column of Table 6, none of the parameters would be statistically significant at a p-value of 0.05 with the
standard error estimates from the DDD models.
The results derived from equations (1) – (3) are reduced-form estimates that examine the impact
of higher EITC payments on outcomes. A question remains about the mechanism linking higher
payments to health. The improved outcomes can be due to the benefits of higher income but at the same
time, previous research concerning the EITC has shown a number of effects from the program with the
most prominent being an increase in labor supply. Therefore, it is unclear if the increase in health results
from these changes in labor supply induced by the EITC or from some other intermediate event produced
25

by higher transfer payments. To test this specific question, we re-estimated specifications of equation (2)
for the outcomes contained in Table 5 including an indicator variable for current employment as an
additional covariate. Overall, these results suggest that changes in employment are not driving the results.
Adding a ―currently employed‖ dummy to the linear probability models measuring any bad mental health
days and excellent/very good self-reported health status reduces the magnitude (standard error) of the
treatment effect to -0.0137 (0.0084) and 0.0121 (0.0074), respectively, numbers that are only marginally
smaller in magnitude that the estimates in Table 5 and remain statistically significant at the same levels.
Likewise, the coefficient on the treatment effect in the negative binomial model for the number of bad
mental health days when we add the ―currently employed‖ falls in magnitude to only -0.0694 (0.0330).
As these results suggest, increased work cannot explain the results in Table 5.
While the results controlling for labor force status suggest that the health estimates are caused by
the increased income resulting from the EITC expansion, some concern may remain that changes in other
government policies that occurred concurrent with the expansion are actually driving the estimates. For
example, it is possible that the above results are driven by the start and rapid expansion of the State Child
Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) in the late 1990s. The SCHIP program was started in 1997 and it is a
state/federal partnership that provides health insurance coverage to low income children and pregnant
women whose incomes are too high to qualify for Medicaid.14 SCHIP enrollment grew from 897,000 in
1998 to 3.9 million in 2003.15 The implicit argument is that having children without health insurance
induces stress for mothers and if the expansions increased coverage, then we should see a reduction in
stress in a population of mothers with little education. The growth of the SCHIP program would
potentially contaminate our results if there was a differential change in insurance status for two-plus child
families among low income women compared to single child families with similar incomes. This does
not, however, appear to be the case. Using data from the March CPS outlined above, we matched loweducated women with children to their children aged 18 and under. This produces a sample of 171,614

14
15

For an overview of the SCHIP program, please see http://www.cms.gov/LowCostHealthInsFamChild/
http://www.kff.org/medicaid/upload/7348.pdf
26

children. For this group, we regress a dummy for whether a child has health insurance16 on a complete set
of dummies for states and years, the child‘s age and gender, plus a set of dummies for the mother‘s age,
marital status, race/ethnicity and education. The key covariate is the difference-in-difference treatment
effect which is defined as it was in equation (1). In models that allow for arbitrary correlations in errors
within states, the coefficient (standard error) on the EITC expansion treatment effect in the full sample,
children of single women and children of married women are -0.0025 (0.0064), -0.0071 (0.0091), and 0.0091 (0.0106). These estimates show that changes in health insurance coverage resulting from the
expansion of the SCHIP program do not seem to be a credible alternate explanation to the EITC for the
reduction in stress identified in Tables 5 and 6.
A similar argument could be made about the possible roll that Medicaid expansions have played
in enhancing maternal health. Starting in the 1980s, Medicaid programs have been expanded to include a
much larger portion of the population including low income mothers and pregnant women who would
otherwise not have qualified for the program (Currie and Gruber 1996a and 1996b). As a result,
Medicaid enrollment by adults that were not aged or disabled increased from 6 million in 1990 to 10.6
million in 2000.17 Again, the growth in this insurance program should only prove problematic for our
models if coverage for low educated mothers with two or more child grew differentially compared to
mothers with only one child. Similar to the case of SCHIP, this does not appear to be the case. Using the
sample of low-educated mothers from the March CPS, we estimate a linear probability model with an
indicator for whether the mother had any health insurance as the outcome of interest. The coefficient
(standard error) on the EITC expansion treatment effect in the full sample was -0.0000 (0.0069). Similar
to the results for SCHIP, these estimates for Medicaid expansion show that changes in health insurance

16

We would have preferred to include whether the child was enrolled in SCHIP or Medicaid but most federal
surveys such as the CPS tend to under count Medicaid enrollment (Davern et al., 2009). Research has suggested
that the undercount is primarily due to miscoding the source of the insurance rather than respondents confusing
Medicaid with uninsurance (Call et al., 2008). LoSasso and Buchmueller (2004) present evidence that the problem
is particularly pronounced for children, suggesting that because of the rise of Medicaid managed care, many with
Medicaid report private insurance instead. As a result, we follow LoSasso and Buchmueller and use any insurance
as the outcome of interest in this case.
17
http://www.cms.gov/DataCompendium/15_2009_Data_Compendium.asp#TopOfPage, Table IV.8.
27

status caused by the newly created and expanded government programs are not the actual source of the
reduced stress following the expansion of the EITC.

VIII.

Maternal Health Results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
Samples
While the above results provide some evidence of the effect of higher transfer payments on

health, they are two potential concerns about the set of outcomes examined in the BRFSS data: all of the
outcomes are self-reported and all are subjective measures of health.
Self-reported health has become a controversial method of measuring health in large datasets. On
the one hand, the indicator is more easily obtained in large samples than other more objective measures of
health. In addition, these data appear to be particular useful predictors of future health and mortality. In a
review of twenty seven community studies, Idler and Benyami (1997) found that global self reported
health was an independent predictor of mortality. This was true even when indicators of morbidity were
included in the analysis. Similarly, Maddox and Douglas (1973) found that self reported health status
was a better predictor of future physician ratings than the reverse. This led the authors to claim that self
reported health data ―clearly measure something more—and something less—than objective medical
ratings.‖ In a meta-analysis of 163 studies, DeSalvo et al. (2005) found that individuals with a self report
health status of ―poor‖ had a two-fold higher mortality rating than those with a status of ―excellent.‖ This
relationship between self reported health and mortality was still found even after controlling for a variety
of demographic factors and co-morbidities. This literature suggests that using self reported health as an
outcome can provide useful information about a wide range of health outcomes.
On the other hand, some caution about should exist in using this type of data as outcomes
measure. The subjective nature of self-reported health survey questions lead to a lack of comparability
across individuals which is functionally the same as the introduction of classical measurement error
(Bound, 1991). Because we use self-reported health as an outcome, this type of measurement error
should primarily reduce precision which is costly in this case given the marginal statistical significance of

28

our results from the BRFSS samples. In an attempt to overcome this measurement error, researchers have
proposed using self-reported data regarding objective medical conditions and diagnoses as opposed to
health status. Research has found that even these data are subject to measurement error. Baker, Stabile,
and Deri (2004) analyzed a unique dataset that contained self-reports of disease presence (e.g., cancer,
heart disease, high cholesterol) that were matched to measured indicators of disease presence from claims
data. They found that these self-reported measures produced both false positive and negative indications
of disease presence.
In a study which is more pertinent to this analysis, Johnston, Propper, and Shields (2009)
examined whether measurement error in self-reported measures of hypertension can explain the mixed
findings regarding the income-health gradient. Using a self-reported measure of hypertension, the authors
found no evidence of an income health gradient. When the authors used data on blood pressure readings
from medical professionals for the same individuals, they found a large income-health gradient with
respect to blood pressure. Though these estimates still primarily identify correlations between income
and health, they provide evidence that relying on self-reported data—even of objective health outcomes—
can generate a biased estimate of the income-health gradient.
Self-reported measures of health can also be subject to systematic measurement error as well.
Currie and Madrian (1999) examined the problems that labor economists have faced using variables such
as self-reported health status in models explaining labor market outcomes. For example, researchers
examining the role of disability and health status on labor force participation have found a ―justification
bias‖ where individuals who are not in the labor force are more likely to over-report their number of
health conditions and disabilities. Baker, Stabile, and Deri (2004) found evidence that individuals who
are not in the labor market report the presence of poor health in order to explain their lack of employment.
Bound (1991) noted that this source of bias will lead to an overestimate of the role of health compared to
other economic factors in the labor supply decision.
In addition to this justification bias, researchers have also examined whether the misreporting of
both objective and subjective health outcomes are related to socioeconomic factors such as age and
29

income. In this literature, authors have found underreporting of chronic conditions by both education and
social class. (Mackenbach,Looman, and Van Der Meer, 1996; Elstad, 1996). Since our identification
strategy is based on differences in both education and the number of children, it is possible that
differences in self-reporting between these groups could bias results using these data.
Both arguments concerning the costs and benefits of using self reported health measures have
merit. These measures clearly have some predictive power concerning mortality and therefore changes in
outcomes such as health status or mental health days are important indicators of health status. However,
there is potentially a tremendous amount of measurement error in these variables which could provide a
biased estimate of the effects of income on health. Perhaps most troubling is that due to the differential
effects between the two potential types of measurement error, the bias in these estimates is in an unknown
direction.
A second shortcoming of omnibus measures of health such as self reported health or the number
of bad mental health days is that these outcomes are limited in their ability to inform us regarding the
mechanism driving this observed increase in health. One method of addressing this question is to
examine more detailed indicators of health. Increasingly, researchers examining disparities in health
outcomes by socio-economic factors have turned their attention to biomarkers of physical and mental
stress. As discussed in Karlamangla et al. (2010), this movement has occurred for several reasons. First,
individuals (particularly elderly individuals) have experienced significant reductions in health even
without the presence of identifiable chronic conditions. Often, these decreases in health can be identified
through the use of biomarkers even when specific diseases are not detectable. In addition, biomarkers
have been found to be useful in predicting a wide variety of health outcomes among even the non-elderly.
Finally, due to the fact that biomarkers precede the onset of major diseases they are believed to be more
susceptible to external factors such as psychological stressors and other interventions. Because poor
biomarker measurements are precursors to future diseases, it is thought that they require smaller sample
sizes in order to estimate the effects of various interventions. Due to these factors, biomarkers appear to
be the ideal setting for comprehensively estimating the health effects of the EITC.
30

As a result of concerns about potential bias in the BRFSS results and a desire for an
understanding of the mechanism underlying the identified changes in health, in this section, we conduct a
similar analysis using medically measured biomarker data. This data, obtained from several panels of the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), directly confronts the two questions
discussed above. The NHANES contains outcomes such as cholesterol levels and blood pressure that are
measured by medical professionals—addressing concerns about relying on self-reported health outcomes.
These biomarker data could provide evidence about the causal pathways generating the previously
documented relationship between disease, mortality and socioeconomic status. This strategy does,
however, involve tradeoffs. While the NHANES provides detailed health outcomes measured by health
professionals, it also has a dramatically smaller sample size than the BRFSS or other health datasets.
The NHANES is a national survey designed to measure the health and well being of the
American population. Dating back to the 1960s, the survey component of the NHANES contains data on
demographic, socio-economic, and health related issues. An important difference between this dataset
and others such as the National Health Interview Survey or the BRFSS is the examination component.
Conducted in specially designed mobile examination centers staffed by a physician, medical and health
technician and a health interviewer, the examination component provides detailed and documented
medical information including that which can be gathered from blood and urine tests and medical exams.
The first three NHANES surveys were approximately 8-10 years apart. After NHANES III
(which interviewed people from 1988-1994), the survey frequency was changed and surveys are now
fielded on two-year intervals but with smaller samples. Since NHANES III occurred during the pre-1993
expansion period, we pair this data with the first three samples from the new timing framework—the
NHANES 1999-2000, NHANES 2001-2002, and NHANES 2003-2004. These four samples provide
roughly equal samples sizes in the pre- and post-EITC expansion periods.
The econometric model outlined in Section V requires that we identify the number of EITCeligible children in families. Due to the structure of the survey, this is accomplished in different ways
depending on the particular NHANES sample. In NHANES III, the sample respondent for the household
31

is asked to identify the number of people in the family. We estimate the number of children as family
size minus two for married heads of households and family size minus one for families with single
mothers. We will overstate the number of qualified children if some of the children in the family are
being claimed as a qualifying child by a non-custodial parent in another household or if some of the
children are above the EITC-qualifying age. There is little we can do about the former situation but by
restricting the top end age range of mothers, we can eliminate counting ―boomerang children‖ who do not
quality as EITC qualifying child because of their age. As with the BRFSS, we will restrict the sample to
women aged 21-40. In the 2000 Census One-Percent Public Use Micro Sample, the fraction of mothers
aged 21-40 with a high school degree or lower in families with non-qualifying children (e.g., children
aged 19-24 and not in school, or any child over the age of 24) was only 3 percent.
The final three NHANES surveys do not ask about family size, but rather, household size. In this
instance we first eliminate all households where the woman reports zero live births in her lifetime since
few women who never gave birth live in families with children from their spouse.18 Next, we estimate the
number of children as 2 minus household size for married women and 1 minus household size for single
mothers. Among families with children, the fraction of households with 2 or more children is very
similar across the four surveys. In our sample, we find 77 percent have two or more children in the
NHANES III survey and about 72 percent in the final three NHANES surveys.
The NHANES has a wealth of information from physical, blood and urine tests that signal the
current health of the mother. Table 7 contains the definitions and sample means of the biomarkers we
utilize from the NHANES data sets. The selection of outcomes was guided by the template in Seeman et
al. (2008). In that study, the authors classify individuals based on whether they are above or below
certain medically-defined cutoffs for dangerous levels of these biomarkers (e.g., high blood pressure, high
cholesterol levels) and we define outcomes in a similar way. Also following this template, we group the

18

Using data from the Fertility Supplement to the June 2000 CPS, only 6 percent of women aged 21-40 who have
never had a live birth report they have their ―own children‖ under the age of 18, a variable that measures not only
biological children but step and foster children as well.
32

biomarkers into four groups: those that measure inflammation, cardiovascular conditions, metabolic
disorders and aggregate risks across all three groups.
The first two biomarkers are acute-phase proteins which are proteins where concentration levels
are altered in response to inflammation. For example, atherosclerosis (considered the main cause of
coronary artery disease) is an inflammation process where fatty material collects on the walls of arteries.
Therefore, acute-phase proteins are thought to be independent predictors of heart disease (Hansson,
2005). The two acute-phase proteins we consider are c-reactive (CRP) and albumin.
CRP is produced by the liver and is only present in the blood when there is inflammation. It is
measured as milligrams per deciliter of blood (mg/Dl). Because CRP is only produced during
inflammation, medical researchers have investigated whether it is an independent predictor of coronary
heart disease (Ridker, 2003; Onat, 2008; Koenig et al., 1999). Owen et al. (2003) found elevated levels
of CRP among lower employment classes in the Whitehall II survey while Alley et al. (2006) found
higher levels of CRP among those at or near the poverty level. Respondents are defined to have risky
CRP levels when concentrations are ≥ 0.3 md/Dl (milligrams per deciliter).
Albumin is a blood protein made by the liver and is measured as grams per deciliter (g/Dl). In
this case, albumin levels decline during inflammation (Gillium et al., 1994). Lower levels of albumin
may indicate liver disease, and is predictive of coronary heart disease and negative cardiac events
(Danesh et al., 1998; Shalk et al. 2006) and stroke (Gabay et al., 1999). Seeman et al. (2008) found little
correlation with low albumin levels and education but find risky albumin levels decline with higher
income. Risky albumin levels are defined to be when concentrations fall below 3.8 g/Dl (grams per
deciliter). Albumin has been criticized as a biomarker of inflammation because low levels of albumin
may also signal malnutrition.19 Therefore, a lower fraction of risky albumin could be due to either reduced
inflammation or improved nutrition. We believe malnutrition is not a problem for the vast majority of
women in our sample. In the pre-EITC expansion period, roughly 30 percent of the women in our sample

19

http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/003480.htm

33

are obese and 70 percent are overweight. In contrast, there are only 6 percent of women in our sample
during this time period that report body-mass indexes of 20 or under.
Looking at the sample means in Table 7 for these inflammation biomarkers, roughly 44 percent of
the mothers in our sample have elevated CRP levels while about a quarter have risky albumin levels.
About 53 percent of women in the sample have at least one risky inflammation condition and the average
number of risky inflammation conditions is about 0.7.
The second group of biomarkers measure cardiovascular conditions and in this case, we include
three: diastolic blood pressure, systolic blood pressure and pulse. Blood pressure is measured in
measured in millimeters of mercury (mmHg) while pulse is resting pulse measured in beats per minute.
High blood pressure is predictive of heart disease, heart failure, stroke, and kidney failure.20
There is a long literature connecting blood pressure and socioeconomic status and this work is reviewed
in Colhoun, Hemingway, and Poulter (1998). Their review notes that 30 years of research has found a
consistent connection between low socio-economic status and elevated blood pressure across several
developed countries. Further research has also found a relationship between increased stress levels and
blood pressure. Zeller et al. (2004) found an increase in diastolic blood pressure among medical students
taking their final licensing exams. Steptoe, Cropley, and Jokes (1999) found that individuals observed as
having high job-related stress had a smaller decrease in blood pressure following the workday than did
similar individuals with lower levels of job strain. Similarly, Light, Turner and Hinderliter (1992) found
increases in blood pressure for healthy non-hypertensive men who experienced job strain compared to
similar men without job strain. The pattern was not as large for woman. Schnall et al. (1998) found the
estimated effects of stress on blood pressure were long lasting. In a study of particular interest to this
analysis, Steptoe, Brydon, and Kunz-Ebrecht (2005) found that changes in financial strain were associated
with changes in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure—with the effect of systolic pressure more
precisely estimated. Additionally, studies have connected reduced stress levels on decreases in blood
20

http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/dci/Diseases/Hbp/HBP_WhatIs.html

34

pressure. For example, Schneider et al. (2005a) found that individuals over age 55 with high blood
pressure who underwent a program of transcendental meditation and other stress relieving activities had
reduced mortality. Schneider et al. (2005b) found similar results for a sample of African-American men.
Rainforth et al. (2007) conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature on stress
reduction techniques on blood pressure. They found a large and statistically significant effect of
transcendental meditation but other stress-management techniques had little impact on blood pressure.
Elevated pulse rates are predictive of future coronary heart disease and other cardiovascular
events (Gillum et al., 1991; Palatini and Julius, 1997) and Seeman et al. (2008) found a strong negative
relationship between education, income and elevated pulse rates.
Respondents are defined to have risky blood pressure if the systolic levels are 90 and above or the
diastolic levels are 140 and above. Likewise, a resting pulse rates of 90 beats or more per minute is
considered risky. Given the age of the population, only about 4 percent of mothers have elevated blood
pressure but roughly 11 percent have an elevated pulse rate. Approximately one in six mothers in our
sample have at least one risky cardiovascular condition.
The third group of biomarkers indicates metabolic disorders and the conditions for this category
include total cholesterol, the concentration of high density lipoproteins (HDL) and the concentration of
glycated hemoglobins.
Total cholesterol and HDL are measured in mg/Dl. Observed connections between cholesterol
levels and periods of mental and physical stress have been seen for many decades. Grundy and Griffin
(1959) found increases in average serum cholesterol levels among medical students taking academic
examinations compared to time periods of relative relaxation. Similarly, Friedman et al. (1958) found
increased cholesterol among male accountants during times periods surrounding urgent tax deadlines.
More recently, Muldoon et al. (1992) and Muldoon et al. (1995) found increases in cholesterol levels
from periods of mental stress—with the latter study finding increases in HDL levels. Mattiasson et al.
(1990) found that shipyard workers facing the threat of unemployment experienced increased serum
cholesterol compared to workers of similar ages who were not facing an unemployment threat. More
35

recently, Steptoe and Brydon (2005) found that acute mental stress increased cholesterol levels. These
authors also found that these levels were still elevated during a follow-up measurement three years later.
The strongest evidence in this literature is for changes in total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol as a result
of stress. Increases in HDLs in response to stress is less consistent, and it must be noted that increases in
HDL levels are associated with increases (and not decreases) in cardiac health. Total cholesterol levels
of 240 mg/Dl and above and HDL levels below 40 are through to increase risk and one in ten mothers
have elevated cholesterol while one in 7 have elevated HDLs.
The third biomarker in this group is the level of glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) which is a
substance in red blood cells that is created when glucose attaches to hemoglobin (the protein in red blood
cells that carries oxygen). HbA1c is measured as percent of the red blood cells that are composed of
HbA1c and it is thought to be a better long-term measure of blood glucose than the point-in-time glucose
tests done on a daily basis by diabetic patients. Elevated levels of HbA1c are associated with eye
damage, kidney disease, heart disease, nerve damage, and stroke.21 HbA1c levels have been found to be
inversely associated with SES status. Kelly et al. (2000) used data from the NHANES 1999-2000 and
found that HbA1c levels among non-diabetics were correlated with a variety of measures of SES.
Research has also shown that changes in chronic stress can alter HbA1c levels in the blood. For example,
Netterstrom et al. (1991) found that HbA1c levels were positively correlated with measures of objective
job strain among a sample of Danish men. Similarly, Kawakami et al. (2000) found that high levels of
job strain and low levels of social support were associated with increased HbA1c among a sample of
Japanese males. Concentrations of HbA1c of 6.4 percent or above are thought to be risky but only 2.6
percent of women have elevated levels of this biomarker. Interestingly, although there are low levels of
risky biomarkers for each of the elements in this group, the fraction of women in the sample with any
risky cardiovascular biomarker is about 25 percent.

21

http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/003640.htm

36

In the final group of biomarkers, we generate aggregate measures of risk by first summing the
number of risky conditions across all 8 biomarkers. Aggregating the data in this manner is more than a
means of increasing statistical power. Medical research has shown that changes in multiple biomarkers
are seen to have effects that are greater than the sum of the predicted individual effects. The sum of risky
biomarkers is often referred to as a measure of ―Allostatic load‖ (McEwen, 1998). Researchers have
found that the strains and stressors that accompany lower socioeconomic status are related to higher
Allostatic loads (Evans, 2003; Evans and Kim, 2007, Evans and Schamberg, 2009). Singer and Ryff
(1999) found that higher Allostatic load levels in midlife among participants in the Wisconsin
Longitudinal Study were associated with a history of low socioeconomic status. Using the same dataset
as this analysis, Geronimus et al. (2006) constructed a measure of 10 cardiovascular, metabolic, and
inflammation biomarkers.22 The authors found that individuals in poverty had higher levels of this
measure of Allostatic load. Also using the NHANES, Seeman (2008) found that Allostatic load was
higher among those with less education and a higher poverty to income ratio. Perhaps most importantly,
Crimmins, Kim and Seeman (2009) found that Allostatic load level predicted a greater risk of mortality
over a 6 to 12 year follow-up period. Similarly, Karlamanga et al. (2010) used data from NHANES III
and found that all cause mortality was monotonically increasing in a measure of Allostatic load
containing 9 biomarkers (8 of which are used in the measure of aggregate risk for this analysis).
Studies show that unweighted count scores across a variety of biomarkers do a better job of
predicting future outcomes such as mortality than any individual measure (Seeman, Singer, and Rowe,
1997; Berenson et al., 1998). Therefore, this strategy is used in this portion of the analysis where all 8
risky biomarker measures are aggregated into a composite score. In the sample for this analysis, the
average respondent has 1.2 risky conditions with this number ranging from 0 to 7. Two thirds of women
have at least one risky condition, a third have two or more and an eighth have at least three conditions.

22

We only use 8 of these biomarkers in this analysis because those are all that are consistent across all three panels
of the NHANES.
37

Results for this composite measure of biomarkers provides the most complete picture of the health effects
of the EITC expansion.
In Table 8, we report estimates for regression-adjusted difference-in-difference models of the
effect of the EITC expansion on maternal health. The sample includes women aged 21-40 with a high
school degree or lower. The covariates in these models include dummies for the survey year plus the
mothers age, race, marital status and number of children. The treatment effect is captured by a simple
interaction: respondents with two or more children in the final three NHANES surveys. In all models,
we estimate standard errors that allow for an arbitrary form of heteroskedasticity across observations.
Initially we report results for the aggregate measures of risky conditions—those thought by the
medical community to be most predictive of negative health outcomes. In the first three rows of the table,
we report estimates from linear probability models where we estimate the impact of EITC expansion on
having one or more, two or more, or three or more negative conditions. For the first two models, we
estimate that EITC expansion increased the probability of having one or more or two or more conditions
by 9 percentage points, and both of these results have p-values less than 0.10. Moving to three or more
conditions, the marginal effect declines to 6.1 percentage points (t-statistic of -1.4) but the impact as a
percent of the baseline sample mean is very large (60 percent). In the fourth row of the table, we utilize
the total number of counts as the dependent variable and estimate a simple Poisson model that explicitly
accounts for the count nature of the data. In this case, the coefficient on the EITC expansion suggests that
counts of risky conditions are 23 percent lower for mothers who received the larger EITC payments. This
estimate is statistically significant at a p-value of 0.05.
The Poisson model is restrictive in that it forces the expected value of outcomes to equal the
variance. In many cases, data is subject to over-dispersion where the variance grows faster than the mean
and when over-dispersion is present, imposing the Poisson distribution on the data will tend to bias
standard error estimates down (Hausman et al., 1984). In our sample, over-dispersion is not an issue
since the maximum count value is 7. Estimating the model with a negative binomial model allows for a
variance to mean ratio of 1+δ but if δ=0 the model collapses to the Poisson . In our case, when the model
38

is estimated as a negative binomial, we estimate δ to be 0.054 with a standard error of 0.028 indicating
some but very little over-dispersion. It is therefore no surprise that we estimate a value of the EITC
expansion treatment to have a coefficient (standard error) of -0.234 (0.096) in the negative binomial
model.23
In general, the results in the first block of Table 8 suggest a large increase in the quality of the
biomarkers for mothers impacted by the EITC expansions. Since medical research has shown that allcause mortality is monotonically increasing in this measure of Allostatic load, the results suggest there
have been true improvements in health resulting from the EITC expansion. In the remaining three blocks
of results in the table, we examine the source of this advantage by estimating results for particular
metabolic, cardiovascular, and inflammation disorders in that order.
Among metabolic disorders, we find a persistent decline in risky biomarkers (cholesterol, HDL
and glycated hemoglobin) but in all cases, the standard errors are larger than the parameter estimates.
The estimated effect for having any metabolic disorder is large (4.1 percentage points) but is statistically
insignificant. Similarly, the estimated EITC treatment effect from a Poisson model with the outcome the
number of metabolic disorders is large but statistically insignificant.
The third block of results in Table 8 contains the estimates for the presence of cardiovascular
disorders (diastolic blood pressure, systolic blood pressure, and pulse). The estimated effect for diastolic
blood pressure shows a 3.2 percentage point decrease in the probability of reporting high diastolic blood
pressure. This estimate is statistically significant at a p-value of 0.10. While no other results in this
section are statistically significant, the coefficient for the Poisson model is large, negative, but with a
large p-value.
The final block of results is for the presence of inflammation biomarkers. All of the results in this
section are statistically significant at least a p-value of 0.10. The estimates for Albumin suggest that the

23

As in the results from the BRFSS data above, the PDF in our case is censored in that by construction, counts vary
only from 0 to 8. Programming a maximum likelihood version of this censored Poisson model, we estimate a value
of the EITC expansion coefficient (standard error) that equals -0.236 (0.098).

39

expansion of the EITC decrease the probability of reporting risky levels of Albumin by 8.8 percentage
points. The estimated effect on CRP is a decrease of 8.3 percentage points. Both of these results are
statistically significant at a p-value of 0.10. The probability of reporting any risky inflammation
biomarker falls by 9.6 percentage points and the pre-expansion mean for this variable is about 50 percent.
The Poisson model estimate for the number of inflammatory biomarkers shows that the EITC expansion
is associated with a 21.7 percent decrease in the number of these biomarkers. These results for
inflammatory biomarkers are the most precisely estimated of the three sub-groupings. This could be due
to a number of factors. First, the incidence rate for these outcomes hovers near 50 percent reducing Type
II error rates. Second, the medical literature has found that inflammatory biomarkers are independently
predictive of a host of outcome such as heart attacks, strokes, cognitive decline, and mortality (Tracy et
al., 1999; Tice et al., 2003; Ridker et al., 2002; Torres and Ridker, 2003; Schmidt et al., 2002; Ridker et
al., 2003) so there are a vast array of physical insults that can be captured by these outcomes.

VIII.

Conclusion
One of the more promising avenues that can potentially explain the pathway linking SES status

and health involves stress. A large medical literature has demonstrated that those in poor economic
conditions exhibit more stress and this manifests itself in physiological transformations in the body.
Those with more stress tend to have higher pulse, higher blood pressure, higher cholesterol and more
inflammation—physiological conditions that are predictive of future disease incidence and mortality. The
literature to date has primarily generated a number of robust correlations but this work has failed provide
convincing evidence that exogenously changing underlying economic conditions would alter markers of
stress. In this paper, we exploit the OBRA93 expansions of the EITC that gave dramatically more money
to families with two or more children compared to other families with one child to examine whether this
change in income translates into better health. Utilizing self-reported data from the large sample of
respondents to the BRFSS, we find that the expansion of the EITC decreased the number of reported bad
mental health days for mothers with a high school degree or lower and two or more children compared to
40

a similar woman with only one child. Suggestive evidence was also found that the increase in payments
increased the probability of reporting excellent or very good health status. Because self-reported mental
and physical health are indirect measures of stress, we also examined medical data from the NHANES
that was collected by medical professionals. We find strong evidence that the expansion of the EITC
lowered the counts of the total number of risky biomarkers for women with two or more children and a
high school degree or less compared to similar women with only one child. These effects were strongest
for measures of inflammation and suggestive evidence was found for a decrease in women with risky
levels of diastolic blood pressure.
This work also creates a new dimension to the understanding of the EITC and other income
maintenance programs. While a vast literature has developed about this large program, its potential effect
on health has gone relatively unnoticed. The results above demonstrate a new dimension of benefits that
can accrue from income support programs. Given that the determination of the size of these programs
results from an implicit discussion of costs and benefits, demonstrating a clear (and previously not
discussed) set of benefits from the nation‘s largest anti-poverty can lead to a more fruitful and concrete
discussion about the appropriate size of these programs. This could lead to more optimal allocation of
resources by government programs and tax structures.
Although the results indicate a positive impact of higher transfer payments on outcomes, it is not
clear these benefits will translate into lower disease incidence and lower mortality rates. Stress is but one
cofactor of heart disease, stroke, etc., and given the ages of the mothers in our sample, many are years
away from these diseases presenting. That said, the results are encouraging that higher income transfers
can help reduce medical indicators and self reports of poor health.
The results also highlight that from a statistical standpoint, there is tremendous amount that can
be gained by aggregating many different biomarkers into omnibus measures of health. The literature on
Allostatic load has stressed the enhanced predictive power of aggregating multiple measures into one
outcome rather than any one measure in isolation. In much the same way, although there was a consistent
pattern in results across most of the eight biomarkers used in this analysis, few were statistically
41

significant. We did, however, obtain much more precise estimates of a reduction in aggregate poor health
from the combined measured of risk than from any individual marker in particular.

42

References
Adams Scott J. 2002. ―Educational Attainment and Health: Evidence from a Sample of Older Adults.‖
Education Economics 10(1): 97-109.
Adda, Jerome, James Banks, and Hans-Martin von Gaudecker. 2009. ―The Impact of Income Shocks on
Health: Evidence from Cohort Data.‖ Journal of the European Economic Association 7(6): 1361-99.
Adler, Nancy, and Katherine Newman. 2002. ―Socioeconomic Disparities in Health: Pathways and
Policies.‖ Health Affairs 21(2): 60-76.
Alley, Dawn E., Teresa E. Seeman, Jung Ki Kim, Arun Karlamangla, Peifeng Hu, and Eileen M.
Crimmins. 2006. ―Socioeconomic Status and C-Reactive Protein Levels in the US population: NHANES
IV.‖ Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 20(5): 498-504.
Backlund, Eric, Paul D. Sorlie , and Norman J. Johnson. 1999. ―A Comparison of the Relationships of
Education and Income with Mortality: The National Longitudinal Mortality Study.‖ Social Science and
Medicine 49(10): 1373-84.
Baker Michael, Mark Stabile, and Catherine Deri, 2004. ―What Do Self Reported, Objective, Measures
of Health Measure.‖ The Journal of Human Resources 39(4): 1067-1093.
Banarjee, Abhijit V., Esther Duflo, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Timothy Watts. 2007. ―Long-Run Health
Impacts of Income Shocks: Wine and Phylloxera in 19th Century France.‖ NBER Working Paper No.
12895.
Banks, James., Michael Marmot, Zoe Oldfield., James P. Smith. 2006. ―Disease and Disadvantage in the
United States and England.‖ The Journal of the American Medical Association 295(17): 2037-2045.
Barrow, Lisa and Leslie. McGranahan. 2000. ―The Effects of the Earned Income Credit on the
Seasonality of Household Expenditures.‖ National Tax Journal 53(4): 1211-1243.
Baughman, Reagan and Stacy Dickert-Conlin. 2009. ―The Earned Income Tax Credit and Fertility.‖
Population Economics 22(3): 537-563.
Baughman, Reagan and Stacy Dickert-Conlin. 2003. ―Did Expanding the EITC Promote Motherhood?‖
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 93(2): 247-250.
Berenson, Gerald , Sathanur Srinivasan, Weihang Bao, William Newman, Richard Tracy , Wendy
Wattigney, for the Bogalusa Heart Study, 1998. ―Association Between Multiple Cardiovascular Risk
Factors and Atherosclerosis in Children and Young Adults.‖ New England Journal of Medicine 338(23):
1650-1656.
Bitler, Marianne, Jonah B. Gelbach, Hilary W. Hoynes. 2005. ―Welfare Reform and Health.‖ Journal of
Human Resources 40(2): 309-334.
Blank, Rebecca M. 2002. ―Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States.‖ Journal of Economic
Literature 40(4): 1105-1166.

43

Bound, John. 1989. ―The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants.‖ American
Economic Review 79(3): 482-503.
Bound, John. 1991. ―Self Reported Versus Objective Measures of Health In Retirement Models.‖
Journal of Human Resources 26: 106-138.
Brownson, Ross C., Elizabeth A. Baker, Robyn A. Housemann, Laura K. Bennan, Stephen J. Barak.
2001. ―Environmental and Policy Determinants of Physical Activity in the United States.‖ American
Journal of Public Health 91(12): 1995-2003.
Call Kathleen, Gestur Davidson , Michael Davern, Rebecca Nyman. 2008. ―Medicaid undercount and
bias to estimates of uninsurance: new estimates and existing evidence.‖ Health Services Research, 43(3):
901–914.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, Nicole Maestas. 2009. ―Does Medicare Save Lives.‖ Quarterly Journal of
Economics 124(2), 597-636.
Case, Anne. 2004. ―Does Money Protect Health Status? Evidence from South African Pensions.‖ In
Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, ed. David Wise, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 287-311.
Case, Anne, Lubotsky, Darren, Paxson, Christina, 2002. ―Economic Status and Health in Childhood: The
Origins of the Gradient. American Economic Review 92(5), 1308–1334
Chaloupka, Frank J., and Kenneth E. Warner. 2000. ―The Economics of Smoking.‖ In. Culyer AJ,
Newhouse J. Eds. Handbook of Health Economics. Amsterdam. Elseiver Science 1539-1627.
Chang, Virginia, Diane Lauderdale. 2005. ―Income Disparities in the Body Mass Index and Obesity in the
United States, 1971-2002.‖ Archives of Internal Medicine 165(18): 2122-2128.
Cherkas, Lynn, Abraham Aviv, Anna Valdes, Janice Hunkin, Jeffrey Gardner, Gabriela Surdulescu,
Masayuki Kimura, and Tim Spector. 2006. ―The Effect of Social Status on Biological Aging as Measures
by White-Blood-Cell Telomere Length.‖ Aging Cell 5(5): 361-365.
Clinton, Hillary, ―White House Announcement on the EITC,‖ July 29, 1993.
Colhoun, Helen, Harry Hemingway,, and Neil Poulter, 1998. ―Socio-economic Status and Blood
Pressure: An Overview Analysis.‖ Journal of Human Hypertension 12(2): 91–110.
Crimmins, Eileen., Jung Ki Kim, and TeresaSeeman. 2009. ―Poverty and Biological Risk: The Earlier
‗Aging‘ of the Poor.‖ Journals of Gerontology Series a-Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 64(2):
286-292.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. ―Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
Child Health.‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 431-466.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996b. ―Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in
Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women.‖ Journal of Political Economy 104(6): 1263-96.
Currie, Janet and Bridgette Madrian. 1999. ―Health, Health Insurance and the Labor Market,‖ in Orley C.
Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics. Volume 3c: 3309-3416.

44

Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti. 2003. ―Mother‘s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings.‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1495-532.
Cutler, David, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2008. ―Education and Health: Evaluating Theories and
Evidence,‖ in Robert F. Schoeni, James S. House, George Kaplan, and Harold Pollack, eds. Making
Americans Healthier: Social and Economic Policies as Health Policy. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation: 29-60.
Dahl, Gordon and Lance Lochner. 2008. ―The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
Evidence from the earned Income Tax Credit.‖ NBER Working Paper #14599.
Danesh, John, Rory Collins, Paul Appleby, and Richard Peto, 1998. ―Association of Fibrinogen, Creactive Protein, Albumin, or Leukocyte Count With Coronary Heart Disease: Meta-analyses of
Prospective Studies.‖ The Journal of the American Medical Association 279(18): 1477-1482.
Davern Michael, Jacob Klerman, David Baugh, Kathleen Call, George Greenberg. 2008. ―An
examination of the Medicaid undercount in the Current Population Survey: preliminary results from
record linking.‖ Health Services Research, 44(3): 965-987.
Deaton, Angus. 2003. ―Health, Inequality, and Economic Development.‖ Journal of Economic
Literature 41(1): 113-58.
DeSalvo Karen, Nicole Bloser, Kristi Reynolds, Jiang He, Paul Muntner, 2006. ―Mortality prediction with
a single general self-rated health question: a meta-analysis,‖ Journal of General Internal Medicine, 21(3):
267-275.
De Walque, Damien. 2007. ―Does Education Affect Smoking Behaviors? Evidence Using the Vietnam
Draft as an Instrument for College Education.‖ Journal of Health Economics 26(5): 877-95.
Dickert, Stacy, Scott Houser, and John Karl Scholz. 1995. ―The Earned Incometax Credit and Transfer
Programs: A Study of Labor Market and Program Participation.‖ Tax Policy and the Economy 9:1-50.
Dickert-Conlin, Stacy. 2002. ―EITC and Marriage.‖ National Tax Journal 55(1): 25-40.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Williamson Hoynes. 2004. ―Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married
Couples: The Earned Income Tax Credit.‖ Journal of Public Economics 88(9-10): 1931-1958.
Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey B. Leibman. 1996. ―Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit,‖
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 605-637.
Ellwood, David. 2000. ―The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy Reforms on
Work, Marriage, and Living Arrangements.‖ National Tax Journal 53(4) part 2: 1063-1105.
Elstad, Jon. (1996). ―How large are the differences - really? Self-reported long-standing illness among
working class and middle class men.‖ Sociology of Health and Illness, 18(4): 475-498.
Epel, Elissa S., Elizabeth H. Blackburn, Jue Lin, Firdaus S. Dhabhar, Nancy E. Adler, Jason D. Morrow,
and Richard M. Cawthon. 2004. ―Accelerated Telomere Shortening in Response to Life Stress.‖
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101(49): 17312-17315.

45

Evans, Gary W. 2003. ―A Multimethodological Analysis of Cumulative Risk and Allostatic Load Among
Rural Children.‖ Developmental Psychology 39(5): 924-933.
Evans, Gary W., and Pilyoung Kim. 2007. ―Childhood Poverty and Health: Cumulative Risk Exposure
and Stress Dysregulation.‖ Psychological Science 18(11): 953-957.
Evans, Gary W., and Michelle A. Schamberg. 2009. ―Childhood Poverty, Chronic Stress, and Adult
Working Memory.‖ Proceedings of The National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
106(16),:6545-6549.
Friedman, Meyer, Ray Rosenman, Vernice Carroll, and Russell Tat, 1958. ―Changes in Serum
Cholesterol and Blood Clotting Time in Men Subjected to Cyclic Variation of Occupational Stress,‖
Circulation 17(5): 852-861.
Frijters Paul, John Paul Haisken-DeNew, and Michael A. Shields. 2005. ―Estimating the Causal Effect of
Income on Health: Evidence from Germany Reunifiation.‖ Journal of Health Economics 24(5); 9971017.
Fuchs, Victor R., "Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study," in V. Fuchs (ed.) Economic
Aspects of Health, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1982.
Cem Gabay, and Irving Kushner. 1999. ―Acute Phase Proteins and Other Systemic Response to
Inflammation.‖ New England Journal of Medicine 340(6): 448-54.
Geronimus, Arline T., Margaret Hicken, Dayna Keene, and John Bound. 2006. ―Weathering" and age
patterns of allostatic load scores among blacks and whites in the United States.‖ American Journal of
Public Health 96(5): 826-833.
Gillum, Richard F., Deborah D. Ingram, and Diane M. Makuc. 1994. ―Relation between serum albumin
concentration and stroke incidence and death: then NHANES I Epidemiological Follow-up Study.‖
American Journal of Epidemiology 140(10): 876-88.
Gillum, Richard F., Diane Makuc, and Jacob Feldman. 1991. ―Pulse rate, coronary heart disease, and
death: the NHANES I Epidemiological Follow-up Study.‖ American Heart Journal 121(1, part 1): 172177.
Grimard, Franque and Daniel Parent. 2007. ―Education and Smoking: Were Vietnam War Draft Avoiders
Also More Likely to Avoid Smoking?‖ Journal of Health Economics 26(5): 896-926.
Grundy, Scott M, and A. Clark Griffin, 1959. ―Relationship of Periodic Mental Stress to Serum
Lipoprotein and Cholesterol Levels.‖ Journal of the American Medical Association 171(13): 1794-1796.
Hansson, Goran K. 2005. Inflammation, atherosclerosis, and coronary artery disease. New England
Journal of Medicine 352(16): 1685-1695.
Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn Hall and Zvi Griliches, 1984 ―Econometric Models for Count Data with an
Application to Patents-R and D Relationship.‖ Econometrica, 52 (4): 909-938.
Haveman, Robert C., Barbara L. Wolfe, Lawrence Buron, and Steven C. Hill. 1995. ―The Loss of
Earnings Capability from Disability/Health Limitations: Towards a New Social Indicator.‖ Review of
Income and Wealth 41(3): 289-308.
46

Hotz, Joseph V. and John Karl Scholz. 2003. ―The Earned Income Tax Credit.‖ In Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States, Robert Moffitt, ed. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press
and the NBER, 141-197.
Hotz, Joseph V. and John Karl Scholz. 2006. ―Examining the Effect of the Earned Income Tax Credit on
the Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare,‖ NBER Working Paper No. 11968.
House James S., Ronald C. Kessler, A. Regula Herzog. 1990. ―Age, Socioeconomic Status and Health.‖
The Milbank Quarterly 68(3): 383-411.
Hoynes, Hillary, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. (2009). ―Is A WIC Start a Better Start?
Evaluation WIC‘s Impact on Infant Health Using Program Introduction.‖ NBER Working Paper No.
15589.
Idler Ellen L. and Yael Benyamini. 1997. ―Self-rated health and mortality: a review of twenty-seven
community studies.‖ Journal of Health and Social Behavior 38(1):21-37.
Kawakami N, K. Akachi, H. Shimizu, T. Haratani, F..Kobayashi, M. Ishizaki, T. Hayashi, O. Fujita, Y.
Aizawa, S. Miyazaki, H. Hiro, S. Hashimoto, and S. Araki, 2000. ―Job Strain, Social Support in the
Workplace, and Haemoglobin A1c in Japanese Men.‖ Occupational and Environmental Medicine 57(12):
805-809.
Karlamangla Arun S, Burton H. Singer, David R. Williams, Joseph E. Schwartz, Karen A. Matthews,
Catrina I. Kiefe, and Teresa E. Seeman. 2005. ―Impact of Socioeconomic Status on Longitudinal
Accumulation of Cardiovascular Risk in Young Adults: The CARDIA Study.‖ Social Science and
Medicine 60(5): 999-1015.
Keane, Michael and Robert Moffitt, 1998. ―A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare Program
Participation and Labor Supply.‖ International Economic Review 39(3): 553-589.
Kelly, Shona J, Jonathan Stedman, J. Leonardi-Bee, 2000. ―Is Hemoglobin A1c Level Associated with
Measures of Socio-economic status in Non-Diabetics after Controlling for Known Explanatory Factors?,‖
Stress and Health 21(3): 185-192.
King, Miriam, Steven Ruggles, J. Trent Alexander, Sarah Flood, Katie Genadek, Matthew B. Schroeder,
Brandon Trampe, and Rebecca Vick. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population
Survey: Version 3.0. [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Koenig Wolfgang, Malte Sund, Margit Frohlich, Hans-Gunther Fischer, Hannelore Lowel, Angela
Doring, Winston L. Hutchinson, and Mark B. Pepys. 1999. ―C-reactive Protein: A Sensitive Marker of
Inflammation, Predicts Future Risk of Coronary Heart Disease in Initially Healthy Middle-Aged Men:
Results from the MONICA Augsburg Cohort Study, 1984 to 1992. Circulation 99(2): 237-42.
Lantz, Paula M., James S. House, James M. Lepkowski, David R. Williams, Richard P. Mero, and
Jieming Chen. 1998. ―Socioeconomic Factors, Health Behaviors, and Mortality.‖ Journal of the
American Medical Association 279(21):1703-1708.
Liebman, Jeffrey B. 1998. ―The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Incentives and Income
Distribution,‖ Tax Policy and the Economy 12:83-119.

47

Light, Kathleen C., J. Rick Turner, and Alan L Hinderleiter. 1992. ―Job Strain and Ambulatory Work
Blood Pressure in Healthy Young Men and Women.‖ Hypertension 20(2): 214-218.
Lindahl, Mikael. 2005. ―Estimating the Effect of Income on Health and Mortality Using Lottery Prizes as
an Exogenous Source of Variation in Income.‖ Journal of Human Resources, 50(1):144-168.
Lleres-Muney, Adriana. 2005. ―The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the US.‖
Review of Economic Studies 72(1): 189-221.
Lo Sasso, Anthony, Thomas Buchmueller. 2004. ―The effect of the state children‘s health insurance
program on health insurance coverage.‖ Journal of Health Economics, 23(5): 1059-1082.
Mackenback, Johan, Caspar Looman, Joost van der Meer. (1996). ―Differences in the misreporting of
chronic conditions, by level of education: the effect on inequalities in prevalence rates.‖ American
Journal of Public Health, 86(5): 706-711.
Maddox George L. and Elizabeth B. Douglass. 1973. ―Self-Assessment of Health: A Longitudinal Study
of Elderly Subjects.‖ Journal of Health and Social Behavior 14(1): 87-93.
Mattiasson, Ingrid, Folke Lindgarde, Jan Ake Nilsson, and Tores Theorell. 1990. ―Threat of
Unemployment and Cardiovascular Risk Factors: Longitudinal Study of quality of Sleep and Serum
Cholesterol Concentrations inMen Threatened with Redundancy.‖ British Medical Journal 301(6750):
461-466.
McEwan, Bruce S. 1998. ―Protective and Damaging Effects of Stress Mediators.‖ The New England
Journal of Medicine 338(3): 171-179.
McEwan, Bruce S., and Eliot Sellar. 1993. ―Stress and the Individual: Mechanisms Leading to Disease.‖
Archives of Internal Medicine 153(18): 2093-2101.
Meer, Jonathan, Douglas L. Miller, and Harvey S. Rosen. 2003. ―Exploring the Health-Wealth Nexus.‖
Journal of Health Economics 22(5): 713-730.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. ―Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor
Supply of Single Mothers.‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3): 1063-1114.
Muennig Peter, Nancy Sohler, and Bisundev Mahato.. 2007. ―Socioeconomic Status as an Independent
Predictor of Physiological Biomarkers of Cardiovascular Disease: Evidence from NHANES.‖ Preventive
Medicine 45(1): 35-40.
Muldoon, Matthew F., Elizabeth A. Bachen, Stephen B. Manuck, Shari R. Waldstein, Patricia L. Bricker,
Jill A. Bennett. 1992. ―Acute Cholesterol Responses to Mental Stress and Change in Posture.‖ Archives of
Internal Medicine 152(4): 775-80.
Muldoon, Matthew, Tracy Herbert, Stephen Patterson, Marina Kameneva, Robert Raible, Stephen
Manuck, 1995. ―Effects of Acute Psychological Stress on Serum Lipid Levels, Hemoconcentration, and
Blood Viscosity.‖ Archives of Internal Medicine 155(6): 615-620.
Netterstrøm Bo, Tage Sondergard Kristensen, Mogens Trab Damsgaard, Ole Olsen, and Anette Sjøl,
1991. ―Job strain and cardiovascular risk factors: a cross sectional study of employed Danish men and
women,‖ British Journal of Industrial Medicine, 48(10), 684-689.
48

Neumark, David and William Wascher. 2001. ―Using the EITC to help Poor Families: New Evidence
and a Comparison with the Minimum Wage.‖ National Tax Journal 54(2): 281-317.
Owen, Natalie, Terry Poulton, Frank C. Hay, Vidya Mohamed-Ali, and Andrew Steptoe. 2003.
―Socioeconomic status, c-reactive protein, immune factors, and responses to acute mental stress.‖ Brain,
Behavior, and Immunity 17(4): 286-295.
Palatini, Paolo, and Stevo Julius. 1997. ―Heart Rate and the Cardiovascular risk.‖ Journal of
Hypertension 15(1): 3-17.
Rablen, Matthew and Andrew Oswald, 2008. ―Mortality and immortality: The Nobel Prize as an
Experiment into the effect of Status Upon Longevity.‖ Journal of Health Economics 27 (6): 1462-1471.
Maxwell V., Robert H. Schneider, Sanford I. Nidich, Carolyn Gaylord-King, John W. Salerno and James
W. Anderson, 2007. ―Stress Reduction Programs in Patients with Elevated Blood Pressure: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.‖ Current Hypertension Reports 9(6): 520-528.
Ridker Paul, Nader Rifai, Lynda Rose, Julie Buring, and Nancy Cook, 2002. ―Comparison of C-reactive
protein and low density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in the prediction of first cardiovascular events,‖
New England Journal of Medicine, 347: 1557-1565.
Ridker, Paul, 2003. ―C-reactive protein: a simple test to help predict risk of heart attack and stroke.‖
Circulation 108(&): 81-85.
Ruggles, Steven. J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and
Matthew Sobek. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable
database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Scholz, John Karl. 1994. ―The Earned Income Tax Credit: Participation, Compliance, and Anti-Poverty
Effectiveness.‖ National Tax Journal 47(1): 59-81.
Scholz, John Karl. 1996. ―In-Work Benefits in the United States: The Earned Income Tax Credit.‖
Economic Journal 106(434): 156-169.
Seeman, Teresa E., Sharon S. Merkin, Eileen Crimmins, Brandon Koretz, Susan Charette, and Arun
Karlamangla. 2008. ―Education, Income and Ethnic Differences in Cumulative Biological Risk Profiles
in a National Sample of U.S. Adults: NHANES III (1988-1994).‖ Social Science and Medicine 66(1):
72-87.
Seeman, Teresa E. ,Burton H. Singer, John W. Rowe, Ralph I. Horowitz, and Bruce S. McEwen. 1997.
―Price of adaptation - Allostatic load and its health consequences,‖ Archives of Internal Medicine
157(19): 2259-2268
Schneider, Robert, Charles Alexander, Frank Staggers, Maxwell Rainforth, John Salerno, Arthur Hartz,
Stephen Arndt, Vernon Barnes, Sanford Nidich, 2005. ―Long-Term Effects of Stress Reduction on
Mortality in Persons ≥55 Years of Age With Systemic Hypertension,‖ The American Journal of
Cardiology, 95(9): 1060-1064.
Schneider, Robert H., Charles N. Alexander, Frank Staggers, David W. Orme-Johnson, Maxwell
Rainforth, John W. Salerno, William Sheppard, Amparo Castillo-Richmond, Vernon A. Barnese and
49

Sanford I. Nidich, 2005. ―A randomized controlled trial of stress reduction in African Americans treated
for hypertension for over one year.‖ American Journal of Hypertension 18 (1): 88-98.
Shalk, Bianca, Marjolein Visser, Marijke Bremmer, Brenda. Penninx, Lex Bouter, DorylDeeg. 2006.
―Change of serum albumin and risk of cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality: Longitudinal
Aging Study of Amsterdam.‖ American Journal of Epidemiology 164(10): 969-77.
Singer, Burton and Carol Ryff, 1999. ―Hierarchies of Life Histories and Associated Health Risks.‖ Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences 896: 96-115.
Smeeding, Timothy M., Katherin Ross Phillips, and Michael O‘Connor. 2000. ―The EITC: Expectation,
Knowledge, use and Economic and Social Mobility.‖ National Tax Journal 53(4, Part 2), 1187-1210.
Smith, James P. 1999. ―Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health and
Economic Status.‖ Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(2): 145-166.
Snyder, Stephen E. and William N. Evans. 2006. ―The Impact of Income on Mortality: Evidence from the
Social Security Notch.‖ Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3): 482-495.
Steptoe, Andrew, Mark Cropley, and Katherine Joekes. 999. ―Job Strain, Blood Pressure, and
Responsivity to Uncontrollable Stress.‖ Journal of Hypertension 17(2): 193-200
Steptoe, Andrew And Lena Brydon. 2005. ―Associations Between Acute Lipid Stress Responses and
fasting Lipid Levels Three Years Later.‖ Health Psychology 24(6): 601-607
Steptoe Andrew, Gonneke Willemsen, Natalie Owen, Louise Flower, Vidya Mohamed-Ali. 2001. ―Acute
Mental Stress Elicits Delayed Increase in Circulatory Inflammatory Cytokine Levels.‖ Clinical Science
101(2): 185-192.
Steptoe, Andrew, Natalie Owen, Sabine Kunz-Ebrecht, and Vidya Mohamed-Ali. 2002. ―Inflamatory
Cytokines, Socioeconomic Status, and Acute Response Responsitivity.‖ Brain, Behavior, and Immunity
16(6): 774-784.
Steptoe, Andrew, Pamela Feldman, Sabine Kunz, Natalie Owen,, Gonneke Willemsen, Michael Marmot,
2002. ―Stress responsivity and socioeconomic status: a mechanism for increased cardiovascular disease
risk?.‖ European Heart Journal 23: 1757-1763
Steptoe, Andrew, Lena Brydon, Sabine Kunz-ebrecht, S. 2005. ―Changes in financial strain over three
years, ambulatory blood pressure, and cortisol responses to awakening,‖ Psychosomatic Medicine 67(2):
281-287.
Sterling, Peter, and Joseph Eyer. ―Allostasis: A New Paradigm to Explain Arousal Pathology.‖ In
Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health. Shirley Fisher and James Reason, eds. Oxford, England:
John Wiley and Sons, 629-649.
Tice, Jeffrey, Warren Browner, RussellTracy, and Steven Cumming, 2003. ―The relation of C-reactive
protein levels to total and cardiovascular mortality in older US women,‖ American Journal of Medicine,
114(3):199-205.
Torres, Joseand Paul Ridker, 2003. ―Clinical use of high sensitivity C-reactive protein for the prediction
of adverse cardiovascular events,‖ Current Opinion in Cardiology,18: 471-478.
50

Tracy, Russell, RozennLemaitre, BrucePsaty, DianneIves, RhobertEvans, Mary Cushman, Elaine
Meilahn, Lewis Kuller, 1997. ―Relationship of C-reactive protein to risk of cardiovascular disease in the
elderly: Results from the Cardiovascular Health Study and the Rural Health Promotion Project.‖
Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biolog, 117: 1121-1127.
Zeller, Andreas, Daniel Handschin, Niklaus Gyr, Benedict Martina and Edouard Battegay, 2004. ―Blood
pressure and heart rate of students undergoing a medical licensing examination.‖ Blood Pressure 13(1):
20-24.

51

Figure 1: EITC Payments for Families with 2 or more Children
1993 and 1996

$3,556

EITC

1996

$1,511
1993

$7,750
$8,890

$12,200
$11,650

$23,050

$28,495

AGI

EITC

Figure 2: EITC Payments for Families with 1 Child
1993 and 1996

$2,152

1996

$1,434

1993

$7,750
$6,330

$12,200
$11,650

$23,050

$25,078

AGI

52

Figure 3: Difference in EITC Benefit in Families with Different Numbers of
Children, 1996 and 1993

$2,045

EITC

2+ Children
$1,327

$800

$718

1 Child

$6,330

$8,990

AGI

$23,050

$25,078

$28,495

53

Table 1
Earned Income Tax Receipt by Education and Number of Children, Women Age 21-40
Tax Years 1993-1995 and 1998-2001

Tax Years 1993-1995
Tax Years 1998-2001

Tax Years 1993-1995
Tax Years 1998-2001

High School Diploma
College Graduate
One
Two Plus
One Child
Two Plus
Child
Children
Children
Percent Receiving the EITC
27.23
22.1
7.36
4.6
28.76
26.54
6.4
4.51
Size of EITC Payment
$316.95
$306.84
$420.08
$585.88

$72.89
$83.42

Size of EITC Payment Among Recipients
Tax Years 1993-1995
$1,164,12 $1,388.33
$989.75
Tax Years 1998-2001
$1,460.54 $2,207.28
$1,306.54
Source: Current Population Survey 1994-1996 and 1999-2002

$53.63
$80.17

$1,174.61
$1,776.65

54

Table 2
Sample Characteristics, Women Aged 21-40 with Children, 1993-1996 BRFSS
≤HS
Education
One
2 or more
Child
Children p-value
31.0
32.0
0.000

College
Graduates
One 2 or more
Child
Children
32.2
34.6

Variable
p-value
Average Age
0.000
Race
% White, non Hispanic
0.761
0.713
0.000
0.789
0.846
0.000
% Black, non-Hispanic
0.129
0.141
0.139
0.104
0.069
0.000
% Hispanic
0.076
0.101
0.006
0.044
0.036
0.070
% Other race
0.033
0.044
0.036
0.063
0.049
0.002
Marital Status
% married
0.548
0.655
0.000
0.709
0.846
0.000
% sep./div./widowed
0.238
0.210
0.000
0.162
0.120
0.000
% never married
0.183
0.111
0.000
0.111
0.025
0.000
Labor supply
% currently employed
0.679
0.580
0.000
0.796
0.714
0.000
Family income
% <$20K
0.405
0.386
0.057
0.110
0.082
0.000
% $20K-$25K
0.132
0.124
0.050
0.059
0.047
0.036
% $25K-$35K
0.158
0.166
0.204
0.155
0.128
0.000
% $35K-$50K
0.131
0.151
0.003
0.227
0.235
0.260
% $50K and above
0.078
0.086
0.060
0.374
0.432
0.000
% income missing
0.096
0.088
0.016
0.075
0.076
0.961
Health outcome
% Excellent/very good health
0.582
0.577
0.446
0.805
0.809
0.580
% with any bad mental health
0.432
0.447
0.039
0.418
0.424
0.603
days in past month
% with any bad physical days
0.351
0.343
0.218
0.357
0.356
0.969
in past month
# of bad mental days in past
4.27
4.52
0.030
2.93
2.89
0.753
month
# of bad physical days in past
2.81
2.65
0.072
1.89
1.95
0.656
Month
Observations
7,315
15,737
3,881
6,740
The P-value is for the test of the null hypothesis that the means across the samples are the same. The test
is performed allowing for an arbitrary correlation for observations within a state.

55

Table 3
Sample Characteristics
Women Aged 21-40 with Children,
1993-2001 March CPS and BRFSS
March
Variable
CPS
BRFSS
P-value
Average Age
31.9
31.8
0.044
% < high school degree
29.9%
21.2%
0.000
% married
68.0%
59.4%
0.000
% with 2+ kids
69.8%
69.3%
0.276
% currently in labor force
64.8%
% currently working
59.3%
63.8%
0.003
Race
% White, non Hispanic
58.3%
69.0%
0.005
% Black, non-Hispanic
12.1%
13.6%
0.192
% Hispanic
25.5%
12.9%
0.003
% Other race
4.1%
4.5%
0.555
Observations
65,713
82,907
The P-value is for the test of the null hypothesis that the means across the samples are the same. The test
is performed allowing for an arbitrary correlation for observations within a state.

56

Table 4
Difference-in-Difference Estimates for Labor Supply Outcomes,
Mother Aged 21-40 with a High School Education or Less,
1993-2001 March CPS and BRFSS
March CPS
Currently in
Currently
labor force
Employed
20,998 observations
0.0679***
0.0524***
(0.0126)
(0.0130)
0.0587***
0.0534***
(0.0121)
(0.0133)
0.538
0.445

BRFSS
Currently
Employed
33,690 obs.
0.0453
(0.0108)
0.0457
(0.0110)
0.554

Married mothers
Simple difference-in-difference
estimate
Regression-adjusted differencein-difference estimate
Pre-expansion mean of outcome
for treatment group

44,715 observations
0.0053
0.0063
(0.0099)
(0.0097)
0.0091
0.0104
(0.0107)
(0.0108)
0.612
0.569

49,217 obs.
0.0099
(0.0106)
0.0183*
(0.0109)
0.593

All mothers
Simple difference-in-difference
estimate
Difference-in-difference estimate

65,713 observations
0.0128
0.0141*
(0.0079)
(0.0083)
0.0137*
0.0136
(0.0083)
(0.0087)
0.591
0.534

82,907
0.0170**
(0.0073)
0.0203**
(0.0074)
0.580

Single mothers
Simple difference-in-difference
estimate
Regression-adjusted differencein-difference estimate
Pre-expansion mean of outcome
for treatment group

Pre-expansion mean of outcome
for treatment group
All standard errors allow for arbitrary correlations between observations within the same state.

Other covariates in the Difference-in-Difference model include: Complete set of dummies for age, race,
marital status, and number of children for the respondent, plus a complete set of dummies for the year of
survey, and state of residence. In the BRFSS models, we also include a complete set of month of survey
effects.
*P-value<0.10, **P-value<0.05, ***P-value<0.001.

57

Table 5
Difference-in-Difference OLS and Negative Binomial Estimates
Women age 21-40, 1993-2001 BRFSS

Difference-in-Difference
Estimates
(82,907 obs.)
Regression
Simple
Adjusted
0.0170**
0.0203**
(0.0073)
(0.0074)

Pre-expansion mean
of outcome for
treatment group
0.580

Estimation
Method
OLS

Any bad mental health
days in past 30 days?

0.447

OLS

-0.0132
(0.0083)

-0.0141*
(0.0083)

Excellent/very good
health?

0.577

OLS

0.0095
(0.0079)

0.0135*
(0.0075)

Any bad physical health
days in past 30 days?

0.342

OLS

0.0038
(0.0071)

0.0041
(0.0069)

# bad mental health days
in past month

4.52

Neg.
Binomial

-0.0474
(0.0306)

-0.0754**
(0.0328)

Outcome
Currently employed?

# bad physical health days
2.65
Neg.
0.0140
0.0105
in past month
Binomial
(0.0390)
(0.0390)
All standard errors allow for arbitrary correlations between observations within the same state.
Other covariates in the Difference-in-Difference model include: Complete set of dummies for age, race,
marital status, and number of children for the respondent, plus a complete set of dummies for the month
of survey, year of survey, and state of residence.
*P-value<0.10, **P-value<0.05, ***P-value<0.001.

58

Table 6
Robustness Tests, Women age 21-40, 1993-2001 BRFSS

Outcome
Currently employed?

DD results

DD Results
State*Year

DD Results
Married

DD Results
Single

DDD Results

Method

OLS

82,907 obs.
0.0203**
(0.0074)

82,907 obs.
0.0206**
(0.0076)

49,217 obs.
0.0183*
(0.0109)

33,690 obs.
0.0457***
(0.0110)

127,209 obs.
0.0130
(0.0123)

Any bad mental health
days in 30 days?

OLS

-0.0141*
(0.0083)

-0.0092
(0.0083)

-0.0146
(0.0112)

-0.0120
(0.0145)

-0.0089
(0.0144)

Excellent/very good
health?

OLS

0.0135*
(0.0075)

0.0119
(0.0075)

0.0211**
(0.0099)

0.0082
(0.0127)

-0.0045
(0.0114)

Any bad physical health
days in past 30 days?

OLS

0.0041
(0.0069)

0.0059
(0.0069)

0.0069
(0.0105)

-0.0004
(0.0110)

0.0169
(0.0151)

# bad mental health days
in past 30 days

Neg.
Bin.

-0.0754**
(0.0328)

-0.0615*
(0.0326)

-0.1027**
(0.0519)

-0.0514
(0.0519)

-0.0622
(0.0729)

# bad physical health
Neg.
0.0105
0.0249
0.0432
-0.0377
days in past 30 days
Bin.
(0.0390)
(0.0391)
(0.0508)
(0.0675)
All standard errors allow for arbitrary correlations between observations within the same state.

0.1226
(0.0911)

Other covariates in the Difference-in-Difference model include: Complete set of dummies for age, race,
marital status, and number of children for the respondent, plus a complete set of dummies for the month
of survey, year of survey, and state of residence.
Other covariates in the Difference-in-Difference-in-Difference model include: Complete set of dummies
for age, race, marital status, education, and number of children for the respondent, a complete set of
dummies for the month of survey, year of survey, state of residence, plus interactions between the
education and the year effects, the number of children and the year effect, the education and number of
children effects.
*P-value<0.10, **P-value<0.05, ***P-value<0.001.

59

Table 7
Biomarkers for Mothers Aged 18-40 with a High School Education or Less,
NHANES III, 1999/2000, 2001/2002, 2003/2004

Biomarker
Measures of inflammation
C-reactive proteina (CRP)
Albumin
# of risky inflammation conditions
Any risky inflammation conditions
Measures of cardiovascular conditions
Diastolic blood pressure
Systolic blood pressure
Resting pulse
# of risky cardiovascular conditions
Any risky cardiovascular conditions
Measures of metabolic conditions
Total cholesterol
High density lipoproteins
Glycated hemoglobin
# of risky metabolic conditions
Any risky metabolic conditions
Aggregate risks
# of risky conditions
1 or more risky conditions
2 or more risky conditions
3 or more risky conditions

Measured
in:
mg/Dl
g/Dlb

mmHgc
mmHg
Beats/minute

mg/Dld
mg/Dl
percent

Obs.

Sample
mean

Risky levels
of biomarker

% with
risky
levels

2,950
2,935
2,934
2,934

0.573
4.07
0.699
0.526

≥ 0.3 mg/Dl
< 3.8 g/Dl

0.437
0.262

2.947
2,952
3,090
2,947
2,947

69.3
112.2
74.97
0.184
0.155

≥ 140 mmHg
≥ 90 mmHg
≥ 90 BPM

2,949
2,942
2,992
2,933
2,933

189.95
53.62
5.2
0.283
0.259

≥ 240 mg/Dl
< 40 mg/Dl
≥ 6.4%

2,683
2,683
2,683
2,683

1.156
0.657
0.333
0.127

0.526

0.046
0.035
0.108
0.155

0.102
0.156
0.026
0.259

0.657
0.333
0.127

a

To make the data sets comparable over time, we censored the lower values of C-reactive protein at 0.21
in the final three NHANES samples.
b
g/Dl=Grams per deciliter
c
mmHg = Millimeters of mercury
d
mg/Dl=Milligrams per deciliter

60

Table 8
Regression-adjusted DD and DDD Estimates,
Women Aged 21-40, NHANES III, 1999/2000, 2001/2002, 2003/2004
Pre-expansion
mean for
Outcome
treatment group
DD
One or more risky conditions
0.640
-0.091*
(0.040)
Two or more risky conditions
0.305
-0.094*
(0.043)
Three or more risky conditions
0.108
-0.061
(0.044)
Poisson Model: Total # risky conditions
1.092
-0.235**
(0.095)
Metabolic Biomarkers
Risky Glycated Hemoglobin
0.026
-0.004
(0.013)
Risky Total Cholesterol
0.102
-0.022
(0.034)
Risky HDL
0.156
-0.027
(0.036)
Any risky metabolic condition
0.251
-0.042
(0.045)
Poisson Model: # risky metabolic
0.277
-0.185
conditions
(0.177)
Cardiovascular Biomarkers
Risky Diastolic Blood Pressure
0.045
-0.032*
(0.017)
Risky Systolic Blood Pressure
0.035
0.004
(0.014)
Risky Pulse
0.108
-0.016
(0.037)
Any risky cardiovascular condition
0.131
-0.034
(0.041)
Poisson Model: # risky cardiovascular
0.164
-0.317
conditions
(0.233)
Inflammation Biomarkers
Risky Albumin
0.262
-0.088*
(0.045)
Risky C-Reactive Protein
0.437
-0.083*
(0.05)
Any risky inflammatory condition
0.493
-0.096*
(0.050)
Poisson Model: # risky inflammatory
0.493
-0.217**
conditions
(0.099)

DDD
-0.125
(0.099)
-0.018
(0.092 )
-0.002
(0.062)
-0.211
(0.215)
-0.012
(0.019)
0.043
(0.046)
-0.044
(0.047)
-0.007
(0.078)
0.03
(0.276)
-0.03
(0.026)
-0.0005
(0.023)
-0.043
(0.049)
-0.065
(0.065)
-0.423
(0.343)
-0.087
(0.063)
-0.012
(0.07)
-0.107
(0.096)
-0.136
(0.159)

Other covariates in the DD model include: Complete set of dummies for age, race, marital status, and the year of
survey. Other covariates in the DDD model include: Complete set of dummies for age, race, marital status,
education, plus interactions between the education and the year effects, the number of children and the year effect,
the education and number of children effects. All standard errors allow for arbitrary for of heteroskedasticity.
*P-value<0.10, **P-value<0.05, ***P-value<0.001.
61

