                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     INCOME INEQUALITY AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE UNITED STATES,
                               1970-2000

                                         Leah Platt Boustan
                                         Fernando Ferreira
                                          Hernan Winkler
                                             Eric Zolt

                                        Working Paper 16299
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16299


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2010




We received useful comments from seminar participants at the UCLA and UC Berkeley Schools of
Law. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the UCLA Ziman Center for Real Estate.
Fernando Ferreira would like to thank the Research Sponsor Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate
Center at Wharton for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Leah Platt Boustan, Fernando Ferreira, Hernan Winkler, and Eric Zolt. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Income Inequality and Local Government in the United States, 1970-2000
Leah Platt Boustan, Fernando Ferreira, Hernan Winkler, and Eric Zolt
NBER Working Paper No. 16299
August 2010
JEL No. H7

                                              ABSTRACT

The income distribution in many developed countries widened dramatically from 1970 to 2000. Scholars
speculate that inequality contributes to a host of social ills by weakening the public sector. In contrast,
we find that growing income inequality is associated with an expansion in revenues and expenditures
on a wide range of services at the municipal and school district levels in the United States. These results
are robust to a number of model specifications, including instrumental variables that deal with the
endogeneity of local expenditures. Our results are inconsistent with models that predict heterogeneous
societies provide lower levels of public goods.


Leah Platt Boustan                                   Hernan Winkler
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall                                     UCLA
UCLA                                                 Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                           hwinkler@ucla.edu
and NBER
lboustan@econ.ucla.edu                               Eric Zolt
                                                     UCLA Law School
Fernando Ferreira                                    Box 951476, 2113 Law Bldg
The Wharton School                                   Los Angeles, CA 90095-1476
University of Pennsylvania                           zolt@law.ucla.edu
1461 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu
I. Introduction
        Over the past thirty years, the income distribution has widened dramatically in the United

States and many other developed countries (Piketty and Saez, 2003; Smeeding, 2004). Income

inequality is correlated with several negative social outcomes—including high crime rates, low

levels of education achievement, and bad health.1 Yet, little is known about whether these

relationships are causal and, if so, the channels through which a widening income distribution

might translate into these social ills.

         One frequently proposed mechanism is that income inequality may weaken the public

sector. Some political economy models suggest that, in heterogeneous societies, residents cannot

agree either on the composition of public goods or on the taxes and charges used to fund them

(Benabou, 1996, 2000). In particular, rich households may rely on private alternatives to public

goods and the poor may prioritize personal consumption over public contributions, generating

dissent between the ends and the middle of the income distribution (Epple and Romano, 1996).2

On the other hand, models based on the median voter theorem predict that a widening of the

income distribution will encourage greater use of progressive taxation for redistribution (Meltzer

and Richard, 1981; Alesina and Rodrik, 1994; Persson and Tabellini, 1994). Societies with

greater inequality may also have greater needs, leading altruistic voters to support social

programs.

         Existing empirical work has not provided definitive evidence for the direction of the

relationship between income inequality and the size of the public sector.3 Two types of



1
  See, inter alia, Kawachi, et al., 1997; Kennedy, et al., 1998; and Fajnzylber, Lederman and Loayza, 2002. For an
opposing view, see Deaton and Lubotsky, 2002.
2
  Heterogeneity can also reduce social capital between residents, which may undermine trust, norms of reciprocity,
and support for local government activity (Putnam, 2000; Boix and Posner, 1998; Costa and Kahn, 2003).
3
  In a cross-section of countries, countries with high levels of inequality, like the United States, engage in less public
spending (see, for example, Lindert, 1994, 1996; Moene and Wallerstein, 2005; Schwabish, Smeeding, and Osberg,
2006). In contrast, comparisons across US states and within states over time find that rising income inequality is

                                                                                                                        1
identification problems compound the lack of a consistent empirical relationship between income

inequality and public goods provision. Cross-country comparisons suffer from omitted variable

bias; that is, countries with high income inequality may also have other characteristics that could

limit the size of the public sector. Cross-state comparisons additionally suffer from endogenous

household sorting. If high-income families migrate to states with high public expenditures, the

positive association observed in the literature between state public expenditures and income

inequality may be spurious.

         In this paper, we examine the relationship between income inequality and government

finances at the local level in the United States from 1970 to 2000. We focus mainly on

municipalities and school districts, but also present estimates for states. Local government

represent a large segment of the economy; in the 2009 fiscal year, local governments disbursed

more than $3 trillion in aggregate for such important services as education and public safety.4

         Our study has several advantages over existing empirical work. First, large samples of

municipalities and school districts exhibit much greater variation in income inequality over time

than do the small number of countries or states used in previous studies. Secondly, we develop

an instrumental variable strategy to mitigate concerns about potential reverse causality from the

endogenous sorting of households across localities. Our procedure synthetically advances the

income distribution in a city or school district forward from 1970 by matching the initial income

distribution to national patterns of income growth over the next decades. By design, our

instrument cannot be influenced by mobility into and out of communities; rather, it isolates the


accompanied by higher government expenditures and increasing progressivity in the state tax code (Chernick, 2005;
Schwabish, 2008).
4
  State governments accounted for $1.36 billion in expenditures in 2009, while all other local governments (cities,
school districts, etc.) accounted for $1.72 billion in that fiscal year. The federal government spent $3.52 billion in
2009. Beyond cities and school districts, counties and special districts provide local services, though these
governmental units represent a relatively small share of the total expenditures. These facts were compiled from the
website http://www.usgovernmentspending.com/.

                                                                                                                     2
component of change in the local income distribution that is driven by shifts in the return to skill

over time.

       We find no evidence that an increase in income inequality reduces expenditures on public

services in cities or school districts; rather, as the income distribution widens, localities increase

their revenue collection and expenditures. Our best causal estimates suggest that the average

increase in the city-level Gini coefficient over this period (5 points) leads to a $63 increase in

expenditures per resident. These values imply that the widening of the income distribution from

1970 to 2000 can explain 15 percent of the growth in municipal expenditures over this period.

Among school districts, the average change in the Gini is associated with a $198 increase in

property tax revenue per pupil with a corresponding $190 decline in state transfers. Although

rising inequality can explain 29 percent of the growth in property tax revenue from 1970 to 2000,

state systems of school finance equalization appear to have undone much of the connection

between changes in the local income distribution and local revenue collection.

       For municipalities, rising income inequality is not only associated with increased

expenditures on police services, which we may expect if inequality also leads to higher crime

rates, but also generates additional outlays for fire protection and road maintenance. In related

results, we find that growing racial fractionalization is associated with larger government

expenditures across a wide range of expenditure categories, casting doubt on earlier findings that

more racially fragmented cities spend a smaller share of their budget on public goods (Alesina,

Baqir and Easterly, 1999; see also Cutler, Elmendorf and Zeckhauser, 1993; Hopkins, 2009).

State level results also show a positive impact of inequality on local finances, but the estimates

are not precise enough to be statistically distinguished from zero.




                                                                                                    3
        Our results are consistent with recent work by Corcoran and Evans (2010), which

documents a positive relationship between income inequality and educational expenditures at the

school district level.5 Yet, a series of papers have found that, before World War II, unequal

communities raised less local revenue and provided fewer common goods and services (Goldin

and Katz, 1999; Ramcharan, 2009; Galor, Moav and Vollrath, 2009; Zolt, 2009). Taken together,

these results suggest that the relationship between income inequality and the size of local

government has changed over time. This change may be due to shifts in the sources of local

revenue away from property taxation toward more regressive revenue sources like sales taxes

and direct charges, or to the increasing role of state governments in funding (and, in some cases,

providing) goods that have historically been the responsibility of localities.

        Our findings are inconsistent with models that predict that heterogeneous societies are

unable to compromise on common public goods and services. While our evidence is more

supportive of the median voter model, we caution that cities and school districts do not rely on

progressive forms of revenue, such as income taxation, and rarely engage in spending that is

explicitly redistributive. Therefore, it is unlikely that, in this context, rising inequality lowers the

tax price of public services for the median voter. With this caveat in mind, we prefer to

emphasize our substantive findings; reconciling these patterns with models of local political

economy provides a rich area for future research. Overall, our findings challenge the hypothesis

that income inequality reduces the provision of public goods from local governments in the

United States.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses our

measures of income inequality and government activity at the local level. Section III describes

5
  Our results were generated independently of Corcoran and Evans’ recent study. We reach similar conclusions
despite using different methods to measure income inequality within school districts and developing a different
instrument for changes in inequality at the local level.

                                                                                                                  4
our panel estimation as well as an instrument for shifts in the local income distribution. Section

IV documents the positive relationship between changes in local inequality and growing

revenues and expenditures at the city, school district and state levels. Section V concludes.



II. Data on Income Distribution and Government Activity at the Local Level

II.A. Income Inequality

         We collect decadal data on the income distribution and the levels of expenditures and

revenues from 1970 to 2000 for a large number of cities and school districts. The municipal

sample consists of a balanced panel of every Census-defined place (incorporated city or town)

with 2,500 or more residents in 1970. We exclude the 903 municipalities that were directly

responsible for providing education services, leaving us with a sample of 3,369 cities and towns.

The majority of our sample is made up of small towns: 65 percent of the municipalities in the

sample have fewer than 10,000 residents. Our school district sample contains the 9,024 districts

with more than 2,500 residents in 1970.6

         Because of Census privacy restrictions, we cannot recover the full income distribution at

the local level. Instead, we use published Census reports, which indicate the number of

households in a jurisdiction in each of 15 to 20 income categories, to generate an (approximate)

income distribution. We assign each household an income level equal to the median income in its




6
  The Census of Population provides demographic information for 11,687 and 14,405 school districts in 1970 and
2000, respectively. We use the School District Geographic Reference File for 1970 to combine the demographic
information with expenditure data from the Census of Governments (available at
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/3515/detail). The sample consists of the 9,024 school districts
that could be matched between 1970 and 2000. This sampling rule eliminates school districts that eventually
disappear from the data due, for example, to consolidations with other districts. We choose not to aggregate districts
that eventually consolidate because the political economy mechanism that we have in mind pertains to the actual
voters and residents of a district. As a result, a component of the measured variation in income inequality over time
within a district will be due to mergers with neighboring districts.

                                                                                                                     5
bin by decade as calculated from Census micro-data. We then generate Gini coefficients at the

local level for this modified income distribution.7

          In 1970, the average municipality in our sample had a Gini coefficient of 0.32, compared

to the national Gini coefficient of 0.39 (Table 1). By 2000, the Gini coefficient in the average

municipality increased by 5.5 points to 0.38. However, this average increase hides tremendous

variation across municipalities. The Gini coefficient increased by less than one point (or even

decreased) in one third of the cities in our sample, while in another third the Gini coefficient

increased by more than five points.



II.B. City Finances

          The Census (and Surveys) of Governments provide information on municipal revenues

and expenditures by detailed category. The first panel of Table 1 contains summary statistics on

the sources of revenue and the categories of current expenditures at the municipality level. All

values are reported in year 2000 dollars. In the average municipality, expenditures per resident

doubled from $460 in 1970 to $870 by 2000. Municipalities allocate the majority of their budget

toward the maintenance of local infrastructure and on fire and police protection. Spending on

infrastructure, including roads, sewers, water and electricity, comprise 44 percent of average

municipal budgets and spending on police and fire protection make up another 21 percent. In

comparison, redistribution in the form of direct public welfare and expenditures on health and

public hospitals contribute a negligible amount (less than five percent) of the typical municipal

budget.




7
 Without a full set of micro data at the municipal level, we are unable to calculate other measures of inequality,
such as the 90-10 ratio, with sufficient accuracy.

                                                                                                                     6
         In 1970, property taxes were the largest source of municipal revenue, accounting for 33

percent of total proceeds. By 2000, the reliance on property taxes declined to only 22 percent of

the total budget, replaced in large part by inter-governmental transfers and direct charges for

services.8 Sales taxes also increased from a negligible portion of the budget in 1970 to 12 percent

of total revenue in 2000. Political economy models often assume that tax revenue is generated

through a progressive tax instrument, such as an income tax. However, most property and sales

taxes are regressive in the sense that they require higher tax payments as a share of total income

from poor households (Suits, 1977; Phares, 1985).9 Direct charges may be even more regressive

than property taxation because they are levied on a per house basis rather than tied to the value of

the home.10 On the other side of the ledger, inter-governmental transfers are often financed

through progressive state or federal income taxes; however, the tax burden for these transfers

disproportionately falls on households living outside of the locality in question.

         We caution that higher government expenditures need not be synonymous with a higher

quality or quantity of public services for the average resident. First, the majority of government

expenditures cover the wages and salaries of municipal workers, an increase in which may not

translate into a higher quality of service provision. Secondly, anecdotal evidence suggests that a

greater share of city services are directed toward high-income neighborhoods; however, with

existing data sets, we cannot observe how municipal services are allocated within the

jurisdiction. Finally, we note that local governments may expand certain programs in order to


8
  The relative decline in property taxes from 1970 to 2000 was part of a larger decline in the use of local property
taxes over the twentieth century (Oates and Schwab, 2004; Sokoloff and Zolt, 2007). This trend was accelerated in
the 1980s by statutory limits on the level or growth of property tax rates in some states.
9
  Specific features of the tax system, including exemptions for food and other items from sales taxes or initial
threshold exemptions from property taxes, can affect the incidence of these instruments. There is significant
scholarly debate about the true incidence of the property tax (see Mieszkowski, 1972; Aaron, 1974; Musgrave, 1974
and Hamilton, 1976).
10
   The largest categories of direct charges are for sewers (23 percent), hospitals (20 percent), airports (8 percent) and
sanitation services (8 percent).

                                                                                                                        7
combat new social problems associated with rising income inequality, thereby leaving the level

of public services unchanged. For example, inequality has been linked to higher rates of violent

crime (Fajnzylber, Lederman and Loayza, 2002). Cities may hire additional police officers to

combat the higher crime rates, resulting in more government spending without net improvements

in public safety.



II.C. School District Finances

       The second panel of Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics for our school district

sample. In 1970, the typical district spent $4,140 per pupil. By 2000, this total nearly doubled to

$7,868 per pupil. The sources of school district revenue changed dramatically over this period.

While, in 1970, school revenues were evenly split between local property taxes and inter-

governmental transfers, by 2000 state and federal transfers made up 70 percent of the average

school district budget.

       The changing pattern of revenues in our sample reflects the increasing centralization of

K-12 funding over time. States began to supplement local revenues for education services in the

mid-twentieth century. At that time, state aid was typically disbursed as a flat grant per pupil,

with additional funds provided to poor districts (Hoxby, 2001). In 1965, the federal government

began providing school funding through Title I of the Elementary and Secondary School Act

(Cascio, et al., 2010). As a result, by 1970, locally-raised revenue only accounted for 60 percent

of school district budgets.

       More recently, the use of local revenue sources, even as a supplement to state aid, has

been called into question. Property taxes allow wealthy districts to raise more revenue than poor

districts at the same tax rate, thereby generating an association between the level of wealth in a



                                                                                                 8
district and its level of school funding. Starting with the Serrano v. Priest decision in California

(1971), many state supreme courts have ruled that existing systems of local school finance are

unconstitutional.11

         In response to these legal challenges, states have adopted various plans to equalize school

funding across districts (Hoxby, 2001; Metzler 2003). The most common approach has been to

modify a state’s aid formula in order to directly supplement districts with smaller local property

tax capacity. Some states also guarantee that districts will be able to raise a certain level of

revenue at a given tax rate; the difference between locally raised revenue and the guaranteed

level is then made up by the state. Following this wave of reforms, the share of school revenues

raised through local property taxes declined from 60 percent in 1970 to 30 percent in 2004.



III. Estimating the Relationship Between Income Inequality and Government Activity

III.A. Basic Specification for Municipalities

         The relationship between income inequality and public finances can be described by the

following equation:



         yit = β(Gini)it + ΓXit + εit                  εit =   i   +   it                                     (1)



where i indexes a city or town in Census year t, y is a local public finance outcomes such as total

expenditures, Gini is the Gini coefficient, and the coefficient β indicates the estimated effect of

income inequality on local finances. X contains a set of time-varying city characteristics,

11
  Differences in school funding on the basis of local property wealth have been found to violate rights to equal
protection under some state constitutions (Briffault, 2006). In other states, local financing violates constitutional
provisions requiring that the state provide an adequate elementary and secondary education to all students. Claims
under the Federal equal protection clause were denied by the Supreme Court in San Antonio Independent School
District v. Rodriguez.

                                                                                                                        9
including total population, the share of the population that is black, Hispanic, or over 65 years of

age, and median household income. εit captures the unobserved determinant of local finances,

which depends on a permanent component            i   and a transitory component   it.


       Pooling data from 1970 to 2000, we estimate the following equation in first differences to

absorb the permanent component of the error term ( i):



       ∆yit = β(∆Gini)it + Γ∆Xit + Rit + ∆   it                                             (2)



where equation (2) also includes the vector Rit to allow each Census region to have distinct time

trends in both patterns of government finances and income inequality. The coefficient of interest

(β) indicates the relationship between changes in the Gini coefficient and changes in government

revenue or expenditure within a municipality over time, holding constant changes in median

income and basic demographics. For the rest of the paper we refer to equation (2) as the OLS

specification.



III.B. Instrumental Variable for Income Inequality

       Equation 2 is not sufficient, on its own, to establish a causal relationship between income

inequality and local government finances. On the one hand, the income distribution may affect

government activity through a number of channels: the preferences of local voters, compensatory

transfers from the state and federal government, or simply a mechanical relationship between

inequality and the size of the local tax base. However, it is also possible that changes in

government expenditures could induce shifts in the local income distribution. For instance, an

increase in local expenditures may attract wealthy households who prefer generous public


                                                                                                  10
services even at the expense of higher taxes. These high-income arrivals would widen the local

income distribution.

        To mitigate concerns about this form of reverse causality, we construct an instrumental

variable that is correlated with changes in an area’s Gini coefficient but is not otherwise

associated with changes in local revenues or expenditures. Our instrument is based on a

―synthetic‖ version of the income distribution in a municipality. Recall that the actual Gini

coefficient is calculated from counts of the number of households in a locality by income bin in

every decade. The first step in constructing our instrument is to replace these decade-specific

household tallies with the initial (1970) distribution of households by income bin. By freezing

the distribution of households across bins in 1970, we foreclose the possibility that richer or

poorer households move into a town in search of a given bundle of public goods.

        We then allow the income level of households in the synthetic distribution to grow over

time according to the actual change in median income by income bin and decade from the

Census micro-data.12 As a result, time series variation in the synthetic distribution stems only

from national patterns of income growth by segment of the income distribution. In other words,

the initial income distribution in an area serves as a set of weights indicating how national

income growth likely affects each locality. For example, in the 1980s, the income level of

households in the top income bin grew faster than those for the rest of the distribution. The

instrument will therefore predict greater changes in the Gini coefficient over the 1980s in

municipalities that started out with a large number of high-income households in 1970.




12
  To calculate the median income of a 1970 income bin in later decades, we convert the endpoints of each bin,
which are denominated in absolute income levels, into percentiles of the income distribution. Results are
qualitatively similar when we allow changes in median income by bin and decade to vary by region.


                                                                                                                11
           We present the first stage relationship between the actual and synthetic Gini coefficients

in graphical form in Figure 1 both in level and in changes. We find a strong positive relationship

between the two measures, suggesting that much of the change in local income distributions

from 1970 to 2000 was driven by trends in income growth, rather than by in- and out-mobility of

households from the top or bottom of the income distribution. The F-statistic on the relationship

between the actual and synthetic Gini coefficients is 975.77, surpassing the conventional

threshold for a strong instrument by two orders of magnitude.



III.C. Additional Specification for School Districts

           Because of the substantial changes in the arrangement of school finance over this period,

analyzing the relationship between income inequality and school district revenues requires some

care. In particular, we want to allow for the possibility that an increase in income inequality may

have different effects in states with and without school financing equalization plans. Districts

that experience rising income inequality due to income growth for the rich may be heavily taxed

by state equalization plans, whereas districts with inequality driven by falling incomes among the

poor may be heavily subsidized.

           We define SFR (―school finance reform‖), an indicator variable equal to one in states

whose systems of school finance have been deemed unconstitutional by the state supreme court.

This condition that applies to 14 states by 2000.13 Equation 3 interacts this state-level reform

indicator with changes in the school district-level Gini coefficient. We estimate:



           ∆yit = θ(SFR)it + β1(∆Gini)it + β2(∆Gini · SFR)it + Rit + Γ∆Xit +          it                 (3)



13
     We rely on Card and Payne’s (2002) taxonomy of school finance cases as updated by Baicker and Gordon (2006).

                                                                                                               12
where i indexes school districts and t indicates the Census decade (t = 1970, 2000). The

coefficient β1 summarizes the relationship between changes in income inequality and changes in

revenues or expenditures per pupil in the average school district. The coefficient β2 tests whether

this relationship is different in states that fell under court order to reform their system of school

finance by 2000. We also allow the effect of district-level median income to vary according to a

state’s school finance regime.

       We should note that some states that did not face a court order to equalize school

spending over this period might have reformed their school finance systems preemptively in

order to avoid the threat of litigation (Metzler, 2003). In this case, the two groups of states may

respond equivalently to changes in inequality, leading the coefficients on the interaction terms to

be indistinguishable from zero.



IV. Results

IV.A. Impact of Income Inequality on Municipalities

       Table 2 presents results from equation 2, which estimates the relationship between

changes in income inequality and changes in government revenue or expenditure within a city

over time. We find that an increase in inequality leads to modest growth in municipal revenues

and expenditures. The coefficients imply that a five point increase in the Gini coefficient, the

average change in the Gini over this period, is associated with a $27 increase in expenditures per

capita. Police spending represents $3 of the total increase in municipal expenditures, while the

remainder is spent on other ―productive‖ public services including fire protection and local

roads. Income inequality has little effect on spending for either public welfare or health and



                                                                                                  13
hospitals; however, together, these categories represent less than five percent of the typical

municipal budget.

       The revenues required to fund these expenditures are collected by means of a range of

local tax instruments, including property taxes, sales taxes, and direct charges for services.

Higher property tax revenues could stem either from a decision to increase the tax rate or from a

more mechanical relationship between inequality and the property tax base. The one revenue

category that is not associated with a widening of the income distribution is federal and state

transfers. This may not be surprising because the majority of state transfers to local governments

are provided to school districts, which are examined in the next section, and because state

transfers to municipalities are based on formulas that often do not take into account the local

income distribution.

       Table 3 considers heterogeneous effects of inequality on government revenue by initial

municipality size and by initial median income. We subdivide the sample first by median size in

1970 (6,500 residents) and then by median household income ($41,000 in 2000 dollars). An

increase in income inequality is associated with greater revenue collection in all cases. However,

the positive relationship between income inequality and government revenues is strongest in

smaller and richer towns. Residents of smaller towns may develop a stronger base of social

capital and therefore be willing to fund public goods even as the ends of the income distribution

begin to pull away from the middle. We note that, in particular, rich towns are more likely to

expand their property tax collection as the income distribution widens. This is consistent with a

greater increase in top-end inequality in rich towns; as the rich get richer, the property tax base

may increase.




                                                                                                      14
       Table 4 contains results from the second stage of our instrumental variables analysis, in

which we instrument for actual changes in the Gini coefficient with changes in national income

growth weighted by the initial income distribution in a locality. Most of the IV coefficients are

positive, statistically significant and, if anything, are larger than their OLS counterparts. In the

IV specification, rising inequality increases municipal revenue from all major sources, including

inter-governmental transfers. However, the relationship between inequality and the separate

categories of expenditures are not statistically significant in the IV regressions, with the

exception of fire protection.

       If our OLS estimates were plagued by reverse causality – for example, because the rich

are attracted to towns with generous public services – we would expect the IV coefficients to be

smaller than OLS. The fact that the IV estimates are larger than OLS suggests that the

instrumental variables procedure may instead be correcting for measurement error, which can

bias estimates towards zero. By these estimates, a five point increase in the Gini coefficient leads

to a $63 increase in expenditures per capita. From 1970-2000, the average municipality

experienced a $410 increase in revenues per capita. The widening of the income distribution can

thus explain 15 percent of the growth in the size of local governments from 1970 to 2000 (=

63/410). Overall, the pattern of both OLS and IV results suggests that income inequality neither

reduces the demand for municipal goods and services nor does it limit residents’ ability to pay

for them.



IV.B. Impact of Change in Racial Heterogeneity on Municipalities

       Table 5 examines the effect of another form of local heterogeneity, racial

fractionalization, on municipal budgets. Alesina, Baqir and Easterly (1999) argue that, although



                                                                                                 15
cities with a racially diverse population spend more per resident, they devote a smaller share of

their budget to ―productive‖ public goods, such as roads, sewers and trash collection. We re-

estimate equation 2, replacing the separate measures of black and Hispanic population share with

an index of racial/ethnic fractionalization. Our index is based on four racial/ethnic categories:

white, non-Hispanics; black, non-Hispanics; Hispanics; and other races (which include Asians,

Pacific Islanders and American Indians).14 We improve upon the methodology used in Alesina,

et al. by using a panel of cities from 1970 to 2000, rather than a single cross-section in 1990, and

by extending the analysis to municipalities with fewer than 25,000 residents.

         As in Alesina, et al., we find that an increase in racial heterogeneity is associated with

larger municipal expenditures. While half of the increase is due to higher police spending, we

also find large positive effects on fire protection and health and hospital spending. Because

spending on roads fails to keep pace with the overall increase in expenditures, the share of the

budget dedicated to roads does fall, which Alesina, et al. interprets as a decline in the share of

revenue dedicated to productive public goods. However, we contend that the interpretation of

these patterns are extremely sensitive to the classification of municipal spending into

―productive‖ versus ―non-productive‖ public goods. It is reasonable to believe that spending on

fire protection and public hospitals are equally as productive as spending on roads and,

conversely, that spending on roads is equally susceptible to corruption for patronage purposes.

         On the revenue side, we confirm Alesina et al.’s finding that racial heterogeneity is

associated with an increase in inter-governmental transfers. However, we dispute the

interpretation that racially diverse cities are unwilling to raise their own revenue and therefore

need to be subsidized by the state ―to compensate…[for] the difficulties…in directing local


14
  The racial fractionalization index is defined as 1 – Σi (Number of residents of race or ethnicityi)2. Separate counts
of Asian and Pacific Islanders do not exist at the municipal level in 1970 or 1980.

                                                                                                                     16
resources to the supply of public goods‖ (p. 1266). Instead, we find that an increase in racial

diversity is also associated with an increase in own-source revenue collection, including both

property and sales taxes.



IV.C. Impact of Income Inequality on School Districts

       Turning to school districts, we begin in Table 6 by estimating the baseline specification

(equation 2), which relates decadal changes in income inequality to changes in government

activity, first in OLS and then using our instrument for district-level changes in inequality. As for

municipalities, we find that an increase in income inequality among residents of a school district

is associated with rising expenditures per pupil. However, the relationship between income

inequality and total expenditures per pupil is small. According to our IV estimate, a 1.1 point

increase in the Gini coefficient, the average increase at the district-level from 1970 to 2000,

would result in only $29 additional dollars of expenditure per pupil.

       The total effect of inequality on school resources masks countervailing trends for the two

main sources of revenue. A 1.1 point increase in the Gini is associated with a $198 increase in

property tax revenue per pupil and a corresponding $190 decline in state transfers. This pattern is

consistent with the prospect that state systems of school finance equalization worked to undo the

association between the local income distribution and local revenue collection. The next table

tests this hypothesis more directly.

       Table 7 presents coefficients from equation 3, which allows the effect of income

inequality on school district finances to vary with a state’s system of school finance. For this

specification, we consider long-run changes in school expenditures from 1970 to 2000 in order to

allow the reforms of the 1970s and 1980s time to take hold. Table 7 reports only OLS results



                                                                                                  17
because the instrument is not sufficiently powerful to explain changes in inequality over this

thirty year interval. The first panel replicates the basic specification (presented in Table 6) over

this thirty year period; in the second panel, we allow the relationships between a district’s level

of income inequality and its median income to differ in states with and without court-ordered

school finance reform.

       The first row of Table 7 shows that states under court-order to reform their system of

school finance provide a higher level of state transfers per pupil (see also Card and Payne, 2002).

By 2000, the average district under court order received an additional $474 of state funding per

pupil. However, a portion of this state transfer was reversed by a corresponding reduction in

local property tax revenue. Overall, we find no difference in the level of total expenditures per

pupil in states with and without court-ordered school finance reform, but instead see differences

only in the source of this revenue. As in Table 6, we document that school districts in which the

income distribution widened between 1970 and 2000 raise more revenue per pupil from property

taxation. The magnitude of these effects is somewhat smaller than the decadal IV estimates; a 1.1

point increase in the Gini coefficient is associated with $57 of additional property tax revenue

per pupil. In this specification, we do not find a corresponding decline in state transfers in the

average district. However, as the next panel shows, the relationship between inequality and state

transfers differs in states with and without court-ordered school finance reform.

       Panel 2 demonstrates that the relationship between income inequality and school

expenditures is mediated by a state’s system of school finance. In districts whose state system of

school finance are not under court supervision, rising inequality is positively related to both

property tax revenue and state transfers, such that a 1.1 point increase in the Gini would lead to a

$61 increase in total resources per pupil. However, in states required to equalize school funding,



                                                                                                 18
a 1.1 point increase in the Gini coefficient is associated with a $44 decline in state transfers per

pupil offset by a corresponding $94 dollar increase in property tax revenue. This pattern could be

generated by a rise in top-end inequality. As the rich get richer, the property tax base in a district

may expand, allowing for greater amounts of own-source revenue collection. However, in states

with strong equalization programs, most of the excess taxing capacity that accompanies rising

income inequality is offset by reductions in state aid.

       Table 7 also reports the relationship between educational expenditures and the median

income of a school district’s residents. Not surprisingly, wealthier districts spend more on

education per pupil. On average, a five percent increase in median income is associated with a

$102 dollar increase in per-pupil expenditures. As in Card and Payne (2002), we find that the

presence of an equalization court order does not change the magnitude of the relationship

between local income and school expenditures but does alter the source of these additional funds.

In states that are not under court order, an increase in local median income is associated with

greater school resources from both own-source revenue and state transfers. In contrast, in

equalization states, state transfers do not increase with local median income. Instead, the loss of

state revenue is compensated with a stronger association between median income and property

tax revenue.



IV.D. Impact of Income Inequality on States

       Lastly, we consider the relationship between changes in income inequality and changes in

revenues and expenditures at the state level. State-level tax systems vary greatly, both in their

choice of tax instruments and in their degree of progressivity. For example, while the average

state relies on personal income taxation for 12 percent of its revenue, nine states do not impose



                                                                                                   19
an income tax at all. Although state income taxes are generally progressive, with the degree of

progressivity determined by the rate structure, the tax-free threshold, and the use of exemptions

and credits, the overall bundle of state taxes tend to be mildly regressive (Chernick, 2005; Davis,

et al., 2009).

           In states with a progressive income tax system, the median voter model would predict a

stronger relationship between income inequality and state-level fiscal outcomes (Hayes and

Slottje, 1989; Fletcher and Murray, 2008). Descriptive statistics seem to confirm this intuition:

average state Gini increased from 0.357 in 1970 to 0.43 in 2000, while total revenues and

expenditures per capita increased by approximately $1,800 (on a basis of approximately $2,000)

over these decades.15 Yet, mechanisms like voter altruism and social capital may be less effective

for larger jurisdictions, which could attenuate (or even reverse) any positive relationship between

inequality and expenditures at the state level.

           Table 8 presents state level results. Estimates are based on equation 2, with all municipal

fiscal outcomes replaced by state fiscal outcomes. We find that an increase in inequality has a

positive effect on state revenues and expenditures but all estimates are statistically

indistinguishable from zero at conventional levels. Consistent with median voter models, we do

see that a 7.3 point increase in the Gini coefficient, the average increase in this measure of

income inequality at the state level from 1970 to 2000, is associated with a $913 increase in

general tax revenue per capita. Similarly, changes in income inequality have a positive effect on

total state-level expenditures (but are statistically indistinguishable from zero). All expenditure

sub-items show a positive effect, with the exception of public welfare. Instrumental variable

estimates show similar patterns.16 Overall, Table 8 estimates suggest that increasing income


15
     State fiscal data are collected from the Census of Governments. Appendix Table 1 provides summary statistics.
16
     These estimates are available upon request.

                                                                                                                     20
inequality had, if any, a positive impact on the fiscal situation of state governments. However, as

opposed to our previous estimates at the city and school district level, the limited number of

observations at the state level does not allow us to draw precise inference about the impact of

income inequality on state finances.



V. Conclusion

       The income distribution in the United States widened greatly from 1970 to 2000. We use

variation in income dispersion at the local level to examine the relationship between inequality

and the size of the public sector. Contrary to models that emphasize disagreements between

residents of heterogeneous societies over the optimal level of public expenditures, we find that

rising income inequality is associated with larger increases in tax revenues and faster growth in

public expenditures at municipal, school district and state levels.

       Revenues and expenditures per resident increased in nearly all communities over this

period. Our best causal estimates suggest that a five point increase in the Gini coefficient,

roughly the change in the average locality from 1970 to 2000, leads to a $63 increase in

municipal expenditures per resident to cover services like police and fire protection and

infrastructure maintenance and a $190 increase in locally-raised school expenditures per pupil.

By the estimates, the widening of the income distribution can explain around 15 percent of the

growth in the size of local government over the period.

       We conclude by noting that, although income inequality is associated with greater public

expenditures, it is not clear that additional funds necessarily translate into a larger quantity or

higher quality of public goods. Furthermore, the incidence of local taxation and the distribution

of local services need not be progressive and likely varies substantially across governmental



                                                                                                21
units. Hence, we stop short of claiming that local government activity wholly or partially

compensates for the potential social ills associated with income inequality. However, given the

empirical patterns documented here, we argue that it is unlikely that the social ills correlated with

inequality are due to a weakening of the public sector.




                                                                                                  22
                                         Bibliography

Aaron, Henry J., 1974. ―A New View of Property Tax Incidence.‖ American Economic Review.
       64, 212−221.

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, 1999. ―Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions.‖
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 114(4), 1243-1284

Alesina, Alberto, and Dani Rodrik, 1994. ―Distributive Politics and Economic Growth.‖
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 109, 465–490.

Baicker, Katherine, and Nora Gordon, 2006. ―The Effect of State Education Finance Reform on
       Total Local Resources.‖ Journal of Public Economics. 90, 1519-1535.

Benabou, Roland, 1996. ―Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic
      Implications of Community Structure and School Finance.‖ American Economic Review.
      86, 584-609.

Benabou, Roland, 2000. ―Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract.‖
      American Economic Review. 90, 96-129.

Boix, Carles, and Posner, Daniel N., 1998. ―Social Capital: Explaining its Origin and Effects on
       Governmental Performance.’ British Journal of Political Science. 28, 686–93.

Briffault, Richard, 2006. ―Home Rule and Local Political Innovation.‖ Journal of Law and
       Politics. 22(1).

Card, David, and Payne, A. Abigail, 2002. ―School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School
       Spending, and the Distribution of Student Test Scores.‖ Journal of Public Economics.
       83(1), 49-82.

Cascio, Elizabeth, Nora Gordon, Ethan Lewis, and Sarah Reber, 2010. ―Paying for Progress:
       Conditional Grants and the Desegregation of Southern Schools.‖ Quarterly Journal of
       Economics. 125(1), 445-482.

Chernick, Howard, 2005. ―On the Determinants of Subnational Tax Progressivity in the U.S.‖
       National Tax Journal. 58, 93-112.

Corcoran, Sean P., and William N. Evans, 2010. ―Income Inequality, the Median Voter, and the
       Support for Public Education.‖ NBER Working Paper No. 16097.

Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn, 2003. ―Understanding the American Decline in Social
       Capital, 1952-1998.‖ Kyklos. 56, 17-46.

Cutler, David M., Douglas W. Elmendorf, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1993. ―Demographic
       Characteristics and the Public Bundle.‖ Public Finance. 48, 178-198.

                                                                                             23
Davis, Carl, Kelly Davis, Matthew Gardner, Robert S. McIntyre, Jeff McLynch and Alla
       Sapozhnikova, 2009. Who Pays? A Distributional Analysis of the Tax Systems in All 50
       States. Washington, D.C.: Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy.

Deaton, Angus, and Darren Lubotsky, 2003. ―Mortality, Inequality and Race in American Cities
      and States.‖ Social Science and Medicine. 56(6), 1139-53.

Epple, Dennis, and Richard E. Romano, 1996. ―Ends Against the Middle: Determining Public
       Service Provision When There Are Private Alternatives,‖ Journal of Public Economics.
       62, 297-325.

Fajnzylber, Pablo, Daniel Lederman, and Norman Loayza, 2002. ―Inequality and Violent
       Crime.‖ Journal of Law and Economics. 45, 1-39.

Fletcher, Jason M. and Matthew N. Murray, 2008. ―What Factors Influence the Structure of the
       State Income Tax?‖ Public Finance Review. 36, 475-496.

Galor, Oded, Omer Moav, and Dietrich Vollrath, 2009. ―Land Inequality, the Emergence of
       Human Capital Promoting Institutions and the Great Divergence.‖ Review of Economic
       Studies. 76(1), 143-179.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz, 1999. ―Human Capital and Social Capital: The Rise of
       Secondary Schooling in America, 1910-1940.‖ Journal of Interdisciplinary History. 26,
       683-723.

Hamilton, Bruce W., 1976. ―Capitalization of Intrajurisdictional Differences in Local Tax
      Prices.‖ American Economic Review. 66:5, 743-53.

Hayes, Kathy and Daniel J. Slottje, 1989. ―The Efficacy of State and Local Governments’
       Redistributional Policies.‖ Public Finance Quarterly. 17, 304-322.

Hopkins, Daniel J., 2009. ―The Diversity Discount: When Increasing Ethnic and Racial Diversity
      Prevents Tax Increases.‖ Journal of Politics. 71, 160-177.

Hoxby, Caroline M., 2001. ―All School Finance Equalizations Are Not Created Equal.‖
      Quarterly Journal of Economics. 116, 1189-1231.

Kawachi, Ichiro, Bruce P. Kennedy, Kimberly Lochner, and Deborah Prothrow-Smith, 1997.
     ―Social Capital, Income Inequality, and Mortality.‖ American Journal of Public Health.
     87(9), 1491-8.

Kennedy, Bruce P., Ichiro Kawachi, Deborah Prothrow-Stith, Kimberly Lochner, and Vanita
      Gupta, 1998. ―Social Capital, Income Inequality, and Firearm Violent Crime.‖ Social
      Science Medicine. 47, 7-17.

Lindert, Peter H., 1994. ―The Rise in Social Spending, 1880–1930.‖ Explorations in Economic
       History. 31, 1-37.
                                                                                              24
Lindert, Peter H., 1996. ―What Limits Social Spending?‖ Explorations in Economic History. 33,
       1-34.

Mieszkowski, Peter M., 1972. ―The Property Tax: An Excise Tax or a Profits Tax?‖ Journal of
      Public Economics. 1, 13-96.

Meltzer, Allan H., and Scott F. Richard, 1981. ―A Rational Theory of the Size of Government.‖
       Journal of Political Economy. 89, 914-927.

Metzler, Jeffrey, 2003. ―Inequitable Equilibrium: Education Finance in the United States.‖
       Indiana Law Review. 36, 561

Moene, Karl O. and Michael Wallerstein, 2005. ―Social Democracy as a Development Strategy.‖
      In Pranab Bardhan, Samuel Bowles, and Michael Wallerstein, eds. Globalization and
      Egalitarian Redistribution. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Musgrave, Richard A., 1974. ―Is a Property Tax on Housing Regressive?‖ American Economic
      Review. 64, 222-229.

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 1994. ―Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?‖ American
       Economic Review. 84, 600-621.

Oates, Wallace E. and Robert M. Schwab, 2004. ―What Should Local Governments Tax: Income
       or Property?‖ In A. Schwartz, ed., City Taxes, City Spending: Essays in Honor of Dick
       Netzer. Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar, 7-29.

Phares, Donald, 1980. Who Pays State and Local Taxes? Cambridge, MA: Oelgeschalager, Gunn
       and Hain.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez, 2003. ―Income Inequality in The United States, 1913-
        1998.‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118, 1-39.

Putnam, Robert D., 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community.
      New York: Simon and Schuster.

Ramcharan, Rodney, 2009. ―Inequality and Redistribution: Evidence from U.S. Counties and
     States, 1890-1930.‖ Review of Economics and Statistics. Forthcoming.

Schwabish, Jonathan A., Timothy M. Smeeding, and Lars Osberg, 2006. ―Income Distribution
      and Social Expenditures: A Cross-National Perspective.‖ In Dmitri B. Papadimitriou, ed.
      The Distributional Effects of Government Spending and Taxation. Northampton, MA:
      Edward Elgar Publishing, 247-288.

Schwabish, Jonathan A., 2008. ―The Effects of Earnings Inequality on State Social Spending in
      the United States.‖ Public Finance Review. 36(5), 588



                                                                                          25
Smeeding, Timothy M., 2004. ―Twenty Years of Research on Income Inequality, Poverty, and
      Redistribution in the Developed World: Introduction and Overview.‖ Socio-Economic
      Review. 2: 149-63.

Sokoloff, Kenneth L., and Eric M. Zolt, 2005. ―Inequality and Taxation: Evidence from the
      Americas on How Inequality May Influence Tax Institutions.‖ Tax Law Review. 59(2),
      167-241.

Suits, Daniel B., 1977. ―Measurement of Tax Progressivity.‖ American Economic Review. 67,
        747-752.

Zolt, Eric M., 2009. ―Inequality, Collective Action, and Taxing and Spending Patterns of State
       and Local Governments.‖ Tax Law Review. 62, 445-539.




                                                                                           26
                 Figure 1: First stage regression, Relationship between actual and synthetic Gini coefficients
                                                at the municipal level, 1970-2000
                                                           A. Levels



                                       .6
                                       .5
    Gini coefficient




                                       .4
                                       .3
                                       .2
                                       .1




                                                  .1   .2            .3              .4        .5           .6
                                                                          Predicted Gini

                                                                             45 degree line


                Notes: Each point in the scatter diagram represents a municipality’s actual and predicted Gini coefficients. Gini
                coefficients are calculated using the income bins from Census reports and the median income of each bin from
                Census Microdata. The computation of predicted Gini coefficients is described in section III.B.

                                                                    B. Changes
                                  .2
                                  .1
Gini (Change)




                                       0
                                 -.1
                                 -.2




                                            -.1             -.05              0                .05                .1
                                                                   Predicted Gini (Change)

                                                                             45 degree line


                Notes: Each point in the scatter diagram represents the residual change in a municipality’s actual and predicted Gini
                coefficients over a decade after controlling for changes in population, share of black and Hispanic population,
                median income, share of individuals older than 65 and regional trends.

                                                                                                                                    27
   Table 1: Summary statistics, municipal and school district revenues and expenditures,
                                           1970-2000

                                                   I. Municipalities (per capita)
                          Gini          General        Property       Inter-gov         Direct           Sales
                       coefficient      revenue                                        charges
                                                          tax         transfers                           Tax
A. Revenue
    1970 Mean             0.320           449.7         149.1            99.4            90.2             3.1
       1970 SD           (0.054)         (300.7)       (116.9)         (143.2)         (143.5)           (7.1)
   Δ 1970-2000            0.055           428.6          45.2           100.9           105.1            57.5
                        General          Police          Fire         Highways         Public         Health &
                      expenditures                                                     welfare        hospitals
B. Expenditure
   1970 (Mean)            462.2           76.1           31.4            60.7            0.6              20.6
     1970 (SD)           (436.5)         (45.1)         (34.4)          (34.7)           7.7             117.5
   Δ 1970-2000            410.0           56.6           20.0             9.8            1.9              10.4
                                                   II. School districts (per pupil)
                          Gini           Total          Total         Property        Inter-gov         Direct
                       coefficient      revenue      expenditure        tax                            charges
                                                                                      transfers
    1970 (Mean)           0.370          4185.9         4138.9         2071.4          1821.0            238.3
      1970 (SD)          (0.039)        (1833.9)       (2122.2)       (1597.9)        (1036.1)          (246.5)
    Δ 1970-2000           0.011          3794.1         3730.3          679.8          2757.9             48.1
Notes: Revenues and expenditures are reported in 2000 dollars. We provide the mean of each variable in 1970, the
standard deviation in 1970 in parentheses and the average change from 1970-2000 in italics. The municipality
statistics are for the 3,369 cities and towns with at least 2,500 residents in 1970 that do not provide education
services. The school district statistics reflect the 9,024 districts with more than 2,500 residents in 1970.




                                                                                                                 28
    Table 2: OLS estimates of the relationship between income inequality and municipal
                     revenue and expenditures per capita, 1970-2000

   General           Property tax        Inter-govern      Direct charges          Sales tax         Other tax
   revenue                                 Transfers
   474.1**             119.3***              52.46              289.5**             262.5**            73.53***
  [209.3]              [43.09]              [85.09]             [120.4]             [120.5]            [26.50]

   General              Police                Fire            Highways         Public welfare         Health &
 expenditures                                                                                         hospitals
   536.3**              53.81**             63.16***           68.41***             -4.399              42.13
   [209.2]              [25.31]             [17.48]            [19.70]              [71.06]            [207.9]
Notes: Sample includes municipalities in Census years 1970-2000 that were not responsible for education services in
1970 (N = 13476, or 3369 municipalities per year). Cells report the estimated coefficient on the change in the Gini
coefficient from equation 2 in text. Standard errors in parentheses and are clustered by municipality.


 Table 3: The relationship between income inequality and municipal revenue per capita by
                     initial population and median income, 1970-2000

                   General         Property tax           Inter-          Direct        Sales tax      Other tax
                   revenue                               govern          charges
                                                        transfers

                                                     A. By initial population
Below med           578.3*            88.87*              163.1         331.3**           237.0         102.3***
                   [298.3]            [49.39]            [103.7]       [166.0]           [150.9]        [33.59]

Above med           170.0             196.6***            -205.8          201.2          263.7*          -0.866
                   [233.5]            [65.08]            [138.7]         [133.3]         [141.7]        [39.32]

                                                B. By initial median income
Below med           97.11              57.80           -72.36       352.0*               270.8**        59.10*
                   [341.5]            [42.70]         [116.1]       [191.8]              [132.0]        [32.50]

Above med          802.2***           127.3*              176.8           231.9*          211.0          66.48
                   [261.2]            [74.51]            [128.1]         [121.1]         [216.8]        [42.14]
Note: Sample includes municipalities in Census years 1970- 2000 that were not responsible for education services in
1970 (N = 13476, or 3369 municipalities per year). The first and third rows are the estimated coefficients on the
change in the Gini coefficient from equation 2 for a subsample of municipalities whose population (Panel A) or
household median income (Panel B) are below the sample median in 1970. The second and fourth rows report the
same coefficients but for those municipalities whose population (Panel A) or household median income (Panel B)
are above the sample median in 1970. Median initial population in 1970 was 6,430. Median initial household
median income was $41,273 in 2000 dollars. Standard errors in parentheses and are clustered by municipality.




                                                                                                                29
Table 4: IV estimates of the relationship between income inequality and municipal revenue
                           and expenditure per capita, 1970-2000

    General           Property tax         Inter-govern        Direct charges          Sales tax          Other tax
    revenue                                  transfers
     1079*               620.2***             596.3***             498.0**              657.8*         151.8
    [646.8]              [175.2]              [195.3]              [237.6]              [349.1]        [96.83]

   General                Police                Fire              Highways              Public           Health &
 expenditures                                                                          welfare           hospitals
    1260*                 -44.87              134.4**               93.02              -103.2          329.7
   [701.5]               [160.2]              [65.56]              [75.39]             [237.0]         [425.6]
Notes: Sample includes municipalities in Census years 1970-2000 that were not responsible for education services in
1970 (N = 13476, or 3369 municipalities per year). Cells report the estimated coefficient on the change in the Gini
coefficient from equation 2 in text. The instrument for the actual Gini coefficient is based on a ―synthetic‖ version of
the local income distribution; see Section IIIb for details. Standard errors in parentheses and are clustered by
municipality.



  Table 5: OLS estimates of the effect of racial fractionalization on municipal revenue and
                            expenditures per capita, 1970-2000

    General           Property tax         Inter-govern       Direct charges           Sales tax          Other tax
    revenue                                  transfers
     108.7**              58.12***             56.51*               -9.451               13.49              -0.911
    [52.39]              [14.43]              [30.92]              [29.57]              [37.15]            [13.14]

   General                Police                Fire             Highways          Public welfare         Health &
 expenditures                                                                                             hospitals
   103.0*                 53.76***             21.75***             5.167               -52.91*            139.8*
   [58.83]               [11.58]              [6.555]              [6.877]              [31.68]            [83.55]
Notes: Sample includes municipalities in Census years 1970-2000 that were not responsible for education services in
1972 (N = 13476, or 3369 municipalities per year). Cells report the estimated coefficient β from equation 2 in text
but replacing the Gini coefficient by the index of racial fractionalization. Standard errors in parentheses and are
clustered by municipality.




                                                                                                                     30
  Table 6: OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between income inequality and school
                 district revenue and expenditure per capita, 1970-2000

                                                         OLS
                                   Total               Property                State
                                 spending                 tax                transfers
                                   946.3                2471***               -2086***
                                  [657.8]              [625.5]                [555.6]

                                                          IV
                                   Total               Property               State
                                 spending                 tax               transfers
                                   2678                18084***            -17341***
                                  [4405]               [4298]               [2762]
Notes: Sample includes school districts in Census years 1970-2000 (N = 36,096, or 9,024 school districts per year).
Standard errors in parentheses and are clustered by school district. Cells report the estimated coefficient on the
change in the Gini coefficient from equation 2 in text. The instrument for the actual Gini coefficient is based on a
―synthetic‖ version of the local income distribution; see Section IIIb for details.

   Table 7: Effect of median income and income inequality on school district revenue and
                             expenditures per pupil, 1970-2000

                                            Panel 1                                          Panel 2
                              Total         Property            State          Total         Property          State
                            spending           tax           transfers       spending           tax          transfers
Court order (SFR)             72.10          -147.0            473.9**         -4506          -9619          14884**
                             [262.0]         [259.7]          [218.4]         [6531]          [8460]         [7033]

Gini coefficient             6089***        5232***            1414            5626**         4069**           3210*
                            [1871]          [1694]            [1612]          [2251]         [1893]            [1681]

Gini · SFR                                                                    796.9            4503           -7213**
                                                                              [4457]          [4256]           [3437]

ln(median income)            2036***         265.1***         1447***         2043***        281.5***          1422**
                             [138.9]        [68.85]          [80.34]          [143.3]         [69.68]         [77.57]

ln(median) · SFR                                                               403.2           731.0          -1099*
                                                                              [526.1]         [684.0]         [583.9]
Notes: Sample includes school districts in Census years 1970 and 2000 (N = 18,048, or 9024 school districts per
year). Cells report the estimated coefficients of equation 3 in text. SFR is an indicator variable equal to one in the
year 2000 for the 14 states whose systems of school finance were deemed unconstitutional by the state supreme
court. Standard errors in parentheses and are clustered by school district.




                                                                                                                         31
 Table 8: OLS estimates of the relationship between income inequality and state revenues
                         and expenditures per capita, 1970-2000

   General                Sales              Income             Intergov.           Charges &
   revenue                 tax                 tax              Transfers             Misc.

    12503                 1773*              20052**               2735               -22579
    (8058)               (1050)             (10064)               (1893)             (15156)

  General                Public            Highways             Education            Health &             Public
expenditures             safety                                                      hospitals            welfare

    13099                 167                 388                  3633                 329                  -39
   (11229)               (282)               (1375)               (5569)               (933)               (1269)
Notes: Sample includes all US states in Census years 1970-2000. Cells report the estimated coefficient on the
change in the Gini coefficient from equation 2 in text. Standard errors in parentheses and are clustered by state.




                                                                                                                     32
     Appendix Table 1: Summary statistics, State revenue and expenditures per capita,
                                       1970-2000

                           Gini          General          Sales          Income         Intergov.       Charges &
                        coefficient      revenue           tax             tax          transfers         Misc.
A. Revenue
    1970 Mean             0.357            2057           601             253             506               515
       1970 SD           (0.024)          (2241)         (188)           (202)           (220)            (2030)
   Δ 1970-2000            0.073            1717           281             486             525               321
                         General          Public       Highways        Education        Health &          Public
                       expenditures       safety                                        hospitals         welfare
B. Expenditure
   1970 (Mean)             1849             43             367             751             113              241
     1970 (SD)             (642)           (23)           (162)           (250)            (35)            (103)
   Δ 1970-2000             1805            117             -28             549             140              569
Notes: Revenues and expenditures are reported in 2000 dollars. We provide the mean of each variable in 1970, the
standard deviation in 1970 in parentheses and the average change from 1970-2000 in italics. The state statistics are
for all US states.




                                                                                                                   33
