NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE OPTIONS ON INDEX FUTURES PROFITABLE FOR RISK AVERSE INVESTORS?
EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
George M. Constantinides
Michal Czerwonko
Jens Carsten Jackwerth
Stylianos Perrakis
Working Paper 16302
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16302

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2010

We thank Oleg Bondarenko, Wolfgang Buehler, Jim Hodder, Robert Merton, Ingmar Nolte, Myron
Scholes, Sorin Sorescu, Suresh Sundaresan, Michael Wolf, Campbell Harvey (the editor), the anonymous
associate editor and referees, participants at the Second Mont Tremblant Risk Management conference,
the ESSFM Gerzensee 2008 conference, the 2008 Conference on Financial Innovation at Vanderbilt
University, the 2008 International Conference on Price, Liquidity, and Credit Risks at Konstanz University,
seminars at Mannheim University, Tel Aviv University, the University of Cyprus, and Zurich University,
and especially Russell Davidson for insightful comments and constructive criticism. We remain responsible
for errors and omissions. Constantinides acknowledges financial support from the Center for Research
in Security Prices, University of Chicago. Czerwonko and Perrakis acknowledge financial support
from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by George M. Constantinides, Michal Czerwonko, Jens Carsten Jackwerth, and Stylianos Perrakis.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Are Options on Index Futures Profitable for Risk Averse Investors? Empirical Evidence
George M. Constantinides, Michal Czerwonko, Jens Carsten Jackwerth, and Stylianos Perrakis
NBER Working Paper No. 16302
August 2010
JEL No. D53,G11,G13
ABSTRACT
American options on the S&P 500 index futures that violate the stochastic dominance bounds of
Constantinidesand Perrakis (2007) from 1983 to 2006 are identified as potentially profitable trades.
Call bid pricesmore frequently violate their upper bound than put bid prices do, while violations of the
lower boundsby ask prices are infrequent. In out of sample tests of stochastic dominance, the writing
of optionsthat violate the upper bound increases the expected utility of any risk averse investor holding
the marketDQGFDVKQHWRIWUDQVDFWLRQFRVWVDQGELGDVNVSUHDGV7KHUHVXOWVDUHHFRQRPLFDOO\VLJQLILFDQW
androbust.

George M. Constantinides
The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gmc@ChicagoBooth.edu
Michal Czerwonko
McGill University
michalc04@gmail.com

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16302

Jens Carsten Jackwerth
University of Konstanz
Universitaetsstrasse 10
78464 Konstanz
Germany
Jens.Jackwerth@uni-konstanz.de
Stylianos Perrakis
Department of Finance
Concordia University
1455 de Maisonneuve Bvd. West.
Quebec, Canada H3G 1M8
SPerrakis@jmsb.concordia.ca

We identify American call and put options on the S&P 500 index futures from 1983 to 2006 that
violate the stochastic dominance upper bounds of Constantinides and Perrakis (2007) as
potentially profitable investment opportunities—“good sell” options. We then consider the
utility enhancement that obtains from the exploitation of such violations by adopting the
appropriate trading policy for a generic investor holding only the market index and the risk free
asset. In both the identification of violations and the trading policy we recognize the potential
early exercise of these American options. We allow for realistic trading conditions by using only
observable information and by incorporating transaction costs, bid ask spreads, and trading
delays (by waiting one quote before entering the position).
The main contribution of our paper is to show that trading policies that exploit these
violations lead to out of sample portfolio returns that stochastically dominate (in the second
order) portfolio returns that do not exploit them. This means that the expected utility of a generic
risk averse investor, as defined above, increases when exploiting these violations. This result is
independent of any specific preferences, such as mean variance preferences.
Whereas we find a substantial number of violations of the call upper bound, the
corresponding put upper bound and call and put lower bounds identify relatively few violations
partly because the first two of these bounds are weak, while there do not seem to be many
violations of the put lower bound in our data. Since the frequency of violations of these bounds
is too low for statistical inference, we focus on violations of the call upper bound.1 We note that
we can also use our statistical tests as a general method to investigate good buys or good sells
and in particular the goodness of alternative methods in finding such opportunities. Finally, we
show that neither a simple heuristic for trading options based on observed option price
percentiles for buying low and selling high nor an application of the Bernardo and Ledoit (2000)

2

bounds systematically lead to out of sample portfolio returns that stochastically dominate
portfolio returns that do not trade in options. We conclude that the identification of good buy
and good sell options is difficult, yet the Constantinides and Perrakis (2007) bounds achieve this
task.
There is ample evidence that motivates our focus on the class of investors holding the
market and the risk free asset. Surveys report that a large number of US investors follow
indexing policies in their investments. Bogle (2005) reports that, in 2004, index funds account
for about one third of equity fund cash inflows since 2000 and represent about one seventh of
equity fund assets. The S&P 500 index is not only the most widely quoted market index, but has
also been available to investors through exchange traded funds and index futures for several
years. Furthermore, the results are robust to the investor’s portfolio composition. We show in
our tests that the writing of good sell options may increase the expected utility of an investor
holding a portfolio that includes a wide range of assets in addition to the index and the risk free
asset.
The bounds that identify good sell options are valid for any distribution of the underlying
asset, including the empirical ones extracted from past data.2

Furthermore, the stochastic

dominance statistical tests by Davidson and Duclos (2000, 2006) which we employ to assess the
out of sample profitability of our trading policy are valid under minimal technical assumptions
about return distributions.
Finally, the results are robust to the estimation of the bounds. Note that we are only
using the bound violations as signals for trading.

Thus, the assumptions underlying the

derivation of the bounds may be violated as long as the signals are sufficiently informative for
utility enhancing trading.

3

We use the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) database on S&P 500 futures options,
from 1983 to 2006, which is clean and spans a long period. Much of the earlier empirical work
on the mispricing of index options is based on data on the S&P 500 index options that comes
from two principal sources: the Berkeley Options Database (from 1986 to 1995) that provides
relatively clean transaction prices, but misses important events over the past 14 years, such as the
1998 liquidity crisis, the dot com bubble, and its 2000 burst; and the OptionMetrics (starting in
1996) data base which, however, is of uneven quality and contains only end of day quotes.
Our tests are nonparametric in the sense that we do not assume any particular distribution
for the underlying asset returns. Therefore, our finding of good sell options cannot be attributed
to stochastic volatility and jumps in the index price. We use historical data on the underlying
S&P 500 index returns in order to estimate the bounds. We use several empirical estimates of
the underlying return distribution, all of them observable at the time the trading policy is
implemented. For each one of these estimates, we evaluate the corresponding bounds over the
period from 1983 to 2006 and then identify the observed S&P 500 futures options prices that
violate them. For each violation, we identify the optimal trading policy of a generic investor
with and without the option, using the observed path of the underlying asset till option expiration
and recognizing realistic trading conditions such as possible early exercise and transaction costs.
We identify the profitability of the pair of policies for each observed violation and then conduct
several stochastic dominance tests over the entire sample period.
A large body of finance literature addresses the mispricing of options. Rubinstein (1994)
and Jackwerth and Rubinstein (1996) observe a steep index smile in the implied volatility of
S&P 500 index options that suggests that out of the money (OTM) puts are too expensive.
Indeed, a common hedge fund policy is to sell OTM puts. Coval and Shumway (2001) find that

4

buying zero beta, at the money (ATM) straddles/strangles loses money. Santa-Clara and Saretto
(2009) also find that strategies of selling index options are good deals. The results of Ait-Sahalia
and Lo (2000), Jackwerth (2000), and Rosenberg and Engle (2002) are suggestive of stochastic
dominance, albeit in frictionless markets with a representative agent. The assumption of a
representative agent can be justified if the market is complete. Ait-Sahalia and Lo (2000, pages
25-26) call for extensions which do not rely on complete markets. Our results on stochastic
dominance allow for both an incomplete market (thereby removing the requirement that a
representative investor exists) and frictions.
Constantinides, Jackwerth, and Perrakis (2009) provide empirical evidence that both
European puts and calls on the S&P 500 index violate corresponding stochastic dominance
bounds on European options put forth by Constantinides and Perrakis (2002). Constantinides,
Jackwerth, and Perrakis (2009) estimate the time series process of the index price, use this
process to calculate upper and lower stochastic dominance bounds on the prices of options, and
report the observed violations of the bounds by option prices. This process is subject to model
misspecification and estimation error. Therefore, the bounds are potentially calculated with
error. The reported violations do not account for potential error.
We address the above concerns in this paper as follows.

The claim of stochastic

dominance is not based on the observation of option prices violating the bounds. Observed
violation of the bounds only triggers the trading of these options. The claim of stochastic
dominance is based on the out of sample statistical test of whether the portfolios that incorporate
such options stochastically dominate portfolios which do not incorporate them. Even if the
assumptions that lead to the theoretical development of the bounds are violated in practice, this
does not detract from the finding of stochastic dominance based on the empirical tests but,

5

instead, makes the claim of stochastic dominance conservative and implies that the estimated
bounds may still be used as identifiers of good sell options.
Unlike the results in Constantinides, Jackwerth, and Perrakis (2009), our tests of
stochastic dominance do allow for error in the realized returns. The statistical tests are based on
the one month realized distribution of returns of these portfolios. The tests are nonparametric
and, therefore, free from assumptions regarding the return distribution. The tests are not based
on the estimated time series process of the index price and, therefore, are free from estimation
error and model misspecification of the time series process of the index price. The reported
findings of stochastic dominance are conservative because potential errors in calculating the
bounds result in a trading rule that is less efficient in spotting violations. Finally, we estimate the
bounds at time t based only on information available at time t. Therefore, both the calculation of
the bounds and the tests of stochastic dominance are truly out of sample.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section I, we present the restrictions on futures
option prices imposed by stochastic dominance and discuss the underlying assumptions. In
Section II, we describe the data and the empirical design. We present the empirical results in
Section III and demonstrate their robustness in Section IV. In Section V, we discuss the
implications of our results and conclude. Additional results are reported in the appendices and in
the online appendices.

I.

Restrictions on Futures Option Prices Imposed by Stochastic Dominance

We summarize the model and assumptions in Constantinides and Perrakis (2007) that
lead to the bounds that signify violations of stochastic dominance. We stress that, even if these

6

assumptions do not hold in practice, this does not detract from the finding of stochastic
dominance based on the empirical tests reported in this paper, but instead makes the claim of
stochastic dominance conservative: the tests of stochastic dominance do not depend on the
assumptions made in deriving the bounds.
We allow the market to be incomplete and agents to be heterogeneous. We investigate
the restrictions on option prices imposed by one particular class of agents that we simply refer to
as “traders”. We allow for other agents to participate in the market but this allowance does not
invalidate the restrictions on option prices imposed by the traders.
We consider a market with several types of financial assets. First, we assume that traders
invest only in two of them, a bond and a stock with the natural interpretation as a market index.
Subsequently, we assume that traders can invest in a third asset as well, an American call or put
option on the index futures. The bond is risk free and has total return R. The stock has ex
dividend stock price St at time t and pays cash dividend γ St , where the dividend yield γ is
deterministic. The total return on the stock, (1 + γ ) ( St +1 / St ) , is assumed to be i.i.d. with mean
RS . The call or put option on the index futures has strike K and expiration date T . The

underlying futures contract is cash settled and has maturity T F , T F ≥ T . We assume that the
futures price Ft is linked to the stock price by the approximate cost of carry relation
F
− T F −t
Ft = (1 + γ ) ( ) RT −t St + ε t , t ≤ T F ,

ε t ≤ ε , where the basis risk ε t is serially independent

and independent of the stock price.
Transfers to and from the cash account (bond trades) do not incur transaction costs.
Stock trades decrease the bond account by transaction costs equal to the absolute value of the
dollar transaction, times the proportional transaction costs rate, k , 0 ≤ k < 1 . Transaction costs,

7

exchange fees, and price impact are accounted for in what we refer to as the bid and ask prices of
options.
We assume that traders maximize generally heterogeneous, state independent, increasing,
and concave utility functions. We further assume that each trader’s wealth at the end of each
period is weakly monotone increasing in the stock return over the period, as explained in
Constantinides and Perrakis (2007).3
We do not make the restrictive assumption that all market agents belong to the class of
utility maximizing traders. Thus, our results are robust and unaffected by the presence in the
market of agents with beliefs, endowments, preferences, trading restrictions, and transaction
costs schedules that differ from those of the utility maximizing traders modeled in
Constantinides and Perrakis (2007).
A trader enters the market at time zero with x0 dollars in bonds and y0 dollars in ex
dividend shares of stock. We normalize the stock (or, index price) to y0 dollars so that the trader
holds one share (or, one unit of the index). We consider two scenarios. In the first scenario, the
trader may trade the bond and stock but not the options. The trader makes sequential investment
decisions at discrete trading dates t ( t = 0, 1... , T ' ), where T ', T ' ≥ T F ≥ T , is the finite terminal
date. The trader’s objective is to maximize expected utility, E[uT ' (WT ' )] , where WT' is the
trader’s net worth at date T'. Utility is assumed to be concave and increasing and defined for
both positive and negative terminal worth, but is otherwise left unspecified. We refer to this
trader as the index (and bond) trader, IT, and denote her maximized expected utility by

V0IT ( x0 , y0 ) .
In the second scenario, as in the first scenario, the trader enters the market at time zero
with x0 dollars in bonds and y0 dollars in ex dividend shares of stock, but immediately writes
8

one American futures call option with maturity T , T ≤ T F , where C are the net cash proceeds
from writing the call.4 We assume that the trader may not trade the call option thereafter. At
each trading date t ( t = 0, 1... , T ) the trader is informed whether or not she has been assigned
(that is, assigned to act as the counterparty of the holder of a call who exercises the call at that
time). If the trader has been assigned, the call position is closed out, the trader pays Ft − K in
cash, and the value of the cash account decreases from xt to xt − ( Ft − K ) . The trader makes
sequential investment decisions with the objective to maximize her expected utility, E[uT ' (WT ' )] .
We refer to this trader as the option (plus index and bond) trader, OT, and denote her maximized
expected utility by V0OT ( x0 + C , y0 ) .
For a given pair ( x0 , y0 ) , we define the reservation write price of a call as the value of C

(

)

such that V0OT x0 + C, y0 = V0IT ( x0 , y0 ) . The interpretation of C is the write price of the call at
which the trader with initial endowment ( x0 , y0 ) is indifferent between writing the call or not.
Constantinides and Perrakis (2007) state a tight upper bound on the reservation write price of an
American futures call option that is independent of the trader’s utility function and initial
endowment and independent of the early exercise policy on the calls:

C ( Ft , St , t ) =

1+ k
max ⎡⎣ N ( St , t ) , Ft − K ⎤⎦ , t ≤ T .
1− k

(1)

The function N ( S , t ) is defined as follows:

9

F
− T F −t −1)
N ( S , t ) = ( RS ) −1 E[max{(1 + γ ) (
RT −t −1St +1 + ε − K , N ( St +1 , t + 1)} St = S ], t ≤ T − 1

= 0, t = T .
(2)
The economic interpretation of the call upper bound is as follows. If we observe a call bid price
above the reservation write price, C , then any trader (as defined in this paper) can increase her
expected utility by writing the call.
Transaction costs on the index have only a small effect on the upper bound. Specifically,
without transaction costs on the index, the upper bound is max ⎡⎣ N ( S t , t ) , Ft − K ⎤⎦ ; with
transaction costs on the index, the upper bound merely increases by the multiplicative factor

(1 + k ) / (1 − k ) .

The reason is that this particular bound is based on a comparison of the utility of

an index trader to the utility of an option trader. Both traders follow the trading policy which is
optimal for the index trader but is generally suboptimal for the option trader. This policy incurs
very low transaction costs because trades are infrequent, as shown in Constantinides (1986).
If we further assume that the trader can buy a call at price C ( Ft , St , t ) or less and trade
the futures and do so costlessly, we obtain the following put upper bound:5

P ( Ft , St , t ) = C ( Ft , St , t ) − R

−(T − t )

Ft + K , t ≤ T .

(3)

with similar interpretation. Constantinides and Perrakis (2007) derive lower bounds on the
reservation purchase price of American call and put options on futures. We do not state these
lower bounds here because the observed frequency of their violation is too low for statistical
inference.

10

II.

Data Description and Methodology

In this section, we describe our data on index, futures, and option prices. We explain
how we calibrate a tree of the daily index return and use it to calculate the option bounds. We
describe the construction of the portfolio of the index trader (IT) and of the option trader (OT).
Finally, we explain our empirical methodology of comparing the performance of the IT and OT
portfolios in terms of their means and in terms of the criterion of second order stochastic
dominance.

II.A

Data Description and Estimation

We obtain the time stamped quotes of the 30 calendar day S&P 500 futures options and
the underlying nearest to maturity futures for the period from February 1983 to July 2006 from
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) tapes. This results in 247 sampling dates. We obtain
the interest rate as the 3 month T bill rate from the Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15. The
data sources are described in further detail in Appendix A.
For the daily index return distribution, we use the historical sample of logarithmic returns
from January 1928 to January 1983. However, when looking forward for each of our 247 option
sampling dates, we adjust the first four moments of the index return distribution in various ways
which we now describe in detail. We set the mean logarithmic index return at 4% plus the
observed 3 month T bill rate instead of estimating the mean index return from the data in order to
mitigate statistical problems in estimating the mean. We implement this by adding a constant to
the observed logarithmic index returns so that their sample mean equals the above target.

11

We estimate both the unconditional and conditional volatility of the index returns. We
estimate the unconditional volatility as the sample standard deviation over the period January
1928 to January 1983.
We estimate the conditional volatility in three different ways. First, we estimate the
conditional volatility as the sample standard deviation over the preceding 90 trading days. We
also estimate the conditional volatility over the preceding 360 days.

The results remain

essentially unchanged. Second, we estimate the conditional volatility as the ATM implied
volatility (IV) on the preceding day, adjusted by the mean prediction error for all dates preceding
the given date (typically some 3%).6 Finally, we estimate the conditional volatility as the Nelson
(1991) EGARCH (1, 1) model volatility using EGARCH coefficients estimated for S&P 500
daily returns over January 1928 to January 1983 applied to residuals observed over the 90 days
preceding each sample date to form projections of the volatility realized till the option expiry
date.7 We estimate the 3rd and 4th moments of the index return as their sample counterparts over
the preceding 90 days.
In Table I, we report statistics of the prediction error of the above volatility estimates.
The best overall predictor is the adjusted ATM IV and the second best predictor is the 90 day
historical volatility.
[Table I about here]

II.B

Calibration of the Index Returns Tree and Calculation of the Option Bounds

We model the path of the daily index return till the option expiration on a T step tree,
where T is the number of trading days in that particular month. The tree is recombining with m
branches emanating from each node. Every month we calibrate the tree by choosing the number

12

of branches, spacing, and transition probabilities at each node to match the first four moments of
the daily index return distribution, as described in the online Appendix B. We numerically
calculate the bounds in equations (1)-(3) by iterating backwards on the calibrated tree.

II.C

Portfolio Construction and Rebalancing

For each monthly stock return path, we employ the following rebalancing policies. For
the index trader (who manages a portfolio of the index and the risk free asset in the presence of
transaction costs), we employ the optimal trading policy, as derived in Constantinides (1986) and
extended in Perrakis and Czerwonko (2006) to allow for dividend yield on the stock.
Essentially, this policy consists of trading only to confine the ratio of the index value to the bond
value, yt / xt , within a no transactions region, defined by lower and upper boundaries.
We derive these boundaries for the following parameter values: one way transaction cost
rate on the index of 0.5%; annual return volatility of the index of 0.1856, the sample volatility
over 1928 to 1983; interest rate equal to the observed 3 month T bill date; risk premium 4%; and
constant relative risk aversion coefficient of 2. For this set of parameters, the lower and upper
boundaries are y0 / x0 = 1.2026 and 1.5259, respectively. At the beginning of each month and
before the trader trades in options, we set x0 = 73,300 and y0 = 100,000, which corresponds to the
midpoint of the no transactions region, y0 / x0 = 1.3642. We normalize the index price to y0
dollars so that the trader holds one unit of the index. In our empirical work, we verify the
robustness of our results to these parameter values and the initial portfolio composition.
For the option trader (who manages a portfolio of the option, index, and the risk free asset
in the presence of transaction costs), we set x0 and y0 to the same values as for the index trader.
The option trader writes or buys one call or one put on the index futures. We normalize the size
13

of a futures contract to be on one unit of the index; and we normalize the size of the futures
option to be on one futures contract.
The portfolio composition changes, depending on the assumed position in futures
options, as explained in Appendix B. We employ the trading policy which is optimal for the
index trader but is generally suboptimal for the option trader.

Recall that the goal is to

demonstrate that there exist profitable investment opportunities for the option trader. Given this
goal, it suffices to show that there exist profitable investment opportunities for the option trader
even though the option trader follows a generally suboptimal policy in trading the index.
We focus on the case where the basis risk bound, ε , is 0.5% of the index price. Over the
years from 1990 to 2002, 95% of all observations have basis risk less than 0.5% of the index
price. In Section IV, we argue that our empirical results are robust to the basis risk bound.

II.D

Empirical Methodology

For each of our methods of estimating the bounds, we obtain 247 monthly portfolio
returns for the index trader and the option trader, respectively. Our goal is to test whether the
portfolio profitability of the index and option traders are statistically different in the months in
which we observe violations of the bounds.
We apply the criterion of second order stochastic dominance (SSD), which states that the
dominating portfolio is preferred by any risk averse trader, independent of distributional
assumptions, such as normality, and preference assumptions, such as quadratic utility. Formally,
the OT portfolio stochastically dominates the IT portfolio if, for every z in the joint support of
their respective distributions, the following holds:

14

2
DIT2 ( z ) − DOT
( z ) ≥ 0,

(4)

with strict inequality for at least one value of z, where

z

DJ2 ( z ) = ∫ ( z − x ) dFJ ( x ) ,
z

(5)

J = OT , IT , FJ ( x) is the cumulative distribution function of the portfolio return, and z is the

lower bound of the common support.
First, we test the null hypothesis H 0 : IT ;2 OT against the alternative that either

OT ;2 IT or that neither one of the two distributions dominates the other. Hence, rejection of
the null hypothesis fails to rank the two distributions. We also test the converse null hypothesis
H 0 : OT ;2 IT against the alternative that either IT ;2 OT or that neither one of the two

distributions dominates the other.

For these hypotheses, we report the results of the test

proposed by Davidson and Duclos (2000) (DD (2000)), described in Appendix C. The test
requires that returns be serially uncorrelated, an assumption that holds well in all our return
series: the first order serial correlation ranges from -0.0267 to 0.0964 and is statistically
insignificant.
/ 2 IT which states that the option trader’s
Second, we test the null hypothesis H 0 : OT ;

portfolio return does not stochastically dominate the index trader’s portfolio return, against the
alternative hypothesis H A : OT ;2 IT , which states that the option trader’s portfolio return
stochastically dominates the index trader’s portfolio return. Rejection of this hypothesis means
that the option trader’s portfolio return stochastically dominates the index trader’s portfolio
15

return. Likewise, we test the converse null hypothesis H 0 : IT ;
/ 2 OT

against the alternative

hypothesis H A : IT ;2 OT . For these hypotheses, we report the results of the test proposed by
Davidson and Duclos (2006) (DD (2006)), described in Appendix C. We use the algorithm
developed by Davidson (2007). Again, the test requires that returns be serially uncorrelated, an
assumption that holds well in all our return series. Nolte (2008) investigates the power of the
DD (2006) when there are GARCH effects and finds that the test performs well.
The power of the DD (2006) test is low, unless one trims the tails of the paired outcomes.
Therefore, we trim 10% of the paired outcomes in the left tail of our sample distributions which
affects both the IT and OT returns similarly and is, therefore, innocuous. The trimming of the
right tail of the distribution presents a problem. Without any trimming on the right tail, the test
has low power. Trimming on the right, on the other hand, may bias our test towards rejection of
the null, because IT tends to produce superior results to OT when the return of the underlying
asset is high. For this reason, we present in our tables results with 0%, 5%, and 10% trimming
on the right. In the online Appendix C, we test the effects of such trimming on simulated data
that mirror our sample. Our simulations show that the test is, if anything, conservative in
rejecting the false null.

To facilitate interpretation, we perform all our statistical tests on

annualized arithmetic returns on the wealth of OT and IT investors.8
We choose the tests DD (2000) and DD (2006) because, unlike several alternatives, they
apply to correlated samples and are more powerful than other well known tests. For further
discussion, see Tse and Zhang (2003).

16

III

Empirical Results

In Section III.A, we describe the pattern of observed violations for the bounds with
respect to the degree of moneyness. In Section III.B, we present the main empirical results. We
compare the portfolio return of an option trader who writes good sell calls or puts at their bid
price with the portfolio return of an index trader who does not trade in the options over the
period from 1983 to 2006. We find that the return of an option writer stochastically dominates
the index trader’s return, net of transaction costs and the bid ask spread. Whereas we find a
substantial number of violations of the upper bounds, we find relatively few violations of the
lower bounds.

III.A The Pattern of Violations
In Figure 1, we plot the four bounds for one month options for May 22, 1996, expressed
in terms of the implied volatility, as a function of the moneyness, K / F . We set σ = 20% and

ε = 0 . The figure also displays the 95% confidence interval, derived by bootstrapping the 90
day distribution. The call upper bound is tighter than the put upper bound and both bounds are
downward sloping. The put lower bound is tighter than the call lower bound. The put lower
bound is downward sloping but the call lower bound is not.
[Figures 1 and 2 about here]
In Figure 2, we display the time pattern of actual violations of the call upper bound. The
crosses display the violations of the call upper bound for the period February 1983 to July 2006.
For the adjusted IV distributions, the first 21 dates are not in the sample because they are needed
to obtain the adjustment. The solid lines are the natural logarithm of the S&P 500 index, the
17

VIX index, and the T Bill rate. For all different ways of estimating volatility, we observe
violations after significant down moves in the index, when we expect the implied volatility to be
high.
[Table II about here]
In Table II, the violations are shown as a proportion of the quotes in each moneyness
range. We note that, for all methods of estimating the bounds, there is a large proportion of
violations. For the moneyness range 1.03-1.08, a large proportion of the available quotes violate
the corresponding bound for all estimation methods.
[Table III about here]
Table III shows the violations in each moneyness range, as a proportion of the total
number of quotes across the whole range of moneyness. The largest number of violations, as a
proportion of the total number of quotes, is found in the 1.01-1.03 moneyness range and not in
the 1.03-1.08 range because there are relatively few quotes in the latter range. For all estimation
methods, a majority of the identified violations are in the liquid range, 0.99-1.03. The exchange
regulations specify that the minimum number of available contracts must be at least 20 for each
quote. Our data also shows that the average size of the violation is between 5% and 56% of the
upper bound for most methods of estimating the bounds as we move from the 0.96-0.99 liquidity
range to the 1.03-1.08 liquidity range. In the stochastic dominance tests, the power of the tests
depends, by construction, on the proportion of months with observed violations.
We further investigate how the incidence of calls violating the upper bound relates to
characteristics of the options (moneyness, ATM implied volatility, volume of trade, and put call
ratio), the index (return, momentum, presence of jumps between trading dates, dividend yield,
skew, and volume of trade), the term structure, and the default spread. For each of the four

18

volatility prediction methods, we sort the sample of calls into terciles and report the average
fraction of violations in the top and bottom terciles. The results are reported in Table IV. The
incidence of violations is higher when the Moody Baa-Aaa default spread is high, when the
futures open interest is high, and also when momentum is high – all situations which suggest that
uncertainty of investors is rather high. This nervousness might then well transmit to the option
market and increase the likelihood of observing violating options. For all other characteristics,
we do not find a consistent pattern of violations because the incidence of violations depends on
the prediction method of the volatility as an input to the derivation of the bounds.
[Table IV about here]

III.B Empirical Evidence on Stochastic Dominance
We apply our statistical tests to all months in the sample, even though there are months in
which the OT trader does not trade in options and the returns in these months are identical for the
OT and IT portfolios, thereby making it harder for us to establish profitable (utility improving)
trading opportunities. In Table V, Panels A and B, we present the cases of call and put bid prices
violating their upper bound, when we set the basis risk bound at 0.5% of the index price. We
find a higher frequency of violations of the upper call bound than of the upper put bound because
the upper call bound is tighter than the upper put bound, as we observed in Figure 1.9
[Table V about here]
In our first test of stochastic dominance, we consider the hypothesis H 0 : OT ;2 IT ,
which states that the option trader’s return dominates the index trader’s return. We apply the DD
(2000) test and obtain p-values that exceed 10% for both the upper call bound and the put upper
bound.

19

In our second test, we consider the hypothesis H 0 : IT ;2 OT , which states that the index
trader’s return dominates the option trader’s return. Again, we apply the DD (2000) test. In
Table V, Panel A, the p-values are lower than 1% and the hypothesis is rejected when the option
trader writes good sell calls. In the first two rows of Panel B, the p-values exceed 10% but that is
largely because there are very few months in which we observe violations of the put upper
bound.
In our third test, we consider the hypothesis H 0 : IT ;/ 2 OT which states that either the
option trader’s return dominates the index trader’s return or that neither return dominates the
other. We apply the DD (2006) test and obtain p-values of one for both the upper call bound and
the put upper bound.
Finally, we consider the hypothesis H 0 : OT ;/ 2 IT , which states that either the index
trader’s return dominates the option trader’s return or that neither return dominates the other. As
we explained earlier, the power of the DD (2006) test is low, unless we trim the tails of the
paired outcomes. Therefore, we trim 10% of the paired outcomes in the left tail of our sample
distributions. Without trimming on the right tail, the test has low power and the p-values are
high in the two panels of Table V. Without trimming, we reject at the 10% level for one case in
Panel A. In Panel A, with either 5% or 10% trimming on the right tail, the null is rejected. In
Panel B, the results are inconclusive largely because there are few months in which we observe
violations of the put upper bound.
In Table V, the reported annualized return difference between the portfolios of the OT
and IT traders appear low because the written call is a small fraction of the dollar investment in
the portfolio: for each unit of the index held in the portfolio, the OT trader writes only one call.
In fact, the identified good sell call options provide average monthly returns of 12.3 – 43.2 % to
20

an investor who writes them at their bid price. The range 12.3 – 43.2 % corresponds to the four
different ways of estimating the volatility; in three out of these four cases, the average returns are
statistically significant according to the bootstrap test with 9,999 trials.
We repeat our run for the subset of OTM good sell calls with little change in the results.
To put these results in perspective, the average monthly returns of all call options written at their
bid price is 7.7 % and this return is not statistically significantly different from zero.
A second reason for the rather low portfolio returns is that we report the average return
difference of all months, including the months in which there are no violations of the bounds and
no option writing. For example, suppose that there are violations in n months and no violations
in m months; further suppose that the option writing over the n months increases the annualized
return in these months by x % on average.

In the table, we report the annualized return

difference as xn / ( n + m ) % and not as x %. As shown in the table, even the largest number of
dates with violations is still less than half the total number of dates in our sample. Therefore, the
excess returns attributable to the options strategies should properly be multiplied by a factor
greater than two. The economic significance can be further raised by employing portfolios with
more than one call option per unit of the underlying future. We defer the presentation of these
results until Section IV.B and Table VII which detail the robustness of our approach.
Overall, the results in Table V show that the relatively large number of violations of the
call upper bound by call bid prices leads to a trading policy where the option trader’s return
stochastically dominates the index trader’s return. Furthermore, the observed violations of the
call upper bound are economically significant: we find that stochastic dominance evades
rejection only after we artificially decrease the price of the written calls by 10-15%.

21

The statistical significance of violations of the put upper bound by put bid prices is weak
because there are few months in which we observe violations of the put upper bound. Since
several earlier studies such as Bondarenko (2003) and Driessen and Maenhout (2007) identify
short puts as highly attractive investments, we further investigate the issue of the existence of
good sell put options by testing the policy of shorting straddles and strangles triggered by
observing call options violating their upper bounds at the same or similar strike price. The
results, reported in the online Appendix D, are consistent with put mispricing documented in
these earlier studies.

IV

Robustness Tests

We address the robustness of the results to the composition of the trader’s initial portfolio
(Section IV.A), the number of written options (Section IV.B), the rebalancing of the portfolio
(Section IV.C), and the determination of the bounds (Section IV.D). We find that the results
presented in Table V are robust. In Section IV.E, we demonstrate that the option upper bounds
produce trading results superior to both a naïve trading policy and a policy based on the
Bernardo and Ledoit (2000) bounds.

IV.A Robustness to the Initial Portfolio Composition
We test the sensitivity of the results to the assumption that the index trader does not hold
any assets other than the risk free asset and the index. We vary the composition of the IT
portfolio by adding a broad range of risky assets and investigate whether the trader improves her
utility by writing the earlier identified good sell calls. The bounds that we rely upon are no

22

longer strictly valid because they are derived under the assumption that the index trader does not
hold any additional assets beyond the index and the risk free asset. Nevertheless, we rely on
these bounds to find good sell calls, thereby making it more challenging to find a profitable OT
strategy.
[Table VI about here]
In Table VI, we consider several cases where the IT portfolio differs from a portfolio
invested in the S&P 500 index and the risk free asset either by replacing the investment in the
S&P 500 index with investment in different indices (Panels A-C); or, by varying the percentage
investment in the index and broadening the portfolio to include the “high minus low” (HML) and
“small minus big” (SMB) excess returns of Fama and French (1993) and a real estate fund
(Panels D-F); in the online Appendix E, we also consider cases of open option positions. In all
cases, we find that the portfolio return of the option trader who writes good sell calls
stochastically dominates the return of the modified index trader.

IV.B Robustness to the Number of Written Options
The bounds stated in Constantinides and Perrakis (2007) are derived under the restriction
that the number of written calls does not exceed the number of units of the index held in the
portfolio. In Table VII, we show that, with an increase in the ratio to 1.5 options per unit index
the return gains to the OT portfolio range from 0.46% to 0.99%, while for a ratio of 2 these gains
become 0.62% to 1.32%; in both cases the tests show dominance of OT over IT. Only when the
ratio increases to 3 do the tests fail to establish dominance at conventional significance levels.
[Table VII about here]

23

IV.C Robustness to Portfolio Rebalancing
In Section II.C, we described the portfolio rebalancing policy of the index trader and the
option trader. The policy depends on the assumed risk aversion of the trader. For the results
presented in Tables V, we applied the portfolio rebalancing policy which is optimal for a trader
with risk aversion coefficient equal to two. We stress that neither the bounds nor the empirical
tests depend on the risk aversion of the trader.
[Table VIII about here]
We examine the robustness of our results to the trader’s rebalancing policy in three ways.
First, we replace the optimal rebalancing policy with a buy and hold policy, essentially
equivalent to assuming that the transaction cost is infinite. Since the upper and lower stochastic
dominance bounds on option prices are independent of the trader’s utility, we observe the same
number of violations as we do in Table V. The results of the stochastic dominance tests are
displayed in Table VIII and are virtually identical to those in Table V.
Second, we set the relative risk aversion coefficient at ten instead of two. The change in
the risk aversion coefficient only affects the portfolio rebalancing policy. The test results are
again virtually identical to those in Table V and are reported in the online Appendix F. The
reason for this robustness is that the no transactions region is wide and rebalancing is infrequent,
irrespective of the degree of risk aversion and irrespective of an exogenously imposed buy and
hold policy. Third, the test results are virtually unchanged when the starting portfolio is at either
boundary of the no transactions region.

24

IV.D Robustness to the Determination of the Bounds
In Table V, the bounds are calculated under the assumption that the futures basis risk is
within 0.5% of the index price, consistent with the observation that 95% of all observations over
1990 to 2002 have basis risk within 0.5% of the index price. As a robustness check, we suppress
the basis risk and present the results in the online Appendix G. The bounds become tighter and
there appear to be more violations. Since the upper call and put bounds are lower, the options
trader is less selective than before in writing options that violate their upper bounds. As in Table
V, the DD (2000) test does not reject the hypothesis H 0 : OT ;2 IT and rejects the hypothesis
H 0 : IT ;2 OT . With 10% trimming, the DD (2006) test rejects the hypothesis H 0 : OT ;/ 2 IT .

We conclude that the results in Table V are robust to basis risk.
Next, we set the expected premium on the index at 6% instead of 4%. Since the upper
call and put bounds are higher, the options trader is more selective than before in writing options
that violate these bounds. We also set the premium at 2%. The results are reported in the online
Appendix H. In all cases, the stochastic dominance results in writing calls are as strong as in
Table V. We conclude that the results in Table V are robust to the assumption that the expected
premium on the index is 4%.
Finally, we examine whether the unusually high implied volatility after the October 1987
crash affects our results by presenting unusually profitable utility improving trading
opportunities. We exclude from the sample the seven months from October 1987 to April 1988
and find that the test results are essentially the same as in Table V.

25

IV.E Comparison to Alternative Trading Rules
One may downplay our test results in identifying good sell options, arguing that they are
a consequence of the widely accepted view that OTM index calls and puts are “expensive” and
that even the naïve trading rule of indiscriminately writing all OTM calls and puts is “profitable”.
We address this concern by showing that neither a simple heuristic for trading options based on
observed option price percentiles for buying low and selling high nor an application of the
Bernardo and Ledoit (2000) bounds lead to out of sample portfolio returns that stochastically
dominate portfolio returns that do not trade in options.
[Table IX about here]
We compare the portfolio return of an index trader with the portfolio return of an option
trader who indiscriminately writes all available calls or puts on index futures every month. The
results are presented in the first two lines of Table IX, Panel A. Both the DD (2000) and DD
(2006) tests are weakly supportive of the hypothesis that the call option trader’s returns
stochastically dominate the index trader’s returns. This conclusion is not strengthened in Panels
B and C where the trader writes the top 10% and 2.5% of the calls, respectively, because of the
reduced sample size.
Next, we compare the portfolio return of an index trader with the portfolio return of a
naïve option trader who indiscriminately writes all available puts on index futures every month.
The results are presented in the second line of Table IX, Panel A. The DD (2006) test, with any
amount of trimming of the right hand tail, does not reject the hypothesis that the OT portfolio
does not dominate the IT portfolio. This suggests that indiscriminate writing of puts does not
improve the portfolio return in terms of the stochastic dominance criterion.

26

The results presented in the last two lines of Table IX, Panel A, B, and C, confirm the
obvious, that there is no evidence that indiscriminate buying of calls or puts leads to portfolio
returns that stochastically dominate the portfolio return of the index trader.
Overall, the naïve trading rules work well in a quarter of the cases: they work well in
writing calls but work poorly in writing puts, buying calls, or buying puts. Thus, the limited
success of the naïve trading rules appears to be fortuitous. By contrast, the trading rules based
on stochastic dominance bounds work well in practically all cases: they identify good sell calls
and puts and find very few good buy calls and puts.
Finally, we compare the portfolio return of an index trader with the portfolio return of an
alternative call trader who identifies good buy and good sell calls by applying the Bernardo and
Ledoit (BL, 2000) bounds. We apply the BL program specified for the Monte Carlo approach.
We simulate the terminal distribution for the S&P futures price under the risk neutral measure
for the future volatility estimates as before. Then for a given gain loss ratio we derive the lower
or upper bounds on call prices by applying a respective maximization or minimization program
to BL replicating portfolio constrained to satisfy this given gain loss ratio. Since we apply BL
bounds only to calls, neglecting the early exercise feature is innocuous for futures options.
Having estimated these bounds, we use them to search for the respective violations of the lower
and upper bounds as before. Note that deriving BL bounds for American put options presents
technical difficulties beyond the illustrative scope of our application.
[Table X about here]
The application of the BL bounds requires as input an exogenous parameter, the gain to
loss ratio. In Table X, Panels A and C, we report results for gain to loss ratio of 2. The results
for the upper bound are similar to the ones obtained for the CP upper bound in Table V;

27

however, the results for the lower bound are disastrous. Even when we increase the gain to loss
ratio to 4 (Panels B and D), which by design results in fewer good buys and good sells, these
results for the lower bound prevail when volatility is estimated unconditionally. At the same
time, we observe no evidence for stochastic dominance for the upper bound except for 90 day
volatility estimation mode; furthermore, in two cases we observe negative excess return to OT.

V

Concluding Remarks

We introduce a novel approach for empirical research in option pricing and apply it to
S&P 500 index futures options. We search for good sell and good buy American call and put
options on the S&P 500 index futures by employing stochastic dominance upper and lower
bounds on the prices of options. We find a substantial number of violations of the call upper
bounds, but relatively few violations of put upper bounds and even fewer of the call and put
lower bounds. Since the frequency of violations of these bounds is too low for statistical
inference, we focus on violations of the call upper bounds.

We observe that the highest

proportion of violations occur in the region of OTM calls, where the bounds are tight. We find,
however, that the largest number of violations are in the close to the money region and, hence,
likely to correspond to liquid options.
We compare the portfolio return of an option trader who writes good sell calls at their bid
price with the portfolio return of an index trader who does not trade in the options over the
period 1983 to 2006. In out of sample tests, our main result is that the return of a call writer
stochastically dominates the index trader’s return, net of transaction costs and the bid ask spread.
The dominance holds under a variety of methods for estimating the underlying return

28

distribution. It also holds when the trader is allowed to vary her portfolio position by adding
other risky assets beyond the index to her portfolio.
Our results are consistent with equilibrium in a segmented market along the following
lines.

Mutual funds exert price pressure on OTM index puts because they buy them as

insurance; and overoptimistic speculators exert price pressure on OTM calls because they buy
them as a leveraged bet. Furthermore, Garleanu, Pedersen, and Poteshman (2009) argue that
dealers inflate the prices of options. As we show in the paper, this presents opportunities for
individual investors to write good sell calls and enhance their portfolio returns, net of transaction
costs, in terms of the criterion of stochastic dominance. This can be an equilibrium if the number
of such traders and the scale of their trades are sufficiently small so that they do not eliminate the
overpricing. Large investors such as hedge funds who can potentially eliminate the overpricing
do not write these good sell options in a large scale because, as Santa-Clara and Saretto (2009)
point out, they face obstacles including margin calls and lack of market depth.

29

Appendix A: Data
S&P 500 futures have maturities only in months in the March quarterly cycle. Options
on the S&P 500 futures have maturities either in a month in the March quarterly cycle
(“quarterly options”) or in a month not in the March quarterly cycle (“serial options”). We
consider one month quarterly options written on one month futures and one month serial options
written on futures with the shortest maturity. We obtain the time stamped quotes of the one
month S&P 500 futures options and the underlying one month futures for the period February
1983 to July 2006 from the CME tapes.
From futures prices, we calculate the implied S&P 500 index prices by applying the cost
F
− T F −t
of carry relation Ft = (1 + γ ) ( ) RT −t St + ε t , assuming away basis risk, ε t ≡ 0 . Recall that our

goal is to compare the investment policies of the index trader and the option trader. Since both
policies stipulate approximately the same stock component, the effects of this component cancel
each other out. Also, it is common in empirical work to derive the index value from the index
futures; see, for example, Jackwerth and Rubinstein (1996).
We obtain the daily dividend record of the S&P 500 index over the period 1928 to 2006
from the S&P 500 Information Bulletin and convert it to a constant dividend yield for each 30
day period. Before April 1982, dividends are estimated from monthly dividend yields. We
obtain the interest rate as the three month T bill rate from the Federal Reserve Statistical Release
H.15. We estimate the variance of the basis risk, var ( ε t ) , from the observed futures prices and
the intraday time stamped S&P 500 record obtained from the CME.
We rescale the index price St by the multiplicative factor 100,000 / S 0 so that the index
price at the beginning of each 30 day period is 100,000. Accordingly, we rescale the futures
price, index futures option price, and strike by the same multiplicative factor.
30

We consider options maturing in 30 calendar days, which results in 247 sampling dates.
The 30 day rule eliminates the observation of the October 1987 crash from our sample.
Therefore, we use one 40 day period for October 1987 in order to observe the crash. Our results
remain unchanged. Since the first maturity of serial options was in August 1987, the first 19
periods occur with quarterly periodicity. Overall, we record 36,921 raw call quotes and 42,881
raw put quotes. After eliminating obvious data errors, we apply the following filters: minimum
15 cents for a bid quote and 25 cents for an ask quote; K/F ratio within 0.96-1.08 for calls and
within 0.92-1.04 for puts; and matching the underlying futures quote within 15 seconds. Part of
the data is lost due to the CME rule of flagging quotes, i.e. bids (asks) are flagged only if a bid
(ask) is higher (lower) than the preceding bid (ask); in addition, no transaction data is flagged.
We recover a large part of the data by analyzing the sequence between consecutive bid ask flags;
however, this recovery is not possible in all cases. As a result of the applied filters, we obtain
29,822 quotes for calls and 30,281 quotes for puts in our final sample. These quantities translate
into roughly 60 data points for all strikes for either bid or ask prices for an average day.

Appendix B: Trading Policy
We consider calls with moneyness (K/F) within the range 0.96-1.08 and puts within the
range 0.92-1.04. If we observe n call bid prices violating the call upper bound, each with
different strike price, then the option trader writes 1/ n calls of each type with the underlying
futures corresponding to the index value of y0 . The trader transfers the proceeds to the bond
account: x = x0 + ∑ i =1 Ci / n and y = y0 .
n

31

If we observe n put ask prices violating the put lower bound, each with different strike
price, the option trader buys 1/ n puts of each type and finances the purchase out of the bond
account: x = x0 − ∑i =1 Pi / n and y = y0 .
n

However, when there is a violation of the upper put bound and the option trader writes
puts, the trader also sells one futures contract for each written put. The intuition for this policy
may be gleaned from the observation that the combination of a written put and a short futures
amounts to a synthetic short call. In fact, the upper put bound in equation (3) is derived from the
upper call bound in equation (2) through the observation that if we can write a put at a
sufficiently high price we violate the upper call bound by writing a synthetic call.
Finally, when there is a violation of the lower call bound and the option trader buys calls,
the trader also sells one futures contract for each purchased call. The intuition is the same as
above.
The early exercise policy of a call is based on the function N in equation (2). However,
whenever the option trader is short an option, each period we derive the function N based on the
forward looking distribution of daily returns, i.e. this function is derived under the empirical
distribution of the daily index returns between the option trade and the option maturity.
Effectively, we endow the counterparty of the option trader with information on the 2nd, 3rd, and
4th moments of the forward distribution, while imposing the first moment. The early exercise
policy of a call or put is simplified by the observation that the decision is a function only of time
and the ratio of the strike price to the index level.

32

Appendix C: The Davidson and Duclos (2000, 2006) Tests

The sample counterpart of conditions (4) and (5), applied to the two distributions drawn
from their respective populations, is that we must have for every z in the joint support:

2
( z ) > 0,
Dˆ IT2 ( z ) − Dˆ OT

(C.1)

1 N
2
ˆ
DJ ( z ) = ∑ ( z − WJi )+ ,
N i =1

(C.2)

where

N is the number of paired outcomes, WJi is the ith outcome of the sample J, and ( x ) + ≡ max( x, 0) .
See DD (2000) for further details. Clearly, if (C.1) is violated at any point in the interior of the
joint support, the null of non dominance cannot be rejected. On the other hand, (C.1) becomes,
by definition, equality at one or both endpoints of the support. The DD (2006) test deals with
this problem by restricting the set of points over which (C.1)-(C.2) are estimated.
DD (2000) provide a test of the null hypothesis H 0 : OT ;2 IT in terms of the maximal
and minimal values of the extremal test statistic Tˆ ( z ) , defined below. The null is not rejected, if
the maximal value of the statistic is positive and statistically significant and the minimal value of
the statistic is either positive or negative and statistically not significant. As opposed to DD
(2006), this test may provide evidence for stochastic dominance even if we observe a negative
statistic Tˆ ( z ) .
The variable z denotes the annualized arithmetic return of a trader, where the subscripts
IT and OT distinguish between the index trader and the option trader. The statistic Tˆ ( z ) is
defined as follows:

33

2
( z)
Dˆ 2 ( z ) − Dˆ OT
Tˆ ( z ) = IT
,
Vˆ 2 ( z )

(C.3)

where the numerator is given by (C.1)-(C.2) and

2
( z ) − 2VˆIT2 ,OT ( z )
Vˆ 2 ( z ) = VˆIT2 ( z ) + VˆOT

1 ⎡1
VˆI2 ( z ) = ⎢
N ⎣N

N

∑ ( z −W )

2
Ii +

i =1

(C.4)

⎤
− Dˆ I2 ( z ) 2 ⎥ , I = IT , OT
⎦

(C.5)

and
1 ⎡1
2
VˆOT
, IT ( z ) =
N ⎢⎣ N

N

∑ ( z −W ) ( z −W )
i =1

ITi +

OTi +

⎤
2
− Dˆ IT2 ( z ) Dˆ OT
( z)⎥ .
⎦

(C.6)

The maximal and minimal values of the statistic are calculated as a maximum and minimum of
(C.3) over a set of points of z, as explained below. Stoline and Ury (1979) provide tables for the
nonstandard distribution of the maximal and minimal value of Tˆ ( z ) at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels. In principle, the number of points in this joint support over which the test may be
performed needs to be restricted since a ‘large’ number of these points violate the independence
assumption between the Tˆ ( z ) s. Therefore, we compute these statistics for 20 points, equally
spaced in the joint support of WIT and WOT (including the endpoints) which corresponds to k =
20 in the Stoline and Ury (1979) tables.
By contrast, DD (2006) develop the concept of restricted stochastic dominance in testing
the null hypothesis H 0 : OT ;
/ 2 IT . The test derives the minimal Tˆ ( z ) -statistic over a suitably
34

restricted interval in the joint support for IT and OT. The restriction for the testing interval
comes from the observation that a minimal Tˆ ( z ) -statistic may not be significant by any
distributional standards in the tails of the distribution, be it a sample or a population. It can be
easily shown that the leftmost t-statistic is approximately equal to 1, by construction. The
numerator of the rightmost t-statistic is simply given by (C.1) the difference of the sample
means, which implies that testing for SSD at the largest observed outcome corresponds to testing
for the significance in the difference in the sample means; this condition is much stronger than
necessary for SSD. Having derived the minimal Tˆ ( z ) -statistic in a restricted interval, the DD
(2006) test applies a bootstrap procedure to the entire data to derive the p-value for the test as
described below.
A necessary condition for applying DD (2006) is that condition (C.1) holds for our
sample.

By our trading strategies, condition (C.1) holds over the left side of the return

distribution. Its validity, therefore, needs to be tested only over the right side, in which case it
corresponds to the positivity of the difference of the means of the two samples. We verify this
positivity in all cases and, wherever it is satisfied in the sample, we subject it to further
verification by block bootstrapping 10 years of results from our data. In almost all cases the
bootstrap results confirm the sign of the means’ difference.
The test statistic Tˆ ( z ) is the same as in DD (2000) and is given by (C.3)-(C.6). This
statistic is computed for the values of z that are sample points within the restricted interval, i.e.,
in this interval we have coupled observations of WIT and WOT , transformed to annualized
arithmetic returns. As opposed to the DD (2000) test, there is no restriction on the number of
these points and we compute the minimal value of Tˆ ( z ) in the restricted interval. It may be
shown that Tˆ ( z ) is monotonic between the sample points; therefore the minimal value of Tˆ ( z )
35

may be found only at a sample point. If the minimal value is negative anywhere in the full
support, the null of non dominance is accepted with p-value of 1. In this regard, the DD (2006)
test is more conservative than the DD (2000) test. The latter test verifies whether an extreme
negative Tˆ ( z ) is significant for the null

H 0 : IT ;2 OT

while the former test accepts the null of non

dominance. Otherwise, we apply the bootstrap approach for the derivation of the p-values for
the null hypothesis, as described in detail in DD (2006) and Davidson (2007). These are simply
the number of cases for which the minimal Tˆ ( z ) under the bootstrap distribution exceeds the
minimum Tˆ ( z ) of our sample divided by the number of bootstraps.
In our tests, we use 999 bootstrap replications in order to derive the p-values in the tables.
The bootstrap procedure samples all observed coupled values of WIT and WOT under artificial
probabilities derived for the empirical likelihood maximization under the condition that that the
T ( z)

is set equal to zero at the sample point at which it attains its minimum. See Davidson

(2007) for further details.
There is a cost in adopting the DD (2006) null, because, as it can be analytically shown,
this null cannot be rejected over the entire support of the sample distribution. DD (2006)
overcome this problem by restricting the interval over which the null may be rejected to the
interior of the support, excluding points at the edges. They then show by simulation that
inference on the basis of this restricted interval constitutes the most powerful available inference
on the existence of stochastic dominance. In the case of correlated (coupled) samples, the
procedure for restricting the interval in the right tail is to start by trimming two pairs of data
points: one with the maximal WIT and the corresponding WOT , and one with the maximal WOT
and the corresponding WIT . We continue in a similar way until the desired degree of trimming is
reached. An analogous procedure is implemented in the left tail. Note that the DD (2006) test
36

results for such a procedure are more conservative than those resulting from trimming pairs of
observations in the extremes of the tails of the distribution, irrespective of the sample (OT or IT)
to which this extreme belongs.
In the online Appendix C, using simulated data with characteristics that mirror our
sample, we compute the rejection probabilities of the null hypothesis when it is true as well as
when it is false. DD (2006) is a weak test without trimming, since it has very low probabilities
of rejection of the non dominance null even when it is false. With 5% trimming, the test is still
conservative as far as rejecting the false non dominance null. Problems with rejection of the null
when it is true occur only for deep out of the money options. For this reason, we repeat the
stochastic dominance tests for the call upper bound in Panel A of Table V for a restricted
moneyness range, i.e. by removing violating OTM calls outside the range from the sample. The
results are reported in Table I and remain essentially unchanged.

37

References

Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, and Andrew W. Lo, 2000, “Nonparametric Risk Management and Implied
Risk Aversion,” Journal of Econometrics 94, 9-51.
Baillie, Richard T., and Tim Bollerslev, 1992, “Prediction in Dynamic Models with Time
Dependent Conditional Variances,” Journal of Econometrics 52, 91-113.
Bernardo, Antonio E., and Olivier Ledoit, 2000, “Gain, Loss, and Asset Pricing,” Journal of
Political Economy 108, 144-172.
Bogle, John C., 2005, “The Mutual Fund Industry 60 Years Later: For Better or Worse?”
Financial Analyst Journal 61, 15-24.
Bondarenko, Oleg, 2003, “Statistical Arbitrage and Securities Prices,” Review of Financial
Studies 16, 875-919.
Cerny, Ales, 2004, “Introduction to Fast Fourier Transform in Finance,” Journal of Derivatives
12, 73-88.
Constantinides, George M., 1986, “Capital Market Equilibrium with Transaction Costs,” Journal
of Political Economy 94, 842-862.
Constantinides, George M., Jens C. Jackwerth, and Stylianos Perrakis, 2009, “Mispricing of S&P
500 Index Options,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 1247-1277
Constantinides, George M., and Stylianos Perrakis, 2002, “Stochastic Dominance Bounds on
Derivatives Prices in a Multiperiod Economy with Proportional Transaction Costs,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 26, 1323-1352.
Constantinides, George M., and Stylianos Perrakis, 2007, “Stochastic Dominance Bounds on
American Option Prices in Markets with Frictions,” Review of Finance 11, 71-115.

38

Coval, Joshua D., and Tyler Shumway, 2001, “Expected Option Returns,” Journal of Finance
56, 983-1009.
Davidson, Russell, 2007, “Testing for Restricted Stochastic Dominance: Some Further Results,”
Working Paper, McGill University, http://russell-davidson.arts.mcgill.ca/articles/higherorder.pdf.
Davidson, Russell, and Jean-Yves Duclos, 2000, “Statistical Inference for Stochastic Dominance
and for the Measurement of Poverty and Inequality,” Econometrica 68, 1435-1464.
Davidson, Russell, and Jean-Yves Duclos, 2006, “Testing for Restricted Stochastic Dominance,”
Working Paper, McGill University, http://www.ecineq.org/milano/WP/ECINEQ200636.pdf.
Driessen, Joost, and Pascal J. Maenhout, 2007, “An Empirical Portfolio Perspective on Option
Pricing Anomalies,” Review of Finance 11, 561-603.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Garleanu, Nicolae, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Allen M. Poteshman, 2009, “Demand Based Option
Pricing,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 4259-4299.
Jackwerth, Jens C., 2000, “Recovering Risk Aversion from Option Prices and Realized Returns,”
Review of Financial Studies 13, 433-451.
Jackwerth, Jens C., and Mark Rubinstein, 1996, “Recovering Probability Distributions from
Option Prices,” Journal of Finance 51, 1611-1631.
Nelson, Daniel M., 1991, “Conditional Heteroskedasticity in Asset Returns: A New Approach,”
Econometrica 59, 347-370.

39

Nolte, Ingmar, 2008, “Stochastic Dominance Tests under Test,” Working paper, University of
Konstanz.
Oancea, Ioan M., and Stylianos Perrakis, 2009, “Jump Diffusion Option Valuation Without a
Representative Investor: A Stochastic Dominance Approach”, Working paper, Concordia
University, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1360800.
Perrakis, Stylianos, and Michal Czerwonko, 2006, “Transaction Costs and Stochastic Dominance
Efficiency in the Index Futures Options Market,” Working paper, Concordia University,
http://ssrn.com/abstract=891254.
Rosenberg, Joshua V., and Robert F. Engle, 2002, “Empirical Pricing Kernels,” Journal of
Financial Economics 64, 341-372.
Rubinstein, Mark, 1994, “Implied Binomial Trees,” Journal of Finance 49, 771-818.
Rubinstein, Mark, 1998, “Edgeworth Binomial Trees,” Journal of Derivatives 5, 20-27.
Santa-Clara, Pedro, and Alessio Saretto, 2009, “Option Strategies: Good Deals and Margin
Calls,” Journal of Financial Markets 12, 391-417.
Stoline, Michael R., and Hans K. Ury, 1979, “Tables of the Studentized Maximum Modulus
Distribution and an Application to Multiple Comparisons among Means,” Technometrics
21, 87-93.
Tse, Y. K., and Xibin Zhang, 2003, “A Monte Carlo Investigation of Some Tests for Stochastic
Dominance,” Working paper, Monash University,
http://ideas.repec.org/p/msh/ebswps/2003-7.html.

40

Table I
Prediction Error of Monthly Volatility, 1983-2006
The errors are defined as the difference between the monthly volatility and the volatility predicted by a given mode.
The unconditional volatility is the sample standard deviation over the period January 1928 to January 1983. The 90
day volatility is the sample standard deviation over the preceding 90 trading days. The adjusted IV is the ATM IV
on the preceding day, adjusted by the mean prediction error for all dates preceding the given date, where we drop
from the preceding days all 21 pre crash observations. The EGARCH volatility is the volatility using EGARCH
coefficients estimated for S&P 500 daily returns over January 1928 to January 1983 and applied to residuals
observed over the 90 days preceding each sample date to form projections of the volatility realized till the option
expiration date.
Prediction
mode
Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

Mean

Median

St. dev.

Skew.

Ex. Kurt.

0.0429
0.0095
-0.0005
0.0177

0.0649
0.0076
0.0002
0.0185

0.0680
0.0595
0.0496
0.0531

-1.7300
0.2687
-0.2625
0.0936

3.8296
5.2490
3.4680
7.8302

41

Table II
Percentage of Call Quotes with Violations of the Upper Bound
The table displays the percentages of call bids violating the call upper bound out of all bid quotes observed in each
respective moneyness bracket.

Volatility
prediction
mode
Unconditional
90 day
IV Adjusted
EGARCH

Moneyness (K/F) Range
0.96-0.99
3.3
4.8
4.1
2.3

0.99-1.01
5.8
16.1
15.2
6.5

1.01-1.03
8.6
32.2
30.5
14.1

1.03-1.08
20.6
45.4
30.3
24.3

42

Table III
Percentage of Call Quotes with Violations of the Upper Bound out of the Total Number of Quotes
The table displays the percentages of call bids violating the call upper bound in each respective moneyness bracket
out of the total number of observed bid quotes.
Volatility
prediction
mode
Unconditional
90 day
IV Adjusted
EGARCH

#months
with viol.
(#months)
43 (247)
100 (247)
120 (226)
65 (247)

Moneyness (K/F) Range
0.96-0.99
0.4
0.5
0.3
0.3

0.99-1.01
1.7
4.8
4.6
1.9

1.01-1.03
3.5
13.2
12.9
5.8

1.03-1.08
3.8
8.4
5.9
4.5

All
9.4
26.9
23.7
12.5

43

Table IV
Pattern of Bounds Violations
The classified variable is the ratio of the quotes in violation of the call upper bound to the overall number of call bid
quotes observed in a given cross section. The number of cross sections is 247 for all volatility prediction modes
except for Adjusted IV where it is 226. The overall means (std) of the classified variable for each volatility
prediction mode are: unconditional 0.13 (0.32), 90 day 0.22 (0.35), Adjusted IV 0.24 (0.32), EGARCH 0.13 (0.29).
Option characteristics: mean K/F is the average moneyness of call bid quotes, ATM IV is the average implied
volatility of several bid and ask quotes for calls and puts closely bracketing K/F ratio of 1, call and put volume (open
interest) is the natural logarithm of the respective volume (open interest) recorded on the previous day net of the
natural logarithm of the average of the respective volume (open interest) over the past 90 calendar days, put call
ratio or similar ratio for open interest was recorded on the previous day. Index characteristics: return is the S&P 500
index excess return over the previous month, momentum is the ratio of the previous day S&P 500 index level to its
average level over the past year, negative (positive) jumps represent the number of the S&P 500 daily returns lower
than -4% (greater than 4%) recorded over the past 30 calendar days (it was found 15 (16) occurrences for negative
(positive) jumps in total), yield is the ratio of dollar dividends over the past year to the previous day S&P 500 index
level, left (right) skew is the implied volatility for the K/F ratio of 0.96 net of ATM IV (ATM IV net of the implied
volatility for the K/F ratio of 1.04), futures volume (open interest) is the natural logarithm of the futures volume
(open interest) recorded on the previous day net of the natural logarithm of the average of the futures volume (open
interest) over the past 90 calendar days. Interest characteristics: interest rate is the three month T bill rate, yield
slope is the difference between the yield of 10 and 1 year to maturity CRSP indices for government bonds, Moody’s
Baa-Aaa is the difference between the baskets of Baa and Aaa ranked corporate bonds.

44

Sort based on:
Option Characteristics
mean K/F
ATM IV
call volume
put volume
OTM put volume
call open interest
put open interest
OTM put open interest
put call ratio
put call ratio, open interest
Index Characteristics
return
momentum
negative jumps(a)
positive jumps(a)
yield
left skew
right skew
futures volume
futures open interest
Interest Characteristics
interest rate
yield slope
Moody’s Baa-Aaa

Unconditional
Bottom
Top
Tercile Tercile

Volatility Prediction Mode
90 day
Adjusted IV
Bottom
Top
Bottom
Top
Tercile Tercile Tercile Tercile

EGARCH
Bottom
Top
Tercile Tercile

0.042
0.000
0.109
0.110
0.103
0.130
0.139
0.138
0.150
0.228

0.278
0.385
0.178
0.137
0.152
0.186
0.152
0.167
0.124
0.079

0.087
0.100
0.117
0.161
0.188
0.172
0.180
0.221
0.167
0.226

0.331
0.373
0.298
0.263
0.241
0.271
0.274
0.185
0.225
0.197

0.248
0.243
0.303
0.288
0.309
0.255
0.267
0.240
0.234
0.225

0.185
0.182
0.205
0.227
0.230
0.250
0.246
0.249
0.234
0.275

0.074
0.028
0.082
0.127
0.105
0.109
0.090
0.102
0.126
0.211

0.194
0.275
0.186
0.097
0.078
0.172
0.162
0.198
0.066
0.064

0.244
0.045
0.095
0.109
0.172
0.121
0.042
0.090
0.066

0.093
0.312
0.784
0.639
0.116
0.189
0.276
0.184
0.212

0.357
0.242
0.211
0.224
0.219
0.166
0.160
0.155
0.159

0.156
0.286
0.302
0.010
0.208
0.255
0.261
0.301
0.290

0.226
0.184
0.248
0.251
0.186
0.341
0.357
0.267
0.218

0.261
0.229
0.115
0.006
0.381
0.117
0.150
0.252
0.284

0.146
0.099
0.119
0.135
0.126
0.103
0.118
0.118
0.098

0.192
0.223
0.343
0.000
0.145
0.159
0.189
0.151
0.193

0.150
0.107
0.033

0.128
0.134
0.274

0.205
0.191
0.205

0.231
0.178
0.258

0.292
0.239
0.134

0.281
0.292
0.317

0.124
0.098
0.104

0.149
0.101
0.208

(a) Instead of terciles, the classified variable was split for dates without and with jumps in the preceding 30 calendar
days.

45

Table V
Returns of Call Trader and Index Trader
Equally weighted average of all violating options equivalent to one option per share was traded at each date. The
symbols * and ** denote a difference in sample means of the OT and IT traders significant at the 5% and 1% levels in
a one sided bootstrap test with 9,999 trials. Maximal t-statistics for Davidson and Duclos (DD, 2000) test are
compared to critical values of Studentized Maximum Modulus Distribution tabulated in Stoline and Ury (1979) for
three nominal levels of 1, 5, and 10% with k = 20 and ν = ∞ . The p-values for H 0 : OT ;2 IT are greater than 10%,
the highest nominal level available in the Stoline and Ury (1979) tables. The p-values for the Davidson and Duclos
(2006) test are based on 999 bootstrap trials. The p-values for H 0 : IT ;/ 2 OT are equal to one.
DD (2006) p-value H 0 : OT ;/ 2 IT

Volatility
prediction
mode

#months
with viol.
(# months)

μˆOT − μˆ IT

DD (2000)
p-value

(annualized)

H 0 : IT ;2 OT

Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

43 (247)
100 (247)
120 (226)
65 (247)

0.0031
0.0043
0.0066*
0.0062**

A: Call Upper Bound
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

0.244
0.166
0.119
0.079

0.024
0.007
0.029
0.000

0.000
0.002
0.000
0.000

Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

23 (247)
16 (247)
4 (226)
9 (247)

0.0009
-0.0008
n/a
n/a

B: Put Upper Bound
>0.1
>0.1
n/a
n/a

0.399
1
n/a
n/a

0.203
1
n/a
n/a

0.154
1
n/a
n/a

10% trimming in left tail, trimming in
right tail as below:
5%
10%
no trimming
trimming
trimming

46

Table VI
Robustness Tests of the Initial Portfolio Composition
Equally weighted average of all violating options equivalent to one option per share was traded at each date. The
symbols * and ** denote a difference in sample means of the OT and IT traders significant at the 5% and 1% levels
in a one sided bootstrap test with 9,999 trials. Maximal t-statistics for Davidson and Duclos (DD, 2000) test are
compared to critical values of Studentized Maximum Modulus Distribution tabulated in Stoline and Ury (1979) for
three nominal levels of 1, 5, and 10% with k = 20 and ν = ∞ . The p-values for H 0 : OT ;2 IT ,are greater than 10%,
the highest nominal level available in the Stoline and Ury (1979) tables. The p-values for the Davidson and Duclos
(2006) test are based on 999 bootstrap trials. The p-values for H 0 : IT ;/ 2 OT are equal to one. MSCI denotes
Morgan Stanley Capital Index (in Panel E data was absent for the first four dates in our sample). REIT denotes real
estate investment fund. HML and SMB denote Fama and French factors, i.e. HML denotes a portfolio long in two
value portfolios and short in two growth portfolios and SMB denotes a portfolio long in three small cap portfolios
and short in three large cap portfolios. See Fama and French (1993) for details.
DD (2006) p-value H 0 : OT ;/ 2 IT
10% trimming in left tail, trimming in
μˆ OT − μˆ IT
right tail as below:
(annualized) H : IT ; OT
0
2
5%
10%
no trimming
trimming
trimming
A: 100% CRSP Value Weighted Index in Stock Account
Unconditional
43 (247)
0.0031
<0.01
0.244
0.001
0.001
90 day
100 (247)
0.0043
<0.01
0.174
0.007
0.000
Adjusted IV
120 (226)
0.0066*
<0.01
0.124
0.014
0.000
EGARCH
65 (247)
0.0062**
<0.01
0.084
0.000
0.000
B: 100% MSCI in Stock Account
Unconditional
43 (247)
0.0031
<0.05
0.244
0.031
0.000
90 day
100 (247)
0.0043
<0.01
0.174
0.015
0.003
Adjusted IV
120 (226)
0.0066*
<0.01
0.124
0.019
0.010
EGARCH
65 (247)
0.0062**
<0.01
0.084
0.003
0.000
C: 60% of S&P 500 and 40% of CRSP Zimen REIT Value Weighted Index in Stock Account
Unconditional
43 (247)
0.0031
<0.05
0.244
0.038
0.002
90 day
100 (247)
0.0043
<0.01
0.175
0.018
0.000
Adjusted IV
120 (226)
0.0066*
<0.01
0.124
0.050
0.006
<0.01
0.083
0.000
0.000
EGARCH
65 (247)
0.0062**
D: 60% of S&P 500, 20% of HML and 20% of SMB in Stock Account
Unconditional
43 (247)
0.0031
<0.05
0.244
0.126
0.038
90 day
100 (247)
0.0043
<0.01
0.149
0.056
0.012
Adjusted IV
120 (226)
0.0066*
<0.01
0.133
0.052
0.000
EGARCH
65 (247)
0.0062**
<0.01
0.072
0.006
0.000
E: 60% of S&P 500 and 40% of Barclays Aggregate US Bond Index in Stock Account
Unconditional
33 (212)
0.0026
<0.05
0.288
0.100
0.031
90 day
84 (212)
0.0056*
<0.01
0.150
0.018
0.000
Adjusted IV
94 (212)
0.0060
<0.01
0.162
0.094
0.000
<0.01
0.087
0.003
0.000
EGARCH
48 (212)
0.0065*
F: 60% of S&P 500 and 40% of Moody’s Commodity Index in Stock Account
Unconditional
43 (247)
0.0031
<0.05
0.244
0.106
0.042
90 day
100 (247)
0.0043
<0.01
0.175
0.034
0.001
Adjusted IV
120 (226)
0.0066*
<0.01
0.124
0.061
0.021
<0.01
0.085
0.000
0.000
EGARCH
65 (247)
0.0062**
Volatility
prediction
mode

#months
with viol.
(# months)

DD (2000)
p-value

47

Table VII
Robustness Tests to the Number of Written Calls
Equally weighted average of all violating options was traded at each date. The symbols * and ** denote a difference
in sample means of the OT and IT traders significant at the 5% and 1% levels in a one sided bootstrap test with
9,999 trials. Maximal t-statistics for Davidson and Duclos (DD, 2000) test are compared to critical values of
Studentized Maximum Modulus Distribution tabulated in Stoline and Ury (1979) for three nominal levels of 1, 5,
and 10% with k = 20 and ν = ∞ . The p-values for H 0 : OT ;2 IT are greater than 10%, the highest nominal level
available in the Stoline and Ury (1979) tables. The p-values for the Davidson and Duclos (2006) test are based on
999 bootstrap trials. The p-values for H 0 : IT ;/ 2 OT are equal to one.

μˆOT − μˆ IT

DD (2000)
p-value

(annualized)

H 0 : IT ;2 OT

DD (2006) p-value H 0 : OT ;
/ 2 IT

Volatility
prediction mode

#months
with viol.
(# months)

Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

43 (247)
100 (247)
120 (226)
65 (247)

A: One and Half Calls per Unit of Index
0.0046
<0.01
0.244
0.0064
<0.01
0.166
<0.01
0.122
0.0099*
<0.01
0.097
0.0092**

0.089
0.055
0.053
0.018

0.000
0.006
0.000
0.000

Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

43 (247)
100 (247)
120 (226)
65 (247)

0.0062
0.0086
0.0132*
0.0123**

B: Two Calls per Unit of Index
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

0.242
0.166
0.121
0.095

0.125
0.084
0.055
0.031

0.026
0.025
0.006
0.000

Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

43 (247)
100 (247)
120 (226)
65 (247)

C: Three Calls per Unit of Index
0.0093
>0.1
0.0128
>0.1
>0.1
0.0198*
>0.1
0.0185**

0.221
0.125
0.363
0.169

0.203
0.161
0.363
0.179

0.203
0.177
0.363
0.185

10% trimming in left tail, trimming in right tail as
below:
no trimming
5% trimming
10% trimming

48

Table VIII
Robustness Tests to Buy and Hold Portfolio with 50% in S&P 500
Equally weighted average of all violating options was traded at each date. The symbols * and ** denote a difference in sample means of the OT
and IT traders significant at the 5% and 1% levels in a one sided bootstrap test with 9,999 trials. Maximal t-statistics for Davidson and Duclos
(DD, 2000) test are compared to critical values of Studentized Maximum Modulus Distribution tabulated in Stoline and Ury (1979) for three
nominal levels of 1, 5, and 10% with k = 20 and

ν = ∞ . The p-values for H 0 : OT ;2 IT are greater than 10%, the highest nominal level

available in the Stoline and Ury (1979) tables. The p-values for the Davidson and Duclos (2006) test are based on 999 bootstrap trials. The pvalues for H 0 : IT ;/ 2 OT are equal to one. Equally weighted average of all violating options was traded at each date. The symbols * and

**

denote a difference in sample means of the OT.

Volatility
prediction mode

#months
with viol.
(# months)

μˆOT − μˆ IT

DD (2000)
p-value

(annualized)

H 0 : IT ;2 OT

Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

43 (247)
100 (247)
120 (226)
65 (247)

0.0031
0.0048
0.0065*
0.0065**

A: Call Upper Bound
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

DD (2006) p-value H 0 : OT ;
/ 2 IT
10% trimming in left tail, trimming in right tail as
below:
no trimming
5% trimming
10% trimming

0.244
0.175
0.124
0.086

0.032
0.012
0.034
0.000

0.000
0.002
0.000
0.000

49

Table IX
Returns of Naïve Options Trader and Index Trader
Equally weighted average of all violating options equivalent to one option per share was traded at each date. The
symbols *, **, and *** denote a difference in sample means of the OT and IT traders significant at the 10, 5 and 1%
level in a one sided bootstrap test with 9,999 trials. Maximal t-statistics for Davidson and Duclos (DD, 2000) test
are compared to critical values of Studentized Maximum Modulus Distribution tabulated in Stoline and Ury (1979)
for three nominal levels of 1, 5, and 10% with k = 20 and ν = ∞ . The p-values for H 0 : OT ;2 IT are greater than
10%, the highest nominal level available in the Stoline and Ury (1979) tables. The p-values for the Davidson and
Duclos (2006) test are based on 999 bootstrap trials. The p-values for H 0 : IT ;/ 2 OT are equal to one.
DD (2006) p-value H 0 : OT ;/ 2 IT
10% trimming in left tail, trimming in right
tail as below:
0%
5%
10%

Trade type
or
Volatility
Est. Mode

#months
with viol.
(# months)

μˆ OT − μˆ IT

DD (2000)
p-value

(annualized)

H 0 : IT ;2 OT

Short call
Short put
Long call
Long put

247 (247)
247 (247)
247 (247)
247 (247)

0.0060
0.0078
-0.0403***
-0.0292***

0.207
0.280
1
1

0.093
0.186
1
1

0.007
0.060
1
1

58 (243)
67 (243)
73 (243)
95 (243)

B: 10th or 90th Critical Quantile
0.0041
<0.01
0.195
0.0034
<0.01
0.331
-0.0149***
>0.1
1
-0.0058
>0.1
1

0.146
0.232
1
1

0.023
0.100
1
1

32 (243)
36 (243)
27 (243)
45 (243)

C: 2.5th or 97.5th Critical Quantile
0.0057
<0.01
0.073
0.0022
>0.1
0.359
-0.0038
>0.1
1
0.0000
>0.1
0.482

0.069
0.225
1
0.477

0.094
0.051
1
0.345

Short call
Short put
Long call
Long put

Short call
Short put
Long call
Long put

A: All Quantiles
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

50

Table X
Good Buy and Good Sell Calls Using the Bernardo and Ledoit (2000) Method
The symbols *, ** and *** denote a difference in sample means of the OT and IT traders significant at the 5% and 1%
levels in a one sided bootstrap test with 9,999 trials. Maximal t-statistics for Davidson and Duclos (DD, 2000) test
are compared to critical values of Studentized Maximum Modulus Distribution tabulated in Stoline and Ury (1979)
for three nominal levels of 1, 5, and 10% with k = 20 and ν = ∞ . The p-values for H 0 : OT ;2 IT are greater than
10%, the highest nominal level available in the Stoline and Ury (1979) tables. The p-values for the Davidson and
Duclos (2006) test are based on 999 bootstrap trials. The p-values for H 0 : IT ;/ 2 OT are equal to one.

μˆ OT − μˆ IT

DD (2000)
p-value

(annualized)

H 0 : IT ;2 OT

DD (2006) p-value H 0 : OT ;/ 2 IT

Volatility
prediction
mode

#months
with viol.
(# months)

Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

46 (247)
141 (247)
162 (226)
91 (247)

A: Upper Bound (Gain to Loss Ratio = 2)
0.0008
<0.01
0.436
0.0012
<0.01
0.426
0.0082
<0.01
0.153
0.0063
<0.01
0.152

0.150
0.190
0.083
0.056

0.000
0.048
0.013
0.011

Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

20 (247)
57 (247)
75 (226)
27 (247)

B: Upper Bound (Gain to Loss Ratio = 4)
-0.0012
>0.1
1
0.0039
<0.01
0.203
0.0013
<0.01
0.387
-0.0036
>0.1
1

1
0.102
0.325
1

1
0.014
0.135
1

Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

156 (247)
43 (247)
11 (226)
64 (247)

C: Lower Bound (Gain to Loss Ratio = 2)
-0.0248***
>0.1
1
-0.0080
>0.1
1
-0.0014
>0.1
1
-0.0123*
>0.1
1

1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1

Unconditional
90 day
Adjusted IV
EGARCH

104 (247)
7 (247)
2 (226)
13 (247)

D: Lower Bound (Gain to Loss Ratio = 4)
-0.0163**
>0.1
1
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
-0.0015
>0.1
1

1
n/a
n/a
1

1
n/a
n/a
1

10% trimming in left tail, trimming in
right tail as below:
5%
10%
no trimming
trimming
trimming

51

Figure 1. Illustration of upper and lower bounds on call and put options. Bounds are derived for σ = 0.20
imposed on a 90 day past distribution of daily S&P 500 returns for May 22, 1996. 95% upper and lower confidence
intervals represented by dotted lines are derived by bootstrapping the 90 day distribution. The results exemplify the
dependence of the bounds on the third and fourth moments of the distribution because the width in of the confidence
intervals is determined solely by varying the skewness and kurtosis, i.e. the bootstrap changes only these quantities.

52

Figure 2. Time distribution of observed violations. The crosses display the violations of the call upper bound for the
period February 1983 to July 2006. For the adjusted IV distribution, the first 21 dates are not in the sample. To facilitate
presentation, the S&P Index was transformed to a logarithmic scale. The inception date of the VIX index was on
February 4th, 1986. The value for VIX just prior to the October 1987 crash was 170% and is trimmed to facilitate
presentation.

53

Footnotes
1

In the online appendix A, we demonstrate the ability of the lower bounds to identify good buy options by showing

that a portfolio with long positions in options bought at artificial prices equal to the lower bound stochastically
dominates a portfolio without them.
2

In the absence of transaction costs and additional state variables, Oancea and Perrakis (2009) show that the bounds

nest the jump diffusion and stochastic volatility option pricing models.
3

For example, a trader who holds 100 shares of stock and a net short position in 200 call options violates the

monotonicity condition, while a trader who holds 200 shares of stock and a net short position in 200 call options
satisfies the condition. Essentially, we assume that the traders have a sufficiently large investment in the stock,
relative to their net short position in call options (or, net long positions in put options), such that the monotonicity
condition is satisfied.
4

The reservation write price of a call is derived from the perspective of a trader who is marginal in the index, the

bond, and only one type of call or put option at a time. Therefore, these bounds allow for the possibility that the
options market is segmented.
5

We prove equation (3) by noting that an investor achieves an arbitrage profit by buying a call at C ( Ft , St , t ) ,

writing a put at P , P > P ( Ft , S t , t ) , selling one futures, and lending K − R

−(T −t )

Ft . In the proof, we ignore the daily

marking to market on the futures until the exercise of the put or the options’ maturity, whichever comes first. This
matters little because the investor has a large investment in the bond which suffices to cover margin calls.
6

We start with the 22nd month. We use the holdout sample of the first 21 months to estimate the mean adjustment

error and adjust the IV of the 22nd month. We use the holdout sample of the first 22 months to estimate the mean
adjustment error and adjust the IV of the 23rd month; and so on.
7

We form the volatility projections by iterating from day t + 1 till the option maturity T, as explained in Baillie and

Bollerslev (1992). We use as inputs the past 90 day residuals and the model coefficients estimated in the pre sample
period. In the final step, we sum up the forecasted squared residuals to derive the variance forecast for a given
period. The estimated model coefficients were as follows: κ -0.10451, ARCH (1) 0.16620, GARCH(1) 0.98799,
leverage -0.05969.

54

8

We annualize returns since times to maturity vary from 28 to 31 days in our sample. Since transaction costs are

present in our economy, we derive returns for the liquidation of the risky asset under the assumed one way
transaction costs rate of 0.5%.
9

The theory in Constantinides and Perrakis (2007) has not produced a tight upper bound for put futures options.

The bound in (3) is a weak filter extracted from the combination of the call upper bound and put call parity.

55

