                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              REGULATORY CHOICE WITH POLLUTION AND INNOVATION

                                         Charles D. Kolstad

                                        Working Paper 16303
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16303


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2010




Research assistance from Valentin Shmidov is gratefully acknowledged. Comments from Don Fullerton,
Sasha Golub, Rob Williams, Kerry Smith, Barry Nalebuff, Nat Keohane and several anonymous referees
have been appreciated. Research supported in part by the University of California Center for Energy
and Environmental Economics (UCE3). The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Charles D. Kolstad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation
Charles D. Kolstad
NBER Working Paper No. 16303
August 2010, Revised October 2011
JEL No. L51,Q55,Q58

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper develops a simple model of a polluting industry and an innovating firm. The polluting
industry is faced with regulation and costly abatement. Regulation may be taxes or marketable permits.
The innovating firm invests in R&D and develops technologies which reduce the cost of pollution
abatement. The innovating firm can patent this innovation and use a licensing fee to generate revenue.
In a world of certainty, the first best level of innovation and abatement can be supported by either
a pollution tax or a marketable permit. However, the returns to the innovator from innovation are
not the same under the two regimes. A marketable permit system allows the innovator to capture all
of the gains to innovation; a tax system involves sharing the gains of innovation between the innovator
and the polluting industry.


Charles D. Kolstad
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
kolstad@econ.ucsb.edu
I       INTRODUCTION


        Probably the most fundamental issue in climate change is the role of innovation and invention in

helping find a solution to the climate change problem. It is clear that many are depending on innovation

to find cheaper ways to mitigate emissions and adapt to impacts. Governments around the world are

trying to spur innovation. But nobody really knows how to efficiently induce innovation. No one knows

what kinds of policies are effective in promoting the necessary amount of innovation. It is also unclear

how the different approaches to regulating greenhouse gas emission perform in inducing innovation.

There is a sense that it is important to place a price on carbon, directly or indirectly, to send better

signals to innovators. But how that carbon price translates into abatement‐cost‐reducing innovation is

poorly understood.


        In this paper, we examine how environmental regulations work when there is an innovator with

perfect property rights (perfect in the sense of a perfect patent with no spillovers). The innovator does

not engage in pollution abatement but instead specializes in reducing the cost of pollution abatement,

through innovation (which is then sold/licensed to polluters). The two questions we ask are (1) do

different types of environmental regulations perform differently in inducing innovation and abatement;

and (2) do regulations differ in terms of how the gains from innovation are appropriated?


        We develop a simple model, involving no uncertainty, in which we compare the performance of

a cap & trade system (marketable permits) and an emissions tax system. Although other authors have

examined this question, most authors use a highly simplistic representation of the innovation process.

In this paper, we focus more on the innovation process and less on other aspects of the economic

environment.


        As one might expect, given a lack of uncertainty, either regulatory policy is able to implement

the first best outcome. However, innovators clearly do better under a cap & trade system, capturing all

Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation       1                                     September, 2011
of the rents from their innovation. Under a tax system, gains are split between the polluters and the

innovators. Nevertheless, marginal conditions are such that efficiency is obtained.




II.     BACKGROUND


        Innovation is at the core of dynamic economics. Hicks (1932) put forward the idea that when

relative prices of input factors shift, technical change will focus on saving the factor that has become

relatively more expensive (the induced innovation hypothesis). One of the insights of the Solow model

of growth is the so‐called “Solow residual” which is the difference between growth in output and growth

in input. It is attributable to technical change. This is a natural precursor to the more recent literature

on endogenous growth (Romer, 1994).


        In the 1960s, a number of economists turned their attention to innovation, beginning with a

seminal paper of Arrow (1962) and culminating in a host of papers including the classic papers by

Scherer (1967) and Kamien and Schwartz (1968), the latter of which provides a theoretical model of

induced innovation.


        None of these papers deals with environmental externalities or regulation. That literature

began to emerge in the 1970s, with a paper by Smith (1972). A common theme in the environmental

literature is the comparative performance of different regulatory structures in terms of fostering

innovation. Magat (1976) follows the common approach at that time of examining technical change

through the lens of factor/output augmenting technical change (as did Kamien and Schwartz, 1968),

within the context of optimal growth. He finds little difference between prices and quantities within this

framework. Milliman and Prince (1989) compare a wide variety of environmental regulations

(command‐and‐control, subsidies, taxes, free permits, auctioned permits) with a simple representation



Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation       2                                    September, 2011
of regulation, cost‐reducing innovation and diffusion and then regulatory response to post‐innovation

costs. The focus is on who captures rents from innovation in a multi‐agent context, rather than on

providing an explicit model of the innovation process. Fischer et al (2003) takes this further by explicitly

representing the process of innovation (making innovation endogenous). Abatement costs are C(a,k)

where a is the level of abatement and k is the level of technology, which results from R&D at cost F(k).

The presence of the possibility of imitations of the innovated technology allows spillovers and thus

diffusion to occur, which limits licensing fees. They do find differences among the different

environmental regulations examined, though no clear regulatory approach dominates in terms of

performance.


         Denicolò (1999) focuses on innovation rather than diffusion and explicitly models the innovation

process separately from the abatement process. He assumes the pre‐innovation emissions‐output ratio

is α (a constant) and the post‐innovation ratio is β (a variable chosen by the innovator), with β < α. The

R&D cost of achieving that innovation is C(β). The innovator licenses its innovation for a fee. With this

simple structure of innovation, he shows that emission fees and marketable permits perform identically

when the regulator moves first and commits to not change regulations post‐innovation. When the

regulator cannot so commit, the two instruments perform differently, though it is not possible to

conclude that one regulatory approach dominates the other. Krysiak (2008) de‐emphasizes the

innovator as licensing a technology and focuses on how uncertainty might induce a preference for prices

vs. quantities, in the spirit of Weitzman’s (1974) classic analysis. He concludes quantities are more

efficient.


         Scotchmer (2010) provides one of the most recent analyses of this issue, in the context of

regulations for carbon emissions. Because of this, her model explicitly involves producing a good

(energy) with an emissions‐output ratio that can be reduced through innovation. Rather than focusing



Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation      3                                    September, 2011
on the innovator’s decision of how much innovation to undertake (with an explicit cost of innovation),

she focuses on the returns to innovation from a specific reduction in the emissions‐output ratio. She

concludes that an emissions tax provides more innovation incentives than a cap‐and‐trade system.


        The discussion above concerns theoretical results on innovation. However, one of the key issues

that has been of concern in the realm of climate policy and related empirical economics is how to

empirically represent the extent of carbon‐saving technological change (or, more generally, the rate of

technical change for any factor). Although this literature is large, it is appropriate to mention two recent

contributions by David Popp. Popp (2002) uses patent data to explicitly model the formation of the

knowledge stock, using a perpetual inventory method (much as one would do using investment over

time to estimate the capital stock). Using this approach he is able to disentangle the effect on energy

consumption of prices as distinct from technological improvements. In Popp (2004) he carries this

process further by modifying an optimal growth model commonly used for climate policy (Nordhaus’

DICE model) to include endogenous technical change. One of the challenges is to represent private

provision of R&D, acknowledging the inefficiencies of its provision, within a representation of the

dynamics of economic activity and emissions.




III.    A MODEL OF INNOVATION AND ABATEMENT


        We consider a situation with multiple atomistic firms in a polluting industry. Distinct from the

polluting industry, there is one innovating firm, developing technologies to reduce the cost of abating in

the polluting industry. The innovating firm conducts research, innovates, patents its innovation and

licenses the innovation to the polluting industry.




Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation      4                                    September, 2011
        Our characterization of the polluting industry is straightforward. If the polluting industry

chooses an aggregate amount of abatement a, then C(a) is the cost of abatement incurred by firms in

the industry (these costs are pre‐innovation and exclude the costs of innovating). Furthermore, B(a) is

the environmental benefits from abatement, though those benefits do not accrue to the polluting

industry. As is customary, C’, C’’, and B’ > 0 and B’’< 0.


        Our characterization of the innovating firm is also straightforward. Assume there is a firm which

does not emit pollution but rather engages in innovation and licenses its abatement‐cost‐reducing

innovations to the abating firms. The innovating firm undertakes R&D, which results in a technology

which reduces the marginal cost of abatement. In particular, assume the innovator chooses the

reduction in the marginal cost of abatement, σ. The cost of achieving this reduction in abatement costs

is an R&D cost to the innovator of R(σ), with R’≥0 and R’’>0. Note that the unit of measurement for R is

dollars whereas the unit of measurement for σ is dollars per ton (or dollars per unit of pollution abated).

R’ is the change in R&D expenditures necessary to achieve a unit decrease in the marginal cost of

abatement; R’ thus maps dollars per ton into tons. Let the inverse of R’ be given by the function S, which

maps tons into dollars per ton. The innovating firm licenses its technology to the abating firms for a fee

of φ per unit of abatement. This setup is shown in Figure 1. The post‐innovation social marginal cost of

abatement is lower but the licensing fee offsets some or all of these cost reductions, from the

perspective of the polluting firm. This model is similar to that of Denicolò (1999), though differs in

substantial ways, primarily in the representation of abatement and innovation.


        The dynamics of this problem are as simple as possible: a three period world. In the first period,

the regulator acts, setting the level of the environmental regulation. In the second period, the R&D

occurs and is licensed. In the third period, firms abate. This does not necessarily involve the actual

passage of time but might be three stages to a single regulatory game.



Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation        5                                  September, 2011
                                                                           Pre‐innovation marg‐
                                                                           inal abatement costs               C’(a)

                                            Post‐innovation
                                            marginal abatement
                                            costs as seen by the
                                            polluting industry
              Marginal costs of abatement



                                                                                                      σ
                                                                                                      (cost reduction from
                                                                                                      innovation)


                                                                               φ (license fee)


                                                                   Post‐innovation social marginal costs of abatement.


                                                                                                  Abatement (a)

Figure 1: The effect of innovation on marginal abatement costs.




        Superimposed on these market players is a regulator who is trying to maximize social welfare:


        W(a,σ) = B(a) – [C(a) – σa] – R(σ )                                                                              (1)


Although it may seem like Eqn (1) is the obvious social welfare function, some ambiguity remains.

Certainly the cost of R&D is a social cost. However, once the R&D is done, it becomes a sunk cost and

abatement costs are forever lowered. Post innovation, the regulator’s objective is to balance B(a) and

C(a)‐σa, without regard to the sunk cost (R(σ)). Recognizing this, a regulator may act in the first period

to ignore R(σ) in the social calculus. However, ignoring innovation involves viewing this problem

through a different dynamic lens than is assumed here. In our simple structure, no further action occurs

after innovation and abatement. This is equivalent to the regulator committing to not change the level




Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation                            6                                   September, 2011
of the regulation post‐innovation.2 It is clearly an interesting question as to what will prevail if a more

realistic view of the dynamics of innovation is explored.


        With exact control over abatement and innovation, the regulator can choose abatement and

innovation to maximize welfare:


        B’(a*) –C’(a*) + σ* = 0                                                                      (2a)


and


        a* ‐ R’(σ*) = 0 => σ* = S(a*)                                                                (2b)


However, we are assuming the regulator does not directly control abatement (a) and innovation (σ), but

rather uses imperfect regulatory instruments. In particular, the regulator chooses a price instrument (t)

or a quantity instrument (a). Polluting firms respond rationally and the innovating firm invests in the

privately profit maximizing amount of innovation and also sets the licensing fee (in dollars per ton

abated), φ, accordingly. We are concerned about how much abatement and how much innovation

result from an arbitrary price or quantity regulatory instrument and, further, when optimally designed,

how these two instruments differ in terms of induced innovation, abatement or distribution of rewards

from innovation.


A. Quantity Instruments. Consider first the case of a quantity instrument, â, which mandates the

amount of abatement which must take place. The abating firm has no choice but to undertake this

amount of abatement. The innovator on the other hand, must choose a license fee, φ̂ , and a level of

innovation, σˆ , to maximize profits of the innovator. Since the abating firms have no ability to adjust the




2
 The point about commitment to regulation and the distinction between the pre‐innovation and post‐innovation
period is clearly articulated by Denicolò (1999).

Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation       7                                    September, 2011
amount of abatement (it is mandated), the innovating firm can set the licensing fee to capture all of the

rent, φ̂ = σ̂ . Profits for the innovating firms are then


        ΠI = σ a – R(σ )                                                                            (3)


Which implies a resulting profit‐maximizing level of innovation (σ̂ ), as a function of the mandated

abatement (â), defined implicitly by the first‐order conditions:


        d ΠI /dσ = â – R’(σ̂ ) = 0                                                                  (4)


Eqn. (4) defines a condition for the amount of innovation that maximizes profit for the innovator: σ̂ is

set so that the marginal cost of reducing abatement costs is equal to the amount of abatement. By

totally differentiating Eqn. (4) one obtains an expression that shows how innovation changes as the

abatement mandated increases:


        dσ̂ /dâ = 1/R’’                                                                             (5)


Because of curvature assumptions on R, this equation implies that as required abatement increases, the

amount of innovation will also increase.


B. Price instruments. Now consider the more complex case of a price instrument. Compared to

quantities, the price instrument sends a more indirect signal to both abaters and innovators. The

regulator sets a price, t, for abatement (a payment for extra abatement is of course conceptually

equivalent to charging a fee for unabated pollution). Profits for the polluting industry are given by


        ΠP = ta – C(a) + (σ ‐φ) a                                                                   (6)


Profit maximization implicitly defines the abatement level, ã, in response to a price t̃ :


        ã: dΠI/da = t̃ – C’(ã) + (σ ‐φ) = 0  t̃ = C’(ã) – (σ ‐φ)                                   (7)



Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation         8                                    September, 2011
We now turn to the innovator’s behavior. First, we totally differentiate Eqn (7), keeping t constant to

determine how changes in σ and φ influence ã:


        0 = C’’ dã – dσ +dφ =>                                                                         (8a)


         dã/dσ = 1/C’’                                                                                 (8b)


        and


        dã/dφ = ‐1/C’’                                                                                 (8c)


The innovator’s profit is


        ΠI = φ ã – R(σ)                                                                                (9)


The innovator must choose both σ and φ to maximize profits (Eqn 9), resulting in first order conditions


        ∂ΠI/∂σ = φ˜ dã/dσ – R’( σ˜ ) = 0                                                               (10a)


and


        ∂ΠI/∂φ = φ˜ dã/dφ + ã = 0                                                                      (10b)


which implicitly define σ˜ and φ˜ as functions of ã which in turn depends on t˜ :


        σ˜ : R’( σ˜ ) = ã    =>    σ˜ =S(ã)                                                            (11a)


        φ˜ : φ˜ = ã C’’(ã)                                                                             (11b)


In essence, the three equations, Eqn. (7), (11a) and (11b) implicitly define ã, σ˜ and φ˜ , as functions of t.


C. Socially Optimal Instruments.




Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation        9                                     September, 2011
        First best levels of abatement (a*) and innovation (σ*) are defined by Eqn. (2). If a quantity

regulation is set such that â = a*, then innovation, σ̂ , will be set according to Eqn. (4). Thus σ̂ = σ*. A

price regulation must be set (if possible) so that the same outcome prevails. In particular, set t̃

according to:


        t̃ = C’(a*) – S(a*) + a*C’’(a*)                                                                (12)


It is easy to see that ã=a* and σ˜ =σ* satisfy Eqn. (7) and (11), and thus a first‐best outcome is supported

by this level of the price instrument.


        Eqn. (12) is intuitive, if somewhat more complicated than for the optimal quantity instrument.

At an efficient level of abatement, a*, and an efficient level of innovation, σ*, the marginal costs will be

reduced by S(a*) but then the license fee will increase the marginal cost seen by polluters by a*C’’(a*).

This results in marginal costs equal to the right‐hand‐side of Eqn. (12). Setting the price instrument

equal to that marginal cost, evaluated at a*, supports the first‐best outcome. Note that the optimal

price instrument will be less than would prevail absent innovation. Similarly, the optimal quantity

instrument will be more than would prevail absent innovation (since absent innovation, the σ* would be

missing from Eqn. 2).


        This leads to the following result:


Prop 1. Given the structure and assumptions above, price and quantity instruments are equivalent in

implementing the first best amount of abatement and innovation.


        Note however that the private return to the innovator from innovation differs for the two

instruments. For the quantity instrument, all returns to innovation are captured by the innovator (the

licensing fee is equal to the cost reduction from the innovation). In the case of the price instrument,

only part of the marginal gains are captured by the innovator. As the licensing fee is raised from zero,

Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation       10                                     September, 2011
direct revenue from the license obviously increases. However, an increased licensing fee increases the

cost of abatement to the polluter and thus reduces abatement (see Eqn 8c) and thus, indirectly, revenue

to the innovator. So a tradeoff between raising the fee and lowering the fee implies there is some

happy medium with the license fee strictly greater than 0 but strictly less than σ. Thus the polluter

captures some of the gain from innovation in the form of reduced costs and the innovator also captures

some of the gain. Of course who captures the gain does not matter to efficiency in this case since the

marginal conditions are such that innovation is the same with the two regulatory instruments.




IV.     CONCLUSIONS


        Innovation is clearly a core issue for modern environmental regulation. Climate change is a case

in point. Significantly regulating greenhouse gas emissions will be expensive, and innovation is the

primary way of reducing costs (after regulatory efficiency gains have been exhausted). In fact, due to

the long lag times of turning emissions reductions into temperature reductions, one of the primary

reasons for implementing carbon regulation now is to spur innovation on reducing abatement costs in

the future (when we get really serious about emissions). Thus the question of which environmental

regulations tend to spur the most innovation is highly relevant.


        A related question is how to represent the process of innovation, which is not well understood

empirically. A better empirical understanding will help design better policies to encourage innovation

and abatement.


        This paper provides a small step forward in terms of representing the process of innovation on

abatement costs, though there is a considerable literature on this issue. One conclusion is that price

instruments (eg, a carbon tax) can be designed to induce the same amount of innovation and abatement



Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation     11                                   September, 2011
as a quantity instrument (eg, cap and trade). Although the two instruments can provide the same

marginal incentives to innovators and abaters, the inframarginal rents from innovation differ in the two

cases. In fact, the innovators appropriate all of the gains from innovation in the case of a quantity

instrument whereas innovators and abaters share the rents in the case of a price instrument.


        This results reported here are suggestive more than definitive. In particular, most types of

regulation lead to a first best level of innovation, though different levels of rents to the innovators.

What are the implications of this? Can a more realistic representation, perhaps with some uncertainty,

lead to sharper distinctions between the two regulatory approaches. This paper raises these issues but

does not come close to resolving them.




Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation      12                                     September, 2011
REFERENCES


Arrow, Kenneth J., “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,” in R. Nelson (Ed),

        The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors, Princeton University

        Press, Princeton, NJ (1962).


Denicolo, Vincenzo, “Pollution‐reducing innovations under taxes or permits,” Oxford Economic Papers,

        51:184‐99 (1999).


Downing, P.B. and L. J. White, “Innovation in Pollution Control,” J. Env. Econ. & Mgmt., 13:18‐25 (1986).


Fischer, Carolyn, Ian W.H. Parry, and William A. Pizer, “Instrument Choice for Environmental Protection

        When Technological Innovation is Endogenous,” J. Env. Econ. & Mgmt., 45:523‐45 (2003).


Hicks, John R., The Theory of Wages (Macmillan, London, 1966). [originally published in 1932]


Kamien, Mort and Nancy Schwartz, “Optimal Induced Technical Change,” Econometrica, 36:1‐17 (1968).


Krysiak, Frank C., “Prices vs. Quantities: The Effects on Technology Choice,” J. Public Econ., 92:1275‐87

        (2008).


Magat, Wesley A., “Pollution Control and Technological Advance: A Dynamic model of the Firm,” J. Env.

        Econ. & Mgmt., 5:1‐25 (1978).


Milliman, Scott and Raymond Prince, “Firm Incentives to Promote Technological Change in Pollution

        Control,” JEEM, 17:247‐ 65 (1989).


Montero, Juan‐Pablo, “Permits, Standards, and Technology Innovation,” J. Env. Econ. & Mgmt., 44:23‐44

        (2002).


Popp, David, “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices,” Amer. Econ. Rev., 92:160‐80 (2002).


Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation     13                                    September, 2011
Popp, David, “ENTICE: endogenous technological change in the DICE model of global warming,” J. Env.

        Econ. & Mgmt., 48:742‐68 (2004).


Requate, Till, “Dynamic Incentives by Environmental Policy Instruments – A Survey,” Ecol. Econ., 54:175‐

        95 (2005).


Romer, Paul M., “The Origins of Endogenous Growth,” J. Econ. Perspectives, 8(1):3‐22 (1994)


Scherer, F. M. “Research and Development Resource Allocation under Rivalry,” Quart. J. Econ., 81:359‐

        94 (1967).


Scotchmer, Suzanne, “Cap‐and‐Trade, Emissions Taxes, and Innovation,” working paper, Department of

        Economics, University of California, Berkeley (March 2, 2010).


Smith, V. Kerry, “The Implications of Common Property Resources for Technical Change,” Eur. Econ.

        Rev., 3469‐79 (1972).


Weitzman, Martin B., “Prices vs. Quantities,” Rev. Econ. Stud., 61:477‐91 (1974).




Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation    14                                  September, 2011
