                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE VALUE OF LUMINOSITY DATA AS A PROXY FOR ECONOMIC STATISTICS

                                              Xi Chen
                                        William D. Nordhaus

                                        Working Paper 16317
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16317


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2010




The authors are Associate in Research (Chen) and Sterling Professor of Economics (Nordhaus), Yale
University. Corresponding author: Chen at xi.chen@yale.edu. The authors are grateful for comments
from Ben Jones and other participants in the NBER-CRIW Workshop, July 2010. This research was
supported by the Glaser Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Xi Chen and William D. Nordhaus. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Value of Luminosity Data as a Proxy for Economic Statistics
Xi Chen and William D. Nordhaus
NBER Working Paper No. 16317
August 2010
JEL No. E01,O47,Q4

                                             ABSTRACT

One of the pervasive issues in social and environmental research has been to improve the quality of
socioeconomic data in developing countries. Because of the shortcoming of standard data sources,
the present study examines luminosity (measures of nighttime lights) as a proxy for standard measures
of output. The paper compares output and luminosity at the country levels and at the 1° x 1° grid-cell
levels for the period 1992-2008. The results are that luminosity has very little value added for countries
with high-quality statistical systems. However, it may be useful for countries with the lowest statistical
grades, particularly for war-torn countries with no recent population or economic censuses. The results
also indicate that luminosity has more value added for economic density estimates than for time-series
growth rates.


Xi Chen
<DOH8QLYHUVLW\
28 Hillhouse Ave
New Haven CT 06511
xi.chen@yale.edu

William D. Nordhaus
Yale University, Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Avenue
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
william.nordhaus@yale.edu
      Introduction

         One of the pervasive issues in social and environmental research has been
to improve the quality of socioeconomic data in developing countries. Many
countries of tropical Africa, particularly those in war-torn countries, have no reliable
censuses of population and only rudimentary economic statistics. The poor quality
of the data has hindered attempts to understand economic growth, poverty, health
status, and environmental quality. The lack of regional data has been even more
daunting for those working at the sub-national level.

          This difficulty has been a major difficulty for the GEcon project at Yale,
which has undertaken the research project of constructing geophysically based
economic data on gross cell output by 1° latitude by 1° longitude for all terrestrial
grid cells for the world. The project has been hampered by very poor quality data in
many low-income countries with poorly funded statistical systems and particularly
in those regions plagued by civil wars. One example is Somalia. While international
agencies routinely produce population and output estimates, the basis for these is
very tenuous. The last population census in Somalia was 1975. There is no functional
statistical office, and indeed there have been only sporadic central governments for
two decades. A search for statistics from a web site stating it is the government web
site finds a message, “UNDER RECONSTRUCTION PLEASE CHECK BACK
SOON.” Similar issues arise for many other African countries. The last functional
population census for the Democratic Republic of Congo was 1984. Economic data
are generally even sparser with the exception data on international trade.

         Because of the shortcoming of standard data sources, the authors undertook
to examine measures that could supplement or substitute for our measures of
regional output that come from standard sources on income, output, and other
demographic information. The obvious place to look was nighttime luminosity.
There is now a large literature on both luminosity and the use of luminosity as a
proxy for population, output, and poverty (see the references in the next section).
The intuitive notion is that luminosity might serve as a useful proxy for output
because it is “objectively” measured, is highly correlated with output, and is
universally available for the world except for the high latitudes. Figure 1 shows a
striking image of nighttime lights for India, and it is immediately obvious that high-
income regions have higher luminosity. The question is, can these data be usefully
exploited for measuring output?

        The tentative bottom line of this project is that luminosity shows
considerable promise for regions with very poor data but little or no value added for
countries with good to excellent statistical systems. The noise in the light signal is

                                            -2-
too high to be useful for improving economic accounts for countries like the United
States or Brazil, but appears to have sufficient signal for the poor countries of
tropical Africa as well as countries with minimal governing structures.

      Use of Luminosity as Socioeconomic Indicators

         Nighttime luminosity has been gathered from satellites for almost two
decades and has been carefully filtered into a series of data at very disaggregated
level, with observations beginning in 1992. The results are visually striking (see
Figure 1) and are seemingly related to the level of economic activity in different
regions.

       Luminosity has been increasingly used in studies of areas with weak data
systems. Previous studies have used nighttime image data as a proxy for
socioeconomic development of particular geographic areas (Doll, Muller, Elvidge
2000; Ebener, Tandom, and Elvidge 2005; Elvidge et al. 2007; Elvidge et al. 1997;
Sutton, Elvidge, and Ghosh 2007; Sutton and Costanza 2002; Henderson, Storeygard,
and Weil 2009). Elvidge et al. (2007, p.51) conclude “Nighttime lights provide a
useful proxy for development and have great potential for recording humanity’s
presence on the earth’s surface and for measuring important variables such as
annual growth for development.”

       In the past decade, researchers have tried a series of tests to support this
conclusion. During the initial phase of their research, Elvidge and his colleague
focused on correlation between luminosity and GDP values at the country level.
They found a strong log-log correlation (R2 = 0.97) between “lit area” in square
kilometers, derived from luminosity series and defined as all areas that have
persistent detectable lights, and GDP for 21 countries (Elvidge, et al. 1997). Similarly,
Doll, Muller, and Elvidge (2000) found a strong log-log relationship between total lit
area (measured as km2 ) of a country and its GDP for 46 countries that have at least
10 identified urban polygons (R2 = 0.85). Doll, Muller, and Elvidge (2000) also
extrapolated 1° latitude by 1° longitude grid cell GDP by applying the coefficient of
log-log relationship obtained at the country level, and concluded that lit-area-
derived PPP-GDP grid map modeled global economic activity “very well.”Sutton
and Costanza (2002) also derived GDP per square kilometer by applying the
correlation coefficient of luminosity and GDP at the national level and generated
fine resolution map of economic activity.

       More recently, studies have used nighttime image to predict income per
capita at the sub-national level (Ebener et al. 2005). Their results show that lit area
and percent frequency of lighting can predict GDP per capita at the national and
sub-national level. They write that, when climate and agriculture are considered, the
model yields better results in predicting GDP (Ebener et al. 2005). Later Sutton et al.


                                            -3-
(2007) improved Ebener’s model by adding estimated urban population at the state
level to solve the problem of saturation in traditional luminosity image and applied
the new model to four countries – China, India, Turkey, and the U.S. The variable
“urban population” of each state of a country was estimated by using a log-log
linear relationship between the aerial extent of urban areas and population. Then
they used the estimated “urban population” as a predictor for GDP values for sub-
national administrative units, and concluded that “spatial disaggregation of
estimates dramatically improves aggregate national estimates” of GDP. Nighttime
luminosity has reached a level of accuracy that it is currently under consideration
for use in target acquisition by the U.S. military.

       Few studies have undertaken a formal analysis comparing luminosity with
traditional output measures. The present study was developed in parallel with a
pathbreaking study by Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2009) using much the
same statistical approach. We are indebted to that study for suggesting a
modification of our original modeling as well as for pointing to an approach for
measuring errors. That study suggests that the growth rate of true income estimated
from luminosity data is more accurate than the World Bank estimates, especially for
countries having poor quality data (the “D countries” defined by the Penn World
Tables (PWT)). Among these countries, they argued, “general growth is
underestimated in the WDI for countries with low measured income growth rates,
and overestimated in the WDI for some countries showing very high growth rates….
For D countries at the tails of high or low recorded growth (Myanmar, Liberia, and
Congo), lights strongly amend recorded growth rate.”

      In light of the apparent successes of past studies in applying luminosity
measures, the authors undertook a detailed study of the relationship between
luminosity and economic activity. We first describe the construction of the data and
then present our results.

      Description of the Luminosity Data

   The data on nighttime lights is one of the most striking images of the presence of
human settlements (see Figure 1). One look at the map makes it immediately clear
that lighting is closely related to the density of economic activity. We begin with a
discussion of how the nighttime lights data are constructed.

    The primary nighttime image data were gathered by U.S. Department of Defense
satellites starting in the mid-1960s to determine the extent of worldwide cloud cover.
It was later declassified and made available as the Defense Meteorological Satellite
Program Operational Linescan System (DMSP-OLS). The DMSP satellites collect a
complete set of earth images twice a day at a nominal resolution of 0.56 km,
smoothed to blocks of 2.8 km (30 arc-seconds). The data, in 30 arc-second resolution,
covers 180° West to 180° East longitude and 65° North to 65° South latitude.

                                           -4-
    Creation of a light-time lights data is an undertaking of monumental difficulty.
The raw data are heavily processed on an empirical basis to correct for various
optical and atmospheric distortions. 2 Among the important steps are the following:
gathering the raw data; identifying clouds; removing glare; identifying the visible–
near infrared emissions (lights); gridding the data; calculating the number of cloud-
free detections and the number of light detections in cloud-free areas; and manually
editing the results to conform to shorelines and other geographical phenomena.
Examination of the data indicates the presence of atmospheric disturbances (such as
water vapor), scanning errors, errors in mapping of the earth’s topography, and
blooming or overglow across pixels.

    There are different versions of the data. The two major sources are the raw data
and the stable lights data. The stable lights version removes ephemeral events such
as fires and background noise, while the raw version does not. Because of all the
adjustments, the processed data are substantially different from the raw data in
ways that are not immediately apparent. Currently DMSP-OLS Nighttime Lights
Time Series provides cloud-free digital values of nighttime light image generated
from persistent lighting of human activities, and the annual data are available from
1992 to 2008.

    We decided to use the raw data because of concerns that low-density cells would
be set to zero in the stable lights data set and because some of the processing was
related to discrepancies between the lights data and demographic data. A case could
be made for using the stable lights version, but from a statistical point of view errors
in measurement of luminosity pose less of a difficulty than inappropriate filtering at
the low end.

    Figure 2 shows a detailed map of Los Angeles that illustrates some of the issues
with the use of luminosity as a proxy. One issue is that road networks show distinct
luminosity. Generally, road traffic will not be captured in an accurate spatial way by
conventional accounts because it will only be recorded by equipment or fuel
purchases, not by actual location of traffic. The figure also shows the bleeding that
occurs outside of the areas of human settlement and is significant as much as 50 km
offshore. These are relatively unimportant at the scale we employ but clearly
introduce errors in measurement of the spatial luminosity data. Another feature
shown in the figure is the saturation at the high end, with no detectable distinctions
among most cells near the city center.

   The annual data are presented as digital numbers (DN) from 0 to 63. These can
be converted to radiance by the formula Radiance = (Digital Number)3/2 x 10-10

2   For a comprehensive discussion, see the description by Christopher Doll (Doll, 2008).

                                                     -5-
Watts/cm2/sr/um (Elvidge, et al. 1999). For our purposes, we aggregated the data
up to 1° x 1° grid cells to match our finest resolution economic data. For this
aggregation, we took each pixel’s DN, raised it to the power of 1.5, and then
summed these radiances over all pixels in the grid cell. (Aggregation errors would
be introduced unless this transformation is used.) For a complete grid cell, this
would include 120 x 120 pixels. This procedure yielded 40,570 grid cells with data
for 17 years, with overlaps of 12 satellite-years.

    A preliminary examination of the data indicates that there are substantial
measurement errors in both the time-series and the cross-section of the data. For
example, we examined the correlation of logarithm of gridded luminosities for
satellites F14 and F15 for the year 2000 yielded R2 = 0.965. Regressions of the
logarithm of luminosity for the same year across satellites have standard errors in
the range of 0.20. Slightly smaller numbers are found for year-to-year variations of
individual satellites. The interpretation of these numbers is that the measurement
error for individual grid cells is in the order of 20 logarithmic percent. There has
been relatively little analysis of the error patterns of nighttime lights. For example,
satellite F14 is consistently dimmer than the earlier satellites. This will not pose a
major difficulty in our statistical analysis below, but it does raise questions about the
overall reliability of the lights data. The size of the errors indicates that luminosity is
at best a noisy indicator.

    We then merged our grid cell luminosity with new Gecon 3.3 data (available at
gecon.yale.edu). Since GEcon data includes country boundaries, and cells that fall
between countries are divided into multiple subcells, we divided luminosity values
for those subcells based on the share of population of subcells. Generally, to reduce
noise caused by remote areas and extremely small cells, we limited our analysis to
cells located between latitude 60° N and 60° S, with grid-cell output value of 1990
larger than 10 million U.S. dollars, and with land area at least 10 percent of the area
of the grid cell. At the country level, we used GDP PPP values (at constant 2005
international dollar) from World Bank from year 1992 to 2008 as our country GDP
and aggregated grid cell luminosity by country to obtain county luminosity for
corresponding year.


      A First Look at the Data

         It is always useful to do a preliminary scan of the data to see what emerges.
For this purpose, we have taken a benchmark year for the GEcon data, 2000, and
compared the gross cell product (GCP) from the GEcon data with the output-
luminosity proxy. Appendix Tables A-3 and A-4 show raw data on luminosity and
output.



                                              -6-
         We show in Figure 3, 4, and 5 the bivariate double-logarithmic plot for the
world, for the United States, for tropical Africa. For these plots, we have chosen only
grid cells with RIG > .1 (i.e., only cells where the grid cell observation covers at least
10 percent of the grid cell). This avoids border effects as well as difficulties with
luminosity that arises near coastlines.

         Four points are immediately clear. First, there is a strong positive
relationship between luminosity and output. The global R is 0.61 for the global
curve. This observation confirms that there is a strong positive relationship between
our luminosity proxy and measured GDP at a disaggregated level.

        Second, the relationship works very poorly at the low end of the
output/luminosity spectrum. This can be seen most clearly for Africa. For ln output
density less than -9, the relationship is essentially flat. To understand the numbers,
log output density of -9 represents an output density about $100,000 per square km.
To put this in perspective, this is approximately the output density of one-thirtieth
of a retail gasoline station in the U.S. The meaning of this is that the luminosity at
the low end is dominated by noise and errors of the kind discussed above rather
than economic activity. Since there are 2270 African grid cells and only 189
observations above the threshold, we may have difficulty predicting output with
luminosity unless output is extremely concentrated.

        Third, the relationship is strongly positive for high-income regions, but it is
extremely noisy. For example, the regression of log of luminosity output on output
for grid cells with log output density greater than -8 has an elasticity of 0.74 ( +
0.013), with a R2 of 0.573. However, the standard error of the equation is 0.661,
indicating that the error is in the order of magnitude of + 100 percent. Of course, this
might be because of error in the GEcon data, but evidence suggests that it arises
from imprecision in the luminosity data.

       Fourth, the results for the United States are useful because of the presumption
that the regional data for the US are relatively accurate. The U.S. data show the
phenomenon of noise at the lower end and has a standard error that is actually
larger than the global standard error (being 0.764). Additionally, if we look at the
very high end, there is a suggestion of a new problem – saturation. The problem at
the high end is that the satellite sensors become saturated and are therefore top
coded. This is a problem particularly for the largest U.S. cities, New York, Los
Angeles, and Chicago and explains why the curve flattens out at the high end.

        The major points that arise from this preliminary look at the data are two.
First, based on our examination of our constructed luminosity-output measure at the
cell level, it appears to be a very noisy indicator of output using the GEcon cell data
as a benchmark. This is true even in countries like the United States where we have
the most reliable disaggregated data. Second, the luminosity data are likely to be


                                             -7-
least useful in areas where it is most needed – in countries with low output density.
Only 6 percent of African grid cells are ones with output beyond the threshold
where the luminosity data is highly correlated with the output data.


      The Analytical Background

         The analytical approach used here is similar to that proposed in Henderson,
Storeygard, and Weil (2009). However, we derive different formulas, use different
data sets, have different priors for resolving the errors-in-measurement issue, and
have dramatically different results.

Constructing “true” GDP

        Our ultimate purpose is to determine whether luminosity contains useful
information for constructing economic data at either the national or regional level.
The most natural place to hope for value added is for countries with poor data or
those with little or no data at a subnational scale.

         For this purpose, we define the different measures as follows:

       Y = measured output (GDP in international U.S. $)
       Y* = true output (GDP in international U.S. $)
       X = synthetic measure of output (GDP in international U.S. $)
       M = measured luminosity (index value)
       Z = luminosity-based measure of output (GDP in international U.S. $)
       i = grid cell (here 1° latitude by 1° longitude)
       j = country
       k= country grade (A, B, C, D, E)
       t = year
       y = ln (Y)
       x = ln (X)
       m = ln (M)
       z = ln (Z)
      ε i = measurement error in GDP
      ξ i = measurement error in luminosity
      ui = random error in output-luminosity relationship
          For notational purposes, we define xi,j(t) as the value of variable x in grid
cell i and country j averaged over year t. We assume that there is a “true” level of
output for each country and grid cell, which is measured with error:

(1)     y i = y i* + ε i


                                             -8-
Measured output is assumed to have a unitary coefficient on true output. This
assumption is not completely innocuous as there may be systematic growth
mismeasurement due, say, to incomplete source data or infrequent observations.

       Luminosity is subject to measurement error (satellite, calibration, and other):

(2)      mi = mi* + ξ i

There is a structural relationship between luminosity and true output as follows:
                      *
(3)     m i = α + β y i + ui

The error in (3) arises from several sources. One important reason why the
relationship is noisy is that luminosity is sampled at night, whereas economic
activity is generally concentrated in the daytime. More important, the light intensity
differs greatly across sectors. The use of electricity per dollar of output in different
sectors provides a rough idea of how light-intensities might vary. In the 2002 U.S.
input-output tables, the electricity used per unit output of real estate was 200 times
greater than that of software. Similar differences are seen across other sectors. This
example suggests that industrial composition across countries is likely to make the
output-luminosity relationship in (3) relatively noisy.

        We want to construct a luminosity-output proxy from these relationships. We
have measurements of all variables over time and space at the national and grid cell
levels. However, we need to develop measures of the error of measurement of
national and grid cell output, the coefficient on luminosity as well as the error in the
structural relationship in equation (3).

       Our procedure is first to estimate equation (3). This provides an estimate of
the structural coefficient β. We then do an errors-in-variable correction for β from
our prior estimates of the error in GDP to get a corrected estimate of β. The corrected
coefficient is calculated as:

           ⎛σ 2 +σ 2      ⎞
                   ε
(4)     
        β =⎜
              y*
                          ⎟ βˆ
           ⎜ σ y*2        ⎟
           ⎝              ⎠

Where βˆ is the estimated coefficient in equation (3); σ ε2 is a priori error of true
output; σ y2* is the estimated variance of true output. (We obtain estimates of the error
variances of both conventionally measured output and our luminosity-output proxy
in a manner that is described below.)

       We then estimate luminosity output as follows by inverting (3):


                                              -9-
(5)      zi = (1 / β ) mi

where z i is the log of our luminosity-output proxy and β is the corrected coefficient
in equation (3).


       Next, we will construct an optimal synthetic measure of output by taking the
optimal weights of conventional measures of output and our luminosity-output
proxy:

(6)   x i = θ y i + (1 - θ )zi
where
      X i = new synthetic measure of output
      x i = ln(X i )
      θ = optimal weighting fraction on conventional output measures

        The key variable of this study is θ, which is the optimal weighting share on
conventional output measures. The central question we address is whether we can
significantly improve conventional measures of output using luminosity. If the
measurement error of synthetic output has been significantly reduced compared to
the prior error ε, luminosity can be a useful proxy.

        The error variance of x i can be expressed as a function of θ as follows:

V (θ ) = E[θ y + (1 − θ )z − y *]2
                                              2
= E[θ ( y * +ε ) + (1 − θ )γ ( β y * +u) − y *]
                        2
= E[θε + (1 − θ )γ u]

= θ 2σ ε2 + (1 − θ )2 γ 2σ u2

Where γ = 1 / β



Maximizing with respect to θ:




                                                  -10-
                              2         2   2
     V '(θ ) = 0 = 2θσ ε − 2(1 − θ )γ σ u

     θσ ε2 = γ 2σ u2 − θγ 2σ u2

                  σ u2
(7) θ =
           ( β 2σ ε2 + σ u2 )

      The expression for the optimal weight is intuitively appealing because the
weight on measured output is 1 when (a) β = 0 (when luminosity is unrelated to true
                              2
output); (b) when σ ε = 0 (when there is no measurement error in output); or (c)
when σ u2 is very large (when the relationship between luminosity and output is
extremely noisy.)


Differences in reliability by country

         There are several modifications of equation (7) that can be pursued, but we
use only one in the present study. We know both from direct observation and from
studies that the reliability of national statistical systems vary greatly. We therefore
will be particularly concerned about the applicability of our estimates to different
countries. For this purpose, we will divide countries into different “grades,” k = A,
B, C, D, and E. (We discuss the methods further below.) This leads to the slight
modification of (7) in which the optimal weights depend on the error output
estimates by grade:


       k             σ u2
(8) θ =
                  ( )
                          2
               β 2 σ εk       + σ u2
           k
where σ ε is the error for measured output for country grade k.



       Estimates of the Error of Measured Output and Luminosity

       The last section showed that the statistical model for deriving the optimal
weights on conventional GDP measures and luminosity is underidentified and
requires estimates of the two error terms as well as the coefficient in the luminosity
equation. We discuss each of these terms. The first two are relatively simple, while
the third is extremely difficult to estimate.




                                                -11-
       Errors of measurement of luminosity

        The errors in the luminosity equation (3) can be estimated from both different
satellites and different years of the same satellite as well as from estimates of the
equation. The estimates are straightforward, and we therefore describe them
verbally. Satellites differ in their optical quality and may degrade over time. In
addition, there is sampling variation because of physical factors. We can estimate the
error of satellites by examining the difference between the luminosity of different
satellites for the same year because we have 12 year-satellite overlaps (See Table A-5,
Figure A-1 and Figure A-2). In addition, because the satellite noise is so large
relative to output changes, we can look at adjacent years to measure the errors for
individual satellites. These are estimated for both cross-sections and growth rates.
To give a flavor of the estimates, we estimate that the measurement error of log
luminosity using the same year but different satellites is between 0.136 and 0.369,
depending upon year. The estimated error from year-to-year changes of the same
satellite is between 0.122 and 0.338 depending upon year and satellite. (See Table A-
5.) These indicate that the error of measurement of luminosity is in the range of 14 to
37 logarithmic percent. In our final estimates, we use mean square residual obtained
from regression results of equation (3), assuming the error terms in the structural
equation are primarily caused by errors in luminosity.

       Structural coefficient in luminosity equation

       Estimates of the coefficient β in equation (3) are a second ingredient in the
estimation of the optimal weights on the two measures. The estimates here are
straightforward. While the coefficient estimate in equation (3) will suffer from bias
because of errors of measurement, the error is relatively small. We have also used an
alternative approach of instrumental variables, using a suite of cell variables such as
climate, proximity to ports, and population, and the results differ very little from the
correction using classical measurement error except for the cross section output of
grade-E countries (the last row in Table A-6). Table A-6 in the Appendix provides
the IV estimates of the luminosity equation for all grid cells. Because the results of
the IV approach are very similar to the other approaches, we ignore those results in
the present discussion.

       Errors of measurement of output

       The most difficult parameters to estimate are the errors of conventional GDP
measures. This discussion deals primarily with issues of errors in national economic
accounts and is relatively technical. Those who are not concerned about the details
can skip to the next section.

       We begin with a definition of “error.” Depending on country and time
period, there are many errors in measuring national output (conceptual differences,
data sources, index construction, sectoral definitions such as how to treat home

                                              -12-
production, and so on). The question might be posed as follows: Relative to some
ideal measure of national output, what would be an estimate of the measurement
error of output and growth of output? Errors would include not only the accuracy of
source data and imputations, but the scope of the exclusions, such as home
production, subsistence farming, illegal activity, smuggling, and the like. For our
purpose, we define the “ideal” measure of output as that one corresponding to the
line delineating national output by the System of National Accounts (1993). As we
noted above, it may sometimes occur that luminosity will more closely track the
actual location of economic activity than conventional accounts. Examples of this
phenomenon include road traffic (see Figure 2), fishing boats, and gas flaring
associated with oil and gas production.

       We can distinguish two different kinds of errors. The first is time-series errors.
Measures of output here generally keep the conceptual basis of the measures as well
as the data sources constant over time (at least for short periods); errors here will
arise primarily from errors in the source data or errors in aggregation. Moreover,
since there are two or three alternative methods of constructing national output (e.g.,
income and expenditures), we can examine the statistical discrepancy to make a first
estimate of the size of the measurement error (conditional on the methods).

       A second kind of measurement error is cross-sectional level or density errors.
These would apply to comparisons among countries or regions. Cross-sectional
errors will be much broader and include source-data errors, differences in concepts,
price measurement errors, as well as errors in measuring exchange rates among
different currencies. Moreover, there are no identities that can be relied upon to
provide alternative estimates of the kind that produce the statistical discrepancy in
country measures. We would therefore expect the cross-sectional errors to be much
larger than the time-series errors.

       In addition, the present study examines both country output data and grid-
cell output data. We will therefore consider errors in both country and grid-cell as
well as time-series and level estimates.

       We must alert the reader at the outset that estimation of errors of
conventional GDP measures is a vast topic that has received very only modest
attention in the literature on national accounts. Our estimates therefore are very
tentative. However, even order-of-magnitude estimates may be sufficient for the
purpose at hand.

       Errors in national-level data

       Time series errors: general

     We begin by surveying estimation errors for the U.S. The most systematic
measure of error is the statistical discrepancy (SD) between income and expenditure


                                            -13-
accounts. The SD is relatively “unmanaged” and is therefore a relatively clean
measure of the measurement error conditional on the definitions. This absolute
value of the change in the ratio of the annual SD to GDP averages around 0.56
logarithmic percentage points (per year) of GDP for the 1929-2008 period. If the true
value is the average of income and product, this would indicate that the error in the
growth rate is 0.28 percentage points. As an alternative estimate of the errors, BEA
has examined the change from the third annual estimates to current methodology
and found an average absolute revision of the annual growth rate of real GDP of
0.41 percentage points for 1983-2006 with 0.29 for nominal GDP (Fixler and Grimm,
2008). 3 This second calculation includes some changes in methodology as well. From
these two calculations, this indicates a lower bound for the measurement error of the
growth rate of real output of around 0.3 percentage points per year for countries
with high-quality statistical systems.

       Time-series errors from index-number differences

        One of the methodological differences among countries involves the index-
number techniques used in determining growth rates. Most high-quality systems
currently use superlative techniques (such as Fisher’s Ideal index), while other
countries (such as China) continue to use Laspeyres indexes. BEA’s calculations
indicate that for the U.S., the average error is around 0.3 percentage points per year
(this being always positive). Larger biases would be expected in countries with
particularly rapid structural change.

       Cross-sectional errors from revisions and methodological differences

       A second set of estimates concerns the level of GDP (or GDP density per
square km when used in conjunction with luminosity). For the U.S., we can use the
average ratio of SD to GDP as a lower bound estimate of the measurement error
conditional on the methodology. Over the period 1929-2008, the SD was 0.50 percent
of GDP. Again, if the average of income and product sides is the correct estimate,
this would indicate an average measurement error of 0.25 percent of GDP as a lower
bound for high-quality statistical systems.

       However, it is likely that cross-sectional errors will arise from other issues
such as measurement error, sectoral inclusion, exchange rates, and even
idiosyncratic country effects. One way to estimate the methodological differences is
to examine the change in the level of nominal GDP in different vintages of estimates.
Comparing current estimates with those of 1964 and 1973, BEA found an average
error of between 3.1 and 3.3 percent. Most of these are probably definitional (such as
the inclusion of software in investment) rather than measurement error, however. If
we go back to the earliest estimates of national income by Simon Kuznets published

3All data comparisons are based on data from the BEA web site at www.bea.gov as of
February 2010.

                                              -14-
in 1934, we find much more substantial differences, however (Kuznets, 1934). The
difference between the original estimates of national income by Kuznets and the
current estimates by the BEA is 17 percent for 1929-32. The average absolute
difference in the logarithmic growth rates of nominal national income was 4.5
percentage points for this period. This is a very demanding test, of course, because
these first estimates were at the dawn of national income accounting, and the period
was the descent into the Great Depression. These are suggestive of the very
substantial cross-sectional differences that can arise in immature accounting systems
as well as the measurement problems that can arise in economic crises.

       Cross-section differences from exchange-rate calculations

       One of the thorniest issues in country comparisons is the conversion from
national currencies into a common unit. Common practice today is to use PPP, or
purchasing-power parity, exchange rates rather than market exchange rate. While
there is (in our view) no question about the appropriateness of these measures
conceptually, the practice of calculating them has proven extremely difficult, and in
some cases, such as the appropriate multilateral weights, unresolved. 4

       One point of clarification should be made about PPP-corrected estimates. In
some but not all systems, introduction of PPP exchange rates should have no effect
upon the country growth rates. To a first approximation, PPP adjustments are to the
level of output, not to the growth rates.

        In our estimates of measurement errors, we will rely on the country grading
system defined by the Penn World Table and earlier authors. Countries are assigned
subjective quality grades from A to D by the authors of PWT based on several
criteria of the data. We will add grade E for those countries with essentially no
statistical system which are missing from the PWT and other standard sources.
Appendix Table A-1 gives the number of countries by grade while A-2 gives the
grade sheet for country systems.

       Very few countries receive the grade of “A” and a substantial number are C
or D. Perhaps the most pertinent estimates are those provided by Robert Summers
and Alan Heston on the margin of error of the estimates. These are most usefully
interpreted as the cross-sectional errors that arise from price and aggregation
estimates involved in moving from market exchange rates to PPP exchange rates.
Originally, Summers and Heston provided estimates of the margin of error (which is
defined as the root mean squared error) by different country grade. These are shows
in Table 1.


4There is a vast literature on the subject. For a recent review, see the article by Deaton and
Heston (2008).


                                               -15-
                         Estimated margin of error in PPP cross section
                        Country grade Error in level
                                A                   9%
                                B                 15%
                                C                 21%
                                D                 30%

        Table 1. Cross-sectional errors estimated by Summers and Heston



The A countries would be representative of countries such as the United States. Note
that the margin of error is much greater than the average statistical discrepancy, but
not as large as the difference in the Kuznets-BEA estimates. We will adopt the
margin of errors in Table 1 for our estimates by countries.

       The errors in the international data have been recently examined in a
comprehensive study by Simon Johnson, William Larson, Chris Papageorgiou, and
Arvind Subramanian (2009). They examined the revisions of estimates of both the
level of the price index and the growth in real GDP across countries between Penn
World Table 6.1 and 6.2, shown in Table 2. One feature of the study was to examine
the changes or revisions in cross-sectional differences due to price changes. These
revisions arise from several sources: revisions in source data, methodological
changes, and most importantly from changes in the international price data. These
can be interpreted as an approximation of the error in PWT 6.1. For example, if the
PWT 6.2 was exactly correct, then the errors would be the errors in the PWT 6.1.
There is no theoretical way to determine whether these should be higher or lower
than the Summers-Heston margins of error, but they do tend to be considerably
smaller. Note that the Summer-Heston grades applied to an earlier version of PWT
and should presumably be smaller on average in the latest version.



                          Estimated margin of change in PPP
                          price between PWT 6.1 and PWT 6.2
                         Country grade       Change in level
                                 A                2.9%
                                 B                2.9%
                                 C               10.9%
                                 D               22.6%

  Table 2. Cross-sectional errors as estimated by the change in country PPP level
                          between PWT 6.1 and PWT 6.2



                                            -16-
        Johnson et al. focus primarily on the revisions of the growth rates. Based on
their results, we have compiled estimates of the revisions to the growth rates of real
GDP by country grade, and the results are shown in Table 3. This table shows the
revisions in growth rates across countries between Penn World Table 6.1 and 6.2. We
transformed the 29-year growth rate differences to 1-year growth rate differences by
assuming that the differences by year were independent. As with the cross-sectional
differences in Table 2, there is no necessary relationship between the errors and the
revisions.

       The number for the U.S. using this methodology is 0.3 percentage points per
year, which is virtually identical to the number derived above. The errors for the A
countries are consistent with the estimates for the U.S., indicating about double the
measurement error for the U.S. Part of the difference, however, is probably due to
the fact that the U.S. dollar is the numeraire. The revision numbers for the D
countries are astoundingly high, indicating a revision that is actually more than
double the mean growth rate. However, note that 135 of the poor quality countries
are “C” while only 13 are “D.”

      At the same time, some of the worst statistical systems – Iraq, West Bank and
Gaza, and Afghanistan – are not even in the PWT data set.



                      Difference between PWT 6.1 and 6.2
            Country grade        29‐year growth rate          1‐year growth rate*
                                                              Average         Median
            A                      0.108%                      0.583%         0.350%
            B                      0.134%                      0.720%         0.700%
            C                      0.576%                      3.104%         1.642%
            D                      1.644%                      8.852%         6.731%

            * One‐year growth rate is 29‐year multiplied by square root of 29.

       Table 3. Revision to growth rate of real GDP



       Differences from compilation errors

       A final issue comes from the “transmission errors” that come when those who
compile databases make errors of omission or commission. We have generally relied
on the World Bank compilation of national accounts statistics because it is the most
complete. One set of errors would arise because the data are from earlier vintages of
publications from the national statistical offices. For data available on the same date,
the ratio of the World Bank measure of U.S. nominal GDP to the official version


                                               -17-
erred by an average of 1.1 percent over the 1960-2006 period. The average growth
rate of real GDP differed by 0.18 percentage points. By contrast, the IMF database
associated with the World Economic Outlook had essentially no errors.

       Grid-cell estimates

       In our estimates below, we use grid cell as well as country output estimates.
The grid cell output data have higher errors than the national data, but they may be
useful because of the much higher resolution than country data. We have about
20,000 non-zero grid cells as compared to somewhat less than 200 countries.

       The tradeoff is that estimating the grid-cell errors is more challenging because
their estimation is in its infancy. We would consider the national level and growth
estimates to be a lower bound on our grid-cell estimates. The major approach
available to estimate potential error is similar to that used above -- to examine
changes in estimates of levels of PPP output for individual grid cells across GEcon
revisions. The revisions have added considerable accuracy by using improved maps,
better population estimates, and improved imputations. In addition, the GEcon
estimates have added output estimates for “E” quality countries for which data are
not generally available, such as Somalia and Afghanistan. Revisions have been
completed for 34 of the countries in the data set, with 7756 grid cells.

       The revisions considered here are from the first published version (GEcon 1.3
from 2005) to the latest version (GEcon 3.32 in 2010). One comprehensive set of
revisions has been in the gridded population data, which were a complete revision
cycle. The economic data have been thoroughly revised only for a subset of
countries, primarily the large countries such as the U.S., China, Brazil, and Russia.

         Table 4 shows the revisions measured as the standard deviation of the ln of
first to last estimates for GDP per grid cell and population per grid cell for countries
with revisions. These should be compared with the cross-sectional results above.
The results suggest very high potential error for the grid cell output estimates, even
for grade A countries.




                                            -18-
                                              Standard deviation of
                                          ln (First estimate/last estimate)
                       Country grade           Output         Population
                       A                         36.1             33.4
                       B                         24.4             20.9
                       C                         79.5             33.4
                       D                         57.4             41.8
                       E                          na               na

       Table 4. Revisions in estimates in grid-cell data from GEcon data

       We will also be using growth rate estimates for the grid cell data. These have
been developed from a combination of gridded population for different years and
country data on regional or national per capita GDP. At present there are no
revisions of the data for comparison purposes. Work on regional GDP estimates
suggest, however, that relative per capita incomes in most countries are relatively
stable over time, so the errors in the growth rates of gridded data are likely to be
only slightly above the estimates of the errors for the population and for the national
GDP data. We have made tentative estimates here, but we recognize that these error
estimates have only a sparse empirical basis.

       The last column in Table 4 provides the estimates of the estimated errors for
grid cell output data for each of the five groups of countries. These are clearly very
high, and are still tentative given the tentative nature of the GEcon data. The
question is whether, given the very high potential errors in these data, the
luminosity information can be used to improve the estimates.

      Final Estimates

       Table 5 shows our estimates that we have used in our empirical estimates
below. The estimates for country growth and cross-sectional errors are based on the
findings discussed above. For countries, the cross-sectional are largely consistent
with the Summers-Heston grades, while the growth estimates are largely drawn
from the Johnson et al results. For grid cells, we decided to double the estimates of
the country errors for the cross-sectional errors. The assumption of doubling is
based in a rough way on the revision estimates for the GEcon data discussed above.
We also note that the results for the “E” countries are based on our own judgments
as these data are generally not found in the international data bases. For the time-
series numbers for grid cells, we have doubled the errors for the high-quality data,
but have added a maximum of 1 percentage point to the cell growth errors. This
number comes from estimates we have made about the relative divergence of
regional from national data in several countries. In addition, we use weighted
average over the number of observations to generate error estimates for all countries
and all cells in the following analysis.

                                           -19-
        It must be emphasized that estimating the error of standard measures of GDP
is extremely difficult, and our results should be taken with some caution because of
this problem.



                       Estimates for country output                 Estimates for grid‐cell output
       Country grade 1‐year growth rate     Output level          1‐year growth rate         Output level
       A                0.600%                10%                       1.200%                   20%
       B                0.800%                15%                       1.600%                   30%
       C                3.000%                20%                       4.000%                   40%
       D                5.000%                30%                       5.000%                   60%
       E                6.000%                50%                       8.000%                 100%



Table 5. Estimates of errors of national and gridded GDP data used in estimates of
combined measures of output


      Some Preliminary Tests

      We can get the basic point with the simplest test. For this test, we take a
group of 103 grade-C countries (those with the moderate quality statistical systems)
and construct growth rates of both real GDP and luminosity over the 1992-2008
period. A linear regression of the two growth rates has a R2 of 0.22.

      We estimate that the error of the real GDP growth rate of C countries is 3
percentage points per year. Using these data, we calculate that β̂ = 0.25. The error
variance of the 17-year GDP growth rate is 0.015, while the error variance of 17-year
luminosity growth is 0.046. From the formula for the optimal weights, we get:

                                                 −2
                γ 2σ u2                 (0.25)        × 0.046
       θ=                       =                                 = 0.980
            (σ ε2 + γ 2σ u2 )       ( 0.015 + (0.25)−2 × 0.046)

         For this simple example, then, the optimal weight is 98 percent on measured
GDP growth and 2 percent on luminosity growth. The intuitive reason for the low
weight on luminosity is that it is too noisy a proxy to be useful for measuring output
in countries with moderately accurate statistical systems. If we double the estimated
error of national growth rates to 6 percentage points per year, the optimal weight on
luminosity will increase to 0.24. This simple example suggests that luminosity will
not be much help in countries with moderately accurate statistical systems unless
the errors of growth rate of these countries are significantly underestimated.


                                                       -20-
         What about the low-quality countries? For these countries, we take an
average error of 6 percentage points per year. If we perform the same experiment for
the 9 countries with grade E, we get:

                                           −2
         γ 2σ u2                 (0.285)        × 0.0045
θ=                       =                                    = 0.476
     (σ ε2 + γ 2σ u2 )       (0.061 + (0.285)−2 × 0.0045)

In this simplest case, luminosity data have approximately the same information
content as conventional output data. These preliminary tests suggest that only for
countries with the most rudimentary accounts (such as Angola, Chad, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Republic of Djibouti, Eritrea , Niger, Sudan, Uganda and
Yemen), can the luminosity data be considered as reliable a measure of output
growth as standard output measures.

       Formal Tests of Luminosity and National Output

         The informal tests in the last section are only suggestive because they rely
primarily on one or two country grades. An alternative test is to look at data from all
country grades and estimate the optimal weights on luminosities. For these
countries, we conducted two sets of estimates. The first set is for the 17-year growth
of output from 1992 to 2008, while the second is output density measured as output
per unit area. We look at both country data and grid-cell data. The grid cell results
generally have large samples (N > 250). The sample size for countries is small
particularly for E countries (see Table A-1).

          Our ultimate goal is to see how much luminosity can contribute in
constructing the “true” GDP measures. We do this by estimating the weight θ in
equation (7). We report θ estimates for countries and cells in both the 17-year growth
rates and the output density. We also run a separate analysis for observation with
low density GDP, because many of the low-quality statistical systems are also in
low-density regions. For countries, we defined low-density observations as ones
with 1990 GDP per unit area one standard deviation below the mean GDP density.
For grid cells, we defined cells with ln output density above -9 in the year 2000
(about $100,000 per square km) as high density-observations, while the rest of the
cells are designated as low-density observations.

         Table 6 reports the results for countries, while Table 7 reports the results for
grid cells. In addition, we show the estimated weights on luminosity graphically in
Figures 6 and 7. Comparing the estimated θ weights leads to the following
conclusions.

       First, examine the results for the time series, shown at the top of Tables 6 and
7. There is essentially no information in the luminosity signal for A and B countries,


                                                       -21-
with the weight on luminosity being less than 1 percent. There is a small weight on
luminosity in the C countries, with the weight being between 2 to 7 percent. The
results on D and E countries are inconsistent, but the general finding is that there is
substantial weight, with a maximum weight on luminosity being over 60 percent for
E countries with low GDP density.

        Second, consider the cross sectional values, or output density estimates,
shown as the bottom panels in Tables 6 and 7. Since the areas are well measured,
these involve uncertainties about output. The estimates here are consistent across
both countries and grid cells. For A through D countries, there is a small value
added of luminosity, with the range of weights on luminosity from 1.0 to 14.0
percent. By contrast, there is substantial weight on luminosity in the E countries,
with the weights being over 30 percent for both cell and country data. The
interesting finding here is that luminosity is considerably more useful than official
data, having a 94 percent weight, for high-GDP-density cells in E countries. This
result is confirmed by its highest weight for those observations in the IV analysis
(the last row in Table A-6). One possible reason is that economic activity is more
concentrated in urban areas in low-density and therefore poorer countries than in
developed countries, and these cells are more likely to locate in populous, more
developed cities, such as the national capitals. Thus, luminosity could be a good
proxy for their output measures due to the lack of reliable regional data in these
countries.

       Third, consider the relative contribution of luminosity for grid cells and
countries. We originally expected that there would be much more value added for
luminosity in grid-cell output measures because of the low quality of regional
economic data in most countries. This turns out not to be the case. In general, the
information content of luminosity is approximately the same for grid-cell data and
for country data. The only exception is that luminosity adds more information for E
countries (about 60 percent) than for cells in the E countries (about 35 percent) in
time series analysis.

        Fourth, consider the results for low-density observations. We had expected
that the value added of luminosity for the low-density observations would be much
higher than for all observations. The results are more complicated. For countries, the
weight on luminosity is almost uniformly higher for low-density observations. For
grid cells, the results are mixed. The weights on luminosity are generally higher for
the low-density cells than for all cells for time series, but the relative weights for
cross section are reversed. We have not investigated the reasons why luminosity
adds less information for low-GDP-density cells for cross section. We hypothesize
that this phenomenon may arise because economic activity is more concentrated in
large urban areas in poor and therefore low-density countries.




                                           -22-
         As a final test, we examine output and luminosity data for U.S. states. The
reason to look here is that U.S. states probably have the most accurate cross sectional
data set constructed with a uniform and high-quality methodology. They are less
accurate than the U.S. national data, but probably better for comparative purposes
than any other regional comparison. We obtained real annual GDP by state from the
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and reallocated grid cell luminosity to state
luminosity. We assumed that the error of annual growth rate is 0.8 percent and the
error of output density 15 percent (equivalent to the errors for grade B countries).
Using the standard approach in equation (7), we calculation that the optimal weight
on luminosity is 0.0012 for the growth rate and 0.102 for the density measure. This
result further indicates that the contribution of luminosity is of no value for time
series estimates but is of modest value for cross sectional estimates for high-quality
data systems.

      Summary

      This project began with the hope that luminosity measures could be used to
improve the estimates of output at the regional level, particularly for countries with
low-quality data systems.

        The results confirm that the use of luminosity as a proxy for output will be
most beneficial for countries with the poorest statistical systems, those that receive a
D or E grade. Luminosity has very limited value as a proxy variable for output for
countries with moderate to excellent statistic systems because it is so noisy and the
errors in the standard economic data are relatively low. But we do find that
luminosity can significantly improve the cross-sectional output measures for rich
cells in poor countries.

         We draw one major conclusion for the development of economic statistics
from this study. There are natural concerns about improving the quality of economic
data in countries with low-quality statistical systems. Given the results here, we
suggest that major improvements will come primarily from the standard procedures
for designing and improving national economic accounts. These involve improving
methods as well as increasing the depth and reliability of source data. We see
relatively little utility in relying instead on proxy measures such as luminosity
except in the regions with the most deficient data. The reason for this conclusion is
that, even in the best of cases, the errors in the luminosity data at present are too
large to provide accurate indicators of economic activity. Once a country has moved
from the E or D grade to the C or B grade, there is almost no value added in using
luminosity for estimates of real economic growth. However, in the interim, and
particularly for periods or countries where economic data are extremely weak,
luminosity data may be a useful supplement to current indicators.



                                            -23-
                                  Country sample for time series
                                                     Low density
                 Country grade   All countries
                                                      countries
                 All                0.9747              0.9547
                 A                  1.0000                na
                 B                  0.9986                na
                 C                  0.9791              0.9548
                 D                  0.8911              0.9721
                 E                  0.4745              0.3655


                                 Country sample for cross section
                                                     Low density
                 Country grade   All countries
                                                      countries
                 All                0.9773              0.9291
                 A                  0.9829                na
                 B                  0.9500                na
                 C                  0.9754              0.9650
                 D                  0.9778              0.9604
                 E                  0.6809              0.6529




Table 6. Estimated optimal weight on measured output for countries of different
grades using 17-year growth rates and for cross-sectional density




                                         -24-
                                        Cell sample for time series
                                               High density Low density
                  Country grade   All cells
                                                   cells       cells
                  All             0.9676             0.9568   0.9681
                  A               0.9956             0.9995   0.9945
                  B               0.9995             0.9989   0.9971
                  C               0.9642             0.9284   0.9706
                  D               0.8352             0.6327   0.8173
                  E               0.8203             0.9273   0.8111


                                       Cell sample for cross section
                                               High density Low density
                  Country grade   All cells
                                                   cells       cells
                  All             0.9633             0.9266   0.9813
                  A               0.9850             0.9772   0.9916
                  B               0.9663             0.9514   0.9880
                  C               0.9702             0.8929   0.9839
                  D               0.9615             0.8609   0.9827
                  E               0.6948             0.0638   0.6671

Table 7. Estimated optimal weight on measured output for grid cells of different
grades using 17-year growth rates and for cross-sectional density




                                              -25-
Figure 1. Nighttime lights from India

(Source: Defense Meteorological Satellite Program.)




                                         -26-
Figure 2. A detail from nighttime lights for Los Angeles for 2002

Note the lights from rural interstate I-15, which would not be measured by standard
economic accounts. Note also the bleeding of lights beyond the coastline, which is
shown in red. The picture covers an area of approximately 250 x 250 km.




                                         -27-
                                           6


                                           5
                 ln (luminosity density)




                                           4


                                           3


                                           2


                                           1


                                           0
                                               -14   -12   -10     -8      -6    -4   -2

                                                           ln (output density)


Figure 3. GDP from GEcon and luminosity data, all grid cells

This figure shows all grid cells with RIG > 0.1 and ln output density > -14.




                                                                 -28-
                                            7


                                            6
                 log (luminosity density)


                                            5


                                            4


                                            3


                                            2


                                            1


                                            0
                                                -14   -12   -10      -8     -6     -4   -2

                                                            log (output density)


Figure 4. GDP from GEcon and luminosity data, US grid cells

This shows all U.S. grid cells. The cells at the upper left are Alaska.




                                                                  -29-
                                          6

                                          5

                                          4
               log (luminosity density)




                                          3

                                          2

                                          1

                                          0

                                          -1

                                          -2
                                               -18   -16   -14   -12    -10    -8   -6   -4

                                                            log (output density)


Figure 5. GDP from GEcon and luminosity data, African grid cells




                                                                 -30-
               0.70
                      Country: TS_all       Results for Countries
               0.60   Country: TS_lo

                      Country: XS_all
               0.50
                      Country: XS_lo

               0.40
     1‐theta




               0.30


               0.20


               0.10


               0.00
                       All              A           B          C    D   E




Figure 6. Summary estimates of the value of (1-θ) or the weight on luminosity for
countries of different grades




                                                        -31-
               1
                    Cell: TS_Hi       Results for Cells
              0.9
                    Cell: TS_lo
              0.8
                    Cell: XS_Hi
              0.7
                    Cell: XS_lo
              0.6
    1‐theta




              0.5

              0.4

              0.3

              0.2

              0.1

               0
                     All          A            B          C     D           E




Figure 7. Summary estimates of the value of (1-θ) or the weight on luminosity for
cells of different grades




                                               -32-
       References

Deaton, Angus S. and Heston, Alan. 2008. “Understanding PPPs and PPP-Based National
Accounts.” NBER Working Paper Series, Vol. w14499, 2008.

Doll, Christopher. 2008. CIESIN Thematic Guide to Night-time Light Remote Sensing and its
Applications. Palisades, NY: Center for International Earth Science Information Network of
Columbia University.

Doll, Christopher, Muller, J-P., and Christopher D. Elvidge. 2000. “Nighttime Imagery as a
Tool for Global Mapping of Socio-economic Parameters and Greenhouse Gas Emissions.”
Ambio, 29, 157-162.

Ebener, Steve, Christopher Murray, Ajay Tandon, and Christopher Elvidge. 2005. “From
Wealth to Health: Modeling the Distribution of Income per capita at The Sub-national Level
Using Nighttime Lights Imagery.” International Journal of Health Geographics, 4(5): 5-14.

Elvidge, Christopher D., Jeffrey Safran, Benjamin Tuttle, Paul Sutton and Pierantonio
Cinzano, et al. 2007. “Potential for Global Mapping of Development via a Nightsat Mission.”
GeoJournal, 69: 45–53.

Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberly E. Baugh, John B. Dietz, Theodore Bland, Paul C. Sutton
and Herbert W. Kroehl. 1999. “Radiance Calibration of DMSP-OLS Low-Light Imaging
Data of Human Settlements.” Remote Sensing of Environment, 68(1):77-88.

Elvidge, Christopher D., K.E. Baugh, E.A. Kihn, H.W. Kroehl, E.R, Davis, and C.W. Davis.
1997. “Relation between Satellite Observed Visible - Near Infrared Emissions, Population,
Economic Activity and Electric Power Consumption.” International Journal of Remote Sensing,
18:1373-1379.

Fixler, Dennis J. and Bruce T. Grimm. 2008 “The Reliability of the GDP and GDI Estimates,”
Survey of Current Business, 88(2): 16–32.

Johnson, Simon H., William D. Larson, Chris Papageorgiou, and Arvind Subramanian. 2009.
“Is Newer Better? Penn World Table Revisions and Their Impact on Growth Estimates”
NBER Working Paper, No. w15455.

Henderson, Vernon, Adam Storeygard and David Weil. 2009. Measuring Economic Growth
from Outer Space, NBER Working Paper Series, Vol. w15199, 2009.

Kuznets, Simon. 1934. National Income, 1929-1932, NBER: New York.

Sutton, P. C., C. D. Elvidge and T. Ghosh. 2007. “Estimation of Gross Domestic Product at
Sub-national Scales Using Nighttime Satellite Imagery.” International Journal of Ecological
Economics and Statistics, 8 (SO7): 5 – 21.



                                              -33-
Sutton, Paul C., Robert Costanza. 2002. “Global Estimates of Market and Non-market Values
Derived from Nighttime Satellite Imagery, Land cover, and Ecosystem Service Valuation.”
Ecological Economics, V41(3): 509-527.

System of National Accounts. 1993. United Nations.
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/sna1993/toctop.asp (accessed March 21, 2010)




                                            -34-
                                  Number of
                    Grade level                   Number of cells
                                  countries
                    A                     16           3731
                    B                     13           980
                    C                    103           8736
                    D                     26           1471
                    E                     9            1063
                    Total                167          15981


Table A-1. Distribution of countries and cells without missing values by grade




                                           -35-
Country            Grade   Country             Grade   Country            Grade
Afghanistan        E       Central African     D       Gibraltar          B
Albania            C       Chad                E       Greece             B
Algeria            D       Chile               B       Greenland          B
American Samoa     C       China               C       Grenada            C
Andorra            C       Christmas I.        D       Guadeloupe         C
Angola             E       Cocos Is.           D       Guam               C
Anguilla           C       Colombia            C       Guatemala          C
Antarctica         D       Comoros             D       Guinea             D
Antigua and Barb   C       Congo               E       Guinea Bissau      C
Argentina          B       Cook Is.            D       Guyana             D
Armenia            C       Costa Rica          C       Haiti              D
Aruba              C       Cote d'Ivoire       C       Heard I. & McDon   D
Australia          A       Croatia             C       Honduras           C
Austria            A       Cuba                D       Hong Kong          C
Azerbaijan         C       Cyprus              D       Hungary            C
Bahamas            C       Czech Republic      C       Iceland            C
Bahrain            C       Democratic Repub    D       India              C
Baker and Howlan   D       Denmark             A       Indonesia          C
Bangladesh         C       Djibouti            E       Iran               C
Barbados           C       Dominica            C       Iraq               E
Belarus            D       Dominican Republ    C       Ireland            A
Belgium            A       Ecuador             C       Isle of Man        C
Belize             C       Egypt               C       Israel             B
Benin              C       El Salvador         C       Italy              A
Bermuda            C       Equatorial Guine    C       Jamaica            C
Bhutan             D       Eritrea             E       Jan Mayen          D
Bolivia            C       Estonia             C       Japan              A
Bosnia&Herzegovi   C       Ethiopia            C       Jarvis I.          D
Botswana           C       Falkland Is.        C       Johnston Atoll     D
Bouvet I.          D       Faroe Is.           C       Jordan             C
Brazil             C       Federated State     D       Kazakhstan         C
British Indian O   D       Fiji                C       Kenya              C
British Virgin I   C       Finland             B       Kiribati           D
Brunei             C       France              A       Kuwait             C
Bulgaria           C       French Guiana       C       Kyrgyztan          C
Burkina Faso       C       French Polynesia    C       Laos               D
Burundi            C       French Southern     D       Latvia             C
Cambodia           D       Gabon               C       Lebanon            C
Cameroon           C       Gambia              C       Lesotho            D
Canada             A       Georgia             C       Liberia            D
Cape Verde                 Germany             B       Libya              D
Cayman Is.                 Ghana               C       Liechtenstein      B




                                        -36-
Country            Grade   Country            Grade   Country            Grade
Liechtenstein      B                                  St. Pierre & Miq   C
Lithuania          C       Norway             A       St. Vincent and    C
Luxembourg         A       Oman               C       Sudan              E
Macau              C       Pakistan           C       Suriname           D
Macedonia          C       Palau              D       Svalbard           C
Madagascar         C       Panama             C       Swaziland          C
Malawi             C       Papua New Guinea   D       Sweden             A
Malaysia           C       Paraguay           C       Switzerland        A
Maldives           C       Peru               C       Syria              C
Mali               C       Philippines        C       Taiwan             C
Malta              D       Pitcairn Is.       D       Tajikistan         D
Marshall Is.       D       Poland             B       Tanzania           C
Marshall Islands   D       Portugal           B       Thailand           C
Martinique         C       Puerto Rico        B       Timor Leste        E
Mauritania         C       Qatar              C       Togo               D
Mauritius          C       Reunion            C       Tokelau            D
Mayotte            D       Romania            C       Tonga              D
Mexico             C       Russia             C       Trinidad and Tob   C
Micronesia         C       Rwanda             C       Tunisia            C
Midway Is.         C       Saint Helena       C       Turkey             C
Moldova            C       Samoa              C       Turkmenistan       D
Monaco             B       San Marino         C       Turks & Caicos I   C
Mongolia           D       Sao Tome and Pri   C       Tuvalu             D
Montserrat         D       Saudi Arabia       D       Uganda             E
Morocco            C       Senegal            C       Ukraine            C
Mozambique         D       Serbia and Monte   C       United Arab Emir   C
Myanmar            E       Seychelles         C       United Kingdom     A
Namibia            D       Sierra Leone       C       United States      A
Nauru              D       Singapore          B       Uruguay            B
Nepal              C       Slovakia           C       Uzbekistan         D
Netherland Antil   C       Slovenia           C       Vanuatu            D
Netherlands        A       Solomon Islands    C       Vatican City       D
Netherlands Anti   C       Somalia            E       Venezuela          C
New Caledonia      C       South Africa       C       Vietnam            C
New Zealand        B       South Georgia &    E       Virgin Is.         C
Nicaragua          C       South Korea        B       Wake I.            C
Niger              E       Spain              B       Wallis and Futun   D
Nigeria            C       Sri Lanka          C       West Bank and Ga   E
Niue               D       St. Helena         C       Yemen              E
Norfolk I.         D       St. Kitts and Ne   C       Zambia             C
North Korea        E       St. Lucia          C       Zimbabwe           D
Northern Mariana   D



                                     -37-
Table A-2. Country grades
                year        f10         f12                f14         f15         f16
               1992    130901.1            .                  .           .           .
                       215777.5            .                  .           .           .
                        17575.0            .                  .           .           .
               1993    116858.5            .                  .           .           .
                       204683.3            .                  .           .           .
                        17571.0            .                  .           .           .
               1994    111849.4    139993.3                   .           .           .
                       214893.1    224159.5                   .           .           .
                        17326.0     17489.0                   .           .           .
               1995            .   130891.2                   .           .           .
                               .   227916.0                   .           .           .
                               .    17539.0                   .           .           .
               1996            .   123192.8                   .           .           .
                               .   219661.5                   .           .           .
                               .    17575.0                   .           .           .
               1997            .   135643.5            96053.0            .           .
                               .   234274.8           192918.7            .           .
                               .    17575.0            17552.0            .           .
               1998            .   191499.8           105024.5            .           .
                               .   253795.5           197161.8            .           .
                               .    19355.0            17565.0            .           .
               1999            .   177086.1           103215.6            .           .
                               .   263062.1           202037.6            .           .
                               .    18378.0            17549.0            .           .
               2000            .           .          109679.3    181436.7            .
                               .           .          216877.1    240954.9            .
                               .           .           17469.0     19823.0            .
               2001            .           .          125058.7    145177.2            .
                               .           .          227136.4    232601.6            .
                               .           .           17550.0     17575.0            .
               2002            .           .          124119.7    152794.8            .
                               .           .          236180.5    239186.9            .
                               .           .           16365.0     17575.0            .
               2003            .           .          128392.2     99541.4            .
                               .           .          222748.3    191665.7            .
                               .           .           19138.0     17575.0            .
               2004            .           .                  .   110133.6    140468.3
                               .           .                  .   192524.2    213234.6
                               .           .                  .    19826.0     19826.0
               2005            .           .                  .   104591.3    110601.9
                               .           .                  .   199367.8    195375.6
                               .           .                  .    19826.0     19826.0
               2006            .           .                  .   102925.4    133114.0
                               .           .                  .   198590.5    212744.5
                               .           .                  .    19826.0     19826.0
               2007            .           .                  .   103532.5    153832.3
                               .           .                  .   198575.4    238442.9
                               .           .                  .    19826.0     19826.0
               2008            .           .                  .           .   137462.6
                               .           .                  .           .   234186.5
                               .           .                  .           .    19826.0

Table A-3. Statistics of luminosity raw data (mean, standard deviation, and
number of observations)


                                               -38-
              Correlation
              Coefficent     f10     f12          f14     f15     f16
                 1992       0.519
                 1993       0.521
                 1994       0.546   0.534
                 1995               0.561
                 1996               0.542
                 1997               0.537         0.561
                 1998               0.369         0.529
                 1999               0.486         0.545
                 2000                             0.549   0.356
                 2001                             0.550   0.515
                 2002                             0.635   0.496
                 2003                             0.466   0.502
                 2004                                     0.350   0.403
                 2005                                     0.420   0.428
                 2006                                     0.416   0.417
                 2007                                     0.424   0.410
                 2008                                             0.469



Table A-4. Correlation of log GDP and log luminosity for grid cells by year




                                           -39-
    errors of f10 (t+1 f12 on f12 (t+1   f14 on f14 (t+1 f15 on f15 (t+1 f16 on f16 (t+1
   regressions on t)     f10    on t)      f12    on t)    f14    on t)    f15    on t)
      1992     0.205
      1993     0.260
      1994              0.369 0.273
      1995                     0.150
      1996                     0.172
      1997                     0.156     0.211   0.249
      1998                     0.157     0.188   0.185
      1999                               0.182   0.267
      2000                                       0.338   0.288   0.158
      2001                                       0.320   0.255   0.122
      2002                                       0.315   0.357   0.144
      2003                                               0.254   0.203
      2004                                                       0.158   0.176   0.169
      2005                                                       0.138   0.136   0.168
      2006                                                       0.160   0.162   0.136
      2007                                                               0.175   0.127



Table A-5. Errors of regressions of log grid cell luminosity over satellites or years

The entries are the standard errors of estimates of regressions of the logarithm of
luminosity for grid cells across satellites or across time. The unshaded columns
show the SEE for regressions of luminosity in t and t+1, while the shaded columns
show the SEE for luminosity of satellite k on satellite j.




                                             -40-
         0.400

         0.350

         0.300

         0.250                                                                                                                   F10

         0.200                                                                                                                   F12
                                                                                                                                 F14
         0.150
                                                                                                                                 F15
         0.100
                                                                                                                                 F16
         0.050

         0.000
                 1992
                        1993
                               1994
                                      1995
                                             1996
                                                    1997
                                                           1998
                                                                  1999
                                                                         2000
                                                                                2001
                                                                                       2002
                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                     2004
                                                                                                            2005
                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                          2007
Figure A-1. Time-series error of log grid cell luminosity

This figure shows the standard error of estimate or SEE (described in Table A-5) for
individual satellites and adjacent time periods. For example, the first line shows the
SEE for two pairs of years for satellite F10. These data correspond to the second
column of Table A-5.




                                                                          -41-
          0.400

          0.350

          0.300

          0.250
                                                                                                                    F12 on F10
          0.200
                                                                                                                    F14 on F12
          0.150                                                                                                     F15 on F14
          0.100                                                                                                     F16 on F15

          0.050

          0.000
                  1994
                         1995
                                1996
                                       1997
                                              1998
                                                     1999
                                                            2000
                                                                   2001
                                                                          2002
                                                                                 2003
                                                                                        2004
                                                                                               2005
                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                             2007




Figure A-2. Cross sectional errors of log grid cell luminosity

This figure shows the standard error of estimate or SEE (described in Table A-5) for
the same year and different satellites. For example, the second line with three
observations shows the SEE comparing three pairs of years for satellite F12 and
satellite F14. These data correspond to the fifth column of Table A-5.




                                                                           -42-
                 IV method        Cell sample for time series
                                              High density Low density
                 Country grade   All cells
                                                 cells        cells
                 All              0.9164            1.0000      0.9161
                 A                0.9935            0.9479      0.9931
                 B                0.9945            1.0000      0.9908
                 C                0.9347            0.9791      0.9418
                 D                0.9693            0.9864      0.9361
                 E                0.8942            0.9961      0.8944


                 IV method        Cell sample for cross section
                                              High density Low density
                 Country grade   All cells
                                                 cells        cells
                 All              0.9640            0.9273      0.9810
                 A                0.9802            0.9604      0.9811
                 B                0.9637            0.9411      0.9826
                 C                0.9707            0.9022      0.9829
                 D                0.9730            0.8772      0.9929
                 E                0.8641            0.4064      0.9348

Table A-6. IV regressions of luminosity equation for all grid cells




                                             -43-
