                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  FINANCIAL POLICIES AND THE FINANCIAL CRISIS:
HOW IMPORTANT WAS THE SYSTEMIC CREDIT CONTRACTION FOR INDUSTRIAL CORPORATIONS?

                                              Kathleen M. Kahle
                                               René M. Stulz

                                             Working Paper 16310
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w16310


                           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          August 2010




      We thank Christian Leuz, Cathy Schrand, Berk Sensoy, and Mike Weisbach for useful discussions,
      and Matt Wynter for excellent research assistance. We are especially indebted to Harry DeAngelo
      for discussions and detailed comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
      not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

      NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
      reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
      NBER publications.

      © 2010 by Kathleen M. Kahle and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
      exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
      © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Policies and the Financial Crisis: How Important Was the Systemic Credit Contraction
for Industrial Corporations?
Kathleen M. Kahle and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 16310
August 2010
JEL No. E22,E32,E51,G32,G35,N1

                                                ABSTRACT

Although firm financial policies were affected by a credit contraction during the recent financial crisis,
the impact of increased uncertainty and decreased growth opportunities was stronger than that of the
credit contraction per se. From the start of the financial crisis (third quarter of 2007) to its peak (first
quarter of 2009), both large and investment-grade non-financial firms show no evidence of suffering
from an exceptional systemic credit contraction. Instead of decreasing their cash holdings as would
be expected with a temporarily impaired credit supply, these firms increase their cash holdings sharply
(by 17.8% in the case of investment-grade firms) after the fall of Lehman. Though small and unrated
firms have exceptionally low net debt issuance at the peak of the crisis, their net debt issuance in the
first year of the crisis is no different from the last year of the credit boom. In contrast, however, the
net equity issuance of small and unrated firms is low throughout 2008, whereas an impaired credit
supply by itself would have encouraged firms to increase their equity issuance. On average, the cumulative
financing impact of the decrease in net equity issuance from the start to the peak of the crisis is approximately
twice the cumulative impact of the decrease in net debt issuance. The decrease in net equity issuance
and the increase in cash holdings are also economically important for firms with no debt.


Kathleen M. Kahle
8QLYHUVLW\RI$UL]RQD
McClelland Hall
P.O. Box 210108
Tucson , AZ 85721-0108
kkahle@eller.arizona.edu

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
    After the crash of the dot.coms, the U.S. went through a striking credit boom that was followed by a

dramatic financial crisis.1 The crisis, which is generally considered to have started in August 2007, was

unexpected. It became the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression after the surprising events of

September 2008, which include the bankruptcy of Lehman and the rescue of AIG, when panic reigned in

the markets and there were concerns about whether the financial system would keep functioning.2 In this

paper, we investigate firm-level financial policies during the crisis, taking advantage of the fact that its

abrupt start and its unforeseen virulence following Lehman’s bankruptcy make it a natural experiment to

study the impact of an unexpected systemic crisis.

    The conventional view of the crisis is that bank losses from toxic assets led to an abrupt contraction

of credit (see Brunnermeier (2009)). These toxic assets were mostly securities backed by subprime and

related mortgages, so their loss of value had little to do with the performance of industrial firms, making

the credit contraction an exogenous event for these firms. Research in finance, including research on the

recent financial crisis, argues that exogenous credit contractions have real effects on firms, in that firms

cannot obtain financing as planned and therefore reduce investment.3 An important issue with this

research is that it is difficult to assess whether investment falls because of the credit contraction directly

or because firms have fewer attractive investments and thus borrow less. In this paper, we take one step

back from directly studying the impact of credit contractions on investment and instead investigate how

the financial policies of firms differ during the financial crisis compared to normal times and what those

differences tell us about the extent to which industrial firms suffered from an impaired credit supply.

1
  There is a vast literature on financial crises. Schularick and Taylor (2009) state that “In line with the previous
studies we define financial crises as events during which a country’s banking sector experiences bank runs, sharp
increases in default rates accompanied by large losses of capital that result in public intervention, bankruptcy, or
forced merger of financial institutions.”
2
  In this paper, we use the bankruptcy of Lehman as a short-hand for the events that took place in the second half of
September 2008 and beginning of October 2008 that led to sharp decreases in stock prices and dramatic increases in
credit spreads and LIBOR. Among others, these events include the collapse of Washington Mutual, the run on
money market funds, the rescue of AIG, and the merger of Merrill Lynch. We are not taking a position in this paper
on the issue debated in the literature of whether the changes in credit spreads and LIBOR were caused by the
bankruptcy of Lehman or by subsequent events (see Taylor (2009)).
3
  References to this large literature include work focused on the impact of monetary policy (e.g., Gertler and
Gilchrist (1994)), Kashyap, Stein, and Wilcox (1993), and Kashyap, Lamont, and Stein (1994)) as well as more
recent work focused on specific events associated with changes in the supply of credit (e.g., Sufi (2007), Leary
(2009), and Lemmon and Roberts (2010)). Papers on the financial crisis are discussed later in this introduction.

                                                          1
    There is much evidence that financial policies depend on both financial market conditions and

macroeconomic conditions (see references, for instance, in Baker (2009), Erel, Julio, Kim and Weisbach

(2010), and Korajczyk and Levi (2003)). Based on this evidence, we would expect to find that firms

exploit advantageous conditions in credit markets and that their leverage increases when such conditions

obtain. As the availability of credit becomes restricted, we would expect firms to borrow less. With

suddenly less welcoming credit markets, firms should use their cash holdings to finance investment since

precautionary holdings of cash, whose importance has been emphasized in the recent literature (see, for

instance, Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (1999)), exist precisely to mitigate the impact of

adverse shocks. Finally, to the extent that a credit contraction is of an unprecedented scale, we would

expect the decrease in net debt issuance to also be of an unprecedented scale.

    As credit becomes harder to obtain, we would also expect firms to reduce their dividend payouts, to

repurchase less stock, and to issue more equity (see Leary (2009) for evidence of the latter). However, at

least since Miller (1963), we also know that equity issues are particularly sensitive to the business cycle;

equity issues fall during downturns, a phenomenon which is consistent with the view expressed in the

literature that information asymmetries become more important as corporate net worth falls (e.g.,

Bernanke and Gertler (1989)), as growth opportunities disappear (e.g., DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Stulz

(2009)), and as the cost of equity capital increases as investors become more risk-averse. The overall

impact of these combined forces on equity issues is ambiguous. If firms issue equity to offset the effects

of the credit contraction, we expect equity issuance to increase. Alternatively, if the business cycle effects

dominate, we expect equity issuance to fall with the economic downturn. It follows that if the dominant

factor in financial policies during the crisis is the exogenous curtailment of credit to industrial firms,

additional equity issuance should offset some of the shortfall in firm debt financing. However, if the

dominant effects are increased information asymmetries, a disappearance of growth opportunities, and an

increase in risk premia, equity issuance should fall.

    We investigate firm financial policies using quarterly data, which is the highest frequency corporate

data available. Consequently, we must define quarters that correspond to the financial crisis. Early August

                                                        2
seems to be the consensus starting point of the crisis (e.g., Paulson (2010)). In our analysis, we are

interested in the financial phase of the crisis, which we define as the period from the start of the third

quarter of 2007 through the end of the first quarter of 2009. Though the crisis continues after the first

quarter of 2009, financial markets start to stabilize such that at the end of the second quarter of 2009, both

the stock market and credit spreads reflect better economic conditions than at the end of the first quarter

of 2009. Specifically, the spread of the high yield Merrill Lynch index over intermediate term treasuries

reaches its low point for 1983-2009 in the second quarter of 2007, increases to unprecedented levels after

the Lehman bankruptcy, and falls back to pre-Lehman bankruptcy levels in the second quarter of 2009.

The S&P 500 index reaches its lowest value in March 2009, but it rebounds sharply during the second

quarter, so that the end of the first quarter of 2009 is the index’s lowest end-of-quarter value during the

crisis. For comparison, we consider the credit boom phase to extend from the beginning of 2005 through

the second quarter of 2007.

    We also investigate firm financial policies using both asset-weighted and equal-weighted results.

Firms in the U.S. differ dramatically in size, with a small number of large firms co-existing with a large

number of small firms. It is well-known from prior research (e.g., Bernanke (2007)) that the impact of a

credit contraction should differ across firms of different sizes, since large firms are more likely to have

access to public debt markets, while small firms rely more on bank financing. Equally-weighted averages

of financial ratios reflect the characteristics of small firms. Asset-weighted averages of financial ratios

represent the ratios for the industrial sector as a whole, or the aggregate of U.S. industrial firms.

    When examining the aggregate of U.S. industrial firms, we show that the credit boom is associated

with a decrease in cash holdings, a less than one percent change in leverage, an increase in the rate of

stock repurchases, and a small increase in dividends to assets. The evidence on stock repurchases is

consistent with the aggregate evidence from 1984 to 2009 of Jermann and Quadrini (2009), who find that

aggregate payouts to equity are pro-cyclical. Except for the increase in dividends and repurchases, these

trends persist after the start of the financial crisis in the third quarter of 2007. To measure the extent of

borrowing, we focus on net debt issuance from the cash flow statement. The advantage of this measure is

                                                       3
that there are many different ways for firms to borrow and this measure includes all of them.

Consequently, if one type of borrowing is especially restricted – say bank borrowing – it allows for the

fact that firms have substitute forms of borrowing – for instance loans from institutional investors.

Strikingly, aggregate net debt issuance (obtained from the cash flow statement of firms) in the first twelve

months of the crisis is actually higher than during the last twelve months of the credit boom, and net

equity issuance (from the same source) is about the same. This evidence is consistent with Chari,

Christiano, and Kehoe (2008), who find that aggregate bank credit to firms does not fall in the first year

of the crisis. As noted by Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010b), such evidence does not distinguish whether

firms are receiving new credits or simply drawing down existing credit lines. However, in either case,

firms’ net debt financing is not lower. Confirming the low initial impact of the credit contraction on

aggregate data, we find that capital expenditures to total assets are virtually the same in the last twelve

months of the boom and the first twelve months of the crisis for our sample of public firms.

    Slightly more than one year after the beginning of the crisis, markets were further disrupted by the

events of September 2008. In the following, when we discuss financial policies after the bankruptcy of

Lehman, we consider financial policies for the last quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009.4 After the

bankruptcy of Lehman, aggregate net debt issues fall, but not to levels that are extreme outliers in the

sample – strikingly, neither of the first two quarters after Lehman has aggregate net debt issuance at or

below the fifth percentile of the distribution of quarterly aggregate net debt issuance in our sample. In the

aggregate, the drop in net debt issuance is more than offset by a reduction in equity repurchases.

However, aggregate cash as a percent of assets (the cash ratio) increases by 1.30 percentage points in the

two quarters following the bankruptcy of Lehman, a two-quarter increase unmatched since the start of our

sample. The fact that in the aggregate firms do not use cash to offset a curtailment in credit availability

suggests that concerns about the future brought about by the crisis, which increase the precautionary

demand for cash, are more important than the direct impact of the decrease in credit availability.

4
  One could argue, however, that the financial data for the end of the third quarter of 2008 already partly reflects the
impact of the collapse of Lehman. By considering only the two quarters we do, our analysis is conservative and may
ignore some of the impact of the collapse of Lehman.

                                                           4
    Though it is hard to find traces of an exceptional crisis before the events of September 2008 when

investigating aggregate data, the impact of the crisis shows considerable heterogeneity across different

firm types when examining equally-weighted data. Yet, net debt issuance in the first twelve months of the

crisis is similar to the last twelve months of the boom for all firm types. However, after Lehman’s

bankruptcy, the extent to which net debt issuance falls is inversely related to firm size. Net debt issuance

in the first quarter of 2009 is the worst since the start of our sample in 1983 for unrated and small firms,

but not for large and investment-grade firms. All types of firms increase their cash holdings after

Lehman’s bankruptcy, but before then all but large and investment-grade firms decrease their ratio of cash

to assets. The percentage increase in cash holdings after Lehman’s bankruptcy is largest for investment-

rated firms, for which it is 17.8% on average. We would expect the least debt-dependent firms to be firms

with no debt. Strikingly, these firms experience a substantial increase in their cash ratio after Lehman, so

the increase in cash holdings cannot be attributed simply to firms drawing down credit lines or to firms

concerned about their ability to roll over existing debt.

    No type of firm uses increased equity issuance to reduce the impact of a possible curtailment in credit

availability. To the contrary, small and unrated firms experience a reduction in their net equity issuance

before they experience a reduction in their net debt issuance. Further, from the start to the peak of the

crisis, the average cumulative cash flow shortfall from the reduction in net equity issuance is roughly

twice the magnitude of the average cumulative cash flow shortfall from the reduction in net debt issuance.

In contrast, net equity issuance for large firms is not different during the first twelve months of the crisis

compared to the last twelve months of the boom. For these firms, the decrease in net debt issuance

between the top of the boom and the peak of the crisis is less than the decrease in net repurchases, so that,

on average, the decrease in repurchases makes up for the lost cash from reduced net debt issuance.

    After documenting the changes in financial policies during the credit boom and the financial crisis,

we use models of cash, net debt issuance, and net equity issuance from the literature before the financial

crisis to investigate whether these changes in financial policies remain after controlling for changes in

firm fundamentals. Starting with cash, we find that abnormal cash (defined as the actual cash ratio minus

                                                      5
the cash ratio predicted by the regression model) of small firms falls from the end of the credit boom to

the quarter before Lehman and then increases again; however, the abnormal cash for these firms at the

peak of the crisis is not significantly different from the abnormal cash at the top of the boom. For firms in

the top three size quintiles, abnormal cash at the peak of the crisis is sharply higher than at the top of the

boom. For instance, abnormal cash increases by 2.83 percentage points during the financial crisis for the

largest firms. Similarly, investment-grade firms increase abnormal cash over the crisis in a way that is not

explained by fundamentals. In contrast, abnormal cash does not change significantly for speculative grade

and unrated firms.

    We next turn to net debt issuance. We find that firms have significantly negative net debt issuance in

each quarter after Lehman, but not before. When we turn to debt rating subsamples, we show that

investment grade firms do not exhibit abnormally low net debt issuance in the quarter after Lehman,

while the other rating subsamples do. Further, the largest firms do not experience abnormally low net debt

issuance in the quarter after Lehman either, while smaller firms do. All subsamples experience abnormal

net debt issuance in the first quarter of 2009. We estimate similar equations for net equity issuance.

Unrated firms and the smallest firms have significantly negative abnormal net equity issuance throughout

2008.

    Our evidence adds to an increasing literature on the implications of the financial crisis for industrial

firms. This literature generally finds that the supply shock to credit associated with the financial crisis has

an economically significant impact for some subsets of firms. In particular, using survey data, Campello,

Graham, and Harvey (2010) show that firms that were credit constrained in 2008 reduce their spending

plans, bypass attractive investment opportunities, and burn more cash. Almeida, Campello, Laranjeira and

Weisbenner (2009) show that firms which had a substantial proportion of their long-term debt maturing

immediately after the third quarter of 2007 reduce investment substantially in comparison to other firms.

Campello, Giambona, Graham, and Harvey (2009) show that credit constrained firms draw down credit

lines during the crisis, but also face difficulties in renewing credit lines. They further provide evidence

that the terms of credit lines become progressively tighter during the crisis. The importance of credit lines

                                                      6
is also emphasized by Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010a, 2010b), who demonstrate that in the fourth

quarter of 2008, new loans to large borrowers fall by 47% from the previous quarter. They provide

evidence that firms draw down their credit lines after the Lehman bankruptcy. Strikingly, they show that

the drop in lending by banks is highly dependent on the financial conditions of banks in that banks that

rely more on deposit financing reduce lending less. Further, Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010b) shows that

firms with credit lines hoard the funds drawn in cash. Duchin, Ozbas, and Sensoy (2010) find that firms

with greater excess cash holdings at the beginning of the crisis reduce investment less early in the crisis

but not later. They interpret their evidence as consistent with the existence of a supply shock to credit that

is less costly for firms with excess cash. Iyer, Lopes, Peydró and Schoar (2010) find no credit supply

reduction for large firms in Portugal, but find that younger firms with weak bank relationships are

affected. Our investigation complements these papers in that we focus on the financial policies of

industrial firms, on how they differ from normal times, and on what these differences tell us about the

impact of the financial crisis on industrial firms. Our work also contributes to the large literature on

financial policies and we note some of the contributions to that literature later.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1, we introduce the dataset we use. In Section 2, we show

how cash holdings, debt and equity issuance evolve during the credit boom and the financial crisis. In

Section 3, we contrast the evolution of financial policies across different types of firms. In Section 4, we

use pre-crisis models of cash holdings, debt issues and equity issues to separate expected and unexpected

changes in financial policies and to assess further how financial policies differ during the crisis. We

discuss the interpretation of our results and conclude in Section 5.



Section 1. The sample

    Most empirical work in corporate finance uses annual data. For our purpose, such data is unsuitable

since it would force us to ignore how corporate financial policies differ after Lehman’s failure from

before; it would make it impossible for us to examine the financial crisis from the top of the credit boom

to the peak of the financial crisis which, as already discussed, we define as the first quarter of 2009. We

                                                       7
therefore use quarterly data collected from the CRSP/Compustat Merged (CCM) Fundamentals Quarterly

database for 1983-2009.

    There are distinct problems with the use of quarterly data. First, many of the Compustat data items are

only provided annually, so less data is available on a quarterly basis than on a yearly basis. Second, many

industries have seasonal factors. There is little we can do to deal with the lack of data availability, but we

can address the seasonality issue. The first approach we use to address the seasonality issue is that we

often compare quarters to identical quarters in other years. The second approach is that we estimate

models that specifically allow for seasonality.

    In our investigation, we use issuance data from the cash flow statement. This is not the data typically

used in the literature that focuses on security issuance to better understand firms’ capital structure

decisions. That literature typically considers changes in debt or equity above a threshold (see, for

instance, Leary and Roberts (2005)) or considers only public issues (e.g., DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Stulz

(2010)). In this paper, we are focused on the funding obtained by corporations from all sources, not just

banks or public markets, since substitution across funding sources could help firms offset the impact of a

bank credit contraction, for instance (for evidence of such substitution see, for instance, Iyer, Lopes,

Peydró and Schoar (2010)). We are also focused on understanding whether financing flows are unusual,

so that a net debt issuance close to zero for a class of firms is of interest to us since it could be abnormally

low.

    The quarterly issuance data we need in our investigation is only available beginning in the third

quarter of 1983. Consequently, our sample effectively starts from that quarter and ends with the first

quarter of 2009. We delete observations with negative total assets (atq), negative sales (saleq), negative

cash and marketable securities (cheq), cash and marketable securities greater than total assets, and firms

not incorporated in the U.S. If a firm changes its fiscal-year end, and thus a given data quarter is reported

twice in Compustat (for both the old fiscal quarter and the new fiscal quarter) we retain the observation

for the new fiscal quarter only. Finally, we eliminate all financial firms, which we define as firms with



                                                       8
SIC codes between 6000 and 6999; we also eliminate utilities, which we define as firms with SIC codes

between 4900 and 4949.



Section 2. The aggregate evidence

    At the start of the crisis, our sample includes 3,198 firms. When we divide firms listed on the NYSE

into quintiles based on total assets and assign non-NYSE firms to these quintiles, we find that 2,021 of the

3,198 firms are smaller than the largest firm in the bottom quintile of NYSE firms. Consequently, at the

beginning of the crisis, two-thirds of our firms are small firms with assets less than $715.7 million. The

average and median assets for these firms are $196.6 million and $127.6 million, respectively. In contrast,

the mean and median of assets are $31.9 billion and $16.1 billion, respectively, for the firms in the top

quintile. We therefore examine the financial policies of firms in two different ways. First, we weight each

firm by its assets. Second, we weight each firm equally. As we will see, results using the asset-weighted

approach are strikingly different from the equally-weighted approach. Such differences occur when the

experience of large firms differs from the experience of small firms, as equally-weighted results are

dominated by small firms while asset-weighted results are dominated by large firms. At the end of the

section, we examine the role of credit lines for a random sample.



Section 2.1. Asset-weighted results

    Panel A of Table 1 shows the asset-weighted results. We start with the asset-weighted ratio of cash to

assets, where cash is cash and marketable securities (cheq). We show the values of this ratio from the first

quarter of 2005 to the first quarter of 2009. The cash ratio shows a u-shape during this period. It starts in

2005 with a value of 10.42%, falls to 9.49% at the top of the credit boom, and ends the period at 10.18%.

Consequently, at the peak of the financial crisis, firms hold more of their assets in the form of cash than at

the start of the crisis. After the top of the credit boom, the ratio keeps falling and reaches its lowest point

(8.89%) at the end of the third quarter of 2008. In the last two quarters alone, the cash ratio increases by

1.30 percentage points, representing an increase in cash holdings of 9.5%. There is no other two-quarter

                                                      9
period in our sample where the cash ratio increases by more.5 We assess the significance of these changes

using two different approaches. The first approach (seasonality-adjusted p-values) is extremely

conservative in that we compare the change of interest to changes over identical quarterly calendar

periods to account for seasonality. For example, to investigate the statistical significance of the increase in

cash holdings of 1.30 percentage points after Lehman, we use the distribution of two-quarter turn-of-the-

year changes in cash holdings. This approach has low power since it uses only 26 two-quarter changes,

but it fully adjusts for seasonality. The second approach (Newey-West p-values) uses all two-quarter

changes but relies on Newey-West t-statistics to account for overlap. The 1.30 percentage point change

over the last two quarters is significant irrespective of the approach we use. In contrast, the increase in

cash holdings from the top of the boom to the peak of the crisis is only significant with the Newey-West

t-statistic.

     In the first year of the crisis, the cash ratio falls by 0.58 percentage points. One is tempted to conclude

that firms react to the crisis by consuming cash and that this is evidence of a supply shock to credit.

However, such a conclusion does not withstand more careful study. To see why, note that from the fourth

quarter of 2005 to the fourth quarter of 2006, a period of abundant credit, the cash ratio falls by much

more, namely by 0.90 percentage points. A falling cash ratio is therefore not necessarily indicative of a

recession or of a credit contraction. As discussed in Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2009), we understand only

partly why the cash holdings of industrial firms more than doubled since the early 1980s. That trend stops

during the credit boom and cash holdings fall, but not drastically. The aggregate cash ratio peaks at

10.77% at the end of 2004; it then falls to 9.49% at the start of the crisis and bottoms out at 8.89% in the

third quarter of 2008.

     The next two columns examine net debt issuance. We use two measures to examine net debt issuance.

For either measure, there is no difference between net debt issuance in the last twelve months of the credit


5
  The next highest increase is 1.22 percentage points from Q3 1999 to Q1 2000. There was much concern about
potential software problems at the turn of the century and this concern most likely explains this hoarding. Because
cash holdings were lower at that time, the percentage change in cash is higher at the turn of the century (18.8%) than
from 2008Q3 to 2009Q1 (14.6%).

                                                         10
boom and the first twelve months of the crisis. The first measure is obtained from the statement of cash

flows and is calculated as long-term debt issuance (dltisy) minus long-term debt retirement (dltry) divided

by lagged assets.6 Strikingly, the highest net long-term debt issue ratio does not occur during the credit

boom period, but in the last quarter of 2007. Though this ratio dips in the quarter after Lehman, it is

always positive. In contrast, it has a negative value in the second quarter of 2005 – as well as in twelve

other quarters before 2005. The second (and broader) measure of debt issuance, which we refer to as net

total debt issuance and which includes short-term debt, is examined next. This measure is calculated from

the balance sheet data and includes changes in both long-term debt (dlttq) and debt in current liabilities

(dlcq) during the quarter. With this measure, we again see that the highest ratio is in the last quarter of

2007. The ratio falls steadily after the last quarter of 2007 and turns negative in the first quarter of 2009.

Strikingly, however, there are six quarters since 1983 where this ratio has a lower value than in the first

quarter of 2009. Consequently, when looking at the asset-weighted data, none of the quarters from the

start of the crisis to its peak show evidence of this crisis leading to debt issuance ratios that are the lowest

in our sample period, or even in the bottom 5% of the distribution.

    We turn next to the aggregate ratio of net equity issuance to lagged assets, where aggregate net equity

issuance is defined as aggregate equity issuance (sstky) minus aggregate equity repurchase (prstkcy).

Equity issuance falls during the crisis. However, more strikingly, equity repurchases (not reported in

table) decrease sharply. Because of these offsetting effects, net equity issuance is similar in the last twelve

months of the boom and the first twelve months of the crisis. Equity repurchases reach a peak of 1.51% of

assets in the third quarter of 2007 and fall to 0.31% of assets in the first quarter of 2009. The repurchase

peak and trough coincide with the highs and lows of the stock market. The decrease in repurchases more

than finances the increase in cash holdings – or the decrease in net debt issuance using the net total debt

issuance measure. Though we do not show dividends in the table, dividends to assets do not decrease at

all during the crisis.

6
  Many of the quarterly Compustat variables, including dltis and dltry, are reported on a year-to-date basis. For these
variables, in the second, third, and fourth quarter of each fiscal year, the quarterly value is calculated by subtracting
the lagged value from the current value.

                                                           11
    Since firms are both repurchasing equity on net and issuing debt on net during the crisis, it is not

surprising that leverage increases during the crisis. Here, leverage is defined as the sum of long-term debt

(dlttq) plus debt in current liabilities (dlcq), divided by assets (atq). Perhaps more surprising is the fact

that leverage hardly moves during the credit boom. In the first quarter of 2005, the aggregate leverage

ratio is 26.16%. Although not shown in the table, one year earlier, leverage is 27.17%. At the top of the

credit boom, that ratio is 26.94%. Given the low credit spreads and the general availability of credit, such

an outcome is surprising. From the top of the boom to the peak of the crisis, leverage increases sharply. It

increases almost 3 percentage points before the Lehman bankruptcy. After the Lehman bankruptcy, it

increases by roughly 1.5 percentage points, with most of the increase taking place in the last quarter of

2008 (though partly because of a decrease in the book value of assets, as we will discuss later). We also

consider (but do not report) results for the net leverage ratio, defined as the sum of long-term debt (dlttq)

plus debt in current liabilities (dlcq) minus cash (cheq), divided by assets (atq). This ratio increases

through most of the boom and most of the crisis, but it falls in the first quarter of 2009. The reason the

ratio increases throughout the boom is not because firms have more debt, but because they have less cash.

The net leverage ratio hardly changes after Lehman, but leverage increases (though the increase is only

marginally significant using the seasonality adjusted p-value). This evidence confirms that at the

aggregate level firms increase debt and hoard much of the proceeds.

    One could be concerned that the cash hoarding simply reflects firms saving cash by reducing capital

expenditures in anticipation of a deep recession. The evidence is not consistent with this hypothesis for

the quarter immediately after Lehman; in that quarter there is no evidence that capital expenditures or

R&D decrease (R&D not reported in table). Capital expenditures as a percent of assets do not decrease in

2008 and are higher than in 2005. Though capital expenditures fall in the first quarter of 2009, so does

operating cash flow. Operating cash flow has a pronounced seasonal component, so that it is generally

much lower in the first quarter, but the fall in operating cash flow is significant when we use the

seasonality adjusted p-value. Operating cash flow in the quarter after Lehman is hardly distinguishable

from before Lehman. To obtain quarterly operating cash flow, we use the approach of Minton and

                                                     12
Schrand (1999). Operating cash flow is computed as sales (saleq) less cost of goods sold (cogsq) less

selling, general and administrative expenses (xsgaq) less the change in working capital for the period,

divided by total assets (atq). Working capital is current assets other than cash and short-term investments

less current liabilities and is calculated as the sum of the non-missing amounts for accounts receivable

(rectq), inventory (invtq), and other current assets (acoq) less the sum of the non-missing amounts for

accounts payable (apq), income taxes payable (txpq), and other current liabilities (lcoq). If all components

of working capital are missing in either the current quarter or the previous quarter, working capital and

operating cash flow are both set equal to missing. Quarterly selling, general and administrative expenses

exclude one-quarter of annual research and development costs (xrd) and advertising expenses (xad) when

those data items are available. Thus, operating cash flow represents the cash flow available for

discretionary investment.



Section 2.2. Equally-weighted results

    We now turn to the equally-weighted results provided in Panel B of Table 1. While in the aggregate

results we require firms to have data for all variables so that the denominator of the ratios is the same, for

the equally-weighted results we construct averages for each variable separately and only require data for

that variable. The number of observations reported is the number of firms for which we have cash and

assets data. We winsorize the equally-weighted results at the 1% and 99% levels, however, to mitigate

the influence of outliers. Firms decrease their cash holdings by 1.1 percentage points from the first

quarter of 2005 to the top of the boom. The magnitude is similar to the 1.3 percentage point drop for the

asset-weighted results. However, instead of a u-shape pattern of cash holdings, cash holdings fall from the

top of the boom to the peak of the crisis by 1.78 percentage points. When examining the asset-weighted

results, we noted that the cash ratio falls more during 2006 than it does in the first year of the crisis. This

is clearly not the case for the equally-weighted ratio. In 2006, the equally-weighted cash ratio falls by 0.8

percentage points. From the top of the boom to one year later, the cash ratio falls by 2.01 percentage

points. This ratio increases by 0.58 percentage points after Lehman’s bankruptcy. In evaluating

                                                      13
significance, we report p-values for paired t-tests using a sample of firms that are in existence before

Lehman’s bankruptcy and at the peak of the crisis. For these firms, cash holdings increase by 0.70

percentage points, which is statistically significant at the 1% level. The evidence is consistent with the

view that small firms use their precautionary cash holdings to cope with adverse shocks. This behavior

does not show up in aggregate data because, while there are many small firms, their weight in the asset-

weighted average is small.

    The story of net debt issuance is substantially different after the Lehman bankruptcy when we

examine the equally-weighted average instead of the asset-weighted average, but not in the first twelve

months of the crisis. During the first twelve months of the crisis, net debt issuance is the same as during

the last twelve months of the credit boom, irrespective of the measure of net debt issuance used. However,

net debt issuance collapses after the failure of Lehman. For both measures of net debt issuance, we find

that net debt issuance is negative in the two quarters after the failure of Lehman, i.e. firms are repaying

debt. Further, the net total debt issuance measure (that includes short-term debt) has its lowest value in the

sample in the first quarter of 2009, and the net long-term debt issuance measure has its second worst

value in that quarter.

    In contrast to net debt issuance, net equity issuance falls sharply in the first year of the crisis. In the

last twelve months of the boom, net equity issuance is roughly 1% per quarter; it drops to 0.5% in the first

twelve months of the crisis. Strikingly, it turns negative in the quarter following the failure of Lehman,

albeit by a small amount – this is the only quarter in our sample where equally-weighted net equity

issuance is negative. In contrast, asset-weighted net equity issuance is typically negative because large

firms repurchase more equity than they issue. There is no evidence that firms faced an exogenous

curtailment of credit that led them to use equity issuance as a substitute for debt issuance.

    The cumulative shortfall in financing cash flow from the decrease in net equity issuance for the

equally-weighted results is on average more than double the cumulative shortfall from the reduction in net

debt issuance. To see this, suppose that from the start of the crisis to its peak, firms continued issuing

equity at the same rate as in the last quarter of the credit boom. Over these seven quarters, firms would

                                                      14
have issued equity corresponding to approximately 9.94% of assets.7 Instead, they issue equity

corresponding to 2.50% of assets, for a shortfall of 7.44% of assets. In contrast, had firms kept issuing

debt as they did in the last quarter of the credit boom, they would have issued debt equal to approximately

7.35% of assets. Instead, they issue debt equal to 3.79% of assets, for a shortfall of 3.56% of asset.

    Both net debt issuance and net equity issuance affect a firm’s leverage. Leverage increases by 1.2

percentage points from the start of 2005 to the top of the credit boom. It then increases by 3.0 percentage

points to the bottom of the financial crisis. However, leverage actually falls in the first quarter of 2009.

Though average net leverage (not reported) is negative during the credit boom, it increases from 2005

onward – i.e., becomes less negative – and turns positive in the first quarter of 2008.

    In sum, there are striking differences between the asset-weighted and equally-weighted averages. In

the aggregate, net debt issuance is not affected by the crisis in the first twelve months and does not have

extreme values in the two quarters after Lehman. However, with equally-weighted averages, debt

issuance collapses after Lehman. Yet, strikingly, while equally-weighted debt issuance is unaffected in

the first twelve months of the crisis, equally-weighted equity issuance falls in half during this period; in

contrast, it stays unchanged for the asset-weighted average. This evidence suggests that financial policies

evolved in sharply different ways for large and small firms during the financial crisis and that the

financial crisis affected large and small firms in a markedly different way, a finding that is reminiscent of

the conclusion of Bernanke (1983) that small firms bore the brunt of the Great Depression. Our results are

also consistent with some of the evidence on investment for this crisis (e.g., Campello, Graham, and

Harvey (2010) and Duchin, Ozbas, and Sensoy (2010)) and with Iyer, Lopes, Peydró and Schoar (2010),

who show that large Portuguese firms were not affected by the credit supply shock.

    The patterns observed after Lehman cannot be observed in the other recession in our sample

associated with a credit crunch, namely the recession of 1990-1991. With that recession, there are only

trivial changes in the asset-weighted and equally-weighted averages of the cash ratio. More specifically,


7
 Note that, for simplicity, we use actual assets in these computations rather than what the assets would have been
had equity issuance or debt issuance been different.

                                                         15
the aggregate cash ratio falls by 0.06 percentage points from the third quarter of 1990 to the first quarter

of 1991 and the equally-weighted average increases by 0.03 percentage points. Nothing like the post-

Lehman increase in cash holdings takes place in that recession. Such an increase does occur in the

recession in our sample period not associated with a credit crunch, namely the 2001 recession. In that

recession, the aggregate cash ratio increases by 0.62 percentage points and the equal-weighted cash ratio

increase by 1.58 percentage points. However, just about all of the increase in the cash ratio takes place

after September 11. The only other dramatic two-quarter increase in cash is from the third quarter of 1999

to the first quarter of 2000, when there was much concern about the impact of passing the millennium

mark on the functioning of computers.

    One concern is that our results could be influenced by the changing composition of the sample as

firms cease to exist. Consequently, in untabulated results, we construct a sample of firms that exist

continuously from the end of the first quarter of 2007 to the end of the first quarter of 2009. There are

2,547 firms that satisfy this requirement. The change in the aggregate cash ratio after Lehman’s failure

for these firms is 1.47 percentage points as compared to 1.30 percentage points for the whole sample of

firms. All the other patterns we discuss exist for these firms. We also verify that the dollar amount of cash

holdings increases as well and find that, over the crisis, the aggregate dollar amount of cash held by firms

that are continuously in existence increases by roughly $100 billion from the top of the boom to the peak

of the crisis. For the whole sample, cash holdings increase by $89 billion in the two quarters after

Lehman. We also investigate the medians for the sample used for the equally-weighted average. We find

an increase in the median cash ratio after Lehman of 0.91 percentage points, compared to the mean

change of 0.58 percentage points.



Section 2.3. Lines of Credit

    As discussed in our review of the literature, much attention has been paid to the role of credit lines

and credit line drawdowns during the financial crisis. Using the approach of Sufi (2009), we construct a

random sample of 300 firms as of the second quarter of 2007 to examine the economic importance of

                                                     16
credit line drawdowns for firms meeting our sampling criteria. We then obtain data on line of credits

available and drawdowns from 10-Qs and 10-Ks. Table 2 shows data for the asset-weighted sample and

the equally-weighted sample. Not surprisingly given the existing literature, many firms have access to

credit lines. Out of our 300 firms, 248 or 82.7% have credit lines at the start of the crisis. In our equally-

weighted sample, credit lines represent 18.0% of assets in the sample formation quarter, which is not very

different from the 16.5% in the Sufi (2009) sample. The percentage of firms with credit lines having new

drawdowns is typically less than 10% per quarter except in two quarters, the fourth quarter of 2007 when

it is 34.4%, and the fourth quarter of 2008 when it is 30.6%. The next column shows the percentage of

new drawdowns as a percentage of the total line of credit. We then estimate the importance of credit lines

and credit lines drawdowns using asset-weighted averages and equally-weighted averages. Looking first

at the asset-weighted sample, we find that the ratio of total lines of credit to total assets is 9.79% at the

start of the crisis, which implies that credit lines are proportionately larger for smaller firms. The

aggregate amount drawn down per quarter divided by total assets is less than 1% of assets in all quarters

except one, the fourth quarter of 2007, when it is 1.46%. Yet, during that quarter, the ratio of cash

holdings to total assets for our random sample falls. New drawdowns in the first quarter of 2009 are

trivial. We turn next to the equally-weighted results. The equally-weighted average of the new

drawdowns in the fourth quarter of 2008 is 1.44%. For comparison, the equally-weighted average cash

ratio for our random sample increases by 0.30 percentage points during this quarter, from 18.6 to 18.9%.



Section 3. Evidence for size, ratings, financially constrained and zero debt subsamples

    The contrast between the equally-weighted results and the asset-weighted results shows that financial

policies of small and large firms evolve very differently during the financial crisis. To investigate this

heterogeneity further, we turn to several subsamples. First, we consider firms of different sizes. Second,

we examine financial policies of firms that differ in credit ratings – either the level or the existence of

one. Third, we report results for firms that are financially constrained versus unconstrained immediately



                                                     17
before the crisis, according to a modified version of the definition of Korajczyk and Levi (2003). Finally,

we discuss results for a sample of firms with no debt.



Section 3.1. Size groups

    We first examine the financial policies of firms by size. Size quintiles are formed quarterly. We

divide the NYSE firms into five quintiles based on assets at the beginning of the quarter. We then assign

the non-NYSE firms to these quintiles. Panel A of Table 3 provides data for the smallest and largest size

quintiles, detailing changes in financial policies and the significance of these changes from pre- to post-

crisis and pre- to post-Lehman. Figure 1 shows the evolution of the equally-weighted average cash ratio

for size quintiles in our sample. In the figure, we normalize the ratio to 1 at the start of 2005 for all size

quintiles. It is immediately apparent that the experience of firms is quite different depending on their size.

Firms in the three top quintiles decrease cash throughout the boom period and continue to do so until at

least the first quarter of 2008. However, the cash ratio increases after the failure of Lehman; the increase

is especially sharp for the third and fifth quintile. In contrast, the two quintiles of the smallest firms have a

substantially different experience. The decrease in cash for these firms during the boom period is

minimal. However, they decrease their holdings sharply during the first year of the financial crisis, and

increase their cash less during the two quarters following September 2008.

    We turn to net debt issuance next. Figure 2 shows the evolution of the broad measure of net total debt

issuance for the five size quintiles. It is apparent for all size quintiles that there is no clear change from

before the peak of the credit boom to the first year of the financial crisis. However, net debt issuance falls

dramatically after Lehman and turns negative for all size groups except the largest firms, whose net debt

issuance is essentially zero in the last quarter of the sample. For the four smallest size quintiles, the low

net debt issuance after Lehman is lower than the lowest net debt issuance experienced during the boom. In

contrast, for the largest firms, the net debt issuance for the first quarter of 2009 is actually higher than the

net debt issuance in the first quarter of the boom period. Over our whole sample period, the four smallest

size quintiles never experience a net debt issuance rate lower than the one they experience in the first

                                                       18
quarter of 2009. Since small firms rely much more on bank loans than large firms, our evidence is

consistent with the evidence in Becker and Ivashina (2010) of a serious supply shock to bank debt in

2009. However, the situation of the largest firms is different as they experience lower net debt issuance

for 18 quarters during the sample period.

    Figure 3 shows net equity issuance for the size quintiles. Equity issues are important for small firms.

They have positive net equity issuance while the other size groups have negative net issuance – i.e., they

buy back more equity more than they issue. In fact, in the four quarters before the start of the crisis, Panel

A of Table 3 shows that small firms raise an average of 1.90% net equity a quarter and 0.83% net debt a

quarter. In the first four quarters of the crisis, net equity issuance falls to 1.12% while net debt issuance

remains unchanged at 0.83%. For the other size groups, net equity issuance increases in 2008, but that is

because repurchases fall. It is only in the last two quarters of the sample that the other size groups

experience net equity issuance ratios that are higher than the highest experienced during the credit boom.

In contrast, net equity issuance by small firms plunges in early 2008. For three quarters in 2008 and the

first quarter in 2009, small firms have the lowest net equity issuance of any quarter in our sample. In

2008, only the second quarter has net equity issuance higher – but only slightly so – than the lowest net

equity issuance of our sample before the crisis – and that quarter is the fourth quarter of 1990.

    As shown in Panel A of Table 3, book leverage increases sharply during the crisis for small firms. At

the start of the crisis, their leverage is 15.9%; at the bottom, it is 18.3%. Small firms during that time have

negative net leverage – i.e., they have more cash than debt. However, net leverage increases more than

leverage because firms reduce their cash holdings. Leverage increases even more for the largest firms. For

these firms, it is 26.5% at the top of the boom and increases to 30.7% at the bottom of the crisis, an

increase of 4.2 percentage points. Net leverage is positive for large firms. It increases slightly less than

leverage, from 17.4% to 21.1%, an increase of 3.7 percentage points. Perhaps not surprising at this point,

the leverage of large firms increases by 2.2 percentage points in the quarter following Lehman’s failure

and the associated increase in net leverage is 1.6 percentage points. In contrast, the increase in leverage of

small firms is only 0.5 percentage points and net leverage falls by 0.1 percentage points. Note that if firms

                                                      19
hoard the cash proceeds from new debt, net leverage falls - assets (the denominator) increase due to the

increase in cash while net debt (the numerator) is unchanged. Thus the net leverage decrease of small

firms is more consistent with full hoarding of new debt than the net leverage increase of large firms.



Section 3.2. Credit rating groups

    We next turn to subsets of our sample based on credit ratings in Table 3, Panel B. We divide firms

quarterly into firms with an investment grade rating, a speculative rating, and no rating using the S&P

long-term rating (splticrm) available on Compustat. The results are striking. Investment grade firms, as

shown in Figure 4, have a higher cash ratio at the peak of the crisis than at the beginning of the crisis.

Their cash ratio increases by 1.43 percentage points, from 8.04% to 9.47%. Another way to put this is

that, measured as a fraction of assets, their cash at the peak of the crisis is 17.79% higher than at the

beginning of the crisis. Almost all of the increase in cash takes place in the last two quarters – cash as a

percent of assets increases by 1.19 percentage points in the last two quarters. Investment grade firms raise

funds through debt each quarter, though in the last quarter the net debt issuance is a trivial 0.01%. They

also are net repurchasers of equity throughout the crisis. Not surprisingly, their leverage increases

throughout the crisis. From the end of Q3 2008 to the end of Q1 2009, leverage increases by 1.08

percentage points, but net leverage increases by only 0.02 percentage points. Consequently, investment

grade firms increase debt but hoard much of the proceeds.

    When we examine speculative grade firms, the increase in cash throughout the crisis is small as it is

only 0.27 percentage points. However, the increase from the end of Q3 2008 to the end of Q1 2009 is 0.83

percentage points. Debt issuance is negative for these firms in the last two quarters of the sample.

Speculative-grade firms raise equity on net each quarter, but the amount is very small after Lehman.

Leverage increases by 2.95 percentage points after Lehman even though net debt issuance issuance is

negative.

    Finally, non-rated firms have a dramatically different experience from the firms with a rating and

hence with access to public markets, which supports further the conclusion of Faulkender and Petersen

                                                    20
(2006) that access to public debt markets has an important impact on firm financial policies. The cash

ratio of these firms is 26.77% at the start of the crisis. That ratio is almost the same as the one they have at

the beginning of 2005 when it is 27.67%. At the bottom of the crisis, these firms have a cash ratio of

24.14%, so their cash ratio falls by 2.63 percentage points. These firms increase their cash holdings after

Lehman’s failure as well. The unrated firms issue debt on net in every quarter except for the last two. The

net debt issuance of these firms is actually larger in the first year of the crisis than in the last year of the

boom – an average of 0.69% per quarter in the last year of the boom versus 0.83% in the first year of the

crisis. In contrast, net equity issuance falls from an average of 1.52% to 0.80% from the last four quarters

of the boom to the first four quarters of the crisis. Leverage increases for these firms during the crisis as

well, but the increase in leverage after September 2008 is only 0.57 percentage points. The increase in net

leverage over that period is 0.14 percentage points. Unrated firms have negative net leverage. From the

start of the crisis to its peak, the net leverage of unrated firms increases from -11.10% to -5.75%.



Section 3.3. Financially constrained firms

      It is not uncommon in the literature to define financially constrained firms to be small firms or firms

without a rating.8 Table 3 shows that these firms decrease their cash holdings during the financial crisis,

but nevertheless experience an increase in cash holdings after Lehman. We also compare cash holdings

between a sample of firms that are financially constrained and firms that are not constrained at the top of

the credit boom, using a modified version of the definition of Korajczyk and Levi (2003). We define a

firm to be financially constrained if it (1) does not pay dividends, (2) does not have net equity

repurchases, (3) does not have a credit rating, and (4) has a Tobin’s q greater than one (defined as the

market value of the assets divided by the book value, where market value of assets is book value minus

book equity plus market value of equity). With our definition of financial constraint, we attempt to

isolate firms that have growth opportunities that outpace their internally generated cash and that have not

had access to public debt markets. We find that constrained firms have an average cash ratio of 35.77%

8
    See, for instance, Almeida, Campello and Weisbach (2004).

                                                        21
at the end of the credit boom. The cash ratio of these firms falls sharply during the crisis, to 31.09% at the

peak of the crisis. Yet, the cash ratio of these firms increases after Lehman by 0.36 percentage points on

average. Before the crisis, these firms are large issuers of equity and their average net equity issuance

dwarfs their average net debt issuance. In the second quarter of 2007, their equity sales amount to 3.13%

of assets. Equity sales are sharply lower in 2008 and early 2009. In the quarter after Lehman, they amount

to 0.55%. Since the capital expenditures of these firms stay unchanged in the first year of the crisis, they

must be using their cash holdings to offset the decrease in equity sales. Unconstrained firms experience a

decrease in the cash ratio during the crisis as well, but they have a much larger increase in their cash ratio

after Lehman, since their cash ratio increases from 24.51% to 25.86%, or by 1.35 percentage points.



Section 3.4. Zero debt groups

    To understand the role of debt better in the evolution of firm financial policies during the crisis, we

construct two samples of firms that have no debt, which we define as firms with zero leverage. We do not

tabulate the results. The first sample is composed of firms that have zero leverage at the start of a quarter.

These firms could borrow during that quarter and end the quarter with debt. We would expect the

financial policies of such firms to be the least affected by changes in the credit markets among the

subsamples we have considered. These firms have an extremely high cash ratio of 41.95% at the end of

the credit boom. The cash ratio of these firms falls to 38.32% at the end of the third quarter of 2008.

However, these firms hoard cash after Lehman as their cash ratio increases to 40.27%, an increase of 1.96

percentage points, which is the largest percentage point increase among the subsamples we have

considered. This increase, representing an increase in cash holdings of 10.70%, is statistically significant.

Further, these firms experience a dramatic decrease in net equity issuance. Strikingly, net equity issuance

for these firms as a percentage of assets is 2.05% in the last quarter of the credit boom. Yet, it is negative

for each quarter in 2008. Net equity issuance for firms with no debt is negative in one quarter prior to

2008, the third quarter of 2002. There are no consecutive quarters with negative net equity issuance for

such firms before 2008. The second sample is a sample of firms that have no debt at the end of the

                                                     22
quarter. Obviously, this creates a bias in the results. However, the point of this sample is to consider firms

that do not increase their cash because of debt issuance. Because these firms have no debt at the end of

the quarter, they typically have negative net debt issuance during the quarter. These firms experience an

increase in the cash ratio after Lehman’s failure of 1.19 percentage points. This increase is statistically

significant as well and represents an increase in cash holdings of 15.38%. It follows that the increase in

cash holdings is not tied to credit line drawdowns. These firms also experience a dramatic drop in net

equity issuance.



Section 3.5. Sources of changes in the cash to assets ratio

    To better understand why the cash ratio changes, we decompose the change in the cash ratio using a

first-order approximation as follows:

                    1                    1                    1           1
                    1                1                    1               1

where C(t) is cash at date t and A(t) corresponds to assets at date t. This decomposition shows that the

cash ratio can increase even though cash holdings fall if assets fall sufficiently. We compute the ratios

[C(t)-C(t-1)]/A(t-1) and [A(t)-A(t-1)]/A(t-1) for all our subsamples. Strikingly, changes in cash are

negative for the equally-weighted ratio but not for the asset-weighted ratio in the quarter after Lehman’s

failure. However, for the equally-weighted ratio, the asset growth ratio is also negative, so that that the

value of assets falls. It turns out that the negative change in cash is driven by the smallest firms and the

unrated firms,. For all the other groups, the change in cash is positive. The drop in assets after Lehman’s

failure is striking. For the equally-weighted average, assets decrease by 5.44% in the last quarter of 2008.

We examine the decreases in assets for that quarter across firms and find that a major source of decreases

in assets are write-downs of goodwill. In 2008, firms adopt FASB 157 which requires them to use an exit

value for estimates of fair value. We would expect that such estimates would have fallen substantially in

the last quarter of 2008 as the stock market fell dramatically. In an examination of goodwill impairments

for the last quarter of 2008, not only is the average impairment large (10.07% of assets for the firms that


                                                     23
report such impairments) but the number of firms that report impairments is unusually large (from

2005Q1 to 2007Q2, the highest number of firms reporting impairments in a quarter is 165, but that

number is 666 in Q4 of 2008).



Section 4. Predicted versus unpredicted changes in financial policies

    So far, we have shown that the first year of the financial crisis is not associated with lower net debt

issuance by firms, but is associated with lower net new equity issuance by smaller and unrated firms.

Cash holdings fall for smaller firms and firms with a non-investment grade rating or no rating. After the

collapse of Lehman, however, firms hoard cash, but much more so for larger firms and investment grade

firms, and net debt issuance becomes exceptionally low at the peak of the crisis for all but large and

investment grade firms. In this section, we investigate whether these changes can be explained by the

evolution of firm characteristics using models from the recent literature. Our approach is to use these

models to predict financial policies and to evaluate whether departures from these predicted values during

the crisis, the abnormal values for these financial policies, are significant. None of these models were

developed using quarterly data because quarterly data is not typically used in corporate finance research.

Consequently, when we find that changes in a financial policy cannot be explained by fundamentals, it

could be because the models we use are poorly specified when using quarterly data. However, we do find

that our estimates of these models are consistent with estimates using yearly data. We also estimate the

models using lagged values for firm characteristics, and the results we find are supportive of the results

we report.



Section 4.1. Predicted and unpredicted cash holdings.

    We start by investigating abnormal cash. Our model for expected cash is the model used in Bates,

Kahle, and Stulz (2009), but we estimate this model using quarterly data. This model allows for a

transaction demand for cash as well as a precautionary demand for cash. The dependent variable is the

cash ratio, and the following explanatory variables are used: the standard deviation of cash flows at the

                                                    24
industry level (using the two-digit SIC level), the market-to-book ratio, the log of firm size, the ratio of

cash flow to assets, the ratio of net working capital to assets, capital expenditures to assets, leverage,

R&D to assets, a dummy variable for missing data on R&D, dividends to assets, acquisitions to assets, net

equity issuance to assets, and net debt issuance to assets.9 Because we use quarterly data, we add to the

model indicator variables for the second, third, and fourth quarters to accommodate seasonal effects.

    We estimate the model from the first quarter of 1995 through the first quarter of 2009. We also

estimate the model over our whole sample period and our inferences are similar. Given that the cash ratio

increases over time, we prefer to use a shorter sample period that reflects better cash holding patterns over

the credit boom and the financial crisis. However, it turns out that whether we start the sample in 1983 or

in 1998 makes no substantive difference for our conclusions. We estimate the model for all firms and then

separately for the five size quintiles and for the three ratings groups. We use indicator variables for each

quarter starting in the first quarter of 2005 to capture average abnormal cash (i.e., the cash ratio minus the

predicted cash ratio). Since we know that cash holdings increase dramatically over time and that only part

of the increase is explained by the firm characteristics typically used in models explaining cash holdings

(see Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2009)), we expect average abnormal cash to be positive, at least early in the

credit boom period. Our interest is in how abnormal cash changes rather than in the level of these

abnormal cash holdings.

    Table 4, Panel A, reports the estimated regressions. Regression (1) shows estimates of the model for

the whole sample of industrial firms. The independent variables take values that are consistent with

estimates for the aggregate sample in Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2009). The seasonal indicator variables are

significant for the fourth quarter for the investment grade and unrated firms. We see that the abnormal

cash ratio is roughly constant and significantly positive during the credit boom period. It falls in half in

the first three quarters of 2008 and then increases sharply from 1.54% to 4.60% from the Lehman

bankruptcy to the peak of the crisis. Consequently, the increase in the cash ratio after the Lehman

9
 Not all firms report R&D on a quarterly basis. When a firm does not report R&D quarterly, we use the annual
R&D, divided by four, as an estimate of R&D in each quarter of that year. Results are similar if we set R&D as
missing for these firms.

                                                        25
bankruptcy is even larger after accounting for changes in fundamentals. Abnormal cash is significantly

higher at the peak of the financial crisis than at the top of the credit boom.

    The next two regressions in Table 4, Panel A, report results for the smallest and largest size quintiles.

We also examine but do not report estimates for the other size quintiles. Almost all coefficients on the

independent variables are significant and consistent in sign across size quintiles except for the coefficients

of operating cash flow to assets and size. The indicator variable for the fourth quarter is positive and

significant, except for the middle and largest quintiles. There are sharp differences in the evolution of

abnormal cash across firm sizes. Abnormal cash at the top of the credit boom is not significantly different

from abnormal cash at the peak of the financial crisis for the two smallest size quintiles, but this result is

due to the increase in the cash ratio after September 2008. More specifically, abnormal cash drops in the

first year of the crisis for the two quintiles of smallest firms. For the top three size quintiles, abnormal

cash increases significantly over the crisis. More specifically, abnormal cash increases by 2.83 percentage

points during the crisis for the largest firms. After Lehman’s failure, abnormal cash increases significantly

for all but the two smallest size quintiles, but the increase in abnormal cash takes place almost exclusively

in the first quarter of 2009. At the end of that quarter, firms in the three top quintiles of firm size have

extremely large abnormal cash.

    Regressions (4) to (6) show the results for the three ratings groups. For investment grade firms,

abnormal cash falls during the credit boom and keeps falling until the end of 2007. After that, abnormal

cash increases. Not surprisingly, abnormal cash for investment grade firms is significantly higher at the

peak of the crisis compared to the top of the boom and compared to the third quarter of 2008. Abnormal

cash increases by 6.56 percentage points over the crisis, but most of this increase occurs in the last quarter

of the sample period. The increase in abnormal cash is much smaller for firms with a speculative rating.

For these firms, abnormal cash becomes significantly negative during the crisis and is positive at the peak

of the crisis, so that it increases by 2.27 percentage points after Lehman, but the latter increase is not

statistically significant (p-value = 0.11). Finally, firms without a rating have positive abnormal cash

throughout the credit boom and the financial crisis, but their abnormal cash has a u-shape during the

                                                      26
crisis. The abnormal cash of these firms is similar at the end of the credit boom and at the peak of the

financial crisis. However, their abnormal cash more than doubles after September 2008.

    It follows from Table 4, Panel A, that abnormal cash for large and investment grade firms increases

even more following Lehman than the cash ratio itself. Such a result implies that fundamentals typically

used in cash holding regressions cannot explain the change in cash holdings in these firms after the failure

of Lehman. However, changes in fundamentals seem to explain changes in cash holdings for the smaller

firms. In the literature, small firms and firms without ratings are often viewed as firms that are financially

constrained. These firms actually do not experience an increase in abnormal cash over the crisis, but they

do not experience a significant decline either. The reason that constrained firms do not experience a

decline in abnormal cash is due to the increase in the cash ratio following Lehman. Though we do not

report the results in the table, we also estimate a regression that allows abnormal cash to evolve

differently for constrained and unconstrained firms, where the definition of constrained firms is the

modified Levi-Korajczyk (2003) definition of financially constrained firms discussed earlier. For

unconstrained firms, abnormal cash increases from 1.71% at the top of the credit boom to 4.00% at the

peak of the crisis, but before increasing after Lehman, abnormal cash falls to 0.59% in the second quarter

of 2008. The abnormal cash of constrained firms exceeds the abnormal cash of unconstrained firms by

5.46% at the top of the credit boom and this excess falls to 4.02% at the peak of the crisis. This result is

consistent with the evidence in Duchin, Ozbas, and Sensoy (2010) that constrained firms used their

abnormal cash holdings early in the crisis. However, the abnormal cash of constrained firms increases by

3.07 percentage points after Lehman’s failure, showing that consumption of abnormal cash stops in

September 2008.

    Though the model we estimate for cash makes the cash ratio of a firm depend on the uncertainty of its

environment, the uncertainty measure we use may not be sufficiently forward looking and the absence of

a forward-looking measure of uncertainty may explain why fundamentals do not seem to capture the

increase in the cash ratio after Lehman’s failure. To explore this possibility, we estimate cash regressions

(but do not reproduce them in a table) where we add the VIX at the beginning of the quarter and the

                                                     27
change in the VIX during the quarter as forward-looking measures of economic uncertainty. The VIX is

often used as a measure of risk-aversion and is sometimes viewed as an investor fear gauge (see Durand,

Lim, and Zumwalt (2007)). The addition of the VIX variables does not change our conclusions.

Surprisingly, the VIX variables are not even significant when added to a regression for the whole sample.



Section 4.2. Predicted and unpredicted debt and equity issuance.

    To estimate abnormal debt and equity issuance, we follow Fama and French (2008). We estimate

their models from 1995 to 2009. However, they estimate their models using annual data, and some of the

data they use is not available with quarterly data. Consequently, we modify some variable definitions to

account for the quarterly data limitations and add other variables.        Our corresponding independent

variables include the percentage change in assets from the previous quarter, operating cash flow to assets,

dividends to assets, a dummy variable equal to one if the firms pays dividends, lagged leverage, an

indicator variable equal to one if book equity is negative, the lagged market capitalization, the market-to-

book ratio (computed as book assets minus book equity plus market equity divided by assets), lagged cash

over assets, lagged debt in current liabilities over assets, R&D over assets, and capital expenditures over

assets. However, we lag the independent variables by one additional quarter to avoid having a mechanical

relation between our independent variables and net issuance. Finally, as with the cash regressions, we

allow for seasonality. The high yield credit spread is 2.65% at the peak of the credit boom and 10.63% at

the end of Q1 2009. At the end of 2008, the high yield credit spread is at 13.04%. We would expect that

such a dramatic increase in credit spreads would have an adverse impact on the demand for debt. To

assess the role of the increase in credit spreads on debt and equity issuance, we also estimate our

regressions with the intermediate term treasury rate and the credit spread of high yield debt over the

intermediate term treasury rate. We only report the results without the credit spreads in the table, but also

discuss untabulated results that include the credit spreads.

    As for cash holdings, we start with the regressions for the whole sample. Though we estimate the

regressions for both definitions of debt issuance, we focus on the broadest definition and do not report in

                                                     28
Panel B of Table 4 the estimates for the narrower definition. Regression (1) is estimated using all

industrial firms. The estimates of the coefficients on firm characteristics are generally unsurprising. The

quarterly indicator variables are mostly insignificant. The unpredicted part of net debt issuance is negative

and significant in the two quarters after Lehman, but at no other time during the financial crisis. The

results are similar for the narrower definition of net long-term issuance debt. When we turn to size and

investment rating groups, we find that in the last quarter of 2008, investment grade firms and large firms

do not have abnormal net debt issuance. However, in the first quarter of 2009, all subsamples have

significant negative abnormal net debt issuance. When we take into account credit spreads, firms have

positive abnormal net debt issuance in the last quarter of 2008 (not reported).

    Panel C of Table 4 shows regressions estimating net equity issuance. The independent variables are

the same as the ones used in the net debt issuance model. The first regression provides estimates for the

whole sample. Estimates of abnormal net equity issuance are significantly negative early in 2008, but not

after Lehman. When we turn to subsamples, we find that the negative abnormal equity issuance is

concentrated among small firms and unrated firms. These firms have significantly negative abnormal

equity issuance throughout 2008. There is no evidence, therefore, that these firms somehow use equity to

make up for abnormal net debt issuance brought about by a curtailment in the supply of debt – these firms

issue abnormally low amounts of equity before they issue abnormally low amounts of debt, and when

they issue abnormally low amounts of debt they do not issue more equity.



Section 5. Conclusion.

    We examine financial policies of firms throughout the credit boom and from the start of the financial

crisis to its peak to understand what these policies tell us about the impact of the financial crisis and about

the consequences of an exogenous supply shock to credit resulting from an unexpected financial crisis.

Our findings raise important questions about the gravity of such a supply shock. First, there is no

evidence of a systemic supply shock before the fall of Lehman. More specifically, industrial firms do not

show any evidence of a decrease in net debt issuance before the fall of Lehman. Second, in the first year

                                                      29
of the crisis, small and unrated firms do decrease their cash holdings. However, they do not borrow less

but instead raise less equity financing. It is striking that the drop in equity financing for small and unrated

firms precedes the drop in debt financing. Third, debt financing drops sharply after Lehman for all types

of firms. Yet, the drop for large firms does not lead them to experience a level of debt financing that is

exceptionally low even at the peak of the financial crisis. In contrast, the level of net debt financing for

small and unrated firms is exceptionally low in the first quarter of 2009. Fourth, large firms more than

make up the decrease in debt financing through a reduction in share repurchases. As a result, they are able

to raise their cash holdings sharply after Lehman, an increase that we would not expect to see if these

firms had been starved for cash because of the inability to borrow, but that is consistent with an increase

in the demand for precautionary cash holdings because of exceptionally uncertain times – including

uncertainty about the future availability of credit. Fifth, from the start of the crisis to its peak, the

cumulative loss of financing resulting from the decrease in equity financing for small and unrated firms is

more than twice the cumulative loss of financing resulting from the decrease in debt financing for these

firms. Sixth, all firm types increased their cash to asset ratio after Lehman – even firms that made no use

of debt.

    The hoarding of cash following the events of the third quarter of 2008 and the economically large

changes in net equity issuance suggest that the reaction of firms to the financial crisis is more complicated

than the narrative of the economy being adversely affected as a result of firms being unable to invest

because they were unable to borrow. At the very least, fear and increased uncertainty played at least as

much of a role in financing policies as direct borrowing constraints. Further, it is hard to make sense of

the decrease in equity issuance without taking into account that firms faced a higher cost of equity capital

and/or poorer investment opportunities well before they started raising substantially less cash through

debt. Future research should investigate why equity financing flows are so important during the crisis.

Another fruitful topic for future research is whether our aggregate results obscure problems in the

allocation of credit across firms.



                                                      30
References


Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2004, The cash flow sensitivity of cash,
   Journal of Finance 59, 1777-1804.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, Bruno Laranjeira and Scott Weisbenner, 2009, Corporate debt
   maturity and the real effects of the 2007 financial crisis, working paper, University of Illinois, Ill.

Baker, Malcolm, 2009, Capital market-driven corporate finance, Annual Review of Financial Economics
   1, 181-205.

Bates, Thomas, Kathleen Kahle, and René Stulz, 2009, Why do U.S. firms hold so much more cash than
    they used to? Journal of Finance 64, 1985-2022.

Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2010, Cyclicality of credit supply: Firm level evidence, unpublished
   paper, Harvard Business School, MA.

Bernanke, Ben S., 1983, Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation of the Great
   Depression, The American Economic Review 73, 257-276.

Bernanke, Ben S., 2007, The financial accelerator and the credit channel, Federal Reserve Board,
   Washington, D.C.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., 2009, Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-2008, Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 23, 77-100.

Campello, Murillo, Erasmo Giambona, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2009, Liquidity
   management and corporate investment during a financial crisis, working paper, University of Illinois,
   Ill.

Campello, Murillo, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2010, The real effects of financial
   constraints: Evidence from a financial crisis, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe, Patrick, 2008, Facts and Myths about the Financial Crisis of 2008, working
   paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minnesota.

Harry DeAngelo, Linda DeAngelo, and René M. Stulz, 2010, Seasoned equity offerings, market timing,
   and the corporate lifecycle,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Duchin, Ran, Oguzhan Ozbas, and Berk A. Sensoy, 2010, Costly external finance, corporate investment,
   and the subprime mortgage financial crisis, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Durand, Robert B., Dominic Lim, and J. Kenton Zumwalt, 2007, Fear and the Fama-French factors,
   working paper, Colorado State University.

Erel, Isil, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2010, Macroeconomic conditions and
    the structure of securities, working paper, The Ohio State University, OH.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2005, Financing decisions: Who issues stock?, Journal of
   Financial Economics 76, 549-582.

                                                   31
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2008, Opportunistic financing, working paper, University of
   Chicago.

Faulkender, Michael and Mitchell A. Petersen, 2006, Does the source of capital affect capital structure?,
   Review of Financial Studies 19, 45-79.

Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist, 199, Monetary policy, business cycles, and the behavior of small
   manufacturing firms, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(2), 309-40.

Ivashina, Victoria, and David Scharfstein, 2010a, Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008,
    Journal of Financial Economics 97, 319-338.

Ivashina, Victoria, and David Scharfstein, 2010b, Liquidity management in the financial crisis, working
    paper, Harvard Business School.

Iyer, Rajkamal, Samuel Lopes, José-Luis Peydró, and Antoinette Schoar, 2010, Interbank liquidity crunch
    and the firm credit crunch: Evidence from the 2007-2009 crisis, unpublished, MIT, Cambridge, MA.

Jermann, Urban and Vincenzo Quadrini, 2009, Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks, NBER
    Working Papers 15338, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Kashyap, Anil K., Owen A. Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein, 1994, Credit conditions and the cyclical
   behavior of Inventories, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(3), 565-92.

Kashyap, Anil K., Jeremy C. Stein and David W. Wilcox, 1993, Monetary policy and credit conditions:
   Evidence from the composition of external finance, American Economic Review 83(1), 78-98.

Korajczyk, Robert A. and A. Levi, 2003, Capital structure choice: macroeconomic conditions and
   financial constraints, Journal of Financial Economics 68(1), 75-109.

Leary, Mark T., 2009, Bank loan supply, lender choice, and corporate capital structure, Journal of Finance
   64(3), 1143-1185.

Leary, Mark T., and Michael R. Roberts, 2005, Do firms rebalance their capital structure?, Journal of
   Finance 60, 2575-2619.

Lemmon, Michael and Michael Roberts, 2010, The response of corporate financing and investment to
   changes in the supply of credit, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Miller, Merton H., 1963, The corporate income tax and corporate financial policies, Cowles Foundation
    Paper 210b.

Minton, Bernadette A., and Catherine Schrand, 1999, The impact of cash flow volatility on discretionary
   investment and the costs of debt and equity financing, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 423-460.

Opler, Tim, Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 1999, The determinants and
   implications of corporate cash holdings, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3-46.

Paulson, Henry M., 2010, On the brink: Inside the race to stop the collapse of the global financial system,
   Business Plus, New York, NY.

                                                    32
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor, 2009, Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage cycles
   and financial crises, 1870-2008, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Sufi, Amir, 2007, Information asymmetry and financing arrangements: Evidence from syndicated loans,
    Journal of Finance 62(2), 629-668.

Sufi, Amir, 2009, Bank lines of credit in corporate finance: An empirical analysis, Review of Financial
    Studies 22, 1057-1088.

Taylor, John B., 2009, Getting off track: How government actions and interventions cause, prolonged,
   and worsened the financial crisis, Hoover Institution Press.




                                                  33
Table 1: Financial Policies Statistics During the Credit Boom and the Financial Crisis

Panel A: Financial Policies Using Asset-weighted Averages
This table examines the time series of firm financial policy variables, on an asset-weighted basis, from the first
quarter of 2005 to the first quarter of 2009. We begin with quarterly data collected from the CRSP/Compustat
Merged (CCM) Fundamentals Quarterly database for 1980-2009. We delete observations with negative total assets
(ATQ), negative sales (SALEQ), negative cash and marketable securities (CHQ), cash and marketable securities
greater than total assets, and firms not incorporated in the U.S. We also eliminate all financial firms, which we
define as firms with SIC codes between 6000 and 6999 and utilities, which we define as firms with SIC codes
between 4900 and 4949. LT stands for long-term debt. Other variable definitions are provided in the Appendix.




                                                       34
Quarter                     N      Cash to     Net LT    Net total      Net equity   Leverage   Capex     Operating
                                    assets      debt       debt          issuance                         cash flow
                                              issuance   issuance
2005Q1                      3444     0.1042     0.0011        0.0013      -0.0039      0.2616    0.0106      0.0225
2005Q2                      3413     0.1019    -0.0015        0.0002      -0.0056      0.2603    0.0126      0.0377
2005Q3                      3381     0.1018     0.0026        0.0036      -0.0057      0.2571    0.0129      0.0316
2005Q4                      3317     0.1053     0.0043        0.0061      -0.0072      0.2548    0.0146      0.0682
2006Q1                      3347     0.0971     0.0073        0.0090      -0.0062      0.2620    0.0128      0.0345
2006Q2                      3325     0.0963     0.0047        0.0079      -0.0102      0.2628    0.0141      0.0415
2006Q3                      3318     0.0955     0.0058        0.0067      -0.0095      0.2644    0.0141      0.0503
2006Q4                      3225     0.0964     0.0015        0.0067      -0.0058      0.2622    0.0159      0.0499
2007Q1                      3240     0.0956     0.0068        0.0071      -0.0074      0.2659    0.0133      0.0356
2007Q2                      3198     0.0949     0.0077        0.0087      -0.0110      0.2694    0.0143      0.0458
2007Q3                      3179     0.0962     0.0064        0.0097      -0.0117      0.2732    0.0142      0.0447
2007Q4                      3122     0.0955     0.0080        0.0098      -0.0091      0.2741    0.0158      0.0469
2008Q1                      3167     0.0890     0.0061        0.0097      -0.0088      0.2860    0.0136      0.0362
2008Q2                      3101     0.0890     0.0071        0.0067      -0.0059      0.2862    0.0146      0.0442
2008Q3                      3078     0.0889     0.0061        0.0043      -0.0065      0.2922    0.0155      0.0442
2008Q4                      3000     0.0981     0.0035        0.0009      -0.0028      0.3058    0.0156      0.0484
2009Q1                      2971     0.1018     0.0077        -0.0019     -0.0019      0.3072    0.0111      0.0236


Avg 1983-2004                        0.0675     0.0036        0.0065      -0.0009      0.2922    0.0183      0.0451
Avg 1990-2004                        0.0666     0.0036        0.0056      -0.0008      0.3024    0.0171      0.0454
Min                                  0.0486    -0.0057        -0.0164     -0.0076      0.2201    0.0097      0.0204
Max                                  0.1077     0.0144        0.0460       0.0061      0.3278    0.0295      0.0608
Std. Dev.                            0.0149     0.0034        0.0077       0.0021      0.0259    0.0040      0.0076
Post crisis vs pre crisis
Avg (2007Q3-2008Q2)                  0.0924     0.0069        0.0090      -0.0089      0.2799    0.0146      0.0430
Avg (2006Q3-2007Q2)                  0.0956     0.0055        0.0073      -0.0084      0.2655    0.0144      0.0454
Difference                          -0.0032     0.0014        0.0017      -0.0005      0.0144    0.0002     -0.0024
seasonality adjusted p-values        0.6484     0.5044        0.7192       0.8116      0.2413    0.9365      0.6943
Post vs pre Lehman
2009Q1                               0.1018     0.0077        -0.0019     -0.0019      0.3072    0.0111      0.0236
2008Q3                               0.0889     0.0061        0.0043      -0.0065      0.2922    0.0155      0.0442
2007Q2                               0.0949     0.0077        0.0087      -0.0110      0.2694    0.0143      0.0458


Difference (2009Q1 - 2008Q3)         0.0130     0.0016        -0.0062      0.0046      0.0150   -0.0044     -0.0206
Newey West test p-values             0.0000     0.0000        0.0000       0.0000      0.0000    0.0000      0.0000
Seasonality adjusted p-values        0.0433     0.7082        0.2423       0.0758      0.1118    0.0842      0.0274


Difference (2009Q1 - 2007Q2)         0.0070     0.0000        -0.0106      0.0091      0.0378   -0.0032     -0.0222
Newey West test p-values             0.0000     0.6400        0.0000       0.0000      0.0000    0.0000      0.0000
Seasonality adjusted p-values        0.4982     0.9995        0.1844       0.0009      0.0675    0.3788      0.0234



                                                         35
Table 1, Panel B: Financial Policies Using Equally-Weighted Averages
This table examines the means of the time series of firm financial policy variables, on an equal-weighted basis, from
the first quarter of 2005 to the first quarter of 2009. We begin with quarterly data collected from the
CRSP/Compustat Merged (CCM) Fundamentals Quarterly database for 1980-2009. We delete observations with
negative total assets (ATQ), negative sales (SALEQ), negative cash and marketable securities (CHQ), cash and
marketable securities greater than total assets, and firms not incorporated in the U.S. We also eliminate all financial
firms, which we define as firms with SIC codes between 6000 and 6999 and utilities, which we define as firms with
SIC codes between 4900 and 4949. LT stands for long-term debt. Other variable definitions are provided in the
Appendix.




                                                          36
Quarter                     N      Cash to     Net LT     Net total     Net equity   Leverage   Capex     Operating
                                    assets      debt        debt         issuance                         cash flow
                                              issuance    issuance
2005Q1                      3597     0.2302     0.0046        0.0053       0.0118      0.1903    0.0123      0.0255
2005Q2                      3578     0.2242     0.0019        0.0035       0.0078      0.1909    0.0137      0.0331
2005Q3                      3539     0.2237     0.0042        0.0065       0.0120      0.1901    0.0138      0.0333
2005Q4                      3501     0.2303     0.0034        0.0041       0.0141      0.1899    0.0148      0.0453
2006Q1                      3495     0.2253     0.0051        0.0064       0.0152      0.1905    0.0138      0.0244
2006Q2                      3478     0.2229     0.0060        0.0070       0.0104      0.1903    0.0150      0.0300
2006Q3                      3475     0.2182     0.0052        0.0083       0.0048      0.1949    0.0146      0.0313
2006Q4                      3413     0.2222     0.0056        0.0061       0.0143      0.1966    0.0153      0.0409
2007Q1                      3389     0.2194     0.0075        0.0081       0.0087      0.1996    0.0140      0.0245
2007Q2                      3357     0.2193     0.0079        0.0105       0.0142      0.2028    0.0150      0.0301
2007Q3                      3323     0.2179     0.0065        0.0092       0.0079      0.2053    0.0150      0.0313
2007Q4                      3293     0.2208     0.0063        0.0086       0.0083      0.2077    0.0156      0.0407
2008Q1                      3312     0.2043     0.0084        0.0104       0.0005      0.2140    0.0137      0.0226
2008Q2                      3250     0.1992     0.0054        0.0062       0.0033      0.2156    0.0149      0.0326
2008Q3                      3220     0.1957     0.0045        0.0081       0.0021      0.2230    0.0144      0.0320
2008Q4                      3160     0.2008    -0.0002        -0.0004     (0.0000)     0.2349    0.0131      0.0305
2009Q1                      3126     0.2015    -0.0015        -0.0045      0.0030      0.2331    0.0097      0.0131


Avg 1983-2004                        0.1605     0.0049        0.0086       0.0125      0.2417    0.0184      0.0272
Avg 1990-2004                        0.1721     0.0044        0.0074       0.0138      0.2317    0.0172      0.0288
Min                                  0.1215    -0.0020        -0.0013      0.0027      0.1912    0.0105      0.0120
Max                                  0.2316     0.0144        0.0197       0.0354      0.2830    0.0275      0.0426
Std. Dev.                            0.0319     0.0034        0.0050       0.0055      0.0239    0.0035      0.0070
Post crisis vs pre crisis
Avg (2007Q3-2008Q2)                  0.2105     0.0066        0.0086       0.0050      0.2107    0.0148      0.0318
Avg (2006Q3-2007Q2)                  0.2198     0.0065        0.0082       0.0105      0.1985    0.0147      0.0317
Difference                          -0.0092     0.0001        0.0004      -0.0055      0.0122    0.0001      0.0001
Ttest pre vs post crisis             0.0034     0.8549        0.6294       0.0001      0.0011    0.7855      0.9726
Post vs pre Lehman
2009Q1                               0.2015    -0.0015        -0.0045      0.0030      0.2331    0.0097      0.0131
2008Q3                               0.1957     0.0045        0.0081       0.0021      0.2230    0.0144      0.0320
2007Q2                               0.2193     0.0079        0.0105       0.0142      0.2028    0.0150      0.0301


Diff. (2009Q1 - 2008Q3)              0.0058    -0.0060        -0.0126      0.0010      0.0101   -0.0046     -0.0189
Paired Diff.                         0.0070    -0.0057        -0.0124      0.0013      0.0161   -0.0049     -0.0203
Ttest 2008Q3=2009Q1*                 0.0001     0.0001        0.0001       0.1426      0.0001    0.0001      0.0001


Diff. (2009Q1 - 2007Q2)             -0.0178    -0.0094        -0.0150     -0.0112      0.0303   -0.0053     -0.0171
Paired Diff.                        -0.0196    -0.0096        -0.0163     -0.0109      0.0348   -0.0061     -0.0202
Ttest 2007Q2=2009Q1                  0.0001     0.0001        0.0001       0.0001      0.0001    0.0001      0.0001



                                                         37
Table 2: Summary Statistics on Lines of Credit

This table examines data on lines of credit for a random sample of 300 firms chosen as of the second
quarter of 2007. We follow the approach in Sufi (2009) in sampling the firms. % new drawdown is the
percentage of firms in that quarter that draw down a line of credit. Drawdown to loc is the ratio of the
amount drawn down to the firm’s total line of credit. Line_assets is the ratio of lines of credit to total
assets. Draw_assets is the ratio of new drawdowns in that quarter to total assets.

                               % new     drawdown           Aggregate sample        Equal-weighted sample
DATACQTR       _FREQ_        drawdown      to loc         line_assets draw_assets   line_assets draw_assets
  2007Q1         283          0.0565       0.1371          0.0940      0.0003         0.1764      0.0015
  2007Q2         300          0.0700       0.2017          0.0979      0.0009         0.1804      0.0037
  2007Q3         293          0.0580       0.1008          0.0969      0.0010         0.1755      0.0017
  2007Q4         279          0.3441       0.2564          0.0984      0.0146         0.1757      0.0217
  2008Q1         277          0.0866       0.3039          0.0967      0.0020         0.1718      0.0056
  2008Q2         265          0.0528       0.1205          0.0901      0.0004         0.1719      0.0012
  2008Q3         262          0.0763       0.2685          0.0932      0.0031         0.1770      0.0053
  2008Q4         252          0.3056       0.1921          0.1023      0.0070         0.1921      0.0144
  2009Q1         246          0.0610       0.1795          0.1041      0.0007         0.1707      0.0014




                                                     38
Table 3: Financial Policies by Size, Debt Rating, and Financial Constraint Groupings
This table examines the means of the time series of firm financial policy variables, on an equal-weighted basis, from
the first quarter of 2005 to the first quarter of 2009 for firms categorized according to size, debt, rating, and financial
constraint.     Panel A examines size quintiles, which are formed quarterly by dividing all NYSE firms into five
quintiles based on assets; we then assign the non-NYSE firms to these quintiles. Panel B examines firms by debt
rating. We divide firms quarterly into firms with an investment grade rating, a speculative rating, and no rating
using the S&P long-term rating (splticrm) available on Compustat. Panel C examines financially constrained vs.
unconstrained firms. We examine whether a firm is financially constrained as of the second quarter of 2007, and
define a firm to be constrained if it (1) does not pay dividends, (2) does not have net equity repurchases, (3) does not
have a credit rating, and (4) has a Tobin’s q greater than one (defined as the market value of the assets divided by
the book value, where market value of assets is book value minus book equity plus market value of equity).
Variable definitions are provided in the Appendix.

Panel A: Smallest vs Largest Firms

                                  Cash to       Net LT      Net total    Net equity   Leverage       Capex       Operating
                                   assets        debt         debt        issuance                               cash flow
Sizerank = 0 (smallest)                        issuance     issuance
Avg 1983-2004                       0.1946       0.0047       0.0092        0.0180       0.2152       0.0181       0.0200
Avg 1990-2004                       0.2107       0.0040       0.0076        0.0199       0.1982       0.0168       0.0222
Min                                 0.1430      -0.0012      -0.0011        0.0055       0.1503       0.0049       0.0049
Max                                 0.2857       0.0120       0.0194        0.0487       0.2660       0.0394       0.0394
Std. Dev.                           0.0412       0.0034       0.0052        0.0075       0.0347       0.0076       0.0076
Post crisis vs pre crisis
Avg (2007Q3-2008Q2)                 0.2697       0.0065       0.0083        0.0112       0.1646       0.0141       0.0241
Avg (2006Q3-2007Q2)                 0.2785       0.0064       0.0083        0.0190       0.1554       0.0140       0.0247
Difference                         -0.0087       0.0001       0.0000       -0.0079       0.0093       0.0002      -0.0006
Ttest                               0.0833       0.8794       0.9997        0.0001       0.0316       0.7639       0.5152
Post vs pre Lehman
2009Q1                              0.2572      -0.0020      -0.0025        0.0052       0.1827       0.0085       0.0046
2008Q3                              0.2514       0.0040       0.0086        0.0054       0.1779       0.0132       0.0248
2007Q2                              0.2785       0.0072       0.0104        0.0254       0.1585       0.0141       0.0212

Diff. (2009Q1-2008Q3)               0.0058      -0.0060      -0.0111       -0.0002       0.0048      -0.0047      -0.0202
Paired Diff.                        0.0050      -0.0055      -0.0108        0.0000       0.0141      -0.0049      -0.0217
Ttest 2008Q3=2009Q1*                0.0139       0.0001       0.0001        0.9880       0.0001       0.0001       0.0001

Diff. (2009Q1-2007Q2)              -0.0213      -0.0092      -0.0129       -0.0202       0.0242      -0.0056      -0.0166
Paired Diff.                       -0.0316      -0.0094      -0.0143       -0.0214       0.0328      -0.0063      -0.0196
Ttest 2007Q2=2009Q1                 0.0001       0.0001       0.0001        0.0001       0.0001       0.0001       0.0001




                                                            39
                            Cash to     Net LT    Net total   Net equity   Leverage   Capex     Operating
                             assets      debt       debt       issuance                         cash flow
Sizerank = 4 (largest)                 issuance   issuance
Avg 1983-2004                 0.0631     0.0031     0.0052      -0.0014      0.2940   0.0189      0.0463
Avg 1990-2004                 0.0622     0.0029     0.0044      -0.0016      0.3016   0.0178      0.0461
Min                           0.0476    -0.0054    -0.0114      -0.0100      0.2347   0.0096      0.0259
Max                           0.1069     0.0120     0.0167       0.0023      0.3267   0.0270      0.0656
Std. Dev.                     0.0127     0.0039     0.0061       0.0021      0.0221   0.0039      0.0074
Post crisis vs pre crisis
Avg (2007Q3-2008Q2)           0.0871    0.0043      0.0066      -0.0079      0.2758   0.0149      0.0451
Avg (2006Q3-2007Q2)           0.0922    0.0030      0.0042      -0.0081      0.2639   0.0148      0.0461
Difference                   -0.0051    0.0013      0.0024       0.0002      0.0119   0.0000     -0.0009
Ttest                         0.3281    0.4040      0.2781       0.7786      0.4076   0.9834      0.7703
Post vs pre Lehman
2009Q1                        0.0980    0.0083     -0.0001      -0.0014      0.3075   0.0105      0.0267
2008Q3                        0.0856    0.0041      0.0021      -0.0058      0.2848   0.0152      0.0466
2007Q2                        0.0897    0.0070      0.0072      -0.0095      0.2650   0.0151      0.0486

Diff. (2009Q1-2008Q3)         0.0123    0.0041     -0.0022      0.0044       0.0227   -0.0047    -0.0199
Paired Diff.                  0.0118    0.0023     -0.0035      0.0051       0.0267   -0.0046    -0.0203
Ttest 2008Q3=2009Q1*          0.0001    0.4534      0.3620      0.0001       0.0001    0.0001     0.0001

Diff. (2009Q1-2007Q2)         0.0082    0.0012     -0.0073      0.0080       0.0425   -0.0046    -0.0219
Paired Diff.                  0.0109    0.0002     -0.0120      0.0085       0.0428   -0.0050    -0.0230
Ttest 2007Q2=2009Q1           0.0632    0.9805      0.0085      0.0001       0.0001    0.0001     0.0001




                                                  40
Panel B: Debt Rating

                            Cash to     Net LT     Net total     Net equity   Leverage   Capex     Operating
                             assets      debt        debt         issuance                         cash flow
Investment Grade                       issuance    issuance
Avg 1983-2004                 0.0603    0.0051          0.0073    -0.0019       0.2762   0.0188      0.0468
Avg 1990-2004                 0.0577    0.0049          0.0068    -0.0022       0.2789   0.0180      0.0476
Min                           0.0450   -0.0019         -0.0023    -0.0090       0.2330   0.0105      0.0267
Max                           0.0980    0.0155          0.0204     0.0042       0.3075   0.0276      0.0611
Std. Dev.                     0.0123    0.0034          0.0056     0.0023       0.0163   0.0039      0.0072
Post crisis vs pre crisis
Avg (2007Q3-2008Q2)           0.0810    0.0080         0.0109     -0.0106       0.2469    0.0138     0.0505
Avg (2006Q3-2007Q2)           0.0821    0.0044         0.0060     -0.0097       0.2282    0.0139     0.0500
Difference                   -0.0011    0.0036         0.0049     -0.0009       0.0187   -0.0001     0.0005
Ttest                         0.7722    0.0248         0.0180      0.2234       0.0938    0.8942     0.8773
Post vs pre Lehman
2009Q1                        0.0947    0.0053         0.0001     -0.0014       0.2687   0.0100      0.0334
2008Q3                        0.0828    0.0051         0.0065     -0.0084       0.2579   0.0134      0.0505
2007Q2                        0.0804    0.0056         0.0069     -0.0106       0.2314   0.0137      0.0522

Diff. (2009Q1-2008Q3)         0.0119    0.0002         -0.0064     0.0069       0.0108   -0.0034    -0.0170
Paired Diff.                  0.0105    0.0000         -0.0067     0.0072       0.0178   -0.0036    -0.0168
Ttest 2008Q3=2009Q1*          0.0001    0.9913          0.0545     0.0001       0.0001    0.0001     0.0001

Diff. (2009Q1-2007Q2)         0.0143   -0.0003         -0.0068     0.0092       0.0374   -0.0037    -0.0187
Paired Diff.                  0.0128   -0.0005         -0.0068     0.0093       0.0405   -0.0042    -0.0197
Ttest 2007Q2=2009Q1           0.0021    0.8179          0.0079     0.0001       0.0001    0.0001     0.0001

                            Cash to     Net LT     Net total     Net equity   Leverage   Capex     Operating
                             assets      debt        debt         issuance                         cash flow
Speculative                            issuance    issuance
Avg 1983-2004                 0.0942    0.0096          0.0125     0.0048       0.4471   0.0184      0.0316
Avg 1990-2004                 0.0905    0.0087          0.0119     0.0065       0.4649   0.0186      0.0314
Min                           0.0729   -0.0056         -0.0091    -0.0144       0.2398   0.0100      0.0118
Max                           0.1332    0.0337          0.0446     0.0168       0.5266   0.0278      0.0602
Std. Dev.                     0.0135    0.0087          0.0108     0.0055       0.0632   0.0041      0.0090
Post crisis vs pre crisis
Avg (2007Q3-2008Q2)           0.0809    0.0057          0.0089     0.0010       0.4122   0.0189      0.0372
Avg (2006Q3-2007Q2)           0.0886    0.0134          0.0163     0.0022       0.4044   0.0184      0.0368
Difference                   -0.0077   -0.0077         -0.0073    -0.0012       0.0078   0.0005      0.0004
Ttest                         0.1047    0.0001          0.0031     0.3379       0.5918   0.5985      0.8755
Post vs pre Lehman
2009Q1                        0.0886   -0.0035         -0.0120     0.0007       0.4499   0.0122      0.0185
2008Q3                        0.0803    0.0048          0.0068     0.0000       0.4204   0.0185      0.0397
2007Q2                        0.0859    0.0168          0.0205     0.0018       0.4109   0.0197      0.0410

                                                  41
                            Cash to     Net LT     Net total     Net equity   Leverage   Capex     Operating
                             assets      debt        debt         issuance                         cash flow
Speculative, cont’d                    issuance    issuance
Diff. (2009Q1-2008Q3)         0.0083   -0.0082         -0.0188     0.0006       0.0295   -0.0063    -0.0212
Paired Diff.                  0.0090   -0.0086         -0.0195     0.0006       0.0316   -0.0064    -0.0249
Ttest 2008Q3=2009Q1*          0.0001    0.0025          0.0001     0.5091       0.0001    0.0001     0.0001

Diff. (2009Q -2007Q2)         0.0027   -0.0203         -0.0325    -0.0011       0.0390   -0.0075    -0.0225
Paired Diff.                 -0.0004   -0.0214         -0.0360    -0.0022       0.0395   -0.0083    -0.0249
Ttest 2007Q2=2009Q1           0.5070    0.0001          0.0001     0.1746       0.0001   0.00017     0.0001

                             Cash to    Net LT     Net total     Net equity   Leverage   Capex     Operating
                              assets     debt        debt         issuance                         cash flow
Unrated                                issuance    issuance
Avg 1983-2004                 0.1801    0.0044          0.0082     0.0148       0.2148    0.0180     0.0249
Avg 1990-2004                 0.1962    0.0038          0.0069     0.0166       0.1990    0.0169     0.0264
Min                           0.1215   -0.0013         -0.0015     0.0041       0.1428    0.0104     0.0120
Max                           0.2755    0.0120          0.0171     0.0429       0.2676    0.0275     0.0416
Std. Dev.                     0.0441    0.0032          0.0049     0.0067       0.0356    0.0035     0.0073
Post crisis vs pre crisis
Avg (2007Q3-2008Q2)           0.2562    0.0067         0.0083      0.0080       0.1625    0.0141     0.0279
Avg (2006Q3-2007Q2)           0.2671    0.0054         0.0069      0.0152       0.1504    0.0141     0.0279
Difference                   -0.0109    0.0013         0.0014     -0.0071       0.0121    0.0000     0.0000
Ttest                         0.0147    0.0830         0.1540      0.0001       0.0018    0.9289     0.9646
Post vs pre Lehman
2009Q1                        0.2414   -0.0020         -0.0035     0.0042       0.1808    0.0091     0.0088
2008Q3                        0.2370    0.0044          0.0087     0.0040       0.1751    0.0136     0.0274
2007Q2                        0.2677    0.0063          0.0089     0.0204       0.1541    0.0142     0.0244

Diff. (2009Q1-2008Q3)         0.0044   -0.0064         -0.0122     0.0002       0.0057   -0.0045    -0.0186
Paired Diff.                  0.0060   -0.0059         -0.0117     0.0006       0.0124   -0.0048    -0.0204
Ttest 2008Q3=2009Q1*          0.0006    0.0001          0.0001     0.6170       0.0001    0.0001     0.0001

Diff. (2009Q1-2007Q2)        -0.0263   -0.0083         -0.0124    -0.0162       0.0267   -0.0051    -0.0156
Paired Diff.                 -0.0292   -0.0085         -0.0134    -0.0162       0.0328   -0.0059    -0.0192
Ttest 2007Q2=2009Q1           0.0001    0.0001          0.0001     0.0001       0.0001    0.0001     0.0001




                                                  42
Panel C: Unconstrained vs Constrained

                             Cash to     Net LT     Net total    Net equity   Leverage   Capex     Operating
                              assets      debt        debt        issuance                         cash flow
Unconstrained                           issuance    issuance
Post crisis vs pre crisis
Avg (2007Q3-2008Q2)            0.1607    0.0060         0.0082      0.0008      0.2342    0.0145     0.0355
Avg (2006Q3-2007Q2)            0.1741    0.0055         0.0078      0.0058      0.2227    0.0149     0.0309
Difference                    -0.0134    0.0005         0.0004     -0.0050      0.0115   -0.0004    -0.0004
Ttest                          0.0001    0.4625         0.6731      0.0001      0.0084    0.3448     0.7817
Post vs pre Lehman
2009Q1                        0.1572     -0.0020     -0.0059       0.0009       0.2586   0.0097      0.0205
2008Q3                        0.1499      0.0043      0.0072      -0.0001       0.2451   0.0138      0.0362
2007Q2                        0.1741      0.0037      0.0071       0.0088       0.2260   0.0149      0.0355

Diff. (2009Q1 - 2008Q3)       0.0074    -0.0062      -0.0131       0.0011       0.0135   -0.0040    -0.0156
Paired Diff.                  0.0093    -0.0064      -0.0133       0.0017       0.0160   -0.0042    -0.0166
Ttest 2008Q3=2009Q1*          0.0001     0.0001       0.0001       0.0487       0.0001    0.0001     0.0001

Diff. (2009Q1 - 2007Q2)       -0.0168    -0.0057     -0.0130      -0.0078       0.0326   -0.0052    -0.0150
Paired Diff.                  -0.0117    -0.0066     -0.0142      -0.0059       0.0350   -0.0059    -0.0195
Ttest 2007Q2=2009Q1            0.0001     0.0001      0.0001       0.0002       0.0001    0.0001     0.0001

                             Cash to     Net LT     Net total    Net equity   Leverage   Capex     Operating
                              assets      debt        debt        issuance                         cash flow
Constrained                             issuance    issuance
Post crisis vs pre crisis
Avg (2007Q3-2008Q2)            0.3370     0.0073      0.0082       0.0118       0.1417    0.0147     0.0241
Avg (2006Q3-2007Q2)            0.3551     0.0099      0.0101       0.0245       0.1234    0.0147     0.0220
Difference                    -0.0181    -0.0026     -0.0018      -0.0127       0.0183   -0.0001     0.0021
Ttest                          0.0669     0.0194      0.2176       0.0001       0.0039    0.9201     0.4239
Post vs pre Lehman
2009Q1                        0.3109     0.0002      -0.0030       0.0076       0.1565   0.0095     -0.0033
2008Q3                        0.3073     0.0045       0.0088       0.0042       0.1567   0.0144      0.0241
2007Q2                        0.3577     0.0207       0.0210       0.0309       0.1321   0.0154      0.0123

Diff. (2009Q1 - 2008Q3)       0.0037    -0.0043      -0.0118       0.0033      -0.0002   -0.0049    -0.0274
Paired Diff.                  0.0060    -0.0032      -0.0102       0.0030       0.0115   -0.0052    -0.0292
Ttest 2008Q3=2009Q1*          0.1116     0.1497       0.0013       0.2541       0.0057    0.0001     0.0001

Diff. (2009Q1 - 2007Q2)       -0.0468    -0.0205     -0.0240      -0.0234       0.0244   -0.0059    -0.0156
Paired Diff.                  -0.0457    -0.0195     -0.0232      -0.0275       0.0342   -0.0068    -0.0227
Ttest 2007Q2=2009Q1            0.0001     0.0001      0.0001       0.0001       0.0001    0.0001     0.0001




                                                   43
Table 4: Expected and unexpected cash holdings, net debt issuance and net equity issuance

Panel A examines the determinants of cash holdings. Panel B examines the determinants of debt
issuance, whether debt issuance is defined as the change in long-term and short-term debt. Panel C
examines the determinants of equity issuance. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Variable definitions are provided in the
Appendix.

Panel A: Quarterly Cash/assets
                           (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
                         1995Q1-      Smallest      Largest     Investment    Speculative    Unrated
                         2009Q1        firms         firms
 Sigma12                 1.4888***    1.7493***     0.3179***    0.2746***     0.5106***     1.6722***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Market-to-book          0.0203***    0.0204***     0.0166***    0.0164***     0.0360***     0.0199***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Size                   -0.0046***   0.0106***      -0.0021**   -0.0027***    -0.0059***     0.0008**
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.041)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.012)
 Operating cash flow     0.0415***      0.0091      0.1123***    0.1232***      -0.0123     0.0205***
                           (0.000)      (0.136)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.386)       (0.000)
 NWC                    -0.2643***   -0.2869***    -0.1722***   -0.0854***    -0.1771***    -0.2852***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Capex                  -1.0653***   -1.1622***    -0.5009***   -0.7476***    -0.3640***    -1.1952***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Leverage               -0.3538***   -0.4339***    -0.1449***   -0.1687***    -0.1150***    -0.4264***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 R&D                     0.3889***    0.3329***     0.6829***    0.6665***     1.1383***     0.3485***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Rdmiss                 -0.0132***   -0.0236***     0.0049***    0.0153***     0.0053***    -0.0208***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.003)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Divdum                 -0.0439***   -0.0282***    -0.0574***   -0.0255***    -0.0255***    -0.0336***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Acquisitions           -0.5514***   -0.6394***    -0.3616***   -0.3146***    -0.5487***    -0.5948***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Net equity Issuance     0.2489***    0.2310***     0.2577***    0.1118***     0.2674***     0.2428***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Net LT debt Issuance    0.3171***    0.3266***     0.1944***    0.2184***     0.2910***     0.3336***
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 dqtr2                     0.0008       0.0001        0.0006       0.0012        0.0019        0.0004
                           (0.479)      (0.945)       (0.811)      (0.478)       (0.424)       (0.781)
 dqtr3                    0.0021*       0.0014        0.0019       0.0027        0.0023        0.0017
                           (0.067)      (0.347)       (0.462)      (0.100)       (0.325)       (0.218)
 dqtr4                   0.0055***    0.0050***       0.0039     0.0067***      0.0040*      0.0050***
                           (0.000)      (0.001)       (0.144)      (0.000)       (0.081)       (0.000)
 dum051                  0.0259***    0.0248***     0.0252***    0.0244***      -0.0040      0.0287***

                                                    44
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.390)      (0.000)
dum052               0.0248***   0.0242***   0.0258***   0.0239***     -0.0061    0.0278***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.170)      (0.000)
dum053               0.0205***   0.0200***   0.0277***   0.0205***     -0.0069    0.0227***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.145)      (0.000)
dum054               0.0246***   0.0237***   0.0262***   0.0209***      0.0024    0.0265***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.627)      (0.000)
dum061               0.0213***   0.0188***   0.0198***   0.0212***     -0.0021    0.0229***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.677)      (0.000)
dum062               0.0233***   0.0227***   0.0181***   0.0151***     -0.0036    0.0263***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.003)     (0.000)     (0.457)      (0.000)
dum063               0.0214***   0.0194***   0.0162***   0.0115***     -0.0023    0.0241***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.627)      (0.000)
dum064               0.0210***   0.0177***   0.0187***   0.0124***     -0.0041    0.0226***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.375)      (0.000)
dum071               0.0266***   0.0234***   0.0171***   0.0137***     -0.0047    0.0301***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.005)     (0.001)     (0.345)      (0.000)
dum072               0.0258***   0.0223***   0.0156***   0.0122***     -0.0064    0.0286***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.008)     (0.003)     (0.182)      (0.000)
dum073               0.0268***   0.0250***   0.0150***    0.0106**     -0.0058    0.0307***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.008)     (0.012)     (0.209)      (0.000)
dum074               0.0259***   0.0250***    0.0102*     0.0094**     -0.0070    0.0299***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.065)     (0.022)     (0.106)      (0.000)
dum081               0.0200***   0.0189***    0.0110**   0.0154***   -0.0110***   0.0221***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.032)     (0.000)     (0.007)      (0.000)
dum082               0.0140***   0.0130***    0.0096*    0.0151***   -0.0138***   0.0152***
                       (0.000)     (0.003)     (0.069)     (0.000)     (0.001)      (0.000)
dum083               0.0154***   0.0131***    0.0094*    0.0168***     -0.0054    0.0157***
                       (0.000)     (0.005)     (0.058)     (0.000)     (0.170)      (0.000)
dum084               0.0256***   0.0244***   0.0117**    0.0204***     0.0017     0.0279***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.014)     (0.000)     (0.710)      (0.000)
dum091               0.0460***    0.0327**   0.0439***   0.0778***     0.0173     0.0387***
                       (0.000)     (0.023)     (0.005)     (0.000)     (0.210)      (0.002)
Constant             0.2913***   0.0373***   0.1549***   0.1415***   0.2046***    0.2083***
                       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)

Observations          182,301     120,764     10,135      16,828       21,581      143,892
Adjusted R-squared     0.454       0.446      0.431        0.382        0.395       0.450




                                              45
Panel B: Net Total Debt Issuance
                         (1)          (2)              (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)
                       1995Q1-      Smallest         Largest   Investment   Speculative    Unrated
                       2009Q1        firms            firms


lag_dqsize            -0.0087***   -0.0085***    -0.0113***    -0.0198***      -0.0021    -0.0094***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.004)       (0.000)      (0.584)       (0.000)
lag_ocf               -0.0094***   -0.0139***       0.0057      0.0242**       0.0166     -0.0113***
                         (0.001)      (0.000)       (0.770)       (0.031)      (0.118)       (0.000)
lag_dividends           0.0820*       -0.0752     0.2592**     0.5385***       0.1661        0.0043
                         (0.057)      (0.201)       (0.030)       (0.000)      (0.371)       (0.932)
divdum                -0.0029***      0.0004     -0.0069***    -0.0074***   -0.0037***     -0.0013**
                         (0.000)      (0.529)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.005)       (0.015)
lag2_leverage         -0.0098***   -0.0128***    -0.0118***    -0.0278***   -0.0365***    -0.0120***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.002)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
lag_ngbe               0.0035***    0.0050***       0.0027        0.0066       -0.0012     0.0063***
                         (0.006)      (0.003)       (0.464)       (0.216)      (0.563)       (0.000)
lag2_logmc             -0.0002**      -0.0003       0.0001     -0.0014***   -0.0026***    -0.0006***
                         (0.049)      (0.102)       (0.758)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
lag_MB                 0.0019***    0.0019***       0.0007      0.0013**     0.0088***     0.0019***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.108)       (0.018)      (0.000)       (0.000)
lag2_cash             -0.0158***   -0.0168***    -0.0166***    -0.0224***   -0.0161***    -0.0151***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.006)       (0.000)      (0.005)       (0.000)
lag2_stdebt           -0.0295***   -0.0278***      -0.0147     -0.0224***      -0.0123    -0.0290***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.221)       (0.009)      (0.174)       (0.000)
lag_R&D                 -0.0188*      -0.0085      -0.0472       -0.0408    -0.2986***      -0.0124
                         (0.062)      (0.436)       (0.366)       (0.430)      (0.000)       (0.231)
lag_capex              0.3138***    0.2997***     0.3204***     0.2746***    0.4637***     0.2853***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
dqtr2                  -0.0013**       0.0000      -0.0003       -0.0013       -0.0016      -0.0009
                         (0.018)      (0.950)       (0.862)       (0.392)      (0.393)       (0.121)
dqtr3                    0.0000      0.0013**       0.0004        0.0004       -0.0025       0.0006
                         (0.970)      (0.040)       (0.811)       (0.792)      (0.172)       (0.300)
dqtr4                 -0.0037***   -0.0026***     -0.0037**     -0.0035**      -0.0029    -0.0035***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.028)       (0.017)      (0.124)       (0.000)
dum051                -0.0039***      -0.0023    -0.0094***     -0.0064**   -0.0095***     -0.0027**
                         (0.001)      (0.118)       (0.008)       (0.041)      (0.005)       (0.034)
dum052                -0.0031***    -0.0029**      -0.0029      -0.0056**      -0.0026     -0.0030**
                         (0.005)      (0.040)       (0.466)       (0.028)      (0.492)       (0.015)
dum053                   -0.0018     -0.0025*       0.0016        0.0033       -0.0021     -0.0027**
                         (0.110)      (0.083)       (0.696)       (0.357)      (0.515)       (0.033)
dum054                   -0.0004      -0.0022       0.0011        0.0021      -0.0059*      -0.0003
                         (0.722)      (0.155)       (0.691)       (0.472)      (0.087)       (0.831)


                                                46
dum061               -0.0030***      -0.0014       -0.0021   -0.0068***     -0.0028     -0.0029**
                        (0.006)      (0.333)       (0.606)      (0.007)      (0.466)      (0.019)
dum062                  -0.0003     -0.0025*        0.0055      0.0035      -0.0024       -0.0009
                        (0.797)      (0.089)       (0.170)      (0.213)      (0.481)      (0.507)
dum063                  -0.0006      -0.0007       -0.0035     -0.0026       0.0031       -0.0013
                        (0.568)      (0.613)       (0.265)      (0.334)      (0.418)      (0.284)
dum064                   0.0015       0.0020        0.0015      0.0005       0.0029        0.0008
                        (0.240)      (0.246)       (0.624)      (0.868)      (0.441)      (0.601)
dum071                  -0.0008       0.0005     -0.0058**     -0.0037      -0.0001       -0.0009
                        (0.529)      (0.758)       (0.015)      (0.171)      (0.982)      (0.508)
dum072                 0.0029**       0.0022        0.0048      0.0023      0.0084*        0.0015
                        (0.024)      (0.187)       (0.173)      (0.436)      (0.052)      (0.286)
dum073                   0.0004      -0.0010        0.0009     0.0047*      -0.0032        0.0004
                        (0.755)      (0.539)       (0.778)      (0.069)      (0.392)      (0.804)
dum074                0.0037***       0.0020      0.0048*     0.0086**      -0.0016      0.0038**
                        (0.006)      (0.252)       (0.077)      (0.010)      (0.670)      (0.015)
dum081                   0.0008      0.0027*      -0.0046*     -0.0012      -0.0046      0.0023*
                        (0.479)      (0.079)       (0.058)      (0.632)      (0.105)      (0.089)
dum082                  -0.0009      -0.0003       0.0018       0.0033    -0.0068***      -0.0001
                        (0.381)      (0.848)       (0.491)      (0.174)      (0.005)      (0.961)
dum083                  -0.0003      -0.0004       -0.0031     -0.0000      -0.0030       0.0005
                        (0.822)      (0.805)       (0.174)      (0.995)      (0.298)      (0.710)
dum084               -0.0052***   -0.0059***        0.0014     -0.0001    -0.0117***   -0.0045***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.650)      (0.969)      (0.000)      (0.000)
dum091               -0.0129***   -0.0092***    -0.0099***   -0.0107***   -0.0238***   -0.0103***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
Constant              0.0082***    0.0079***        0.0064    0.0248***    0.0282***    0.0095***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.122)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)

Observations          182,604      118,572          11,470     18,673       22,741      141,190
Adjusted R-squared     0.018        0.018           0.020      0.022         0.041       0.017




                                               47
Panel C: Net Equity Issuance

                         (1)          (2)              (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)
                       1995Q1-      Smallest         Largest   Investment   Speculative    Unrated
                       2009Q1        firms            firms


lag_dqsize               -0.0002    -0.0041**    0.0091***      0.0097***   0.0092***        -0.0021
                         (0.890)      (0.018)      (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.167)
lag_ocf               -0.0737***   -0.0726***   -0.0333***     -0.0307***   -0.0235***    -0.0726***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
lag_dividends         -0.5862***   -0.6322***   -0.2162***         0.0214       0.0386    -0.6028***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.620)      (0.779)       (0.000)
divdum                 0.0014***       0.0006      0.0001         -0.0003      -0.0008      0.0011**
                         (0.000)      (0.272)      (0.892)        (0.409)      (0.279)       (0.011)
lag2_leverage          0.0118***    0.0040***    0.0142***      0.0158***   0.0048***      0.0085***
                         (0.000)      (0.004)      (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.009)       (0.000)
lag_ngbe                 -0.0016      -0.0002     -0.0018      -0.0092***    -0.0024**        0.0008
                         (0.159)      (0.913)      (0.182)        (0.000)      (0.043)       (0.641)
lag2_logmc            -0.0036***   -0.0042***   -0.0008***     -0.0004***   -0.0012***    -0.0043***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.001)      (0.000)       (0.000)
lag_MB                 0.0099***    0.0117***    -0.0006**     -0.0017***   0.0054***      0.0108***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.035)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
lag2_cash             -0.0199***   -0.0224***     -0.0025      -0.0129***      -0.0023    -0.0201***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.556)        (0.000)      (0.520)       (0.000)
lag2_stdebt               0.0015    0.0077***   -0.0157***     -0.0156***       0.0023        0.0027
                         (0.476)      (0.004)      (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.599)       (0.266)
lag_R&D                0.3464***    0.3464***    0.1109***      0.1260***       0.0105     0.3434***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.781)       (0.000)
lag_capex              0.1432***    0.1617***    0.1025***      0.0411***   0.0969***     0.1523***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
dqtr2                    -0.0008      -0.0008     -0.0002         -0.0000      -0.0004       -0.0007
                         (0.107)      (0.237)      (0.741)        (0.949)      (0.717)       (0.252)
dqtr3                 -0.0029***   -0.0030***   -0.0019***     -0.0016***     -0.0018*    -0.0030***
                         (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.005)        (0.001)      (0.083)       (0.000)
dqtr4                    -0.0005      -0.0001     -0.0009         -0.0003      -0.0014       -0.0002
                         (0.323)      (0.899)      (0.147)        (0.447)      (0.177)       (0.683)
dum051                   0.0001       -0.0004    -0.0021**        -0.0004     -0.0029*       -0.0002
                         (0.922)      (0.805)      (0.035)        (0.642)      (0.056)       (0.870)
dum052                  -0.0016*      -0.0015   -0.0033***     -0.0029***      -0.0022      -0.0020*
                         (0.085)      (0.281)      (0.006)        (0.004)      (0.127)       (0.093)
dum053                0.0028***      0.0037**     -0.0016        -0.0017*      -0.0004     0.0033**
                         (0.006)      (0.014)      (0.143)        (0.081)      (0.782)       (0.012)
dum054                    0.0005       0.0014    -0.0025**      -0.0022**      -0.0000        0.0003


                                                48
                        (0.636)      (0.390)     (0.044)        (0.028)      (0.990)      (0.843)
dum061                 0.0028**     0.0041**    -0.0030**      -0.0017    -0.0043***    0.0039***
                        (0.013)      (0.016)     (0.020)        (0.113)      (0.000)      (0.008)
dum062                -0.0025**      -0.0013   -0.0044***    -0.0083***   -0.0045***      -0.0023
                        (0.019)      (0.442)     (0.010)        (0.000)      (0.006)      (0.104)
dum063               -0.0022***    -0.0028**   -0.0054***    -0.0058***   -0.0037***    -0.0025**
                        (0.009)      (0.026)     (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.009)      (0.022)
dum064                  0.0021*      0.0030*   -0.0026***     -0.0023**    -0.0034**     0.0030**
                        (0.069)      (0.093)     (0.005)        (0.025)      (0.025)      (0.045)
dum071                 -0.0018*     -0.0025*   -0.0049***    -0.0056***     -0.0013     -0.0024**
                        (0.066)      (0.084)     (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.584)      (0.042)
dum072                   0.0018    0.0053***   -0.0070***    -0.0064***    -0.0041**     0.0035**
                        (0.129)      (0.005)     (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.023)       (0.026)
dum073                  -0.0009       0.0003   -0.0069***    -0.0087***    -0.0046**       0.0000
                        (0.424)      (0.850)     (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.013)       (0.984)
dum074                -0.0023**      -0.0016   -0.0051***    -0.0055***     -0.0026      -0.0025*
                        (0.040)      (0.344)     (0.000)       (0.006)      (0.129)       (0.084)
dum081               -0.0069***   -0.0082***   -0.0059***    -0.0074***   -0.0067***   -0.0080***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
dum082               -0.0026***   -0.0043***     -0.0012      -0.0025**   -0.0032***   -0.0036***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.352)       (0.024)      (0.006)       (0.000)
dum083                 -0.0014*    -0.0029**     -0.0015     -0.0030***   -0.0039***     -0.0018*
                        (0.061)      (0.011)     (0.114)       (0.001)      (0.000)       (0.066)
dum084               -0.0043***   -0.0083***      0.0001       -0.0007      -0.0013    -0.0066***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.913)       (0.300)      (0.360)       (0.000)
dum091                  0.0007      -0.0018*      0.0008     0.0021***     -0.0021**      -0.0002
                        (0.251)      (0.065)     (0.363)       (0.006)      (0.020)       (0.787)
Constant             0.0061***     0.0061***    0.0036**        0.0009       0.0028     0.0075***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.021)       (0.316)      (0.127)       (0.000)

Observations          184,186      119,498          11,589     18,786       22,986      142,414
Adjusted R-squared     0.117        0.123           0.085      0.076         0.024       0.123




                                               49
Figure 1: Cash/Assets by Size Groupings

We use NYSE cutoffs for firm size quintiles and normalize the average cash/assets ratio to 1 at the start of the credit
boom. Sizerank = 0 (4) are the smallest (largest) firms.

   1.100000
   1.050000
   1.000000
   0.950000
   0.900000
   0.850000
   0.800000
   0.750000
   0.700000
   0.650000
   0.600000




              sizerank=0       sizerank=1         sizerank=2        sizerank=3         sizerank=4




Figure 2: Net Debt Issuance by Size Groupings

We use NYSE cutoffs for firm size quintiles. Sizerank = 0 (4) are the smallest (largest) firms.

   0.020000

   0.015000

   0.010000

   0.005000

   0.000000

   ‐0.005000

   ‐0.010000

   ‐0.015000

              sizerank=0       sizerank=1         sizerank=2        sizerank=3         sizerank=4




                                                          50
Figure 3: Net Equity Issuance by Size Groupings

We use NYSE cutoffs for firm size quintiles. Sizerank = 0 (4) are the smallest (largest) firms.

    0.030000
    0.025000
    0.020000
    0.015000
    0.010000
    0.005000
    0.000000
   ‐0.005000
   ‐0.010000
   ‐0.015000




               sizerank=0        sizerank=1          sizerank=2         sizerank=3         sizerank=4




Figure 4: Cash/Assets by Rating Groupings

We divide firms quarterly into firms with an investment grade rating, a speculative rating, and no rating using the
S&P long-term rating (splticrm) available on Compustat.

   1.200000

   1.100000

   1.000000

   0.900000

   0.800000

   0.700000

   0.600000




                                   investment          speculative         unrated




                                                          51
Appendix

All variables are quarterly, unless otherwise noted. For variables reported on a year-to-date basis, the
quarterly value is calculated by subtracting the lagged value from the current value; in the first quarter of
a fiscal year, the lagged value is set equal to zero. Variables names preceded by “lag” are the value of
that variable in the previous quarter; variable names preceded by lag2 are the value of that variable two
quarters prior.

 Variable name         Description


 Avgtint               Average of monthly intermediate term treasuries during the quarter
 Capex                 capital expenditures (capxy) / lagged assets
 Cash                  cash and marketable securities (cheq) divided by assets
 Divdum                dummy variable equal to one if firm paid dividends
 Dividends             total cash dividends (dvy) minus preferred dividends (dvpq) paid during the
                       quarter, divided by lagged assets
 Dqsize                assets minus lagged assets, divided by lagged assets
 Indmlev               median industry market leverage ratio in the previous quarter, based on the
                       industry groupings in Fama and French (2002).
 Leverage              long-term debt (dlttq) plus debt in current liabilities (dlcq), divided by assets
                       (atq)
 logMC                 log (market value of equity)
 Size                  log (book value of assets in 2009 dollars)
 Mkt lev               long-term debt (dlttq) plus debt in current liabilities (dlcq), divided by long-term
                       debt (dlttq) plus debt in current liabilities (dlcq) plus the market value of
                       common equity
 Sigma12               the median of the standard deviations of cash flow/assets over past 12 quarters
                       for firms in the same industry, as defined by two-digit SIC code.
 Net equity            equity issuance (sstky) minus aggregate equity repurchase (prstkcy), divided by
 Issuance              lagged assets
 Net LT debt           long-term debt issuance (dltisy) minus long-term debt retirement (dltry) divided
 Issuance              by lagged assets
 Net total debt        change in long-term debt (dlttq) and debt in current liabilities (dlcq) during the
 issuance              quarter, divided by lagged assets
 NgBE                  dummy variable equal to one if book equity (ceqq) is less than 0
 NWC                   working capital (wcapq) minus cash, divided by assets




                                                      52
OCF (operating   Operating cash flow calculated following Minton and Schrand (1999) as sales
cash flow)       (saleq) less cost of goods sold (cogsq) less selling, general and administrative
                 expenses (xsgaq) less the change in working capital for the period, divided by
                 total assets (atq). Working capital is current assets other than cash and short-term
                 investments less current liabilities and is calculated as the sum of the non-
                 missing amounts for accounts receivable (rectq), inventory (invtq), and other
                 current assets (acoq) less the sum of the non-missing amounts for accounts
                 payable (apq), income taxes payable (txpq), and other current liabilities (lcoq). If
                 all components of working capital are missing in either the current quarter or the
                 previous quarter, working capital and operating cash flow are both set equal to
                 missing. Quarterly selling, general and administrative expenses exclude one-
                 quarter of annual research and development costs (xrd) and advertising expenses
                 (xad) when those data items are available.
Acquisitions     acquisitions (acqy) divided by assets
PPE              PPE (ppentq) divided by assets
MB               market-to-book calculated as book value of assets (atq) minus book value of
                 common equity (ceqq) plus the market value of common equity (cshoq*prccq)
Qspr_hy2         spread of Merrill Lynch US High Yield 100 Index over intermediate term
                 treasuries, averaged over each month of the quarter
R&D              R&D (xrdq) / assets. If R&D is reported annually, then quarterly R&D is set
                 equal to one-fourth of annual R&D. If R&D is missing, it is set equal to 0.
Rated            dummy variable equal to one if the S&P long-term rating (splticrm) available on
                 Compustat is investment grade or speculative
Rdmiss           dummy variable equal to one if R&D is missing in Compustat
STDebt           change in debt in current liabilities (dlcq), divided by lagged assets




                                               53
