                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    PORTAGE: PATH DEPENDENCE AND INCREASING RETURNS IN U.S. HISTORY

                                            Hoyt Bleakley
                                             Jeffrey Lin

                                        Working Paper 16314
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16314


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2010




The authors thank Nate Baum-Snow, Henry Binford, Lou Cain, Satyajit Chatterjee, Tim Conley, Bob
Fogel, Gordon Hanson, Dave Haddock, Kris Mitchener, Kevin Murphy, Jordan Rappaport, Steve Redding,
and Mark Wright for helpful discussions, Cristine McCollum at the FRBP library for finding several
sources of data, Lauris Olsen for help with the Serial Set at Penn, Chris Winters for patient guidance
through the U of C map collection, Evan Taylor and Allison Kahl for research assistance, and seminar
participants at various institutions for helpful comments. The views expressed here are those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Financial support from the
Booth School of Business and the Center for Population Economics, both at the University of Chicago,
is gratefully acknowledged.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Hoyt Bleakley and Jeffrey Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Portage: Path Dependence and Increasing Returns in U.S. History
Hoyt Bleakley and Jeffrey Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 16314
August 2010
JEL No. F1,J1,N9,R1

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine portage sites in the U.S. South, Mid-Atlantic, and Midwest, including those on the fall
line, a geomorphologic feature in the southeastern U.S. marking the final rapids on rivers before the
ocean. Historically, waterborne transport of goods required portage around the falls at these points,
while some falls provided water power during early industrialization. These factors attracted commerce
and manufacturing. Although these original advantages have long since been made obsolete, we document
the continuing—and even increasing—importance of these portage sites over time. We interpret this
finding in a model with path dependence arising from local increasing returns to scale.


Hoyt Bleakley
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bleakley@chicagogsb.edu

Jeffrey Lin
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Research Department
Ten Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
jeff.lin@phil.frb.org
1    Introduction
Why is economic activity distributed unevenly across space? How much is due to variation in nat-
ural endowments across locations, and how much can be attributed to increasing returns to scale?
Separating these two effects can be challenging, in part because the features that first brought
people to an area (such as topography, resources, climate, et cetera) are usually persistent and
therefore confound attempts to attribute the spatial distribution of activities solely to agglomera-
tion economies. Put another way, it is difficult to disentangle the effects of state dependence (the
presence of factors of production) versus serial correlation (the advantages that first attracted other
factors). In this study, we consider natural features that were valued historically—by a coincidence
of transportation technology and trade patterns—but that were made obsolete some time ago, thus
breaking the link between natural advantage and scale.
    Our approach to this question starts with portage—the carrying of a boat or its cargo, over land,
between navigable waterways, or to avoid a navigational obstacle such as rapids or falls. (Portage
also refers to the place where this act is performed.) During the settlement of North America,
when the long-distance movement of goods was mostly waterborne, portages were a focal point
for commerce. Traders were obliged to stop because of the natural obstacle to navigation; in turn,
these sites offered easy opportunities for exchange and commerce. And while these opportunities
were valued historically, they became obsolete long ago: thanks to changes in transportation tech-
nology, traders no longer walk canoes around rapids. Similarly, although some falls were sources
of water power during early industrialization, these advantages also declined with the advent of
other, cheaper power sources. Notably, despite the obsolescence of canoe transport and water
wheels, concentrations of economic activity continue to exist at many of these sites. In this paper,
we examine this persistence of population centers near obsolete portage advantages. Our evidence
is most consistent with a model where initial heterogeneity in natural features has helped to select
particular locations as city sites, and present-day differences in density and productivity are the
result of a process featuring path dependence in the presence of strong increasing returns.
    To fix ideas, consider the falls of the James River. In colonial times, an important cash crop
in Virginia was tobacco. Tobacco plantations located downriver of the falls of the James had their
own wharves and were visited directly by ocean-going ships. On the other hand, these large-for-
the-period ships could not navigate through the falls, and tobacco growers farther inland sent their
merchandise downriver on canoe-like batteaux. But these batteaux were slow and cumbersome,


                                                  2
and their pilots sought to offload their goods as far upriver as the ocean-capable ships could meet
them. This meant that the falls became a place of exchange. In time, this exchange grew into
broader sorts of commerce, and commercial activity in turn gave rise to financial services. In the
early and middle 19th century, locks and canals bypassed the falls, and rail lines made the batteaux
commerce obsolete, nullifying the area’s natural advantage. In spite of the disappearance of its
original advantages, the falls of the James is today the site of Richmond, the city that grew up
around this colonial tobacco exchange.
       We examine early portage sites like the falls of the James throughout the U.S. South, Mid-
Atlantic, and Midwest. In the southeastern and Mid-Atlantic U.S., we pay particular attention to
river basins that intersect the fall line, a geomorphological feature dividing the Piedmont and the
coastal plain. (The solid lines in Figures 1 and 2 show the approximate boundary of the coastal
plain.) The fall line describes the last set of falls or rapids experienced along a river before it emp-
ties into the Atlantic Ocean or the Gulf of Mexico. An advantage of examining fall-line portages
is that other natural sources of variation are reduced; on land, the transition from coastal plain to
Piedmont is quite gradual. This smoothness allows us to use comparison areas—places within the
same river basins—that, except for an initial portage advantage, share features similar to these his-
torical portage sites. (This similarity also helps to rule out the existence of features co-located with
portage that might be valuable: if flatness is important for road-building, for example, Richmond
is essentially as flat as areas nearby along the James River.) In addition to the fall-line portages, we
examine portage sites on routes used by French fur trappers in the 18th-century Midwest between
the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River system.1 We also consider portages on the Mississippi
River and its tributaries. In section 2, we describe further the historical importance of portage, give
quantitative evidence of its decline, and provide some narratives for selected sites. We present our
sample area and the data on historical portages, population, and economic activity in section 3 and
the data appendix.
       The footprint of portage is evident today, as we show in section 4 with both maps and statistical
tests. First, in the southeastern U.S., an urban area of some size is found nearly every place a river
crosses the fall line (as seen in Figures 1 and 2). Many of these sites are the current locations of
substantial metropolitan areas today: for example, Washington, Philadelphia, and Richmond, as
well as smaller cities such as Augusta and Macon in Georgia and Petersburg and Fredericksburg in
   1
     Indeed, the use of portage to mean carrying your canoe around an obstacle entered North American English
around 1700 from the experiences of French fur trappers. The word is not conventionally used to describe the fall-line
sites in the South, but we do so here to emphasize the commonality of first-nature advantages across these sites.


                                                          3
Virginia. Moreover, among these portage sites, an area is more densely populated today if it has a
larger watershed upstream, which is associated with greater historical demand for commerce. Our
results are not sensitive to a variety of different controls for spatial, climatic, or geological features
(which might have value today), nor to how we measure the concentration of economic activity,
at various levels of aggregation. We also find similar results across various subsamples (including
ones that consist of narrow buffers around the fall line or around principal rivers) or with different
estimators that correct for spatial correlation. (Portage also predicts density today when controlling
for water-power measures, suggesting the greater importance of commerce rather than mills.) We
show similar present-day agglomerations at portages between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi
River (such as Chicago, Illinois, and South Bend, Indiana) and along the Mississippi, Ohio, and
Missouri rivers (such as Louisville, Kentucky, and the Quad Cities of Iowa and Illinois).
   In section 4.3, we argue that the persistence of portage comes from initial choices of where fac-
tors of production located historically and the subsequent effects of these initial choices, rather than
any need to pull a canoe out of the water today. To see this, we replicate our main county-level
results, but explore how the correlation between current density and historical portage changes
when we condition on the historical density of a number of factors. We find that the predictive
power of portage for today’s population density essentially disappears when we condition on pop-
ulation density in 1900. This is entirely consistent with our story. On the other hand, the portage
coefficient does not change much when we condition on specific investments such as installed wa-
ter power in 1890, or railroads circa 1850. Nor is this result likely due to the persistence of the
housing stock in particular, as (i) only a small fraction of the current housing stock was built in
the era before portage became obsolete, (ii) this fraction today is actually smaller at portage sites
than the rest of our sample, and (iii) housing prices and commute times near portage sites are not
significantly different from those in comparably dense areas. (See section 4.4.)
   We next consider to what extent these results are consistent with a model featuring increas-
ing returns to scale in local economic activity. It is useful to consider first an alternative model
characterized by locally decreasing returns to scale and density differences across space driven
entirely by advantages from natural features. If this were the case, portage sites, having lost their
natural advantage, should be shrinking. In section 5, we compare the magnitude of the effect of
portage on population density in the mid-19th century versus the late 20th century. We find no
evidence that these sites have declined relative to comparison areas, and, indeed, the results from
some specifications indicate that portages have actually grown relatively faster.


                                                    4
       In section 6, we interpret these results with a model of economic geography, and we relate
our findings to other studies in the economics and geography literatures. The model features in-
creasing returns to scale in local economic activity and heterogeneity in initial endowments across
many locations. As Krugman (1991a) shows, a common feature in this setup—one that is diffi-
cult to verify empirically—is the existence of multiple equilibria.2 We interpret a portage’s role in
completing trade routes as a coordination device: portage helped to resolve the indeterminacy of
multiple equilibria by selecting the locations of agglomerations. The subsequent obsolescence of
the portage advantage then provides a novel natural experiment to test for the presence of strong
local external economies. Our observations of sustained differences in concentration are difficult
to explain without multiple potential equilibria, and, by extension, the existence (at some level) of
strong scale economies. Taken together, our evidence suggests that it is path dependence in the
presence of strong scale economies, rather than heterogeneity in natural features, that accounts for
much of the current distribution of economic activity across our sample region.
       Our results thus suggest a refined interpretation of related empirical research. In recent work,
Rappaport and Sachs (2003) and Davis and Weinstein (2002 and 2008) emphasize natural variation
in the productivity or amenity value of locations in determining the spatial distribution of economic
activity. While these papers compare locations across very different regions (the coastal versus
interior U.S.) or within a geographically variegated country (Japan), we consider areas within the
coastal South and Midwest, which contain considerably less interior geographic variation. To
understand the contrast among these results, we return to the theory, which predicts that sufficient
initial heterogeneity in local natural advantages can actually suppress the existence of alternative
equilibria. Put differently, multiple equilibria are more likely to appear if we reduce the variance in
natural advantages across space. In contrast, with sufficient variance in natural advantages across
sites, the geographic distribution of population should become fully determined.
   2
     Arthur (1994) surveys an older, mostly theoretical literature that grapples with this point. Cain (1985), Cronon
(1991), and Krugman (1993a) also offer evidence, about Chicago, of “first nature” advantages helping to resolve the
indeterminacy associated with the existence of multiple equilibria. Rauch (1993) considers the problem of transitions
between equilibria. Finally, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2010) use German division and reunification to suggest that
the persistent change in air-traffic patterns following German division is evidence of a transition between equilibria.
Besides the obvious contrast of examining U.S. population instead of German airline hubs, our study benefits from
information about a specific geographic feature, and the value of that feature over a long period of time. That portaging
is no longer valuable provides an advantageous natural-experiment setting to observe path dependence in the presence
of multiple equilibria. There is also some parallel in our work to the integration of monopolistic competition into
the Heckscher-Ohlin model of international trade in the 1980s (see, e.g., Helpman and Krugman, 1985). Because of
increasing returns, in both trade and geography the location of production might be indeterminate depending on the
(initial) distribution of factor endowments. Our contribution is to identify such an initial distribution and point out that
subsequent events closely match predictions of a model featuring increasing returns.

                                                             5
        This paper is also related to a wider empirical literature that considers natural advantages and
the location of economic activity. Although work on location commonly leaves heterogeneity in
natural features aside,3 recent exceptions include the studies noted above, and Chandler (1972),
Kim (1999), Ellison and Glaeser (1999), Holmes and Lee (2009), Hornbeck (2009), and Ellison,
Glaeser, and Kerr (2010). In contrast to these studies, we are able to establish the persistence
of cities in a setting where, indeed, heterogeneity in natural features is no longer relevant. Our
results therefore provide clearer evidence of increasing returns and address the inference problem,
correctly noted by many of these papers, when the distribution of underlying natural features is
unknown.
        There is a still-larger literature that examines the effect of “second nature” factors—advantages
not from natural endowments, but from man-made features, whether railroads, manufacturing,
or institutions—on productivity and density differences across locations. An extremely selective
survey of this literature might include Rosen (1986), Ciccone and Hall (1996), Redfearn (2008),
Atack, Bateman, Haines, and Margo (2009), and Donaldson (2010). We provide suggestive results
related to this literature in section 4.3, though ultimately the precise identification of all secondary
factors contributing to the persistence of portage cities lies outside the scope of this paper. Nor do
we attempt to identify the precise sources of increasing returns at the local level; our point is that
scale economies must exist at some level to be consistent with our results. In sum, our evidence
on the persistence of portage cities in the U.S. points to the effects of natural features—even when
those features have no current value. This allows us to interpret our results as a natural experiment
providing evidence of multiple equilibria, history dependence, and the existence of strong local
aggregate scale economies in explaining differences in density and productivity across locations.



2        Portage: history and background
In this section, we discuss the rise and fall of portage and its effects on activity at portage sites.4
Throughout the present study, we use the term portage (referring to the activity) somewhat metaphor-
ically. Rather than just referring to the act of carrying a boat around an obstacle, we mean to con-
jure the broader set of activities that arose because of the obstacle to navigation. These activities
    3
    In favor of agglomeration economies; see the survey by Rosenthal and Strange (2004).
    4
    Sherratt (2006) notes the difficulty in English that the word portage can refer to the action of carrying a boat as
well as the site at which it is necessary to carry a boat. He suggests using the term “porterage” or the German term
Schiffschleppweg to refer to the place itself. We refer to the place as a “portage site” if there is any ambiguity.


                                                          6
included cartage and other sorts of transshipment, entrepôt trade, water power (if present), and
whatever other sectors were required locally to service these activities.
   The historical advantage of portage sites derived from their role in completing trade routes. In
an early article in the Quarterly Journal of Economics, Phillips (1905) notes that

        In the interior [South] the principal group of trade centers [...] were those located at
        the head of navigation, or ‘fall line,’ on the larger rivers. To these points the planters
        and farmers brought their output for shipment, and there they procured their varied
        supplies. [...] It was a great convenience to the producer to be able to sell his crop
        and buy his goods in the same market. Thus the towns at the heads of navigation grew
        into marked importance as collecting points for produce and distributing points for
        supplies of all sorts (p. 439).

This advantage was made obsolete sometime ago as transportation technology changed. Below,
we present brief historical case studies of a few specific portage sites. These are useful in seeing
the origins of these sites as well as the obsolescence of portage. Narratives differ some across sites,
but the common theme is that their first-nature advantages are largely, if not completely, obsolete.
We then gauge the decline of portage-related activities with census data on occupational shifts.
(Readers who are only interested in the quantitative evidence should skip forward to section 2.2.)


2.1     Narratives from a few portage sites
2.1.1    The Falls of the James: Richmond, Virginia.

Most of the settlement in the Virginia colony during the 1600s took place on the coastal plain.
Inland grants of land began in the 1730s, first along the James River. Therefore, there was not
much commerce upstream of the fall line before that time. The role of the fall line in providing
a focus for commerce was understood early on. For example, in 1733 William Evelyn Byrd,
one of the early recipients of inland grants of land, said this of the future sites of Richmond and
Petersburg:

        These two places being the uppermost landing of the James and Appamattuck Rivers,
        are naturally intended for Marts where the traffick of the outer inhabitants must center
        (Henry, 1900, p. 156, original spelling preserved).

As mentioned in the introduction, farmers in the interior would descend the James River in canoe-
like batteaux to bring their tobacco and other produce to Richmond for trade. The city of Richmond


                                                    7
was founded in 1742, and by then the site was already a center of exchange, particularly for to-
bacco. In 1779, the capital of the state of Virginia moved from Williamsburg to Richmond in
recognition of the expanded importance of the latter city. In the 1800s, the water power generated
by the locks bypassing the falls was used for manufacturing, principally of tobacco products.
   In the early 1800s, Richmond saw two large changes in transportation infrastructure: (i) canals
and locks and (ii) railroads. First came the construction of the James and Kanawha Canal, which
paralleled the James River up to the Shenandoah Valley. It decoupled to some degree the location
of water power from the location of the falls because the locks all along the canal could be used
to generate power via mill races. The canal was soon rendered obsolete, however, by the coming
of the railroad. The initial railroad through Richmond followed the route of the James River,
approximately. This meant that Richmond could be effectively bypassed as a transshipment point.
For example, before the railroad, coal mined in the interior came down to Richmond and was
off-loaded on to ships there for export. Later, coal was loaded on to trains and brought straight
to collier ships at the seaport in Hampton Roads. On the other hand, tobacco was still brought to
Richmond, which had already established itself as a center of tobacco exchange and processing.


2.1.2   The Falls of the Savannah: Augusta, Georgia

In colonial times, the head of navigation for the Savannah River was at the fall line. Sometime
before 1716, a trading post was located at this intersection. James Oglethorpe, a founding father
of the Georgia colony, described this site as “the key of all the Indian country” in 1739 (Cashin,
1986). Another observer noted that “Indians in canoes brought cargoes of animal skins, which the
colonists in turn sent downstream to Savannah” (Federal Writers’ Project, 1938). Over the next 50
years, the Savannah watershed upstream of the fall line was settled by Europeans. By circa 1800,
Augusta had become an important center of cotton trade, with pole boats carrying cotton bags
down to Savannah for export. In the 1820s, 15 steamboats also plied the route between Augusta
and Savannah (Federal Writers’ Project, 1938). In the 1840s, canals and locks were built at the
fall line and at various points upstream to facilitate navigation. These also provided water power
in several locations. (Far-larger water-power sources on the Savannah River were upstream of the
fall line.) By 1854, Augusta was a stop on a rail line that connected Charleston, South Carolina,
to what became Atlanta, Georgia. The importance of the river for trade declined following the
advent of the railroad, and commercial river traffic up to Augusta was essentially defunct by the
early 1900s. Nevertheless, Augusta maintained its status as a regional center of cotton commerce

                                                8
and leveraged this to some degree with a small-scale manufacturing sector that processed cotton.
Augusta was also the state capital of Georgia circa 1800.


2.1.3    The Falls of the Ohio: Louisville, Kentucky

The contemporary city of Louisville, Kentucky, is located by the Falls of the Ohio. Permanent set-
tlement by Europeans did not begin until the 1770s, when Louisville was founded. In the following
decades, river traffic increased markedly and was dominated by small craft such as keelboats and
flatboats, which were poled up and down the river. In theory, these boats could pass through the
Falls of the Ohio during the spring, when the water level was at its highest. However, this was a
risky undertaking, and many, if not most, chose to cart their goods around the falls rather than risk
losing them. The scene in Louisville circa 1810 was described as follows:

        Through the riverfront street rolled two-wheeled carts, trundling cargo from the wharf
        above the falls to the quay below it. There, merchandise was reloaded onto waiting
        barges (Havighurst, 1970, p. 59).

Steamboats, on the other hand, were generally too large to have any hope of passing through the
falls, and so the advent of steamboats intensified the importance of cartage at Louisville. This
situation changed markedly, however, in the 1830s and 1840s, when a series of locks and short
canals allowed boats to go around the Falls of the Ohio safely, while at the same time obviating
the need to unload, cart, and reload goods at Louisville. This would have a profound impact on the
local demand for labor, as was observed contemporaneously by some of those displaced:

        The Louisville and Portland Canal, as constructed and maintained, is precisely one of
        those improvements for private interests, at the expense of the public good, which is
        obnoxious to the good of the whole community (Louisville Business Directory, 1844,
        quoted in Trescott, 1958).

The implications of this quote were rather pessimistic, as it turned out. Louisville had already
become a regional commercial hub, a status that continued after the end of portage and cartage.
Further, it later became a regional center for manufacturing and finance.


2.1.4    The Chicago/Des Plaines Portage: Chicago, Illinois

French fur trappers used the portage between the Chicago and Des Plaines rivers in the late 1600s,
although there was very little settlement of this site by Europeans until the mid-1700s. By the time

                                                  9
the area became part of the United States, its role as a place of transshipment (for things beyond
simply beaver pelts) had been established:

         From the mouth of the Plein [the Des Plaines River] to the lake, over which there is
         a well-beaten wagon road, boats and their loads are hauled by oxen and vehicles kept
         for that purpose by the French settlers at the Chicago (Long, 1808, quoted by Putnam,
         1918, p. 9).

       The Illinois & Michigan Canal opened in 1848 and connected Lake Michigan and the Missis-
sippi system with a series of locks and a canal dug by manual labor. This made the portaging of
boats obsolete, although Chicago continued as a lakeport, which meant that there would still be
demand for transshipment from the larger lake ships to the smaller canal boats for some time. The
I&M Canal was itself superseded in 1900 by the Chicago Drainage Canal. This successor canal
was constructed, in large measure, to reduce the flow of sewage into Lake Michigan, but it also
allowed for larger ships to pass directly between the watersheds. Two decades later, the Cal-Sag
Channel opened, 15 miles south of the Chicago Loop. This canal allowed much of the commercial
and industrial shipping to bypass the old portage route, and, indeed, there has been relatively little
commercial traffic between the Chicago River and Lake Michigan for many decades.5
       The opening of these latter canals in the early 1900s notwithstanding, traffic on the I&M Canal
actually peaked around 1880 because the railroads proved to be a more economical means of
transport (Putnam, 1918). In the mid-19th century, Chicago became a hub for the railroad network.
It is worth noting that, to connect with Chicago as a hub, the rail lines coming from the East had
to make a significant northerly turn once they passed the southern shore of Lake Michigan. It
is doubtful that a least-cost railroad network would have made this bend had there not been a
populated center at Chicago.6 From the topography of the region, it is difficult to see why the rail
network would have made this turn for some natural reason. These twists and turns are also seen in
the Interstate Highway System as it comes through Chicago. Various westbound interstates make
marked northerly turns as they pass Lake Michigan, so as to intersect with Chicago. This explains
the Chicago peculiarity that many of the interstates labeled East-West actually go North-South
locally, and the North-South interstates go East-West.
   5
      Today, according to information from the Army Corps of Engineers (2009), total tonnage passing from the
Chicago River directly to Lake Michigan (via the locks next to Navy Pier) is about 2% of the tonnage passing through
the Cal-Sag. Further, the vast majority of this 2% is attributable to pleasure boats rather than commercial traffic.
    6
      We are grateful to Lou Cain for pointing this out.




                                                        10
   Chicago was able to leverage its status as a transport hub to become a leading center for pro-
cessing the natural resources of the region. Perhaps one of the more famous examples is how
Chicago became “Hog Butcher to the World.” Further examples of Chicago’s use of the natural
resources of the region are detailed in Cronon (1991).
   Within this narrative, we see the transformation of Chicago from a nexus of transshipment
to a place in which the transshipment was displaced from the city by the congestion generated
by other activities. The Cal-Sag Channel is an example of moving shipment activity away from
the city center, in part because the area was congested with shipping for local uses, and in part
because of the logistical difficulties in expanding the Chicago River, now abutted by tall buildings
in the city center, to accommodate larger ships. Chicago remains today a hub of the rail and
highway systems, but the city is often so congested that shipment takes place along other routes
that avoid the city. Indeed, in Northeast Illinois, the truck route from the east on the Interstates
(I-80) simply continues west after passing Lake Michigan, and does not make the northerly turn to
Chicago discussed above. Today, trucks headed north of Chicago would most likely use one of the
“beltway” interstates on the suburban fringe of Chicago, rather than pass through the old portage
or lakeport sites, both of which are now rather congested.


2.1.5    The St.-Joseph/Kankakee Portage: South Bend, Indiana

South Bend, Indiana, is located at the southernmost bend of the St. Joseph River, which drains
into Lake Michigan. From that river bend, it is a relatively short portage to the headwaters of the
Kankakee River, which eventually drains into the Mississippi River. This portage was used by fur
trappers (Semple, 1903) and later by European settlers:

        South Bend became an early center for transportation activities due to the convergence
        of routes and the break-in-bulk of freight between river and overland transportation.
        Transport activities at South Bend, as elsewhere, produced a concentration of people
        and thus a desirable location for trade and service activities (Gold, 1954, p. 44).

   The railroads came to South Bend in 1848, and connected the city to Chicago and Detroit
(Gold, 1954). Commercial traffic on the river started its decline at this point and disappeared by
1890 (Fogel, 1964). While there were more abundant natural sources of water power at other points
along the river, a dam was built at South Bend to provide water for mill races in the late 1800s.
The mill races were abandoned by the 1950s. Notre Dame, a university of national prominence,


                                                 11
was founded in South Bend in 1842. South Bend also became a manufacturing center in the 20th
century.


2.2      Quantitative evidence on the decline of portage
Employment data from late 19th- and early 20th-century censuses suggest that portaging activ-
ities were relatively important at fall-line portage sites, reached a peak sometime before 1880,
and declined thereafter. As evidence of the decline and obsolescence of the portage advantage,
we calculate employment in water transportation at and near fall-line portage sites, using cen-
sus microdata from 1850–1930 (Ruggles et al., 2010).7 Panel A of Figure 3 shows, by decade,
the share of a river’s total water-transportation employment located in fall-line counties, averaged
across 51 rivers.8 At the peak in 1880, the average fall-line county contained 13.1% of total water-
transportation employment along an entire river. Note that this figure uses a denominator that
includes water-transportation employment at any seaports located near river mouths. By 1930,
that figure had dropped to 2.6%: the relative size of portaging activities at fall-line counties fell
dramatically in the late 19th century.
       Alternatively, consider panel B. Here we display water-transportation employment as a share
of total employment9 for two categories of counties: fall-line portage counties and all other river-
adjacent counties. In 1850, the first year for which data are available, water-transportation em-
ployment is already low relative to total employment, accounting for 1.5% of total employment,
on average, at fall-line portage sites. From the trend, the data suggest that portaging was already
shrinking in importance for local economies as early as 1850. In the same year, the average share
of employment in water transportation in non-portage river counties was less: about 0.3%. The
difference in water transportation employment shares then declined from 1.2% in 1850 to 0.3%
in 1930. By the early 20th century, both fall-line and non-fall-line counties had near-zero and
indistinguishable employment shares in water transportation.
   7
      Census microdata are unavailable before 1850 and in 1890.
   8
      The Raritan and Schuylkill rivers are excluded from this figure, since we are unable to distinguish portage-related
employment from seaport-related employment.
    9
      A limitation of this exercise is that the industry classifications are not precise, since the census does not consis-
tently report industries and occupations until well into the 20th century. The “water transportation” classification is
instead assigned by the IPUMS, and captures only a small group of workers—this may account for the low employment
shares observed in panel B. This category includes stevedores, but it likely excludes related activities like laborers and
warehousing. On the other hand, it includes non-portage activities, like sailors and navigators. This imprecision could
account for differences in the timing of occupational shifts between interior portages and seaports.



                                                           12
         Finally, note that, except for the Mississippi, fall-line rivers today are no longer used for signif-
icant commercial shipping. Indeed, many of these rivers were not used commercially as early as
1890 (Fogel, 1964, Figure 3.3). By inference, the importance of transshipment activities at fall-line
sites must have declined, and probably by the late 19th century.



3         Data
Our broadest study area includes all locations in river basins that intersect the fall line—a wide
swath of the southern and central U.S. that includes locations near the headwaters of the Raritan,
in New Jersey, as well as places along the Rio Grande, in Colorado, New Mexico, and Texas.
(See Appendix Figure A for the full extent of the fall line.10 ) This includes over two-thirds of the
present-day counties in the U.S., with the excluded areas being mostly in New England (the fall
line, as a geomorphological feature, goes underwater near New York harbor), and in areas outside
the drainage basins of fall-line rivers, such as the Great Lakes, most of Florida, and states west of
the Rockies. Thus, our sample contains both a large number of historical portages (defined as the
intersection points between the fall line and major rivers) and, to the extent that locations along the
same river are similar to each other, a large number of suitable comparison areas.11
         The fall line itself is digitized from Physical Divisions of the United States, produced by the
U.S. Geological Survey. We intersect this spatial layer with major rivers in the “Streams and Wa-
terbodies” map layer, from NationalAtlas.gov, in order to identify points that were likely historical
portage sites.
         In contrast, we use historical documents to identify portage sites in the Midwest and Upper
South. Portage paths used by fur traders between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River system
are described by Semple (1903, plate following p. 23). For falls/rapids along the Mississippi, Ohio,
and Missouri rivers, we process data collected from a number of early 19th-century river surveys
performed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, available as part of the Serial Set. More details
on these portages and those along the fall line can be found in the data appendix.
         To measure the geographic distribution of economic activity, we use population density. Such
    10
     In Texas, this line is close to the Balcones Escarpment.
    11
     Note that our main results are not sensitive to narrower definitions of our sample. In particular, we verify that
our results are similar if we restrict our comparison areas to only places that are adjacent to rivers, or places that are
relatively close to the fall line. In addition, our main results are qualitatively the same if we limit our study area to the
oldest and longest-settled areas east of the Appalachians, where and when initial conditions in transport technology
and trade patterns are likely to have valued portage the most.


                                                            13
data are available over a very long period of time: we use county population data at decennial
frequency from the U.S. censuses 1790–2000, obtained from the Haines (2004) census extracts.
County locations, boundaries, and areas for each census are then drawn from the National His-
torical Geographic Information System (NHGIS, Minnesota Population Center, 2004) and spatially
matched to our portage sites. One drawback of county-level population density is its relatively low
spatial frequency. For sub-county areas that are the most densely populated, measurement at the
county level will understate the true level of density experienced by households and other factors.
For this reason, we also use census 2000 tract population to measure the contemporary distribution
of activity at a very high spatial frequency. The tract data afford greater power for contemporary,
cross-sectional comparisons, although tracts (or minor civil divisions for that matter) have poor
coverage of our sample area historically.
    We also use nighttime light intensity, as measured from satellite photos in 1996–97. These
data, collected by the US Air Force Weather Agency and processed and disseminated by NOAA,
serve as a high-resolution measure of the distribution of contemporary economic activity (National
Geophysical Data Center, 2003). The satellite data are both extremely sensitive to variation in
visible radiance and available at very high (and regular) spatial frequencies. In addition, they do
not rely on the boundaries of census tracts, which are related mechanically to population density.
Of course, these satellite data are also unavailable historically.
    In addition to data on population and historical portage sites, we use data on other features
that may vary over space. For example, we spatially match counties in each decade to data on
climate, elevation, aquifers, and more from NationalAtlas.gov and the Climate Atlas of the United
States. Also, we use spatial data on the locations of potential water-power sources (U.S. Census,
1885), 18th century seaports (Phillips, 1905), the navigability of rivers in 1890 (Fogel, 1964), and
19th-century railroads (Pred, 1980). Further details on data sources and the GIS work can be found
in the data appendix.



4    Portage sites and contemporary cities
In this section, we show that pre-19th century portage sites are still likely to be population centers
even today, approximately a century after their initial natural advantage was made obsolete.




                                                  14
4.1     The Fall Line
4.1.1   Maps

Today, contemporary agglomerations are found at many fall-line/river intersections that were likely
to have had rapids or falls. Starting from the northeast, examples include New Brunswick (on the
Raritan River), Trenton (Delaware), Philadelphia (Schuylkill), Washington/Alexandria (Potomac),
Richmond (James), Augusta (Savannah), Columbia (Congaree), and Tuscaloosa (Black Warrior).
West of the Mississippi River, the fall line passes through Little Rock, Fort Worth, Austin, and San
Antonio.12 This spatial correlation appears along at least two dimensions: both along the fall line,
where present-day cities are likely to appear at rivers, and along rivers, where present-day cities
are likely to appear at the fall line. We review this pattern here.
    Figure 1 displays a detailed map of the fall line as it passes through Alabama, Georgia, and
South Carolina. For reference, on the bottom of the figure, we provide a map with state boundaries,
major rivers, and points labeling notable places. A few features are evident in the map. First, there
tend to be population centers today at the point where rivers cross the fall line. Second, there tend
not to be population centers along the fall line, if a river is not present. Take, for example, Augusta,
Georgia, which is along the Savannah River, compared to similar but unpopulated locations to the
northeast or southwest along the fall line.
    We can see the importance of fall-line/river intersections by looking along the paths of rivers.
Along a given river, there is typically a populated place at the point where the river crosses the fall
line. This comparison is useful in the following sense: today, all of the sites along the river have the
advantage of being along the river, but only at the fall line was there an initial portage advantage.
Figure 4 shows the results of this exercise, using smoothed lines based on census-tract data from
2000. We select tracts within 50 miles along rivers that intersect the fall line. Then, we assign
each census tract a relative location x, where the fall line is normalized to location x = 0, and the
Atlantic Ocean is to the left of the origin, x < 0. In the top panel, relative location is measured
using miles from the fall line. In the bottom panel, relative locations are normalized again so
each river mouth, at the Atlantic, is measured at x = −1, and each river’s source is measured at
x = 1. Then, we smooth the data on tract population density using Stata’s lowess procedure, with
bandwidths of 0.3 (top) or 0.1 (bottom). Both graphs clearly display a peak in (log) population
   12
      In Texas, the Balcones Escarpment coincides with some well-known springs. Since the nature of initial advantage
is somewhat different here, we have verified that our results are not sensitive to the exclusion of sites west of the
Mississippi. See the data appendix for a map of this area.


                                                         15
density at the point where rivers cross the fall line.
       Another feature is that many of these portage sites have echoes at the coast. That is, many fall-
line cities have a sister city downriver that serves as a seaport. For example, in Georgia, downriver
from Augusta lies Savannah, and, in Virginia, Norfolk lies downriver from Richmond. This fact
highlights that the persistence of population at these portage sites is not about participation in
ocean-borne trade today. Indeed, almost none of these rivers were used for commercial navigation
as early as 1890. In a few instances, fall-line cities attempted to revive steam travel on their
respective rivers as late as the 1910s, but these efforts were met with failure because steamboats
were nowhere near cost-competitive with the railroads. Therefore, these sites’ direct advantage
from being at the head of navigation was made obsolete well over a century ago.
       The present-day distribution of population across fall-line portage sites is also consistent with
our narrative. Recall that the presence of rapids along the river acted as a kind of coordination
device that selected the location where trade between settlers in the interior and ships would take
place. But rapids were not a sufficient condition, because, if there were no settlers upstream, there
would be no commerce to coordinate. Since much of portage’s initial value lay in completing trade
routes, we see this as a reasonable measure of demand for commerce at the portage site.13
       The case of Georgia is again illustrative. The Savannah River has a fairly large watershed
upstream of the fall line, and this watershed supported a substantial population in the early days of
the republic. This ensured that the falls of the Savannah, the current site of Augusta, would become
an important trading center. In contrast, consider the case of the next river to the southwest, the
Ogeechee. Upstream of the fall line, the watershed that feeds this river is comparatively small.
Louisville, Ga., the town at the falls of the Ogeechee, was a trading center, and indeed was briefly
the capital of Georgia around 1800. But this town is today about an order of magnitude smaller
than its neighbor, Augusta. Moving southwest, the next major river is the Oconee, and the city at
the fall line is Milledgeville. The upstream watershed at that site has an area somewhere between
the previous two rivers, and, accordingly, Milledgeville is today larger than Louisville (Ga.) but
smaller than Augusta.
       Farther west, the intersection of the fall line and rivers is also seen in contemporary population
density. Still in Georgia, both Macon and Columbus lie at the intersection of the fall line and their
respective rivers. Montgomery, Ala., lies just south of the fall line on the Alabama River. (The
  13
     According to Phillips (1905), little if any trade occurred between river basins in the South—population was widely
scattered, and overland transport costs were high. “No traffic of volume [...] might therefore be expected” (p. 440).



                                                         16
case of Montgomery is slightly more complicated because the Alabama River bends and bifurcates
into two slower moving pieces just south of the fall line. This implies that the effective head of
navigation was somewhat south of the rapids.) Tuscaloosa, Alabama, lies at the falls of the Black
Warrior River.
   The next major river that crosses the fall line is the Mississippi, but there is no population
center at that point. In spite of the Mississippi’s vast watershed, this fact is not a challenge to our
hypothesis in that the flow of water is so great that no rapids form at that intersection. Continuing
west, there are minor settlements at the intersection of the fall line with minor rivers, and larger
cities at intersections with larger rivers. Noteworthy are the cases of Little Rock (on the Arkansas
River) and, in Texas, Fort Worth, Waco, Austin, and San Antonio. Curiously, settlements at fall-
line/river intersections are absent in Oklahoma, which may be due to the peculiar manner and
relatively late date at which that area was settled.
   Farther north, there are settlements at the intersection of the fall line and rivers, and, indeed,
major cities at many of the sites with large upstream watersheds. Figure 2 shows detail for the fall
line from North Carolina to New Jersey. The case of Richmond was mentioned earlier; it lies at
the falls of the James River, whose watershed extends into western Virginia and covers much of
the tobacco-growing interior of that state. The first rapids on the Potomac River (not to be con-
fused with the “Great Falls of the Potomac” somewhat farther upstream) lay at the present site of
Alexandria, Virginia, and Georgetown, in the District of Columbia. The watershed of the Potomac
upstream from that point is large and includes the Shenandoah Valley, which was an important
breadbasket region historically. Other major cities at fall-line portage sites include Baltimore,
Philadelphia, Wilmington, and Trenton. Furthermore, a few medium-sized cities are found where
the fall line intersects rivers with smaller upstream watersheds such as Fredericksburg on the Rap-
pahannock and Petersburg on the Appomattox, both in Virginia. Minor settlements are also found
on fall-line portage sites in North Carolina, but the relationship across sites between watershed and
population is less evident. These rivers empty into the Albemarle and Pamlico sounds, which were
isolated from ocean-going commerce by the often treacherous navigation near and through the
barrier islands. (And, indeed, the area just offshore was dubbed the “Graveyard of the Atlantic.”)


4.1.2   Statistical comparisons

Statistical tests confirm the features shown in the maps. We focus on two measures of initial
portage advantage: (i) proximity to historical portage sites, and (ii) watershed area upstream of

                                                  17
the fall line. We consider three outcome variables: (a) population density in census 2000 tracts,
(b) the average intensity of nighttime lights in 1996-97, and (c) population density in census 2000
counties. All three of these variables are transformed into natural logarithms, so that coefficients
can be interpreted as percentage differences.
       We first investigate whether proximity to a fall-line/river intersection predicts population den-
sity in recent data. We estimate:

                              ln densitygr = β · proximityg + Zg ξ + δr + gr                                          (1)

where densitygr is the population density of geographic area g (either a county, tract, or night-light
observation) lying in river watershed r, Zg includes a number of specific characteristics, such as a
fourth-order polynomial in (miles) latitude and longitude, and δr is a fixed effect for the watershed
of each river. We cluster the standard errors at the major-river level to account for spatial correlation
across counties within each watershed.
       We use five measures of proximity. The first measure is the natural logarithm of distance to
the closest historical portage site.14 Being closer to a historical portage site was valuable, so we
expect this coefficient to be negative. The next three measures are binary variables indicating
location within a certain radius of a fall-line/river intersection. The first indicator is set to one if
the centroid of the area is within 15 miles of the portage site. The second indicator equals one if
any part of the area is within 4 miles of the portage site. (Because counties are larger in area than
the other two variables, we cut these radii in half for defining the county indicator variables. This
ensures that approximately the same areal fraction of the sample is defined as a portage site across
the different data sources.) The third indicator is set to one if both the centroid and the adjacency
conditions are satisfied. We expect a positive coefficient on each of these three indicator variables.
The final variable, meant as a specification check, measures distance to a placebo portage site,
which we construct by choosing places that are both on principal rivers and 100 miles inland from
the fall line. Because there is no historical reason why these placebo sites should be special, we
expect the coefficient on distance to the placebo sites to be statistically zero.
       Proximity to portage predicts greater population density today, as shown in Table 1. The basic
  14
     Note that we treat any fall-line/river intersection as a historical portage site, whether we can verify that it was an
early trading site or not. This strikes us as the correct choice in that it eliminates the endogeneity of having become a
historical trading center and further having survived long enough for that history to have been recorded for us to find
it.



                                                           18
specification, which again controls for river/watershed fixed effects and a fourth-order polynomial
in latitude, longitude, and their various interactions, is shown in column 1. Being 10% farther
away from a portage site predicts 6% lower population density in the tract data, and slightly more
than 2% lower density in the lights and county data. The dummy variables for proximity predict
70% to 170% increases in density, depending on the outcome variable used and the definition of
proximity. (The placebo results are discussed later.)
   These results are not sensitive to controlling for a variety of spatial variables, as seen in columns
2-6 of Table 1. Results in column 2 include a full set of state fixed effects, which might be needed if
there are differences in state-level policies affecting density. Column 3 presents results controlling
for the log distance to the fall line, to the ocean, to the closest river, and to the closest circa-
1890 seaport. Column 4 controls for climate variables: the average fraction of days with sunshine
and the natural logs of heating degree days, cooling degree days, and precipitation. Columns 5
and 6 include controls for, respectively, the share of the area over a known aquifer and the mean
elevation of the area. Coefficient estimates in each of these augmented specifications are similar to
the baseline.
   Next, we find broadly similar estimates in different subsamples. In columns 7 and 8, respec-
tively, we restrict the sample to be east of the Mississippi River or to include only watersheds
whose rivers flow into the Atlantic Ocean. In column 9, we restrict the sample to be only those
areas whose centroids are within 5 miles of the fall line. Thus, this specification compares counties
within the same watershed that are quite similar along most dimensions, except that some lie on
a river and others do not. Our final sample restriction is along the rivers rather than along the fall
line; the sample consists of only those areas that are within 5 miles of one of the principal rivers.
This comparison is, therefore, similar to the evidence that was presented in Figure 4: all of the
areas are close to a river and distance to the ocean moves smoothly over space, but the head of
navigation was at the fall line. Estimates from these last two samples are quite similar to those
from the basic specification.
   We then adopt several alternative strategies to deal with the likelihood of spatial serial correla-
tion in the data. Simply treating each observation as independent would be inappropriate because
neighboring areas are very likely correlated among themselves. This is why the basic specification
uses standard errors that are clustered by the watershed of each principal river. In column 11, we
instead cluster on state, which could be more appropriate if the relevant factor that induces spatial
serial correlation is state-level policy choices. But confining the serial correlation to be within


                                                  19
arbitrary jurisdictions such as a state might also be inappropriate. As a third clustering strategy,
therefore, we follow the methodology of Bester, Conley, and Hansen (2009) and cluster instead
on a series of 60mi-by-60mi grid squares that we defined to completely cover the sampled areas.
The results from this estimator are seen in column 12. Next, in column 13, we construct standard
errors by bootstrapping on the river/watershed rather than clustering. Finally, in column 14 we
use Conley’s (1999) estimator that allows for serial correlation within a given radius around each
geocoded observation. The Conley estimator is akin to the Newey-West estimator for time series
in that it allows for fairly general correlational structures within a predefined range. We opt for a
100-mile cutoff, although results are not sensitive to using other radii. Estimates of the standard
errors across these four alternative estimators are quite similar to the baseline, and so we conclude
that our inferences are not unduly biased by serial correlation across space.15
       Finally, we consider a series of placebo portage sites. Recall that we created a pseudo-fall-
line 100 miles farther inland from the true fall line. The placebo distance variable is constructed
according to each location’s distance to this pseudo-fall-line and its distance to the nearest river,
whereby an area located at the placebo portage site would have a distance of zero by both measures.
The estimates of the predictive power of the placebo distance are found in the final row of each
panel in Table 1, where the placebo result is reported for each of the specifications described
above. These estimated coefficients are (a) smaller in absolute magnitude than the ‘true’ distance
coefficients and (b) not statistically significant from zero. Of the 43 coefficients displayed in Table
1 for the placebo distance, only two are statistically significant, and one of these has the “incorrect”
sign. Our model therefore passes this particular falsification test.16
       Among fall-line/river intersections, the watershed upstream from the fall line predicts having
higher population density today. This measure is based on the land area drained by the river of each
portage site and is determined by aggregating hydrologic units, from NationalAtlas.gov, north and
west of the fall line. As discussed earlier, a larger watershed upstream should have been correlated
with greater demand (historically) for commerce at the portage site. We evaluate this idea in Table
2. We estimate:

          ln densitygr = ζ · proximityg + γ · proximityg · ln watershedr + Zg ν + δr + εgr                                  (2)
  15
       Standard errors estimated using the Gauss-Markov or Huber-White assumptions are much smaller than our base-
line estimates, which is to be expected if the data are spatially autocorrelated.
    16
       This latter result is not sensitive to modifying the distance by which the placebo fall line is shifted, unless the shift
is less than 20 miles. But such a small shift does not make for a particularly meaningful placebo exercise in that a city
located right at the portage site could potentially impact density 20 miles away.


                                                              20
where proximityg is a binary indicator for portage site and ln watershedr is the natural loga-
rithm of the watershed area upstream of fall line drained by each river r. As above, we cluster
the standard errors on river/watershed to account for spatial correlation. The default specification
again includes fixed effects for each river/watershed, as well as a fourth-order polynomial in miles
latitude and longitude. Column 1 displays these estimates. A 10% larger upstream watershed is
associated with a 3% to 4.5% higher density at the portage site. By the construction of the vari-
ables, the coefficient on the indicator for proximity of the portage site measures the effect for an
area with a watershed equal to zero. This coefficient is negative, but is not statistically signifi-
cant in most specifications. As an alternative specification, we present in column 2 estimates of
the watershed/portage-site interaction that fixes the direct portage-site effect to zero. Again the
watershed-size effect is positive and statistically significant, although it is quite naturally smaller
because we constrain the main effect of portage to be zero. We find similar results if we estimate
these models with some additional spatial controls, such as state fixed effects (column 3) or dis-
tances to the ocean, to the fall line, to the closest river, and to the closest early seaport (column
4).
       Next, we consider the specific mechanism of having the potential of water power at these
sites, versus other portage effects. These results are seen in columns 5–7 of Table 2. We proxy
water power with the height of the falls at that location, which measures the kinetic energy that
can be theoretically extracted per unit of water passing through the river at that area.17 The first
specification considers the interaction of watershed size with portage site and the interaction of
potential water power with water-power site. (The specification is therefore comparable to results
in column 2, rather than column 1.) As seen in the table, results for water power are mixed, and
the coefficient on the watershed/portage interaction are essentially unchanged from column 2. The
second specification, seen in column 6, compares a binary indicator for portage site with a binary
indicator for water-power site. Again, the results for water power are mixed, although at least in this
case all of the statistically significant results are of the expected (positive) sign. Nevertheless, the
estimates for the portage-site dummy are quite similar to the baseline (seen, for example, in Table 1,
column 1, in the fourth row of each panel). Finally, in column 7, we include both sets of measures
of water power and watershed, as well as an interaction term between watershed and water power
at the portage site. (The specification is most comparable, with respect to interpreting the portage
  17
     The census volume (1885) that we use also contains information on the horizontal length of the falls and, for
a subsample, their estimates of the total potential water power that could be extracted. Using either of these other
variables does not affect the results here.


                                                        21
coefficients, to column 1 of the same table.) As above, results for water power are mixed, either
considering the extensive or intensive margins. Nor is there much evidence of complementarity
between these two factors: the interaction between watershed and water power is insignificant in
2 of the 3 data sets, and is significantly negative in the other. In any event, the coefficients on the
watershed term are quite similar to the baseline in column 1.
   We find similar results using a few alternative strategies for constructing samples or estimating
the model. One approach, seen in column 8, is to only use a sample that is close to the fall line.
These estimates are essentially similar to the baseline. We also use samples in which we look
only at the portage sites or only at the portage or water-power sites; and these results are seen in
columns 9 and 10. Compared to the results from the county data, the watershed interaction is less
predictive of population size in the tract or lights data. As before, controlling for the direct effect of
water power does not materially alter the conclusion about the watershed interaction. Finally, we
repeat the use of alternative estimators for standard errors that was described in detail for Table 1.
The statistical inferences that we make using these alternative standard errors are broadly similar
to those that we made using the baseline specification.


4.2      The Midwest and Upper South
The correlation between historical portage and the current distribution of economic activity is not
unique to the American South: present-day agglomerations occur at many Midwestern portage
sites as well. The most well-known Midwestern example is Chicago, as detailed in Cronon (1991).
But various portage routes between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River system were used,
and many of those routes today have portage-descended cities. Figure 5 shows the locations of
portage routes circa 1700 between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River (from Semple, 1903).
These routes connected rivers flowing into the Great Lakes with small tributaries of the Mississippi
or Ohio rivers. In the case of Chicago, the portage occurred relatively close to Lake Michigan.
Along the continental divide that separates the Mississippi watershed from the Great Lakes water-
shed, contemporary cities located near early portage routes include (from the northwest) Portage
(Wisconsin), Chicago, South Bend, Fort Wayne, Akron, and Erie. In addition, many present-day
cities are located at the Great Lakes mouths of these portage routes, including Green Bay (on the
Fox River), St. Joseph, Michigan (on the St. Joseph), Toledo (Maumee), and Cleveland (Cuya-
hoga).
   There were also a number of obstacles to navigation along Mississippi River tributaries that

                                                   22
required portage. Figure 6 shows 19th-century locations of falls and rapids or heads of navigation
(as open circles) along three major tributaries of the Mississippi River—the Ohio River, the Mis-
souri River, and the upper Mississippi River. Populated areas are seen near each set of (historical)
falls. The number of examples is so small that it is convenient to discuss them individually: the
Falls of the Ohio are located at the site of present-day Louisville, Kentucky. Next, falls and rapids
along the upper Mississippi were located near Minneapolis (the Falls of Saint Anthony), at the
Quad cities in Iowa and Illinois, and near the Iowa/Missouri border, in Keokuk, Iowa. Finally,
two navigational heads of the Missouri River existed at Sioux City, Iowa, and Great Falls, Mon-
tana. In addition, river confluences—the joining of two rivers—were another potential cause of
transshipment, because many of these confluences coincided with changes in river depths and the
need for different kinds of craft on different river sections. Examples of cities at confluences are
Kansas City, Paducah, Cincinnati, and several others. These are not part of our main argument,
however, because there might be persistent advantages of confluences if the tributary is still used
for shipping.


4.3       Reproducible factors and persistence
Next, we consider some mechanisms for the persistence of density at portages. Since the specific
advantages that came from portage have long since disappeared, we suggest that the higher popu-
lation densities at portages today are not directly related to pulling canoes out of the water, but are
instead functions of these initial conditions having attracted economic activity in the past.
       One way to separate the direct versus indirect effects of portage is to see how the coefficient on
the portage advantage changes as we control for the presence of reproducible factors of production
at various points in time. These results are seen in Table 3, where the baseline results are repeated
in column 1. (This analysis is restricted to the fall-line sample used in section 4.1 because the other
portage sites that we identified were too few in number to permit a detailed statistical examination.)
Panels A–C use the main sample, which contains all counties in fall-line/river watersheds.18 We
then replicate the specifications in panels A and B, displaying the portage coefficients only, in a
subsample of counties within 150 miles of the fall line (panel D) and in a subsample of southern
counties only (panel E). The outcome variable is the log of population density in the year 2000.
  18
     We use data on counties exclusively in this table because we are comparing population density today to data from
the past two centuries. These historical data are measured with enough granularity and error that we deemed it unwise
to match them to higher resolution data such as tracts or lights data.



                                                         23
       We consider three reproducible factors as possible intermediating variables: population density,
installed water power, and railroads. In columns 2-4, we condition on population density in 1850,
1900, and 1950.19 Conditioning on population density in 1850 yields a coefficient on portage that
is always lower than the baseline, in some cases by more than a third. This suggests that portage
advantages were still at work in 1850 in spurring growth at portage sites. (The regressions with
lagged population density can be thought of as partial-adjustment models.) If we instead condition
on the 1900 population density, the coefficient on portage is one half to two thirds smaller than
the baseline. Finally, if we condition on population density in 1950, the portage coefficients are
close to zero and statistically insignificant. This suggests that whatever direct effect portage had on
population density was steadily declining by 1850, and had dissipated by 1950, and any persistence
in population at that site was due to reproducible factors that were already there by the early 20th
century. (Results for columns 2–4 are quite similar if we restrict the sample only to those counties
with population defined in 1850 or if we restrict the coefficients on the lagged density to unity.)
       We next consider measures, from 1880, of water power that had already been harnessed (Cen-
sus, 1885). We think of this as a reproducible factor rather than a natural endowment insofar as
there were many sites with the potential for water power, but only some where water power was
developed and installed. These results are seen in columns 5 and 6. Estimates on the portage coef-
ficients are essentially unchanged by the inclusion of a dummy for, or a continuous (log) measure
of, water power.
       We consider the role of early railroad development as intermediating variables for the portage
effect. Using maps from Pred (1980) for 1850, we construct a dummy variable for the presence
of a railroad, a continuous variable for the size of the railroad network to which that county is
connected, and (log) distance to the nearest railroad hub. (Results here are not sensitive to using
the same variables for 1840 or 1860.) These early-railroad variables are strongly predictive of
population density in 2000. However, the inclusion of these variables results in no more than a
20% drop in the portage estimates relative to the baseline. Controlling for combinations of these
early-railroad variables simultaneously does little to change this latter result. Thus, while the early
  19
     Changing county boundaries pose a problem for measuring lagged population density. We address this with a se-
ries of spatial joins within ARCGIS. This yields the approximate population density in an earlier census that lay within
the current county boundaries. See the data appendix for details. Moreover, to account for the fact that some regions
were settled earlier than others, we allow the lag of population density to interact with a second-order polynomial
in latitude and longitude. Prior to constructing an interaction term, we subtract Richmond’s latitude/longitude from
the coordinates, so that the main effect of lagged density (whose coefficient is displayed in the table) is evaluated at
Richmond.



                                                          24
rollout of the railroad network may have been an important variable, it is apparently not the central
mechanism by which the effect of the portage-related initial conditions were transmitted to today.
       Finally, a reproducible factor that might mediate the effect of portage on the location of eco-
nomic activity is housing. Although housing is long-lived and fixed in location, note that its loca-
tion is a function of initial conditions, and houses tend to depreciate over time. It is also likely that,
like other reproducible factors, the presence of housing might improve the value of local marginal
product or utility of new economic activity, in order to allow for increased density. However, given
the depreciation of housing over time, we actually find it an unlikely candidate factor to explain
the persistence of population centers at historical portage points. In fact, in our fall-line sample in
1990, fewer than 15% of houses in portage-site counties were older than 50 years old, compared
to 20% of houses in other counties in the watersheds of fall-line-crossing rivers (Haines, 2004, and
authors’ calculations).
       More generally, any explanation that is based purely on a sunk cost is problematic for two
reasons. First, like housing, most things that we think of as sunk/fixed costs do indeed depreciate
at long horizons, and therefore are not truly sunk.20 Second, in the time period that we consider, the
country’s population increases almost two orders of magnitude, and such an increase in population
could not be contained in the circa-1900 housing stock, however well maintained. Put another way,
it is important to recognize that housing, while a fixed investment with respect to a particular plot
of land, is not a fixed cost at the level of a whole county. When new people arrive, new houses
need to be built. Thus, for a sunk asset to explain some of our results, it would have to be because
of a cost that was fixed at the level of the city. Perhaps such pure fixed-cost assets do exist at a
city level, such as the incorporation of the city itself or the initial surveying and platting of the
site. If such fixed costs were indeed very large, it suggests that increasing returns are important
mainly at the low end of the scale of density: once a town/city is established, it should persist.
However, a model with such a fixed cost provides a less compelling explanation for our results
using the upstream watershed, which produced considerable variation along the intensive margin
of population density.
  20
    Further, history provides various examples of little-used rail lines whose tracks were pulled up and re-deployed
elsewhere, which suggests that specific factor is not completely sunk even in the short run.




                                                        25
4.4       Contemporary housing prices and commuting times
Relative to comparison areas, portage sites have higher housing prices today, but this result dis-
appears when conditioning on local population density. These results are seen in Table 4, where
we estimate equations (1) and (2) again, but use the natural logarithm of a housing price on the
left-hand side instead of population density. The price data are medians at the county level, and
are drawn from census data as found in Haines (2004). We use data on median prices in 1990 and
1940, as well as data on median rents in 1990. As above, we estimate models with a dummy for
portage site (panel A) and an interaction of watershed times portage site (panel B). Odd-numbered
columns report the basic specification, in which we see that the portage variables predict higher
housing prices. The dummy for portage site predicts about 15% higher housing prices in 1990,
and 30% higher prices in 1940. The upstream watershed from the portage site similarly predicts a
higher housing price in the same years, with a doubling of the watershed size predicting a 4%–8%
higher housing price.21 Even-numbered columns contain estimates from a specification that con-
trols for a sixth-order polynomial in population density. When controlling for population density,
the coefficients on portage are 60%–90% lower in absolute magnitude, and in no case are they
statistically significant. This indicates that, while portage sites have more expensive housing, this
price differential is consistent with the relationship between price and density in the whole sample.
       This suggests that portage areas are neither in decline nor are they simply hanging on because
their housing stock has not yet fully depreciated. Relative to areas of the same density, housing
should be cheap in a declining area, to the extent that the natural rate of decrease in population
is faster than the depreciation of the housing stock (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005). But this does
not seem to be the case for portage sites, which suggests that they are neither in relative decline
nor stanching the outflow of population by having relatively cheap housing. Even if population
were immobile, declining areas would still have lower relative housing prices, as the decline in
personal income would translate into an inward shift of the housing-demand curve. Either way,
these results do not point to portage sites being in decline following obsolescence of the portage-
related advantages.
  21
     Recall that the coefficients for population density on portage were 1.6 and 0.2 for, respectively, the dummy and
watershed interaction. These are about a factor of 10 larger than the coefficients of price on portage. If the history
of portage had no direct effect on prices today (except through density), the portage variables would be excludable
instruments for density in a 2SLS regression of price on density. The ratio of coefficients discussed here (an ILS
estimate) implies an elasticity of housing prices to population densities of 0.1, which is similar to the OLS estimate in
this sample.



                                                          26
    A similar argument holds for durable transportation infrastructure investments like roads or
highways. In columns 7 and 8, we find no evidence that commute times are significantly lower
in portage cities relative to other similarly-sized cities. Such a finding might suggest that portage
areas are attractive primarily because of an excess supply of highways, but these results do not
support such an interpretation.



5    Responses following portage obsolescence
We show here that portage sites have not been in decline relative to comparison areas. In fact,
there is some evidence that economic activity has become increasingly concentrated at historical
portage sites—long after portage obsolescence. To show this, we examine data on population
density from 1790 to 2000 for our sample of counties. This finding is common across the fall-line
sample, the Mississippi-River system, and the watershed boundary between the Great Lakes and
the Mississippi River.
    We regress log population density on log distance to portage in each census year, as in equation
(1), obtaining estimates of the proportional increase in density associated with portage in each
decade. As before, the basic specification includes a polynomial in latitude and longitude and a set
of fixed effects by the watershed of each river that crosses that fall line. The coefficient estimate, β̂t ,
is a measure of the relative concentration of economic activity near portage by year. In particular,
β̂t = 0 suggests that population is uniformly distributed across portage and non-portage counties
within the same river watershed, and β̂t < 0 suggests that people are concentrated at portage sites.
    Panel A of Figure 7 shows β̂t in each census year t; the last point estimate, for t = 2000, is
similar to those reported in the specifications shown in Table 1, panel C. As before, we can reject
the hypothesis that population is uniformly distributed along rivers in 2000. But, the path in β̂
across decades suggests that economic activity is similarly concentrated today as it was in 1800.
Although there is some evidence of population spreading out after 1850 (the coefficient attenuates
towards zero), this is neither statistically significant nor persistent.
    In panel B, we show results of decadal regressions of population density on upstream watershed
size in each year, as in equation (2), to obtain estimates of γ̂t for each census year t. This coefficient
estimate yields a measure of the relative concentration of economic activity at “better” historical
portage sites, along the fall line, by year: γ̂t > 0 suggests that population density increases with
upstream watershed size. The last point estimate is similar to those reported in the specifications


                                                    27
shown in Table 2. This figure suggests that population becomes progressively more concentrated
over time at portage sites with larger upstream areas.
       Controlling for other fixed characteristics yields a qualitatively similar pattern of estimates over
time.22 If, for example, tastes for good weather increased over our sample period, and a historical
portage site happened to have the best climate compared to other counties along the same river
or along the fall line, then a continued concentration of factors at a portage site could be due
to the change in preferences for climate. For this reason, we include a vector of other county
characteristics in Zg —such as U.S. state fixed effects, distances to the nearest river, harbor, and
the Atlantic Ocean, additional spatial trend terms, climate, elevation, the presence of aquifers, and
water power.
       To test more formally whether portage areas are in relative decline, we pool the sample of
fall-line counties across decades in order to perform a difference-in-difference estimation. The
first difference is counties having portage advantage or not, measured by portage distance and
upstream watershed area. The second difference is the 19th versus the late-20th century: i.e.,
during and after portage relevance. We exclude decades around 1900 because they likely include
the decline of portage-specific activities. The specific equation to be estimated is as follows:

                       ln densitygrt = ζ · portageg + γ · portageg · postt + δrt + ε̃grt               (3)

where portageg is either the distance to, or watershed upstream, from portage, and δrt is a fixed
effect for watershed×decade. Note that this is not a true difference-in-difference; since county
boundaries change over time, we cannot include county-level effects. The specifications instead
are similar to equations (1) and (2), except that we allow for the coefficients to vary across time.
We correct the inference for spatial autocorrelation by clustering at the watershed level.
       The results of these regressions can be found in Table 5. In panel A, the regression results
suggest that (taking column 1) holding other county characteristics constant, population density is
higher, 30.0% logarithmic, at portage counties along rivers after portage obsolescence. Similarly,
in panel B, the concentration of population with respect to watershed size shows no sign of abating
after portage obsolescence. These patterns confirm those seen in Figure 7: if anything, population
density is more concentrated today near fall-line portage sites than it was in portage’s heyday.
       We have also experimented with specifications that include a proxy for direct damages from the
  22
       These results are available upon request.



                                                      28
Civil War. We use a measure developed by Paskoff (2008). His study reports, by county, whether
there were battles, occupations, or other reports of specific damage, across the former Confederacy.
He refers to such counties as “war counties.” Paskoff reports that war counties were more densely
populated prior to the war, and, relative to non-war-counties, did not experience statistically sig-
nificant changes in population or capital stock between 1860 and 1870. This suggests that either
(i) his measure is a poor proxy for large-scale destruction or (ii) war counties recovered quickly.
Consistent with this, when we estimate models like that of column 2, but also include a dummy
for war county and its interaction with 1850 population density, we do not estimate a significant
effect on the latter interaction term. Our hypothesis is that portage works as a coordination de-
vice, and thus we would expect that large-scale devastation could ‘un-coordinate’ people from a
devastated location. (This is the logic of the studies of Japan by Davis and Weinstein, 2002 and
2008.) However, it is doubtful that the damage that Paskoff measures from the Civil War was,
on average, of sufficient magnitude to affect the equilibrium. In section 6, we present a model in
which the population density of the location can be characterized by multiple equilibria, and each
equilibria is locally stable. If so, it could require fairly substantial damage to get knocked down to
the low-density equilibrium.
   The remaining columns in Table 5 display robustness checks for our results, using different
portage indicator variables or different samples. In columns 2–4, we adjust the definition of our
portage indicator variable. In column 5, we use only those rivers with falls or rapids at the fall line
that we have been able to verify in historical records. In columns 6–7, different sets of decades rep-
resent the 19th and late 20th centuries. Columns 8–11 display regressions using different samples.
In column 8, we use a consistent geographic sample of only Atlantic rivers, so it is relatively undi-
luted by westward expansion. Estimates in column 10 use a sample that is zoomed-in to within
50 miles of the fall line. Finally, column 11 uses the entire southern U.S. as the sample, which
excludes from the sample the parts of the watershed that extend into the Midwest or above the
Potomac.
   The results shown in this table echo the graphs in Figure 7. Importantly, the coefficient esti-
mates on our measures of portage advantage show no sign of attenuating towards zero over time.
Instead, there is some evidence that economic activity has become increasingly concentrated at
historical portage sites, long after the obsolescence of the natural advantages of these sites.
   These patterns hold for the aforementioned portage sites in the Midwest and Upper South,
as well. (These were the sites referenced in Figures 5 and 6.) For the portages between the


                                                  29
Great Lakes and Mississippi River, we estimate decadal county-level regressions of log population
density on the log distance historical portage sites, as in Table 1, using counties within 12.5 miles
of the watershed boundary between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River. Estimates of β̂t by
census decade are reported in Figure 8, panel A. The qualitative dynamics are similar to the fall
line results reported in Figure 7. Importantly, the advantage of portage shows no sign of abating
towards zero over time. Panel B displays estimates of β̂t using a sample of counties within 12.5
miles along three principal tributaries of the Lower Mississippi River. Again, in both panels, the
dynamics are similar to those reported along the fall line and along the Great Lakes watershed
divide.
         An alternative approach to measuring whether portage sites were in relative decline would be
to compare them with places that were comparably dense historically. Note that this exercise was
already done in section 4.3. Recall that conditioning on population density in the early 1900s
rendered the coefficient on portage insignificant in both the economic and statistical sense. Those
results are therefore consistent with what we find here using the pooled cross-section of counties.
         These results suggest several conclusions. First, the concentration of economic activity near
historical portage sites highlights the persistence of density even after initial economic advantages
have since disappeared. This could be due to strongly increasing returns to scale, or simply very
sluggish adjustment to a new, lower equilibrium density. The continuing, and possibly increasing,
importance of having been a portage weighs in favor of a model featuring aggregate increasing
returns, in which returns are stronger than ever. In the next section, we interpret our results in the
framework of such a model.



6         Discussion
Here we outline a simple model in the spirit of Krugman (1991a) featuring persistent differences
in population density across locations, even absent differences in natural advantages.23 These
persistent differences in population can be explained by path dependence in the presence of strong
aggregate increasing returns. Other plausible mechanisms, including large sunk or moving costs,
are also considered, but our evidence suggests these factors are unlikely to be responsible for the
persistence of population density a century after portage obsolescence. We use the model to help
    23
   Alternative modeling strategies are unlikely to change the main predictions. Some examples of other relevant
models of urban systems, where differences in natural value are either assumed or allowed include Henderson (1974),
Rauch (1991), Krugman (1993a and 1993b), Fujita and Mori (1996), and Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007).


                                                        30
illustrate our empirical results and compare them to those elsewhere in the existing literature.


6.1    A simple model of economic geography
Consider a static, general-equilibrium model of the spatial economy featuring two kinds of ag-
glomerating forces: heterogeneity in the natural amenity or productivity value of locations and
scale economies to the geographic concentration of economic activity. These centripetal forces are
balanced with congestion costs that discourage all economic activity from concentrating in a single
black-hole location. There are G distinct geographic areas (g = 1, 2, 3, ..., G), where G is a large
number, covering the entire spatial economy. Without loss of generality, locations have normalized
land area of 1 and other fixed endowments. A large number of factors X are freely mobile, at least
in the long run. For exposition, we call these factors people, but other factors, like capital, can
be explicitly incorporated (see Chatterjee, 2006). Xg households are located in location g, each
inelastically supplying one unit of labor to the production of a (costlessly) traded homogeneous
good y. Household location choice is the central endogenous decision in the model.
    The traded good y is produced at the plant level according to y = φg σ(Xg )f (x), where x mea-
sures factors used by the plant and φg captures the effect of location-specific factors on produc-
tivity. Natural features enter the model through φg . Goods are costlessly traded across locations,
but one way to interpret portage is as a transport-cost advantage—portage’s role in completing a
transportation route makes (locally) available more output net of transport costs. A reduced-form
function of total factor density σ(Xg ) > 0, σ 0 (·) > 0, accounts for local scale economies not inter-
nalized by plants. While an individual plant may face constant or decreasing returns to scale in its
own factor inputs (i.e., in f ), its choice of factors can create positive externalities to other plants in
the same location—for instance, by raising the marginal product of other factors in that location.
These aggregate increasing returns can come from many possible microfoundations—input shar-
ing or knowledge spillovers, for example—but we abstract from their sources (for example, see
Duranton and Puga, 2004, for a review). The important feature, preserved here, is that doubling
factor inputs in one location will more than double total output in that location, not because of
any plant-level production technology but because of (pure or pecuniary) externalities that locally
improve marginal factor products.
    People receive utility from consuming y according to U = ψg y/τ (Xg ), where ψg captures
location-specific consumption amenities and τ (Xg ) > 0 is a reduced-form function that captures



                                                    31
disutility from crowdedness.24 These congestion costs in utility prevent the formation of eco-
nomic “black holes.” As with aggregate increasing returns, we leave the source of congestion
unspecified—it might be due to competition for fixed factors in limited supply, or other negative
externalities such as crime or pollution. Both σ and τ are used to incorporate, in a general way,
local aggregate increasing returns and congestion costs.


6.2     Equilibrium
In equilibrium, the labor and goods markets clear. Traded-good plants behave competitively, taking
population densities Xg and factor prices wg as given. Using the price of the traded good as
numeraire, free entry and zero profit conditions yield equilibrium factor prices (wages) in each
location: wg = φg σ(Xg )f 0 (x). Substitution yields the log indirect utility for the marginal mobile
person in location g:

                           ln Vg = c + (ln ψg + ln φg ) + ln σ(Xg ) − ln τ (Xg )                                (4)

where c reflects economy-wide prices, the second term (ln ψg + ln φg ) captures the effects of
location-specific amenity and productivity advantages on utility, the third term ln σ(Xg ) is the
positive effect of agglomeration economies on utility, and the final term ln τ (Xg ) is the negative
effect of congestion on utility. Equilibrium is characterized by a number V ∗ and a vector (Xg∗ )G
                                                                                                 g=1
                                                           P
such that indirect utility is the same across locations and g Xg = X.
    Taking the outside-option utility (V ∗ ) as given, equilibrium at a particular site g can be analyzed
by considering how local indirect utility Vg varies as a function of factor density Xg . We consider
two cases: (i) Vg is monotonically declining in Xg and (ii) Vg declines with Xg everywhere except
over some intermediate range of density at which Vg rises with Xg . In case (i), the economy
has decreasing or weakly increasing returns—that is, if for all levels of density, congestion costs
increase at a faster rate than agglomeration economies, τ 0 (Xg )/ ln τ (Xg ) > σ 0 (Xg )/ ln σ(Xg ).
Utility increases in factor density only if the magnitude of external economies (in σ) is large relative
to the magnitude of disutility from density (in τ ). We refer to this as strongly increasing returns to
scale. Case (ii) satisfies this definition over an intermediate range of X.
    24
       Helpman (1998) uses the consumption of rival non-traded goods to generate this feature from microfoundations.
Just as large congestion costs prevent dense locations from getting ever more populous, convexity in τ 00 (Xg ) >
σ 00 (Xg ) > 0 allows for disutility from “sparseness” and helps to prevent locations from emptying out completely.



                                                        32
6.2.1     Case (i): Decreasing or weakly increasing returns to scale for all X

Consider the case featuring relatively strong congestion costs and weak increasing returns, depicted
in panel A of Figure 9. For each of three locations (differing only in φg ), indirect utility V is shown
as a function of factor density X. The horizontal (dotted) line shows the equilibrium utility level
V ∗ achieved in other locations in the economy. The spatial equilibrium can be seen where the
marginal household’s indirect utility is V ∗ , at the point of intersection with the horizontal line.25
       The utility curves in panel A are downward sloping—congestion costs outpace increasing re-
turns over the entire range of population density. If indirect utility monotonically declines in
density, then differences in the value of natural features φg fully determine differences in popu-
lation density across locations. In other words, there is a one-to-one mapping between observed
differences in population density and differences in natural advantages.
       Suppose location 1 is a portage site and location 2 is a nearby place along the same river. The
value of portage in an initial time period of φ1 − φ2 generates a difference in equilibrium density
of X1∗ − X2∗ . Following obsolescence of portage, if these locations are identical in other respects,
we expect no (long-run) differences in population density. Graphically, V1 and V2 would overlap,
yielding identical equilibrium population densities. Thus, a parameterization where congestion
costs dominate returns to scale predicts that, as φ1 − φ2 goes to zero, so should X1∗ − X2∗ converge
to zero. As seen earlier, we can reject the hypothesis that differences in population density between
portage and non-portage sites have attenuated towards zero. This evidence, combined with the
results from panel A, suggests that it is difficult to reconcile observed differences in population
density between identical locations if there exist locally decreasing, or even weakly increasing,
returns to scale.


6.2.2     Case (ii): Strong increasing returns to scale at intermediate densities

Path dependence in the presence of strong aggregate increasing returns can account for persistent
differences in population density between otherwise-identical locations. Suppose that, for some
0 < Xg < ∞, it is the case that τ 0 (Xg )/ ln τ (Xg ) < σ 0 (Xg )/ ln σ(Xg ): in words, there is some
level of population density where the degree of increasing returns is greater than the degree of
congestion costs, and indirect utility increases with density. Panel B of Figure 9 illustrates this
  25
     To see this, consider the case if location 1 is slightly less dense than this point. Then, utility in location 1 is higher
than in other locations; the marginal mobile household would choose to relocate to location 1, increasing its density
until equilibrium utility is the same across locations.


                                                             33
case. Strong aggregate increasing returns are responsible for the hump shape26 of the indirect
utility curves—as drawn, the range over which V increases is the range where increasing returns
overpower congestion costs. (Again, for the purposes of the present study, we remain agnostic
about the precise source and scope of these scale economies.)
       The key implication of strong increasing returns and the S-shaped utility curve is the pos-
sibility of multiple stable spatial equilibria. This feature is critical for allowing differences in
long-run population density between two locations—say, along the same river—that are nearly
identical. Consider the center utility curve (the thick black line) in panel B, which could represent
two overlapping utility curves for identical locations. There are two stable equilibrium population
densities—either the leftmost or rightmost point where V = V ∗ .27 Thus, in the strong increasing
returns case, there are two potential mechanisms that explain why locations differ in population
density. Locations may differ in natural advantages, as before. But, it could also happen that
two, otherwise-identical locations have different equilibrium population densities. Notice, how-
ever, that the S-shape is not a sufficient condition for multiple equilibria: the greater the vertical
distance between V curves, the more likely that alternative spatial equilibria are suppressed. As
drawn, differences between location 1 and location 2 in panel B imply a unique long-run spa-
tial equilibrium, in spite of the presence of strong increasing returns. We return to this issue in
section 6.5.
       To summarize, differences in only natural features (φg ) can be sufficient to explain observed
differences in factor density across locations. However, in the absence of heterogeneity in natural
advantages, only path dependence and strong increasing returns can explain persistent differences
in population density, provided that alternate equilibria are selected. How might this equilibrium
selection take place? Given reasonable dynamic adjustments, differences in historical density, per-
haps driven by initial heterogeneity in natural advantages, would help select different equilibrium
population densities across locations.
  26
      This feature is general to many models featuring agglomeration economies. Imagine instead that the degree of
increasing returns is greater than the degree of congestion costs for all density levels. The resulting equilibrium is that
a single location receives all households, and all economic activity concentrates in a single, black-hole location—a
result for which it is easy to provide a counterfactual. Alternatively, the relevant ranges over which increasing returns
outpace congestion costs could be different, as might be the case if agglomeration economies came from multiple
different sources. The visual implication of such a parameterization might be multiple large and small “bumps” in the
utility curves, followed by a flat or declining curve. This case would imply possibly many more equilibria. There may
be a knife-edge case, too, in which indirect utility is flat over some range(s) of X. This could imply a continuum of
equilibria, but note that it still requires economies of scale that are (just) large enough to compensate for congestion
costs.
   27
      The middle intersection is not locally stable, and therefore we disregard it.


                                                           34
6.3    Interpreting portage
The rise and fall of portage provides a test for the presence of strong local external economies
in productivity differences across locations. As noted earlier, portage’s role in completing trade
routes suggests an interpretation that more output was available at these locations net of transport
costs. If φg was higher in these locations, this can explain initial differences in population density.
   In contrast, we presume that today—outside of indirect effects via the location of reproducible
factors—productivity or amenity differences across locations due to portage are negligible. By
comparing locations along the same river or other portage sites, we minimize other sources of
variation in natural advantages. The areas surrounding our portage sites—the relatively flat and
homogeneous areas within the Coastal Plain, the Piedmont, and the Midwest—provide suitable
comparison locations where differences in natural consumption amenities (ψg ) and other produc-
tive natural features (φg ) are likely to be small. In this case, persistent differences in output and
factor density can be explained by path dependence in the presence of strong increasing returns.
   Our interpretation is that portage served as a coordination device. The portage advantage di-
rected factors to a portage sites historically, but the factors of production did not leave after the
obsolescence of portage-related activities. Instead, the above-average factor density at that time
was enough to push those sites into the high-population equilibrium of the model. Notice that
both historical density and strong increasing returns are required for this interpretation. Without
increasing returns, there would be no reason for the continual reinvestment in factor density fol-
lowing obsolescence of portage. Without the historical density, it might have been impossible for
factors to coordinate on that location, because the low-population equilibrium is locally stable.


6.4    Dynamics, moving costs, and sunk factors
Our discussion so far has relied on comparative statics, and although many aspects of the model
are general, it lacks explicit dynamics. Following Krugman (1991a), reasonable specifications
of a dynamic adjustment process can reproduce our model’s results. The presence of some ad-
justment frictions, like moving costs, are necessary conditions for path dependence in our model.
Historical densities should only matter for subsequent location decisions if factors cannot adjust
instantaneously to changes in the value of natural advantages.
   Similarly, the model has so far omitted factors that might be considered sunk, say, location-
specific investments that are long-lived, like housing, railroad tracks, and land surveying and plat-


                                                  35
ting, or psychological costs, like attachments to places of birth. The presence of large sunk costs,
much like large moving costs, plausibly slows down the speed of adjustment to new spatial equi-
libria. In that sense, they can also strengthen the case for path dependence.28 But our evidence
presented in sections 4.4 and 5 suggests that no single factor is likely to be crucial in explaining
the persistence of portage cities a century or more after obsolescence. Many factors that might be
considered sunk, or at least fixed for a long period of time, are also likely to depreciate and require
replacement over the long time horizon (centuries) that we consider. (Refer again to the discussion
in section 4.3.)
       A final issue related to mapping our dynamic results to a static model is that prices are changing
in the economy over our sample period. In particular, changes in technologies or preferences that
affect the value of various natural features or the disutility from crowdedness are likely to change
the shapes of the indirect utility curves in Figure 9. Note however that economy-wide changes
that do not affect relative utility levels across locations will not change the basic predictions of
the model. Improvements in transportation and sanitation technology have reduced disutility from
crowdedness. But such a change would flatten the indirect utility curves for all locations, allowing
for denser cities across the economy but not necessarily changing rankings of locations.


6.5       Interpreting earlier evidence
In considering the spatial organization of economic activity, some early studies attempted to find
agglomeration economies in the residual—that is, by correlating productivity with measures of
endowments, and noting that the spatial distribution of natural advantages is highly correlated with
the location of production. Examples of this approach are Kim (1999) and Ellison and Glaeser
(1999). These papers also (correctly) note the fundamental problem that there are easily more
potential natural advantages than data points. Our study suggests that economic activity can be
spatially correlated even with the location of obsolete endowments. Therefore, Rybczynski-like
regression coefficients may conflate the effects of both agglomeration economies (with path de-
pendence) and natural features on productivity.
       The work of Davis and Weinstein (2002, 2008), showing that the “shock” of Allied bombing
during World War II failed to change the equilibrium location of economic activity across Japanese
cities, suggests that multiple equilibria and path dependence may not be empirically relevant. Our
  28
    In Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2010), sunk costs are explicitly considered in a model of industry location. Without
sunk costs, economic activity reallocates across locations instantaneously.


                                                         36
model indicates one reason why postwar Japan might not be an ideal experiment to test for the
presence of increasing returns. As noted earlier, heterogeneity in natural features can suppress
alternative potential equilibria (see Figure 9, panel B). The rugged topography of much of Japan
suggests that there is large variation in the natural productivity value of locations, perhaps enough
to preclude the possibility that there exist multiple spatial equilibria.
       As a parallel thought experiment that might be more familiar to the North-American reader,
consider California, another Ring-of-Fire area with varied topography. Within California, there is
large variation in natural features: mountains, deserts, arid valleys with productive soil, oil and
mineral deposits, natural harbors, temperate weather, and views of the Pacific. If an experimenter
were to remove all reproducible factors from the state and replay history, it seems likely that
population would concentrate near the very same fixed factors, in the same locations we see today:
in the sunny valleys of Southern California, near the port of San Francisco, in the Sacramento
River delta,29 and in the fertile Central Valley. In contrast, this need not be the case in a more
homogeneous landscape.


6.6      Extensions and speculations
The portage phenomenon that we identify here is hardly unique to the sample that we used for
this study. Throughout the rest of North America, there are examples of places where obstacles
to pre-1900 navigation give rise to trading and transshipment and where these sites continue to be
populated places today. The example of Sacramento, at the head of navigation of the Sacramento
River during the Gold Rush, was identified above. Albany, New York, is another example of a site
that formed around the head of navigation of the Hudson River. This site later became the junction
of the Erie and Champlain canals, providing access to the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence
River. Montréal, Quebec, arose as a settlement because it was at the head of navigation of the St.
Lawrence River, although today the river has been improved for navigation all the way up to the
Great Lakes. (By 1825, the Lachine Rapids were bypassed by a canal that also provided water
power to industry later in the century. And Montréal had already become a hub in the railway
network, leading it to be the main seaport of eastern Canada.) Edmonton, Alberta, is located on
the end of the portage from the Athabasca River to the North Saskatchewan River, which was used
by the Hudson Bay Company on its transcontinental route in the 19th century. Ithaca, New York,
  29
   Although Sacramento’s place at the head of navigation on the Sacramento River, as well as its role in transship-
ment during the California Gold Rush, is noteworthy.


                                                        37
grew up around transshipment. The city is located at the southern tip of Lake Cayuga, which was
connected from there to the Susquehanna River by a portage railway in the 1800s. Water power was
later used at the site, which supported a small manufacturing sector. But what made population at
this site persist was that it re-specialized in tertiary education. Various other sites in North America
began as centers of small-scale manufacturing because of access to water power. Numerous mill
towns in New England are such examples, with Lowell, Massachusetts, being perhaps the leading
case. These areas persist today, in spite of water power being essentially obsolete in this area.
Similar examples abound in the Piedmont of the South, where water power was used in early
industrialization.
   Examples of related phenomena are found outside North America. We discuss a few examples
here. Perhaps the closest parallel between the North American portages of voyageurs is found
in Russia, where the Vikings used convenient portages between the watersheds of the Baltic and
Black seas. Indeed, many place-names in that area incorporate the word “volok,” whose etymology
is derived from Slavic words meaning “drag” or “haul.” One example is the city of Volokolamsk,
which arose at a portage (that is, a volok) between the Lama and Voloshnya rivers, which then flow
downstream to Novgorod and Moscow, respectively. Another example is Corinth, Greece, which
lies on an isthmus connecting the Peloponnesus to the rest of Greece. The portage at Corinth was
convenient relative to rounding the entire Peloponnesus, and Corinth was involved in transshipment
and trading beginning in ancient times. This locational advantage was rendered obsolete both with
the construction of the Corinth Canal circa 1890 and the expanding size of ships with the Age of
Steam. Yet Corinth persists as a populated area to this day, in spite of the old city having been
destroyed by earthquakes twice in the 19th century. (See Sherratt, 2006, for more discussion of
these and other historical portage sites.) Back in the Americas, Honda is a city at the head of
navigation of the lower Magdalena River in Colombia. It grew considerably in the 19th century
as a point of transshipment between the steamboats from Barranquilla and the mules headed up
the Andes to Bogota. The city persists today, in spite of its locational advantage being made
obsolete by a long portage railway (from Beltran to La Dorada), which came into service circa
1910 (Guzmán, 2002).
   The present study has been about obstacles to navigation, but we note briefly the case of fords,
a symmetric phenomenon when water interrupts movement across land. Fords are places where
a river is amenable to crossing on foot (human or animal) or on wheels. Like a portage, this is a
natural solution to the coordination problem of where to bring together activity. Indeed, there are


                                                  38
many examples of places that grew up around the fords of rivers. Rockford, Illinois, is sited at
a (former) ford across the Rock River. An example perhaps more familiar to academics, the city
of Oxford in England grew up around a ford on the Thames. Further, in German and Dutch, the
suffixes -furt and -voorde typically indicate that the populated area owes its original settlement to
the presence of a ford; Frankfurt, Germany, is such an example. The natural advantage associated
with the ford has very likely dissipated over time. Very little traffic in developed countries actually
moves across the river in this manner, and the advantage of constructing a modern bridge at such
a point versus elsewhere on the river is uncertain (fords tend to be shallower, but wider, e.g.).
Further, such a location would be an absolute disadvantage for operating a ferry, which was another
common means of river crossings historically. (It should be noted that some of these fords were
probably also portages.)



7    Conclusion
We study the evolution of economic activity at pre-19th century portage sites across the U.S. South,
Mid-Atlantic, and Midwest. Many of these sites became centers of commerce and manufactur-
ing before 1900, although their natural advantage was made obsolete a century (or more) ago by
changes in technology. Nevertheless, these portage sites are likely to be population centers even to-
day. Further, we do not find evidence that these areas have declined since the obsolescence of their
portage-related advantages. These results stand in contrast with the predictions of a neoclassical
model with local returns to scale that are decreasing or even weakly increasing (but not enough to
overcome congestion costs).
    Our preferred interpretation for these results is seen in a model with strong increasing returns
to scale in local economic activity. The model predicts the possibility of multiple equilibria in
population at a given site. We argue that portage acted as a coordination device, selecting which
equilibrium would be obtained at that site. Portage shifted out the demand for labor at these sites
historically, and it was the historical presence of reproducible factors that selected portage sites
for a high-population equilibrium. This is the sense in which our results exhibit path dependence.
Some readers might have a preferred reproducible factor, X, that they would propose as a parsimo-
nious explanation for these results, where the X-factor might be railroads, housing, or some other
long-lived asset. But a direct, non-neglible effect today of some early X-factor seems unlikely, for
a variety of reasons detailed above. Instead, we suggest early factor density had an indirect effect


                                                  39
via more than a century of overlapping generations of location decisions for various reproducible
factors, combined with strong increasing returns to scale locally. In the model, both of these el-
ements are required for persistence: (i) absent the historical density, it might be impossible for
factors to coordinate on that location; and (ii) absent increasing returns, there would be no reason
for continual increases in factor density following obsolescence of portage.
   We have intentionally said little about the welfare implications of these results, although un-
derstanding the optimal size and distribution of cities is of paramount interest. The presence of
externalities in our model suggests a role for corrective action, in the spirit of Pigou, but further
analysis is needed. Further, a perennial concern in models with path dependence is that we might
get locked in to a choice that is somehow sub-optimal in the future. (Paul David’s case of the
QWERTY keyboard is a canonical, albeit controversial example.) However, we have chosen com-
parison sites that were similar to portage to facilitate the analysis. Thus, it is unlikely that, for
example, if we were to magically move Richmond up or down the river, or along the fall line,
it would result in substantial welfare gains. One possible exception is Chicago, which would
seem to be located 30+ miles to the northwest of an optimally sited transshipment hub. That said,
Chicago’s economy is no longer as centered on transshipment, and therefore the percentage cost
of its mis-location might be small.
   We suggest several avenues for future investigation about the portage phenomenon and about
agglomeration in general. First, we do not attempt to distinguish between alternative mechanisms
that might generate agglomeration economies in this case, although doing so might be informative.
Second, further analysis of the role played by different industries in agglomeration and persistence
would be interesting. Portage sites tended to specialize early in commerce and, to a lesser extent,
manufacturing. This contrasts with the many ghost towns left behind after mining bonanzas. Third,
central to the persistence of population at portages is that these areas were able to re-specialize into
other activities. It would be useful to understand what natural endowments or institutions were
necessary to make this transformation possible.




References
Arthur, W. B. (1994). Increasing returns and path dependence in the economy, Ann Arbor: Uni-
  versity of Michigan Press.

Atack, J., F. Bateman, M. R. Haines, and R. A. Margo (2009). “Did railroads induce or follow

                                                  40
  economic growth? Urbanization and population growth in the American Midwest, 1850-60.”
  NBER working paper no. 14640.

Bester, C. A., T. G. Conley, and C. B. Hansen (2009). “Inference with Dependent Data Using
  Cluster Covariance Estimators.” Manuscript, University of Chicago Booth School of Business,
  Chicago.

Cain, L. P. (1985). “William Dean’s Theory of Urban Growth: Chicago’s Commerce and Industry,
  1854-1871.” The Journal of Economic History. June 45 (2), 241–249.

Cashin, E. J. (1986). Colonial Augusta : ‘Key of the Indian Countrey’, Macon, Ga.: Mercer Uni-
  versity Press.

Chandler, A. D. (1972). “Anthracite coal and the beginnings of the industrial revolution in the
  United States.” The Business History Review. Summer 46 (2), 141–181.

Chatterjee, S. (2006). “A quantitative assessment of the role of agglomeration economies in the
  spatial concentration of U.S. employment.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Pa-
  per 06-20.

Ciccone, A. and R. E. Hall (1996). “Productivity and the density of economic activity.” American
  Economic Review. 86 (1), 54–70.

Conley, T. G. (1999). “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.” Journal of Econo-
  metrics. September 92 (1), 1–45.

Cronon, W. (1991). Nature’s Metropolis, W.W. Norton and Company.

Davis, D. and D. Weinstein (2002). “Bones, bombs, and break points: The geography of economic
  activity.” American Economic Review. 92 (5), 1269–1289.

         and         (2008). “A search for multiple equilibria in urban industrial structure.” Jour-
  nal of Regional Science. 48 (1), 29–65.

Donaldson, D. (2010). “Railroads of the Raj.” Manuscript, MIT.

Duranton, G. and D. Puga (2004). “Micro-foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies.” in
  J. V. Henderson and J.-F. Thisse, eds., Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4,
  Amsterdam: Elsevier, chapter 48, pp. 2063–2117.

Ellison, G. and E. L. Glaeser (1999). “The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does Natural
  Advantage Explain Agglomeration?” American Economic Review. 89 (2), 311–316.

      ,        , and W. R. Kerr (2010). “What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence from
  Coagglomeration Patterns.” American Economic Review. 100 (3), 1195–1213.

Federal Writers’ Project, Georgia (1938). Augusta American Guide Series, Augusta, Ga.: Tidwell
  Printing Supply Co.

                                                41
Fogel, R. W. (1964). Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric History,
  The Johns Hopkins Press.

Fujita, M. and T. Mori (1996). “The role of ports in the making of major cities: Self-agglomeration
  and hub-effect.” Journal of Development Economics. 49, 93–120.

Glaeser, E. L. and J. Gyourko (2005). “Urban Decline and Durable Housing.” Journal of Political
  Economy. April 113 (2), 345–375.

Gold, R. N. (1954). “Manufacturing structure and pattern of the South Bend-Mishawaka area.”
  Master’s thesis, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Guzmán, A. I. (2002). La ciudad del rı́o Honda, Bogotá, Colombia: Unibiblos.

Haines, M. R. and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (2004). Histor-
  ical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002, Ann Arbor,
  MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR). Computer file,
  http://www.icpsr.org [Accessed March 7, 2006].

Havighurst, W. (1970). River to the West; three centuries of the Ohio, New York: Putnam.

Helpman, E. (1998). “The Size of Regions.” in D. Pines, E. Sadka, and Y. Zilcha, eds., Topics in
  Public Economics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 33–54.

        and P. Krugman (1985). Market Structure and Foreign Trade, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Henderson, J. V. (1974). “The sizes and types of cities.” American Economic Review. 64 (4), 640–
  656.

Henry, W. W. (1900). “Richmond on the James.” in L. P. Powell, ed., Historic towns of the southern
  states, American historic towns, New York: G.P. Putnam’s sons, chapter 5.

Holmes, T. J. and S. Lee (2009). “Economies of density versus natural advantage: Crop choice on
  the back forty.” NBER working paper no. 14704.

Hornbeck, R. (2009). “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short and Long-run
  Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.” Manuscript, Harvard University.

Kim, S. (1999). “Regions, resources, and economic geography: Sources of U.S. regional compar-
  ative advantage, 1880-1987.” Regional Science and Urban Economics. 29, 1–32.

Krugman, P. (1991a). “History versus expectations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 106 (2),
  651–667.

         (1991b). “Increasing returns and economic geography.” Journal of Political Economy. 99
  (3), 483–499.



                                                42
        (1993a). “First nature, second nature, and metropolitan location.” Journal of Regional
  Science. 33 (2), 129–144.
        (1993b). “The hub effect: Or, threeness in international trade.” in J. P. Neary, ed., Theory
  Policy and Dynamics in International Trade: Essays in Honor of Ronald Jones, Cambridge
  University Press.
Minnesota Population Center (2004). National Historical Geographic Information System:
 Pre-release Version 0.1, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota.     Computer file,
 http://www.nhgis.org.
National Geophysical Data Center (2003). Version 2 DMSP-OLS Nighttime Lights Time Series,
  Boulder, Colorado: NOAA. Downloaded February 8, 2006, from http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/.
  DMSP data collected by US Air Force Weather Agency.
Paskoff, P. F. (2008). “Measures of War: A Quantitative Examination of the Civil War’s Destruc-
  tiveness in the Confederacy.” Civil War History. LIV (1), 35–62.
Phillips, U. B. (1905). “Transportation in the ante-bellum South: An economic analysis.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics. 19 (3), 434–451.
Pred, A. (1980). Urban Growth and City-Systems in the United States, 1840–1860, Harvard Uni-
  versity Press.
Putnam, J. W. (1918). The Illinois and Michigan Canal : a study in economic history, Vol. X of
  Chicago Historical Society’s collection, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rappaport, J. and J. D. Sachs (2003). “The United States as a coastal nation.” Journal of Economic
  Growth. 8, 5–46.
Rauch, J. E. (1991). “Comparative advantage, geographic advantage, and the volume of trade.”
  Economic Journal. September 101 (408), 1230–1244.
         (1993). “Does history matter only when it matters little? The case of city-industry loca-
  tion.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. August 108 (3), 843–867.
Redding, S. J., D. M. Sturm, and N. Wolf (2010). “History and industry location: Evidence from
  German airports.” Review of Economics and Statistics. forthcoming.
Redfearn, C. L. (2008). “Persistence in urban form: The long-run durability of employment centers
  in metropolitan areas.” Regional Science and Urban Economics. 39 (2), 224–232.
Rosen, C. M. (1986). The limits of power: Great fires and the process of city growth in America,
  Cambridge University Press.
Rosenthal, S. S. and W. C. Strange (2004). “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomera-
  tion Economies.” in J. V. Henderson and J.-F. Thisse, eds., Handbook of Regional and Urban
  Economics, Vol. 4, Amsterdam: Elsevier, chapter 49, pp. 2119–2171.

                                                43
Rossi-Hansberg, E. and M. L. Wright (2007). “Urban Structure and Growth.” Review of Economic
  Studies. 74, 597–624.

Ruggles, S., J. T. Alexander, K. Genadek, R. Goeken, M. B. Schroeder, and M. Sobek (2010). In-
  tegrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database], Minneapolis:
  University of Minnesota.

Semple, E. C. (1903). American History and Its Geographic Conditions, Houghton, Mifflin and
  Company.

Sherratt, A. (2006). “Portages: a simple but powerful idea in understanding human history.” in
  C. Westerdahl, ed., The significance of portages: proceedings of the first International Con-
  ference on the Significance of Portages, Archaeopress Lyngdal, Vest-Agder, Norway October
  pp. 1–13.

Trescott, P. B. (1958). “The Louisville and Portland Canal Company, 1825-1874.” The Mississippi
  Valley Historical Review. March 44 (4), 686–708.

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers:            Navigation Data Center (2009). Tons Locked
  by Commodity Group,           CY 1993-2009,      U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
  http://www.ndc.iwr.usace.army.mil/lpms/cy2009comweb.htm, accessed July 7, 2010.

U.S. Department of Interior, Census Office (1885). Tenth census of the United States, 1880., Vol.
  16–17 (Water Power), Washington, DC: GPO. Re-published by Norman Ross Publishing, New
  York, NY, 1991.




                                               44
         Figure 3: Water-transportation employment across fall-line-area counties, 1850-1930

                      Panel A. Average share of river’s water transportation employment
                                  at historical fall-line portage site counties


                                                                                .15
                        Water transportation employment share at portage site
                                                                                .1
                                                                                .05
                                                                                0




                                                                                       1850   1860   1870   1880                 1900   1910        1920           1930

                                                                                                                   Census year



             Panel B. Water transportation employment as share of total county employment

                                                                                                                                               Portage sites
                                                                                                                                               Non-portage sites
                                                                                .01
                        Employment share in water transportation
                                                                                .005
                                                                                0




                                                                                       1850   1860   1870   1880                 1900   1910        1920           1930

                                                                                                                   Census year




Notes: this figure displays employment in water transportation (e.g., stevedoring occupations) across 51 historical portage sites between 1850 and
1930. We aggregate microdata from 8 IPUMS extracts based on county of residence and water transportation employment in the IPUMS-recoded
variable ind1950=546. Two historical portage sites, on the Schuylkill and the Raritan rivers, are excluded due to their continued use as seaports.
Panel A shows the average share of water-transportation employment at historical portage sites, out of total water-transportation employment along
each river. Panel B shows the average share of water-transportation employment out of total employment, in both portage (solid) and non-portage
(dashed) counties adjacent to rivers.

                                                                                                                   47
                               Figure 4: Population density in 2000 along fall-line rivers

                                 Panel A: Average by absolute distance from the fall line




                             Panel B: Average by renormalized distance from the fall line




Notes: these graphs display contemporary population density along fall-line rivers. We select census 2000 tracts whose centroids lie within 50 miles
along fall-line rivers; the x-axis measures distance to the fall line, where the fall line is normalized to zero, and the Atlantic Ocean lies to the left.
In Panel A, these distances are calculated in miles. In Panel B, these distances are normalized for each river relative to the river mouth or the river
source. Population density is calculated as the logarithm of population per square mile plus a constant (for display purposes). The raw population
data are then smoothed via Stata’s lowess procedure, with bandwidths of 0.3 (Panel A) or 0.1 (Panel B). Population density is calculated as the
logarithm of population per square mile plus a constant (for display purposes).



                                                                           48
            Figure 5: The density of economic activity near early Great Lakes portage routes




Notes: this map shows the contemporary distribution of economic activity near the Great Lakes, measured by the 1996-7 nighttime lights layer from
NationalAtlas.gov. The nighttime lights are used to present a continuous measure of present-day economic activity at a high spatial frequency. The
watershed divide (dashed black) and rivers (dashed gray) are from NationalAtlas.gov, based on data produced by the U.S. Geological Survey. The
nighttime lights data are used to present a continuous measure of economic activity. Seventeenth-century portage routes between the Great Lakes
and the Mississippi River watershed (solid black) are from Semple (1903). Three portage routes in northwestern Wisconsin and northern Minnesota
are not shown. Many portage routes lie in present-day metropolitan areas, including (from the northeast) Erie, Akron, Fort Wayne, South Bend,
Chicago, and Portage, Wisconsin. Semple notes that portaging was common throughout the area between present-day Milwaukee and Chicago.
Here, only the portage route between the Chicago and Illinois Rivers is shown. Many present-day metropolitan areas are located at the Great Lakes
mouths of these portage routes, including Cleveland (on the Cuyahoga River), Toledo (the Maumee), St. Joseph, Michigan (the St. Joseph), and
Green Bay (the Fox).




                                                                       49
 Figure 6: The density of economic activity near portage sites along Mississippi River tributaries

                        Panel A. Ohio River, confluence with the Mississippi to Pittsburgh




                      Panel B. Upper Mississippi River, origin to confluence with the Ohio




                        Panel C. Missouri River, origin to confluence with the Mississippi




Notes: These maps show the contemporary distribution of economic activity around the major Mississippi River tributaries, as measured by the
NationalAtlas.gov nighttime lights layer. The maps have been individually re-oriented and re-scaled for display purposes. Rivers (solid white) are
from NationalAtlas.gov, based on data produced by the U.S. Geological Survey. The nighttime lights data are used to present a continuous measure
of economic activity. Likely 19th-century portage sites (large circles) are collected from 19th-century U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Surveys.
Shown near the center of Panel A are the falls of the Ohio near Louisville, Kentucky. Shown in Panel B are (from left) the Saint Anthony Falls
near Minneapolis, the Rock Island Rapids near the Quad Cities (center), and the Des Moines Rapids near Keokuk, Iowa. Shown in Panel C are
(from left) the Great Falls of the Missouri River near Great Falls, Montana, and the early head of steamboat navigation at Sioux City, Iowa (center).
Confluences with other rivers (small dots) are from NationalAtlas.gov.


                                                                        50
              Figure 7: Relative population density across fall-line-area counties, 1790–2000

                              Panel A. With respect to distance to historical portage sites




                       Panel B. With respect to watershed area upstream from portage site




Notes: these graphs display estimates of equations (1) and (2) in the text. Coefficient estimates are from regressions estimated separately by decade
of the natural log of county-year population density on the natural log of distance from the nearest river/fall-line intersection to the centroid of the
county (Panel A), or on the interaction of portage site with the log of land area in the watershed upstream of the fall line, a variable that proxies for
demand for commerce at the portage site (Panel B). The basic specification also includes a fourth-order polynomial in latitude and longitude and
a set of fixed effects for watersheds of each river that crosses the fall line. The sample includes counties whose centroids lie within 150 miles of
fall-line rivers.




                                                                          51
                      Figure 8: Population density and portage in the Midwest, 1800–2000

   Panel A. Distance to historical portage sites across Great-Lakes watershed divide, 1820-2000


                                                                                                     .05
                                             Estimated coefficient on log distance to portage site

                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                     -.05
                                                                                                     -.1




                                                                                                            1800   1850         1900   1950   2000

                                                                                                                           Year



     Panel B: Distance to the falls along the Mississippi, Ohio, and Missouri Rivers, 1800-2000
                             Estimated coefficient on log distance to por tage site

                                                                                                     .1
                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                     - .1
                                                                                                     - .2
                                                                                                     - .3




                                                                                                            1800   1850         1900   1950   2000

                                                                                                                               Year



Notes: These graphs show coefficient estimates from regressions estimated separately by decade of county-year log population density on log
distance to historical portage sites (Panel A) or falls (Panel B). For Panel A, the sample is all counties that lie within 12.5 miles of the Great Lakes-
Mississippi River watershed divide. For Panel B, the sample is all counties that lie within 12.5 miles of the Upper Mississippi, Ohio, and Missouri
rivers. Specifications and data sources are similar to those reported for fall-line-area counties reported in Table 1, column (4).




                                                                                                                          52
Table 1: Proximity to Historical Portage Site and Contemporary Population Density
                               (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)           (11)            (12)           (13)            (14)
                              Basic         Other Spatial Controls                  Additional Fixed Factors                                 Alternative Samples                                         Alternative Estimators
                                                            Distance                                                                                                       Within                                                       Conley's
                                              State           from                                                           East of        Atlantic       Within         5mi of a                        Cluster         Boot-         estimator
        Specifications:                       fixed         various        Climate          Aquifer          Mean            Miss.          Rivers          5mi of        principal       Cluster        on 60km         strap on       100-mile
                                             effects        features       variables         Share         elevation         River           only          fall line        river         on State       grid cells        river          cutoff
Explanatory variables:                                                                                     Panel A: Census Tracts, 2000, N=21452
Distance to portage           -0.558          -0.598         -0.733          -0.407          -0.542            -0.481         -0.618         -0.708         -0.651          -0.570         -0.558          -0.558         -0.558          -0.558
site, natural logs            (0.099) ***     (0.076) ***    (0.095) ***     (0.093) ***     (0.095) ***       (0.103) ***    (0.125) ***    (0.138) ***    (0.087) ***     (0.095) ***    (0.108) ***     (0.101) ***    (0.119) ***     (0.083) ***
Centroid within 15mi           1.204           1.144          1.270           0.994           1.143             1.050          1.119          1.161          0.761           1.268          1.204           1.204          1.204           1.204
of portage site               (0.199) ***     (0.191) ***    (0.214) ***     (0.192) ***     (0.210) ***       (0.196) ***    (0.253) ***    (0.297) ***    (0.352) **      (0.278) ***    (0.082) ***     (0.103) ***    (0.233) ***     (0.214) ***
Any part within 4mi of         0.977           0.845          1.109           0.737           0.993             0.790          1.046          1.156          0.512           0.911          0.977           0.977          0.977           0.977
portage site                  (0.160) ***     (0.136) ***    (0.114) ***     (0.125) ***     (0.152) ***       (0.183) ***    (0.139) ***    (0.115) ***    (0.084) ***     (0.123) ***    (0.198) ***     (0.159) ***    (0.158) ***     (0.233) ***
Both of previous two           1.192           1.127          1.304           0.982           1.144             1.041          1.165          1.235          0.780           1.250          1.192           1.192          1.192           1.192
conditions                    (0.168) ***     (0.163) ***    (0.197) ***     (0.166) ***     (0.179) ***       (0.170) ***    (0.185) ***    (0.211) ***    (0.216) ***     (0.227) ***    (0.079) ***     (0.081) ***    (0.164) ***     (0.151) ***
Distance to placebo           -0.126          -0.097         -0.253          -0.232          -0.083            -0.183          0.007          0.063         -2.095          -0.138         -0.126          -0.126         -0.126          -0.126
site, natural logs            (0.173)         (0.156)        (0.154)         (0.134) *       (0.136)           (0.164)        (0.117)        (0.178)        (3.880)         (0.164)        (0.207)         (0.159)        (0.183)         (0.103)
                                                                                                       Panel B: Nighttime Lights, 1996-97, N=65000
Distance to portage           -0.248          -0.236         -0.142          -0.241          -0.255            -0.199         -0.190         -0.237         -0.278          -0.263         -0.248          -0.248         -0.248          -0.248
site, natural logs            (0.058) ***     (0.053) ***    (0.091)         (0.057) ***     (0.058) ***       (0.057) ***    (0.084) **     (0.107) **     (0.074) ***     (0.055) ***    (0.068) ***     (0.072) ***    (0.055) ***     (0.083) ***
Centroid within 15mi           0.786           0.726          0.492           0.761           0.790             0.732          0.533          0.590          0.334           0.830          0.786           0.786          0.786           0.786
of portage site               (0.126) ***     (0.121) ***    (0.153) ***     (0.126) ***     (0.127) ***       (0.121) ***    (0.143) ***    (0.156) ***    (0.125) **      (0.130) ***    (0.136) ***     (0.134) ***    (0.150) ***     (0.209) ***
Any part within 4mi of         1.156           1.058          0.507           1.121           1.158             1.049          0.942          0.988          0.388           1.107          1.156           1.156          1.156           1.156
portage site                  (0.170) ***     (0.168) ***    (0.220) **      (0.171) ***     (0.170) ***       (0.169) ***    (0.190) ***    (0.214) ***    (0.151) **      (0.166) ***    (0.179) ***     (0.087) ***    (0.172) ***     (0.383) ***
Both of previous two           0.786           0.726          0.492           0.761           0.790             0.732          0.533          0.590          0.334           0.830          0.786           0.786          0.786           0.786
conditions                    (0.126) ***     (0.121) ***    (0.153) ***     (0.126) ***     (0.127) ***       (0.121) ***    (0.143) ***    (0.156) ***    (0.125) **      (0.130) ***    (0.136) ***     (0.134) ***    (0.142) ***     (0.209) ***
Distance to placebo            0.021           0.012          0.002           0.011           0.016            -0.031         -0.139         -0.014         -2.479           0.026          0.021           0.021          0.021           0.021
site, natural logs            (0.080)         (0.067)        (0.078)         (0.076)         (0.081)           (0.075)        (0.106)        (0.093)        (1.681)         (0.087)        (0.074)         (0.086)        (0.080)         (0.039)
                                                                                                               Panel C: Counties, 2000, N=3480
Distance to portage           -0.224          -0.229         -0.188          -0.208          -0.227            -0.199         -0.123         -0.352         -0.381          -0.230         -0.224          -0.224         -0.224          -0.224
site, natural logs            (0.074) ***     (0.076) ***    (0.088) **      (0.069) ***     (0.075) ***       (0.072) ***    (0.142)        (0.190) *      (0.107) ***     (0.074) ***    (0.105) **      (0.087) **     (0.068) ***     (0.067) ***
Centroid within 7.5mi          1.778           1.727          1.469           1.767           1.778             1.692          1.691          2.087          1.163           1.845          1.778           1.778          1.778           1.778
of portage site               (0.322) ***     (0.289) ***    (0.299) ***     (0.303) ***     (0.322) ***       (0.280) ***    (0.322) ***    (0.270) ***    (0.230) ***     (0.359) ***    (0.350) ***     (0.374) ***    (0.329) ***     (0.326) ***
Any part within 2mi of         0.678           0.670          0.445           0.693           0.677             0.672          0.474          0.668          0.548           0.682          0.678           0.678          0.678           0.678
portage site                  (0.128) ***     (0.122) ***    (0.170) **      (0.130) ***     (0.128) ***       (0.126) ***    (0.139) ***    (0.180) ***    (0.137) ***     (0.138) ***    (0.204) ***     (0.264) **     (0.116) ***     (0.214) ***
Both of previous two           1.593           1.544          1.239           1.593           1.593             1.524          1.468          1.870          1.046           1.627          1.593           1.593          1.593           1.593
conditions                    (0.261) ***     (0.245) ***    (0.233) ***     (0.254) ***     (0.261) ***       (0.239) ***    (0.263) ***    (0.216) ***    (0.241) ***     (0.276) ***    (0.320) ***     (0.328) ***    (0.262) ***     (0.287) ***
Distance to placebo            0.053           0.051          0.005           0.085           0.056            -0.035          0.136          0.224         -4.755           0.043          0.053           0.053          0.053           0.053
site, natural logs            (0.078)         (0.077)        (0.075)         (0.066)         (0.077)           (0.076)        (0.105)        (0.109) *      (3.707)         (0.073)        (0.100)         (0.088)        (0.080)         (0.058)

Notes: this table displays estimates of equation (1) in the text. Each cell presents estimates from a separate regression. The baseline sample consists of all areas that are within the watersheds of rivers that cross the fall line. Except as
noted, the estimator used is OLS, with standard errors clustered on watershed. The outcome variables are, for Panel A, population density by census tracts from 2000; for Panel B, the intensity of nighttime lights; and, for Panel C,
population data for counties from 2000. The basic specification includes a fourth-order polynomial in latitude and longitude and set of fixed effects for watersheds of each river that crosses the fall line. Four measures of proximity to
historical portage sites are employed. The first is the natural log of distance from the nearest river/fall-line intersection to the centroid of the area. The next three measures are binary indicators for proximity to the river/fall-line
intersection. The final measure is the natural log of distance to the nearest intersection of a river with a placebo fall line that is computed 100 miles farther inland. Column 3 controls for the natural log of distance to the fall line, to the
ocean, to the closest river, and to the closest circa-1890 seaport. Column 4 controls for the average fraction of days with sunshine, natural log of heating degree days, cooling degree days, and precipitation. Column 5 includes a control
for the fraction of that area that sits on top of an aquifer, and Column 6 includes a control for the average elevation of the area. Results for columns 7-10 are produced using subsamples as indicated in the column headings. Estimates
for columns 11-14 are produced with the baseline sample, but with the alternative estimators that are indicated in the column headings. Reporting of additional coefficients is suppressed. Data sources and additional variable and
sample definitions are found in the text and the appendices.
Table 2: Watershed Upstream from Historical Portage Site and Contemporary Population Density
                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)               (9)             (10)           (11)            (12)           (13)            (14)
                                    Basic                 Other Spatial Controls             Compare with Water Power                               Alternative Samples                                  Alternative Estimators
                                                                         Distance                                                                                          Portage                                                      Conley's
                                                           State           from                                                         Within                            or water-                       Cluster         Boot-         estimator
        Specifications:                                    fixed         various                                                        5km of            Portage          power          Cluster        on 60km         strap on       100-mile
                                                          effects        features                                                       fall line        sites only         sites         on State       grid cells        river          cutoff
Explanatory variables:                                                                                                 Panel A: Census Tracts, 2000, N=21452
Portage site times            0.324          0.141          0.373          0.355           0.142                           0.326          0.386             0.166            0.186          0.324           0.324          0.324           0.324
upstream watershed           (0.160) **     (0.020) ***    (0.150) **     (0.112) ***     (0.019) ***                     (0.157) **     (0.149) **        (0.108)          (0.101) *      (0.177) *       (0.180) *      (0.192) *       (0.111) ***
Binary indicator for         -1.602                        -2.076         -1.757                          1.195           -1.611         -2.154                             -0.369         -1.602          -1.602         -1.602          -1.602
portage site                 (1.369)                       (1.277)        (0.943) *                      (0.169) ***      (1.346)        (1.300)                            (0.922)        (1.514)         (1.619)        (1.671)         (0.907)
Water-power site                                                                          -0.358                          -0.367                                            -0.460
times height of falls                                                                     (0.029) ***                     (0.068) ***                                       (0.050) ***
Binary indicator for                                                                                     -0.031           -0.034
water-power site                                                                                         (0.319)          (0.332)
Watershed area times                                                                                                       0.003
falls height times site                                                                                                   (0.013)
                                                                                                                     Panel B: Nighttime Lights, 1996-97, N=65000
Portage site times            0.356          0.097          0.312          0.328           0.087                           0.336          0.313             0.230            0.204          0.356           0.356          0.356           0.356
upstream watershed           (0.099) ***    (0.015) ***    (0.091) ***    (0.094) ***     (0.014) ***                     (0.094) ***    (0.073) ***       (0.077) ***      (0.090) **     (0.085) ***     (0.089) ***    (0.109) ***     (0.088) ***
Binary indicator for         -2.235                        -1.919         -2.275                          0.699           -2.134         -2.008                             -1.309         -2.235          -2.235         -2.235          -2.235
portage site                 (0.807) ***                   (0.750) **     (0.765) ***                    (0.122) ***      (0.770) ***    (0.605) ***                        (0.805)        (0.748) ***     (0.747) ***    (0.909) **      (0.794) ***
Water-power site                                                                           0.140                          -0.083                                             0.157
times height of falls                                                                     (0.044) ***                     (0.116)                                           (0.048) ***
Binary indicator for                                                                                      0.598            0.888
water-power site                                                                                         (0.173) ***      (0.442) **
Watershed area times                                                                                                      -0.001
falls height times site                                                                                                   (0.008)
                                                                                                                          Panel C: Counties, 2000, N=3480
Portage site times            0.450          0.195          0.399          0.439           0.192                           0.478          0.371             0.490            0.444          0.450           0.450          0.450           0.450
upstream watershed           (0.184) **     (0.029) ***    (0.177) **     (0.169) **      (0.029) ***                     (0.189) **     (0.163) **        (0.129) ***      (0.176) **     (0.145) ***     (0.134) ***    (0.171) ***     (0.196) ***
Binary indicator for         -2.182                        -1.784         -2.444                          1.569           -2.317         -1.650                             -2.388         -2.182          -2.182         -2.182          -2.182
portage site                 (1.519)                       (1.463)        (1.385) *                      (0.264) ***      (1.562)        (1.392)                            (1.539)        (1.268) *       (1.155) *      (1.447)         (1.661)
Water-power site                                                                           0.051                           0.001                                             0.108
times height of falls                                                                     (0.031)                         (0.102)                                           (0.119)
Binary indicator for                                                                                      0.234            0.284
water-power site                                                                                         (0.125) *        (0.423)
Watershed area times                                                                                                      -0.028
falls height times site                                                                                                   (0.012) **

Notes: this table displays estimates of equation (2) in the text. Each column/panel presents estimates from a separate regression. The baseline sample consists of all areas that are within the watersheds of rivers that cross the fall line.
Except as noted, the estimator used is OLS, with standard errors clustered on watershed. The outcome variables are, for Panel A, population density by census tracts from 2000; for Panel B, the intensity of nighttime lights; and, for
Panel C, population data for counties from 2000. The basic specification includes a fourth-order polynomial in latitude and longitude and set of fixed effects by the watershed of each river that crosses the fall line. The first portage-
related variable in this table is the interaction of portage site with the log of land area in the watershed upstream of the fall line, a variable which proxies for demand for commerce at the portage site. The second portage-related
variable is a binary indicator for proximity to the river/fall-line intersection. Column 4 controls for the natural log of distances to the fall line, to the ocean, to the closest river, and to the closest circa-1890 seaport. Columns 5-7
include controls for proximity to potential water-power sites and the total height of falls at those sites, the latter variable proxying for potential waterpower. Results for columns 8-10 are produced using subsamples as indicated in the
column headings. Estimates for columns 11-14 are produced with the baseline sample, but with the alternative estimators that are indicated in the column headings. Reporting of additional coefficients is suppressed. Data sources
and
. additional variable and sample definitions are found in the text and the appendices.
Table 3: Reproducible Factors as Intermediating Variables
                              (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)
                                                                                              Water         Water                         Railroad       Distance
                                                                                                                          Railroad,
                                            1850             1900             1950          power in       power in                       network         to RR
  Additional variable:     Baseline                                                                                        1850,
                                           density          density          density        use 1890       use 1890                        length,         Hub,
                                                                                                                          dummy
                                                                                             dummy           logs                           1850          1850
Explanatory variables:                                                     Panel A: Binary indicator for portage site
Binary indicator for          1.593           1.029           0.503            0.149          1.519          1.521           1.426          1.409          1.353
portage site                 (0.261) ***     (0.240) ***     (0.226) **       (0.172)        (0.255) ***    (0.256) ***     (0.241) ***    (0.236) ***    (0.250) ***
Additional variable                           0.917           1.121            0.918          0.413          0.045           0.642          0.105         -0.585
                                             (0.089) ***     (0.068) ***      (0.030) ***    (0.156) **     (0.017) **      (0.122) ***    (0.020) ***    (0.096) ***
                                                                       Panel B: Portage site times upstream watershed
Portage site times            0.195           0.126           0.064            0.015          0.186          0.186           0.175          0.173          0.167
upstream watershed           (0.029) ***     (0.028) ***     (0.028) **       (0.021)        (0.029) ***    (0.029) ***     (0.027) ***    (0.027) ***    (0.028) ***
Additional variable                           0.914           1.119            0.919          0.402          0.044           0.640          0.105         -0.584
                                             (0.088) ***     (0.068) ***      (0.030) ***    (0.155) **     (0.017) **      (0.122) ***    (0.020) ***    (0.096) ***
                                                           Panel C: Portage-site dummy and upstream-watershed interaction
Portage site times            0.450           0.287           0.253           -0.122          0.421          0.420           0.417          0.414          0.453
upstream watershed           (0.184) **      (0.181)         (0.199)          (0.119)        (0.179) **     (0.180) **      (0.173) **     (0.169) **     (0.173) **
Binary indicator for         -2.182          -1.371          -1.613            1.168         -2.011         -1.999          -2.073         -2.062         -2.450
portage site                 (1.519)         (1.520)         (1.663)          (0.982)        (1.486)        (1.491)         (1.421)        (1.392)        (1.421) *
Additional variable                           0.912           1.119            0.919          0.395          0.043           0.639          0.105         -0.585
                                             (0.088) ***     (0.068) ***      (0.030) ***    (0.155) **     (0.017) **      (0.122) ***    (0.020) ***    (0.096) ***
                                                     Panel D: Replicate Panels A and B for counties within 150 miles of the Fall Line
Portage site times            0.153           0.124           0.067            0.008          0.144          0.145           0.149          0.149          0.140
upstream watershed           (0.024) ***     (0.023) ***     (0.020) ***      (0.020)        (0.024) ***    (0.024) ***     (0.025) ***    (0.025) ***    (0.024) ***
Binary indicator for          1.265           1.013           0.573            0.097          1.196          1.203           1.235          1.231          1.156
portage site                 (0.218) ***     (0.203) ***     (0.173) ***      (0.166)        (0.211) ***    (0.212) ***     (0.219) ***    (0.219) ***    (0.212) ***
                                                                    Panel E: Replicate Panels A and B for the South only
Portage site times            0.181           0.147           0.085            0.024          0.172          0.172           0.163          0.163          0.164
upstream watershed           (0.032) ***     (0.029) ***     (0.026) ***      (0.016)        (0.031) ***    (0.031) ***     (0.030) ***    (0.029) ***    (0.029) ***
Binary indicator for          1.482           1.216           0.672            0.222          1.402          1.406           1.332          1.328          1.335
portage site                 (0.281) ***     (0.251) ***     (0.222) ***      (0.142)        (0.273) ***    (0.273) ***     (0.259) ***    (0.255) ***    (0.258) ***

Notes: this table displays estimates of equations (1) and (2) in the text. The outcome variable is population density, measured in natural logarithms. Each
column/panel presents estimates from a separate regression. The sample consists of all US counties, from the year 2000, that are within the watersheds of
rivers that cross the fall line, except for Panels D and E, which are further restricted to counties either within 150km of the fall line or within the South,
respectively. The estimator used is OLS, with standard errors clustered on watershed. The basic specification includes a polynomial in latitude and longitude
and set of fixed effects by the watershed of each river that crosses the fall line. Two portage-related variables are used in this table. The first is a binary
indicator for proximity to the river/fall-line intersection. The second is the interaction of portage site with the log of land area in the watershed upstream of the
fall line, a variable that proxies for demand for commerce at the portage site. Panel A reports results using the binary portage-site indicator, Panel B contains
results using the watershed interaction, and Panel C reports a specification in which both variables are included. Panels D and E replicate the results for Panels
A and B in the indicated subsamples. Further, for Panels D and E, each cell represents the result from a separate regression, and the reporting of the coefficient
on the additional variable is suppressed. The baseline specification is used for column 1. Each subsequent column adds one more variable, as indicated in the
column heading. The coefficient estimate on this variable is reported in the row marked "additional variable". Columns 2-4 report estimates with controls for
lagged population density, which were matched onto the year-2000 county boundaries using a spatial join in ArcGIS. Columns 5-6 report specifications in
which the water power in use in 1890 is included as a control, either by the extensive or intensive margins. Columns 7-9 include measures of railroads in that
county in 1850. (To accommodate zeros and the use of logs in columns 6 and 8, we add 1 to the variable before taking logs.) Reporting of additional
coefficients is suppressed. Data sources and additional variable and sample definitions are found in the text and the appendices.
Table 4: Housing Prices, Portage, and Population Density
                              (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)                 (5)          (6)              (7)            (8)
  Additional variable:          Median Rent, 1990                Median price, 1990                Median price, 1940             Travel time, 1990
Explanatory variables:                              Panel A: Binary indicator for portage site
Binary indicator for          0.142          -0.034             0.146        -0.052               0.296        0.028           -0.044         -0.032
portage site                 (0.036) ***     (0.030)           (0.069) **    (0.040)             (0.145) **   (0.100)          (0.036)        (0.038)
Polynomial in log
                              No             Yes                No            Yes                No           Yes               No            Yes
population density?
                                               Panel B: Portage site times upstream watershed
Portage site times            0.018          -0.004             0.020        -0.005               0.039        0.005           -0.005         -0.004
upstream watershed           (0.004) ***     (0.003)           (0.008) **    (0.004)             (0.017) **   (0.012)          (0.004)        (0.004)
Polynomial in log
                              No             Yes                No            Yes                No           Yes               No            Yes
population density?

Notes: this table displays estimates of equations (1) and (2) in the text. The outcome variable is the median housing rent, housing price, and travel
time, all measured in natural logarithms. Each column/panel presents estimates from a separate regression. The sample consists of all US counties,
from indicated year, that are within the watersheds of rivers that cross the fall line. The estimator used is OLS, with standard errors clustered on
watershed. The basic specification includes a polynomial in latitude and longitude and set of fixed effects by the watershed of each river that crosses
the fall line. Two portage-related variables are used in this table. The first is a binary indicator for proximity to the river/fall-line intersection. The
second is the interaction of portage site with the log of land area in the watershed upstream of the fall line, a variable that proxies for demand for
commerce at the portage site. Panel A reports results using the binary portage-site indicator; Panel B contains results using the watershed
interaction. The baseline specification is used for the odd-numbered columns. Specifications reported in the even-numbered columns also include a
sixth-order polynomial in population density. Reporting of additional coefficients is suppressed. Data sources and additional variable and sample
definitions are found in the text and the appendices.
Table 5: The Predictive Power of Historical Portage, 1790-1870 versus 1950-2000

                                    (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)            (9)            (10)            (11)

                                                         Sample of counties within 150 miles of the Fall Line                                                      Other samples
                                                   Use                          Use
                                                                  Use                                                            1790-                                        50-mile
    Sample modification or                        double                      distance                      1850-80                            Atlantic
                                                                distance                     Verified                           1860 vs                        Whole           buffer          Whole
alternate coding of portage      Baseline        radius to                       to                         vs 1970-                            rivers
                                                               to border                    falls only                           1930-                         sample          around          South
                       site:                      define                      centroid                        2000                               only
                                                                  only                                                           2000                                         Fall Line
                                                   sites                        only

Explanatory variables:                                                                          Panel A: Binary indicator for portage site

Binary indicator for                0.596           0.408          0.201           0.811            0.363          0.449          0.891           0.321          0.873           0.518           0.563
portage site                       (0.154) ***     (0.084) ***    (0.088) **      (0.191) ***      (0.162) **     (0.195) **     (0.281) ***     (0.151) **     (0.267) ***     (0.123) ***     (0.150) ***

Binary indicator for                0.300           0.039          0.299           0.283            0.526          0.486          0.200           0.682          0.290           0.318           0.641
portage site x 20th century        (0.191)         (0.148)        (0.119) **      (0.164) *        (0.239) **     (0.219) **     (0.234)         (0.245) **     (0.241)         (0.178) *       (0.182) ***

                                                                                            Panel B: Portage site times upstream watershed

Portage site x upstream             0.076           0.040          0.037           0.126            0.047          0.059          0.111           0.042          0.109           0.065           0.072
watershed                          (0.016) ***     (0.012) ***    (0.010) ***     (0.025) ***      (0.016) ***    (0.022) **     (0.033) ***     (0.015) **     (0.031) ***     (0.012) ***     (0.017) ***

Portage site x upstream             0.037           0.078          0.097          -0.008            0.064          0.057          0.025           0.087          0.036           0.040           0.078
watershed x 20th century           (0.023)         (0.023) ***    (0.020) ***     (0.026)          (0.029) **     (0.027) **     (0.028)         (0.030) ***    (0.029)         (0.021) *       (0.022) ***


Notes: this table reports estimates of equation (3) in the text. Each column/panel presents estimates from a separate regression. The baseline sample consists of all counties, for years 1790-1870
and 1950-2000, that are within 150 miles of the fall line. The estimator used is OLS, with standard errors clustered on watershed. The outcome variable is log population density, where
population is measured by the decennial censuses and area is computed from the NHGIS boundary files. The basic specification includes a second-order polynomial in latitude and longitude and
set of fixed effects by the watershed of each river that crosses the fall line. The first portage-related variable, used in Panel A, is a binary indicator for proximity to the river/fall-line intersection,
where proximity is defined by adjacency and distance to centroid, as in the “both” variable in Table 1. The second portage-related variable, seen in Panel B, is the interaction of portage site with
the log of land area in the watershed upstream of the fall line, a variable that proxies for demand for commerce at the portage site. The interaction of these two variables with a dummy for post-
1900 is also included in the specification. Columns 2-5 present results with alternative definitions of portage sites. Columns 6-7 use alternative decades in the sample. Columns 8-11 use
alternative samples of counties. Reporting of additional coefficients is suppressed. Data sources and additional variable and sample definitions are found in the text and the appendices.
A     Data appendix

A.1     The fall line
We use data on counties in fall-line river watersheds. The base data are county shapefiles, 1790–
2000, from the National Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS), matched to county
populations (and other data) from the Haines (2004) extracts of the decennial U.S. censuses.
    First, we select counties based on their location within river watersheds that intersect the fall
line. The fall line itself, from Texas to New Jersey, is digitized from the map Physical Divisions of
the United States. (Appendix Figure A shows the digitized fall line, in solid black, superimposed
over both the rivers layer and the nighttime lights layer.) We select the 51 large rivers between the
Rio Grande and the Delaware rivers, inclusive, from the North American Atlas-Hydrography map
layer available on NationalAtlas.gov that intersect the fall line. Two smaller rivers, the Raritan
River in New Jersey and the Appomattox River in Virginia, are added from the Streams and Water-
bodies layer. Hydrologic units from the Hydrologic Units (Watersheds) layer are then aggregated
to entire river watersheds and matched to each of the 53 rivers. In addition, we identify the loca-
tions of likely historical portage sites by intersecting the fall-line layer with the rivers map layer.
These steps form a basic “sampling” layer, which is then used to select counties in each decennial
NHGIS   map layer. Counties that lay on the boundary of multiple watersheds are assigned to the
watershed of the closest river, when we perform our across-watershed analyses.
    Second, we intersect each decade’s sampled county layer with various map layers containing
geographic information. These layers include information on spatial relationships (county dis-
tances to the fall line, seaports, or the Atlantic coast, county position upstream or downstream of
the fall line, county adjacency to fall-line portage sites), fixed characteristics of counties (climate,
elevation, the presence of aquifers, and potential water power), and mobile factors (the locations
of 19th-century railroads, state capitals). The major 19th-century seaports (Baltimore, Norfolk,
Wilmington, Charleston, Savannah, Mobile, New Orleans, and Galveston) are taken from Phillips
(1905). Climate data are from the Climate Atlas of the United States, which reports (categorical)
thirty-year averages, over 1961–1990, for most of the climate variables. Data on the locations of
aquifers and other geological features are from NationalAtlas.gov.
    Potential water power is from the Reports on the Water-Power of the United States (1885),
published as part of the Tenth Census. The tables beginning on pages xxx and xxxiii summarize
by river and “locality” the total water power available and the total water power then used in

                                                  59
service. We geo-code this information, and in some cases we rely on textual descriptions in the
accompanying survey to identify localities. The locations of 19th-century railroads are drawn from
Maps 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 in Pred (1980), covering 1840, 1850, and 1860, respectively. We digitize
these maps, and then, since the precise routes are somewhat imprecise, define a buffer of 10 miles
in width around the digitized rail routes. Rail length is then determined by counties that intersect
this buffer, divided by 10.
   Finally, we merge each decade’s spatial data with census data from the Haines extracts. In
addition to data on population, the Haines extracts also include, for some years, information on the
age distribution of the housing stock. We then pool the decennial county data into a single data set.
   The construction of the census 2000 tract data is identical to the procedure described above.
For the nighttime lights, we first sample one out of every 100 raster-resolution pixels, creating a
grid of sample points, then apply the procedure described above.


A.2    The Great Lakes
The basic data sets (NHGIS and the Haines extracts) are the same for our Great Lakes sample. We
first use the Hydrologic Units (Watersheds) to define the divide between the Great Lakes and the
Mississippi River watersheds. (This is the dashed black line in Figure 5.) Then, we select counties
that intersect a buffer of 12.5 miles in either direction from the divide. We identify 12 portage
routes based on the map “Portages Between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi” (Semple, 1903,
facing p. 28) and the two rivers layers from NationalAtlas.gov described earlier. Counties are
assigned to portage-route groups based on distance to the nearest portage route. The remaining
procedures are identical to those described in the fall-line section.


A.3    The Mississippi River basin
We select counties within 12.5 miles in either direction of each of the three major upstream
branches of the Mississippi River. Major confluences with other rivers are identified from the
river layers from NationalAtlas.gov described earlier. We identify early portage sites along these
rivers using early-19th-century surveys from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, found in the Serial
Set. For example, the “Survey of the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers” (17th Congress, 2nd session, H.
No. 260, January 22, 1823) notes navigation obstacles at the falls of the Ohio and other sites along
the Ohio River. The report “Improvement of Missouri River” (46th Congress, 3rd session, H. Ex.


                                                  60
Doc. No. 92, February 17, 1881) and Part II of the Reports on the Water-Power of the United
States, in the section called “The Mississippi River and Some of its Tributaries,” (U.S. Census,
1885) note seasonal navigation obstacles along the Missouri River near Sioux City, Iowa, Council
Bluffs, Iowa (across from Omaha, Nebraska), and Kansas City, Missouri. Part II of the Reports on
the Water-Power of the United States also notes rapids near Keokuk, Iowa, Rock Island, Illinois,
and the Falls of St. Anthony, near Minneapolis. These observations are similar to those in “Report
Intended to Illustrate a Map of the Hydrographical Basin of the Upper Mississippi River” (26th
Congress, 2nd session, S. Doc. 237, February 16, 1841). In addition, many of these surveys (and
others not cited) include notes of minor navigation obstacles at regular intervals along all these
rivers and other major U.S. waterways, which, because of their large number, we do not use in
this paper. We noted several examples of present-day cities at the sites of these minor navigation
obstacles. Finally, we exclude portages along smaller tributaries of the Mississippi River.




                                                61
                  Appendix Figure A: The density of economic activity near intersections between the fall line and fall-line rivers




62
     Notes: this map shows the contemporary distribution of economic activity across the southeastern U.S., measured by the 1996-7 nighttime lights layer from NationalAtlas.gov. The nighttime
     lights are used to present a nearly continuous measure of present-day economic activity at a high spatial frequency. The fall line (solid) is digitized from Physical Divisions of the United States,
     produced by the U.S. Geological Survey. Major rivers (dashed gray) are from NationalAtlas.gov, based on data produced by the U.S. Geological Survey. Many fall line-river intersections lie in
     present-day metropolitan areas, including (from the northeast) New Brunswick, Trenton, Philadelphia, Washington, Richmond, Fayetteville, Columbia, Augusta, Macon, Columbus, Tuscaloosa,
     Little Rock, Fort Worth, Austin, and San Antonio.
