NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BROKER INCENTIVES AND MUTUAL FUND MARKET SEGMENTATION
Diane Del Guercio
Jonathan Reuter
Paula A. Tkac
Working Paper 16312
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16312

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2010

We would like to thank Scott Bauguess, John Campbell, Joseph Chen, Larry Dann, Roger Edelen,
Richard Evans, Ro Gutierrez, Edie Hotchkiss, Robert Hunt, Woodrow Johnson, Wayne Mikkelson,
Elizabeth Odders-White, Jeff Pontiff, Antoinette Schoar, Phil Strahan, Laurens Swinkels, Peter Tufano,
Eric Zitzewitz, and seminar participants at the Pacific Northwest Finance Conference, the Institutional
Investors Conference at the University of Texas, Federal Reserve System Conference on Financial
Markets & Institutions, 4th One-day Conference on Professional Asset Management at Erasmus University
Rotterdam, NBER Summer Institute Household Finance Workshop, Boston College, Cal State Fullerton,
INSEAD, Securities and Exchange Commission, Simon Fraser University, University of Arkansas,
University of Texas-Dallas, and University of Wisconsin-Madison for helpful comments and discussions.
Del Guercio would like to acknowledge support from the Securities Analysis Center at the University
of Oregon. We thank Steven Green for excellent research assistance and Deb Wetherbee at Financial
Research Corporation for generously providing data on distribution channels. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Diane Del Guercio, Jonathan Reuter, and Paula A. Tkac. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Broker Incentives and Mutual Fund Market Segmentation
Diane Del Guercio, Jonathan Reuter, and Paula A. Tkac
NBER Working Paper No. 16312
August 2010
JEL No. G14,G2,G23,L1
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of investor heterogeneity on mutual fund market segmentation. To motivate our
empirical analysis, we make two assumptions. First, some investors inherently value broker services.
Second, because brokers are only compensated when they sell mutual funds, they have little incentive
to recommend funds available at lower cost elsewhere. The need for mutual fund families to internalize
broker incentives leads us to predict that the market for mutual funds will be highly segmented, with
families targeting either do-it-yourself investors or investors who value broker services, but not both.
Using novel distribution channel data, we find strong empirical support for this prediction; only 3.3%
of families serve both market segments. We also predict and find strong evidence that mutual funds
targeting performance-sensitive, do-it-yourself investors will invest more in portfolio management.
Our findings have important implications for the expected relation between mutual fund fees and returns,
tests of fund manager ability, and the puzzle of active management. Furthermore, they suggest that
changing the way investors compensate brokers will change the nature of competition in the mutual
fund industry.
Diane Del Guercio
Lundquist College of Business
1208 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1208
dianedg@lcbmail.uoregon.edu
Jonathan Reuter
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
224B Fulton
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
reuterj@bc.edu

Paula A. Tkac
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Research Department
1000 Peachtree St. NE
Atlanta, GA 30309
paula.tkac@atl.frb.org

To assess the competitiveness of the mutual fund industry, academics and regulators focus on the relation between mutual fund fees and returns. For example, assuming that the market
for retail mutual funds is competitive, Malkiel (1995) and Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu (2009) predict a positive relation between total mutual fund fees and before-fee returns. Contrary to this
prediction, they find that actively managed equity funds charging higher total fees earn lower
before-fee returns. Similarly, Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) find that mutual funds
sold through brokers charge higher fees and earn lower before-distribution-fee returns than funds
marketed directly to investors. Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu (2008, 2009) argue that these patterns
are consistent with a model of strategic fee setting, in which funds with lower expected returns
use higher fees to extract surplus from unsophisticated investors.
An alternative explanation for the lack of a positive relation between total fees and before-fee returns is that higher fees reflect the higher costs associated with providing services that
investors value but which are unrelated to portfolio management and performance. In particular,
investors who value personalized financial advice can choose to invest in mutual funds through a
broker; these funds then charge higher fees to compensate brokers for providing this service.
However, while Hortascu and Syverson (2004) and Coates and Hubbard (2007) argue that demand for costly broker services by mutual fund investors can explain dispersion in mutual fund
fees, neither study explains why mutual funds bundled with broker services should earn lower
before-fee returns.
The goal of this paper is to fully consider a rational alternative to strategic fee setting that
can also potentially explain lower before-fee returns in broker-sold funds. Our alternative is that
competition for investors who value broker services leads broker-sold funds to invest more in
costly-to-provide investor services and less in portfolio management. While Elton, Gruber, and

1

Busse (2004) and Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) acknowledge this possibility, attempts to explicitly test for substitution between broker services and portfolio management are
hindered by the facts that broker services are largely unobservable, and that traditional mutual
fund fee data do not reliably distinguish the cost of portfolio management from firm profits, or
the cost of providing broker services.1
Our approach to shedding light on the nature of mutual fund competition—despite the
unobservability of investments in broker services—is to first lay out a full set of economic arguments and necessary assumptions for our alternative, and then provide a variety of internally
consistent evidence to support the assumptions and predictions. Our argument that heterogeneity
in the demand for broker services can drive market segmentation and cause differences in beforefee returns rests on three assumptions. First, whereas all investors value higher after-fee returns,
some investors also value interacting with a broker for reasons that go beyond maximizing riskadjusted fund returns. For example, investors may value outsourcing decisions about asset allocation and rebalancing to a broker, or derive peace of mind from having someone to call during
extreme market conditions. Second, because brokers have no incentive to recommend mutual
funds that investors can purchase at lower cost online or through another broker, mutual fund
families cannot simultaneously serve both investor types.2 Third, investments in portfolio management generate higher expected before-fee returns, while investments in other services do not.3

1

Although mutual fund investors pay more than $10 billion annually in 12b-1 distribution fees, it is widely recognized that 12b-1 fees underestimate the total cost of marketing and distribution. For example, it is common for mutual fund families to use management fees to cover distribution costs (see, for example, footnote 13 in Elton, Gruber,
and Busse (2004), footnote 8 in Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009), Zweig (2009), and the SEC roundtable
on 12b-1 fees dated June 19, 2007).
2
Telser (1960) argues that when consumers can obtain product information from high service, high price retailers
but buy those same products from low service, low price retailers, retail competition will reduce sales effort and
reduce access to information that is valuable but costly to provide. Bork (1966) argues that by entering into exclusive territory agreements with downstream firms, upstream firms minimize intrabrand price competition and,
thereby, maximize the effort put into selling their products. For an overview, see chapter 4 in Tirole (1993).
3
In a world with costly information acquisition and processing, the relation between investments in portfolio man-

2

Embedding our assumptions into Massa’s (2003) model of competition between mutual
fund families leads us to predict that the market for retail mutual funds will be segmented.4 Mutual fund families must choose whether to compete for investors in the do-it-yourself segment
who only value after-fee performance, or for investors who also value broker services. Mutual
fund families then internalize the preferences of their target investors. Since do-it-yourself investors only value after-fee returns, mutual fund families competing for these investors invest the
most in portfolio management (e.g., software that improves trade execution or hiring skilled analysts), and little in other costly-to-provide services. And, since investors in broker-sold segments
value both broker services and portfolio management, families competing for these investors invest more in their brokers (e.g., hiring client service personnel dedicated to supporting broker
inquiries) and less in portfolio management. Because of their additional investments in portfolio
management, mutual fund families targeting performance-focused investors should earn higher
before-fee returns, on average, than families in other market segments. Under the additional assumption that greater investments in portfolio management cost relatively less than personalized
broker services, and profits are constant across channels, we will also observe a negative relation
between total fees and before-fee returns.
To justify our key assumptions and to test our predictions, we combine data on mutual
fund distribution strategies with data from the subadvisory market, through which fund families
can outsource portfolio management to other firms. To identify potential market segments, we
use data from Financial Research Corporation from 1996 to 2002 to classify each mutual fund
into one of seven distribution channels: direct, captive, bank, insurance, wholesale, institutional,

agement and before-fee returns should be positive (Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)).
4
Massa (2003) models competition between mutual fund families when some investors value the option to freely
switch between funds in a family, but there is an assumed tradeoff between fund variety and fund returns. We contrast his assumptions and predictions with our own in section I.

3

and other.5 We find strong evidence that these distribution channels capture important differences in investor preferences. When we test our assumption that do-it-yourself investors are the
most focused on after-fee returns, we find that monthly net flows in the direct channel are the
most sensitive to extreme positive and negative after-fee returns. More generally, we find stark
evidence of significant market segmentation. In 2002, the average mutual fund family distributes 92.6% of its assets through its primary distribution channel, and 59.1% of families distribute
100% of their assets through a single channel. Even among the 25 largest fund families, for
whom the financial barrier to entering a new distribution channel should be relatively low, 85.8%
of assets are distributed through the family’s primary distribution channel.
To shed light on why distribution is concentrated, we study the propensity of mutual fund
families to distribute assets through different pairs of distribution channels. Consistent with our
assumption that brokers compensated through mutual fund distribution fees will not provide
costly personalized services to investors who can easily access the same funds at lower cost in
another channel, we find that only 3.3% of families distribute funds simultaneously through the
direct channel and any of the broker channels (wholesale, captive, bank, and insurance), or
through multiple broker channels (e.g., through both wholesale and captive). The fact that Janus
closed its direct platform to new investors in July 2009, after a lengthy and costly entry into the
wholesale channel, is also consistent with our assumption because Janus deliberately chose not to
distribute simultaneously through the direct and wholesale channels, despite having operated in
the direct channel for decades.6

5

Mutual funds in the direct channel are marketed directly to do-it-yourself investors, those in the captive, bank, insurance channels are sold by brokers who represent a single mutual fund family, those in the wholesale channel are
sold by brokers with access to numerous mutual fund families, and those in the institutional channel are sold through
401(k) plans. We provide more details on these channels, and the other channel, in Section II. We thank FRC for
sharing their disaggregated distribution channel data with us.
6
See Janus’ 3/16/09 press release at janus.com. We provide additional anecdotal evidence in Section II.C..

4

Given our evidence that investors in the direct channel are the most sensitive to fund performance, we predict that mutual fund families in the direct channel will invest the most in fund
performance. We provide a variety of supportive evidence that direct channel families cater to a
performance-sensitive clientele. First, by studying the negotiated fee schedules in a comprehensive sample of subadvisory contracts in 2002, we are able to estimate the value that mutual fund
families place on portfolio management. Importantly, the subadvisory fee isolates the portion of
the management fee used to pay for the portfolio management function. For example, Vanguard
charges its investors a management fee of 37 basis points for the Vanguard PRIMECAP fund,
and from this pays PRIMECAP Management Company a 25 basis point subadvisory fee to do
the stock-picking. Using two different proxies, we find that mutual fund families in the direct
channel are willing to pay significantly higher fees to skilled or reputable subadvisors.
Second, motivated by Chevalier and Ellison’s (1999) finding that managers who attend
undergraduate institutions with higher average SAT scores earn higher risk-adjusted returns, we
analyze the educational backgrounds of the managers of actively managed equity mutual funds
in 2002. Such managers should be more attractive to mutual funds with performance-sensitive
investors, but also more expensive to hire and retain. We find that mutual fund families in the
direct channel are significantly more likely to employ mutual fund managers who attended the
25 most selective U.S. colleges and universities (30.7 percent versus 21.5 percent). Finally, we
find robust evidence that actively managed funds in the direct channel earn annual risk-adjusted
before-fee returns more than one percent higher than those earned by comparable funds in other
channels. While Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) find a similar difference in beforefee returns, our analysis of alternative performance measures supports our interpretation that this
difference arises from differential investments in portfolio management. Furthermore, when we

5

look within the direct channel, we find no evidence that actively managed funds underperform
index funds. Because this comparison focuses on those actively managed funds with the greatest
incentive to invest in portfolio management, and holds the bundle of other investor services constant, we view it as a more powerful test of the puzzle of active management (Gruber (1996)).
Our findings have implications for future mutual fund research. The fact that families in
the direct channel invest more in performance suggests that more powerful tests for managerial
skill should focus on this channel. Also, while it is common in studies of mutual fund flows to
assume that every mutual fund family competes with every other family, our evidence suggests
that competition should be strongest between families in the same distribution channel. In the
absence of the market segmentation that we document, the fact that mutual fund families enter
into subadvisory contracts with other ‘competitor’ mutual fund families would be quite puzzling.
More importantly, by providing evidence that broker incentives drive market segmentation and differences in before-fee returns, we provide empirical support for a model in which
mutual fund families compete on more than portfolio management. Because investors in this
model are willing to tradeoff broker services and after-fee returns, it is welfare reducing to move
investors with a revealed preference for interacting with brokers to lower-fee funds in the direct
channel that lack these services. Whether our model better captures the nature of mutual fund
competition than the model in Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu (2008) is an important open question
that researchers will not be able to answer until we can overcome the inherent unobservability of
broker services, or until there are significant changes in how investors compensate brokers.7
The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. In section I, we use insights from
Massa’s (2003) model to link our assumptions to our main predictions. In section II, we describe
our distribution channel data, and use these data to show that mutual fund market segmentation is

7

In the conclusion we discuss changes in the structure of broker compensation currently underway in the industry.

6

driven by both investor heterogeneity and broker incentives. In section III, we use data from subadvisory contracts and portfolio manager educational backgrounds to show that families targeting performance-sensitive investors invest more in portfolio management, and then show that
direct channel funds outperform comparable funds in other channels. We also show that actively
managed funds earn the same risk-adjusted returns as index funds within the direct channel. In
section IV, we use data from subadvisory contracts to provide additional evidence on broker incentives and investor heterogeneity. In section V, we conclude.
I. Model of Investor Heterogeneity, Broker Incentives, and Market Segmentation
To motivate our study, we adopt Massa’s (2003) model of competition between mutual
fund families, but change two key assumptions. Massa studies a mutual fund family’s decision
regarding the scope of its fund offerings. He assumes that all investors value after-fee returns,
but that investors with short or uncertain investment horizons also value the option to freely
switch between funds in a family. Given this investor heterogeneity, offering funds in more asset classes and investment styles makes families more attractive to investors who value fund variety. However, because he also assumes that families with broad fund offerings earn lower returns on their investments in portfolio management (i.e., diseconomies of scope in the coproduction of fund variety and fund performance), offering funds in more asset classes and investment styles makes families less attractive to investors who only value performance.
Combining investor heterogeneity with diseconomies of scope, Massa’s model yields two
predictions about the nature of mutual fund competition. The first prediction is that the market
will be segmented, with different mutual fund families offering bundles of fund and family characteristics valued by different types of investors. One segment will consist of large mutual fund
families that compete for investors who value variety by offering a wide variety of asset classes

7

and investment styles.8 The other segment will consist of focused mutual fund families that
compete for performance-sensitive investors by offering a much narrower range of asset classes
and investment styles. Without diseconomies of scope there would be no cost to providing fund
variety and, therefore, no demand for focused mutual fund families. Without a significant number of investors who value fund variety, there would be no demand for large fund families.
The second prediction is that mutual funds belonging to focused families will outperform
comparable funds belonging to large, unfocused families. Investors willing to tradeoff variety
and returns self-select into large families, which invest in fund variety at the expense of fund performance, while investors who only value after-fee returns self-select into focused families.
Consistent with both predictions, Massa (2003) and Siggelkow (2003) find that funds in focused
families earn higher after-fee returns.
To apply Massa’s (2003) model to the provision of investor services, we need to assume
that different types of investors demand different bundles of portfolio management and investor
services, and that mutual fund families are limited in their ability to simultaneously provide different bundles. Our first assumption is that some investors only value after-fee fund returns,
while other investors value access to brokers for reasons that go beyond maximizing after-fee
returns. Although demand for broker services may be negatively correlated with financial literacy, our predictions do not depend on investors who value broker services being less sophisticated than do-it-yourself investors; they depend only on the existence of two types of investors
with different preferences. Our second assumption is that, because brokers are only compensated when their clients buy and hold recommended mutual funds, brokers will not recommend

8

For example, Siggelkow (2003) argues that growth and value investing require different types of research and different trading strategies, resulting in distinct, incompatible cultures. In this case, diseconomies of scope in the coproduction of fund variety and fund performance implies that, everything else equal, a mutual fund family earns
lower after-fee returns by offering both growth and value funds than by specializing in either growth or value.

8

funds that investors can purchase at lower cost elsewhere, for fear that they will not be compensated for time spent developing relationships and formulating personalized fund recommendations (Telser (1960)).9
Combining our two assumptions leads us to predict that the market will be segmented.
As in Massa (2003), some mutual fund families will compete for performance-sensitive, do-ityourself investors. At the same time, other families will compete for investors who also value
broker services. If we add the assumption that investments in portfolio management increase
before-fee returns, we also predict that mutual fund families targeting performance-sensitive investors will invest more in portfolio management, and earn higher before-fee returns.10
Importantly, if the additional investments in portfolio management in the performancesensitive segment cost less than the additional investor services demanded in other market segments, we can explain a negative relation between total fees and before-fee returns without assuming different profits in different channels. In other words, our application of Massa’s model
provides an alternative to the model of strategic fee setting in Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu (2008).
In the rest of this paper, we provide empirical support for predictions that broker incentives drive
market segmentation, and that families targeting do-it-yourself investors invest more in portfolio
management.

9

Our implicit assumption is that while some investors value the stream of broker services they receive through time,
other investors primarily value the broker services provided at the beginning of the relationship, when brokers exert
the effort required to determine the initial asset allocation. The recognition that some investors would take advantage of being able to buy the broker-recommended mutual funds on their own drives the broker incentives. The
same intuition applies to the sale of goods that need to be auditioned, such as high-end audio equipment. To prevent
consumers from spending hours auditioning audio equipment at a local dealer, but then buying their favorite audio
equipment over the internet, many manufacturers prohibit internet sales in states served by dealers.
10
In Massa (2003), predictable differences in performance arise because diseconomies of scope in the co-production
of fund variety and fund returns force families to choose between fund variety and fund returns. In our setting, the
negative impact of costly investor services on fund returns drive performance-sensitive investors to fund families
that provide fewer (or less costly) investor services, giving these families a greater incentive to invest in portfolio
management. At the same time, families targeting investors who are willing to trade investments in portfolio management for investments in investor services, invest more in their broker network and less in portfolio management.

9

II. Do Broker Incentives Drive Market Segmentation?
A. Mutual Fund Distribution Channels
Prior studies emphasize the link between the services that investors receive and the channel through which retail mutual funds are distributed (e.g., Hortascu and Syverson (2004) and
Coates and Hubbard (2007)). The normal distinction is between do-it-yourself investors, who
purchase (no-load) funds directly from mutual fund families like T. Rowe Price, and investors
who pay sales commissions to purchase funds from brokers. However, as Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) and Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2009) emphasize, there are a variety of broker arrangements from which investors can choose. For example, Waddell and Reed
distribute mutual funds exclusively through a captive sales force of 2,300 financial advisors who
“offer one-on-one consultations that emphasize long-term relationships through continued service” (Waddell and Reed’s 2008 10-k filing). Similarly, investors who value both broker services
and the convenience of one stop shopping can purchase mutual funds through their insurance
agent or banker. In contrast to these captive broker arrangements, families like American Funds
and Putnam distribute funds through independent brokers with access to a large number of families in the wholesale channel.
We obtain data on distribution channels for 1996 to 2002 from Financial Research Corporation (FRC). FRC assigns each mutual fund share class to one of five distribution codes: direct, captive, bank, wholesale, and institutional. (Mutual funds in the institutional channel are
typically only available to 401(k) plan participants or investors with more than $500,000 to invest.) Because FRC also includes distribution codes used by Lipper, we create two additional
distribution codes: insurance and other. We classify share classes as being in the insurance
channel when Lipper indicates that they are sold through an insurance company. In other words,
captive, bank, and insurance are three distinct channels utilizing captive brokers, wholesale util10

izes independent brokers, and direct targets do-it-yourself investors. The other category is reserved for share classes for which the FRC and Lipper classifications differ (e.g., FRC assigns
the share class to direct but Lipper assigns it to institutional), and is included for completeness.
We obtain data on total net assets (TNA), and most other fund-level and family-level variables,
including data on which mutual funds belong to each mutual fund family, from the CRSP Survivor-Bias Free Mutual Fund Database.
Our tests assume that mutual fund families distributing funds through different channels
invest in different bundles of services.11 To compete for investors in the do-it-yourself distribution channel, mutual fund families must invest in advertising and the online tools valued by investors who require readily available fund information and ease of use in conducting their transactions.12 To compete for investors in broker-sold distribution channels, however, mutual fund
families must compete for broker recommendations. Families in the captive, bank, and insurance channels must invest in their dedicated sales forces, while those in the wholesale channel
must invest in tools that help independent advisors manage client portfolios.13 In short, we assume that mutual funds are a homogeneous bundle of services within distribution channel and
differentiated products across channels. We will show that distribution channels better capture
the differences in these bundles of services than a comparison of load and no-load funds.
To determine each mutual fund family’s primary distribution channel, we aggregate the

11

Our FRC distribution channels are consistent with the descriptions in publicly-traded asset management firms own
annual reports. For example, Janus’ 2008 form 10-k states that it distributes through the “retail intermediary”
(wholesale) and “institutional” channels. “Each distribution channel focuses on specific investor groups and the
unique requirements of each group.”
12
For example, Fidelity’s Center for Applied Technology conducts R&D activity on social networking, virtual environments, data visualization, behavioral economics, and decision theory, to better serve do-it-yourself investors (see
http://fcat.fidelity.com).
13
For example, Janus launched a redesigned website “that reflects our commitment to partner with advisors and help
them build their businesses” by “providing smart, relevant and productive information and tools designed to help
them better serve their clients” (quotes taken from Janus press release 7/8/2009 referring to the launch of
janus.com/advisor). Janus also developed Janus Labs, a web portal that “helps [advisors] hone their sales skills in
the hope that they will pick Janus products” (Institutional Investor June 2007).

11

assets within each channel across all of a family’s share classes and select the channel that contains the highest percentage of family assets. Repeating this process using only actively managed domestic equity (ADE) fund assets, we obtain the family’s primary ADE distribution channel. Because our primary interest is in testing for differences in investments in portfolio management across distribution channels, we focus on the universe of ADE funds throughout the paper, and thereby eliminate index funds.
In total, we have distribution channel data for 524 of the 547 families in the mutual fund
industry in 2002, and for 452 of the 473 families that offer at least one ADE fund. For tests that
require distribution channel data at the fund level, we aggregate the assets within each channel
across all of the fund’s share classes and assign each fund a distribution channel category when
at least 75% of its assets are sold through that channel.
In Table I, we report the number of families, aggregate industry ADE assets distributed
through that channel, and the top three families ranked by ADE assets, for each of the seven distribution channels. The direct channel has the largest number of families (169) and the largest
ADE assets under management ($632.9 billion), representing 48.1% of industry ADE assets.
This channel contains well-known mutual fund families like Fidelity, Vanguard, and Janus,
which invest heavily in advertising. The wholesale broker-sold channel is the next largest channel, with 76 families and $418.3 billion, representing 31.8% of industry ADE assets. Some of
the largest families in the wholesale channel are also well known: American Funds, Putnam, and
AIM/Invesco. At the other extreme, the bank, captive, and insurance channels have 23, 17, and
16 families respectively, and a combined total of $122.9 billion in ADE assets.
B. Heterogeneity in Investor Demand for Brokers Services
To generate the prediction that direct channel funds will invest more in portfolio management, we assume that investors in the direct channel seek to maximize after-fee (risk12

adjusted) returns, while investors in other channels also inherently value broker services. We
obtain the same prediction, however, if we allow do-it-yourself investors to value fund characteristics other than returns (such as whether the fund was featured in the New York Times, whether
the fund manager is famous, and how much the fund advertises), so long as do-it-yourself investors place relatively more weight on after-fee returns.14 To support the validity of this assumption, we test for differences in the flow-after-fee-performance relation across the seven FRC distribution channels using the sample of actively managed domestic equity funds operating at any
point between January 1996 and December 2002.15 We expect investor flow to be most strongly
related to after-fee performance in the direct channel.
Table II contains the regression results where the dependent variable is the monthly net
flow of fund i in month t. Focusing on monthly flows allows us to test for differences across clienteles in their response to short-term performance. The independent variables of interest are
fund i’s monthly net return in month t-1, and dummy variables that indicate whether fund i's net
return in month t-1 was in the top 20% or the bottom 20% of funds with the same Morningstar
investment style.16 The two dummy variables allow us to capture non-linearities in the flowperformance relation. Other fund-level control variables include fund i’s monthly net flow in
month t-1 (which captures the effect of longer-term performance), a dummy variable indicating
whether fund i charges a sales load, fund i’s lagged expense ratio and 12b-1 fee, the natural loga
14

For evidence that no-load fund investors value media mentions and named fund managers, see Reuter and Zitzewitz (2006) and Massa, Reuter, and Zitzewitz (2010), respectively. For evidence that fund investors respond to advertising, see Reuter and Zitzewitz (2006) and Gallaher, Kaniel, and Starks (2007).
15
We use data for 1996 to 2002 because this is the period over which we possess both FRC distribution channel data
and Morningstar investment style data. Note that we omit a review of the large literature on the fund flowperformance relation. However, papers that have specifically focused on the flow-performance relation within or
across particular clienteles in the United States include Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) (direct vs. broker-sold), Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2009) (captive broker vs. wholesale broker), James and Karceski
(2006) (institutional and bank), Chen, Yao, and Yu (2007) (insurance), and Del Guercio and Tkac (2002) (separate
account). Using data from the United Kingdom, Keswani and Stolin (2009) find that investors in the direct and
wholesale channels are the most sensitive to fund performance.
16
Although we obtain most of our data from the CRSP Survivor-Bias Free Mutual Fund Database, we obtain data
on fund investment styles from Morningstar.

13

rithm of fund i’s TNA, the natural logarithm of its family’s TNA, and fund i’s age. In addition,
we include month-style fixed effects to control for monthly shocks to aggregate demand within
each Morningstar investment style.
To allow for differences across distribution channels, each of the independent variables
and fixed effects is interacted with channel dummy variables. In other words, although we estimate a single pooled regression, the coefficients in Table II are identical to those obtained by estimating a separate regression for each distribution channel. To allow for the possibility that
flows are correlated within each family, we cluster standard errors on mutual fund family. For
brevity, we do not report the coefficients on the control variables in the table.
In both the direct and wholesale channels, we find significant inflows into the top 20% of
funds, significant outflows from the bottom 20% of funds, and little sensitivity to intermediate
returns. However, consistent with our assumption that do-it-yourself investors are the most sensitive to after-fee returns, net flows into the top performing funds and out of the bottom performing funds are both approximately three times larger in the direct channel. Comparing the direct
and wholesale channels, we can reject the hypothesis that the coefficients on the top 20% dummy
variable are equal with a p-value of 0.020; for the bottom 20% dummy variable, the p-value is
0.083. When we estimate a specification comparing funds in the direct channel to all other
funds, we can reject the hypotheses that the coefficients on the top 20% dummy variables are
equal with a p-value of 0.003; for the bottom 20% dummy variable, the p-value is 0.001.17 In
contrast, in the other channels there is little to no benefit to being a top performer and relatively
little punishment for posting bad performance.

17

Although we only report one specification in Table II, the flow-performance relations are qualitatively unchanged
when we constrain the coefficients on the fund-level controls to be equal across channels, exclude the fund-level
controls entirely, omit lagged flows, or define lagged net return percentiles based on month-style-channel (instead of
month-style).

14

The relative lack of sensitivity to after-fee performance in the broker-sold channels is
consistent with other factors driving flows in these channels (e.g., one-on-one personal attention,
or broker incentives to recommend certain funds). It is worth noting that, unlike in traditional
brokerage accounts where broker compensation depends on the number of trades their clients
make, brokers selling mutual funds have less incentive to churn; broker-sold mutual funds compensate brokers for selling their funds and, through the use of trailing loads (12b-1 fees), for
keeping clients invested in these same funds.
C. Broker Incentives and Market Segmentation
Studies as early as Telser (1960) recognized that employees compensated via a sales
commission have little incentive to provide the personalized services that come bundled with a
product if the unbundled version is available more cheaply elsewhere.18 Thus, firms are expected to internalize the incentives of their sales force by not offering the cheaper unbundled
product at all. A recent Wall Street Journal article suggests that mutual fund families understand
these incentives.
Other fund companies that sell through advisers say they have no intention of making their load-waived shares available to do-it-yourselfers. Among them: Invesco
Ltd.'s Invesco Aim unit. “It really undermines your relations with your advisers” if
an investor can buy the same product through an adviser or on his or her own, says
Robin Swope, a senior product-strategy manager. “The financial adviser is a critical part” of the investing process, she says, and “for us to offer our products directly would circumvent that.”19
This reasoning underlies our assumption that fund families perceive that brokers have little incentive to expend effort recommending funds that investors can then purchase online at lower
cost, which in turn leads to our prediction that funds distributed in broker-sold channels will not

18

Consistent with this, Mullainathan, Noth, and Schoar (2009), in their audit study in which ‘auditors’ pose as clients to commission-based brokers, find that 30% of brokers are unwilling to provide any specific advice until the
client transfers funds to the brokerage account.
19
Damato, Karen. “Take a Load Off: Do-It-Yourself Investors Get More Fund Choices.”The Wall Street Journal
March 1, 2010, R1.

15

simultaneously be distributed in the direct channel. A similar argument suggests that funds distributed through one broker-sold channel will not simultaneously be distributed through another
broker-sold channel, because captive brokers would have little incentive to recommend funds
available through other brokers. These assumptions, combined with our assumption that product
bundles differ across but not within distribution channels, lead us to predict that the market for
mutual funds is highly segmented by distribution channel.
Consistent with our prediction, we show in Table III that the average family distributes
92.6% of its actively managed domestic equity (ADE) assets through its primary distribution
channel in 2002, while the median is 100%. Looking across distribution channels, the average
fraction ranges from 86.2% (institutional) to 96.5% (direct). Based on distribution channel
codes from the Investment Company Institute for 2002, the average percentage of family ADE
assets distributed through its primary channel is 94.5%, with a range from 88.3% (institutional)
and 96.9% (direct). 20 For completeness, we also report the same statistics for a family’s total net
assets, including all asset classes and index funds. We find similar numbers in that the average
family distributes 90.7% of its assets through its primary distribution channel in 2002. In other
words, regardless of the primary distribution channel or asset class (or data source), the typical
mutual fund family distributes the vast majority of its assets through a single channel.
To justify our assumption that market segmentation is driven by broker incentives we examine the propensity of families to operate in different pairs of channels simultaneously. In addition, we also consider the plausible alternative explanation that segmentation is driven by the
fixed cost of entering a new channel and providing a new bundle of services (e.g., adding a sales
force). There are several reasons to believe that fixed costs are not the primary driver of market

20

We thank Brian Reid for providing ICI distribution codes for 2002. Because our FRC data cover more mutual
fund families, over more years, we only use the ICI data to verify that the patterns in Tables III and IV are robust.

16

segmentation. First, the last row of Table III shows that even among the 25 largest families, the
average fraction of ADE assets distributed through the primary channel is 85.8%, and the median
is 94.1%. Second, consistent with findings in Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) and
Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2009), we find that a family’s primary distribution channel is
highly persistent.21 In particular, between 1996 and 2002, we observe very little movement between the direct and broker-sold channels. Of the 116 families whose primary distribution channel was broker-sold in 1996, one transitions to direct. Of the 109 families whose primary distribution channel was direct in 1996, two transition to wholesale. Third, to the extent that families
are entering new distribution channels, distribution through new channels is small relative to existing distribution. Between 1996 and 2002, the average fraction of ADE assets distributed
through the primary distribution channel declines from 97.0% to 92.6%, but the median remains
100%.
In contrast, examining family distribution patterns supports the broker incentive explanation. In Panel A of Table IV, we report the number of families that simultaneously distribute assets through each possible combination of primary and secondary distribution channels. Consistent with our findings in Table III, the column labeled “None” indicates that 267 (59.1%) of the
452 mutual fund families in 2002 distribute 100% of their assets through a single distribution
channel. This pattern is potentially consistent with both fixed costs and broker-imposed constraints. However, the other patterns in Panel A are strongly consistent with our hypothesis that
broker incentives constrain mutual fund family distribution strategies.22 Of the 301 families
whose primary distribution channel is direct or broker-sold, only 10 (3.3%) distribute their funds

21

Although neither study examines distribution channel persistence at the mutual fund family level, Christoffersen,
Evans, and Musto (2009) report a high degree of distribution channel persistence at the fund level, while Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) report a high degree of persistence at the share class level.
22
Our inference is similar when we use ICI distribution codes to generate Table III.

17

through any of the secondary channels that we classify as creating a broker conflict. Within this
same sample, 43 (14.3%) families distribute their funds through the institutional channel. Within
the larger sample of 348 families whose primary or secondary distribution channel is direct or
broker-sold, 10 (2.9%) distribute funds through pairs of channels that we classify as creating a
broker conflict, while 75 (21.6%) distribute funds through the institutional channel. When we
focus on the 185 families with both primary and secondary distribution channels, we find that
100 (54.1%) distribute assets through the institutional channel. Note that there should be no conflict between families simultaneously distributing through the direct and (potentially lower-cost)
institutional channels, or through the broker-sold and institutional channels, because retail investors cannot freely access the institutional channel (because access requires the investor to be a
401(k) participant or to have more than $500,000 to invest).
Table IV Panel B contains the average percentage of family ADE assets distributed
through the secondary channel for this subsample of 185 families. The average percentage of
assets tends to be small in secondary channels that we classify as creating a broker conflict. For
example, in 2002, the two families with primary distribution through the direct channel, Fidelity
and Strong Funds, have an average of 6.2% distributed through the wholesale channel. The five
mutual fund families that distribute primarily through the wholesale channel, however, have an
average of 32% of assets distributed through the direct channel. Interestingly, several of these
seven cases involve families transitioning between distribution channels. For example, Scudder
Funds and Columbia Funds transitioned from direct to wholesale distribution before our sample
period. These cases mirror the anecdote mentioned in the introduction about Janus’ recent transition to wholesale distribution. Namely, each family continued to provide services to its formerdirect channel investors, but closed the direct platform to new investors, suggesting that the deci-

18

sion to exit the direct channel was motivated more by broker incentives than by costs.23
In sum, it is rare for a family to distribute its funds simultaneously through the direct
channel and any of the broker channels (captive, bank, insurance, or wholesale), or through multiple broker channels.24 Anecdotal and large sample evidence supports our assumption that this
segmentation reflects constraints imposed on mutual fund family distribution by broker incentives.
III. Do Families in the Direct Channel Invest More in Portfolio Management?
Because investors in the direct channel are the most vigilant in rewarding good recent
performance with additional inflows and punishing poor recent performance with outflows, families distributing funds through this channel have the greatest incentive to invest in inputs that will
enhance investment performance. We predict that mutual fund families serving the direct channel are the most willing to pay the price required to hire and retain skilled portfolio managers,
relative to families in other channels.
A. Do Direct Channel Funds Pay More for Skilled Subadvisors?
Our first test of this prediction uses hand-collected data on contracts that mutual fund
families enter into with subadvisors for portfolio management. The advantage of analyzing subadvisory contracts is that we can separately observe the component of the management fee specific to the portfolio management function.

23

The Scudder and Columbia transitions to wholesale distribution were both motivated by a merger with a family
that distributes through the wholesale channel. In all the cases mentioned here, the 485BPOS SEC filing reveals that
after the transition, only “eligible investors” (previous investors) were allowed to transact through the direct platform. The other exceptions in Table IV Panel B are Capstone Funds and Tocqueville Funds that collectively manage only $275 million in assets, and John Hancock Funds, where 9% of assets are in a ‘broker-conflict’ channel.
24
One firm that offers multiple broker channels is Waddell and Reed, a long-time captive channel firm. In 2002,
they acquired another fund family that distributed in the wholesale channel, Ivy Funds. The same firm owns both
groups of funds, but distributes Ivy funds through wholesale and exclusively distributes Waddell and Reed funds
through the captive channel (Waddell and Reed 2008 10-k). Notably, the firm decided to keep both the Ivy and
Waddell and Reed monikers, effectively marketing them as separate families (and they appear as separate families
on the CRSP mutual fund database).

19

A.1. Data on Subadvisory Contracts
The SEC requires mutual funds to disclose pertinent details of the contract between the
family and the subadvisor. We hand-collect a comprehensive set of subadvisory contracts in
2002 through searches of the SEC’s EDGAR database. Specifically, we conduct text searches of
all N-30D annual report filings for variants of the word ‘subadvisor’ or subadvisory’ to identify
the relevant filings. Within these, we identify the names of all funds in that filing that outsource
the portfolio management to an outside subadvisory firm.25

Matching the list of subadvised

funds to the CRSP Survivor-bias Free Mutual Fund Database, we determine that 17.8% of all the
actively managed domestic equity funds in CRSP in 2002 are subadvised.
We collect details of the subadvisory contracts, including the subadvised fund name, the
parties to the contract (fund family and subadvisory firm names), and the subadvisory fee schedule, from the Statement of Additional Information (485BPOS filings). For each subadvisory
firm, we identify whether or not they also offer retail mutual funds under their own brand name
by matching to the family name and management codes in CRSP. For subadvisory firms not
found in CRSP, we identify them as separate account managers and use the Mobius M-Search
database to obtain assets under management and other investment product information. We use
Mobius’ management codes to aggregate products to the firm level.
A.2. Summary of Subadvisory Fees
In Table V, we summarize the subadvisory fees paid from fund families to subadvisors,
as well as the management fees paid from fund investors to fund families. Fund investors do not
explicitly pay fees to the subadvisor for their portfolio management services. Rather, the mutual

25

In some cases, the filing will identify that a subadvisor manages the portfolio, but also discloses that the subadvisor is an affiliate of the family, typically indicating that the subadvisory firm is legally a subsidiary, or has a common owner. Because the affiliated subadvisory agreements do not reflect the same economic decision or market
forces described above, we focus our analysis on the sample of unaffiliated subadvisors. We find that 8.6% of ADE
funds on CRSP in 2002 are subadvised by an affiliate.

20

fund family pays the subadvisory firm out of its management fee, reducing dollar for dollar the
management fee revenue retained by the family. The subadvisory fee is defined as the dollar
management fee paid to the subadvisor in fiscal year 2002 divided by fund average TNA in
2002. We obtain the management fee from CRSP, defined as the dollar management fee paid by
fund investors in fiscal-year 2002 divided by fund average TNA in 2002. These data originally
come from the Statement of Operations in the 485BPOS SEC filings. Because we calculate subadvisory and management fees based on stated fee schedules, they are gross of any potential fee
waivers.
The sample consists of the 252 relationships between a family and single subadvisor for
which we observe the subadvisory fee schedule, as well as the size, investment style, management fee, and distribution channel of the subadvised fund.26 Across the full sample, the median
management fee is 80 basis points and the median subadvisory fee is 40 basis points. While
most mutual fund research uses the management fee as the price of portfolio management, it is
worth emphasizing that only half of the management fee collected by the median fund in our
sample is used to pay the subadvisor for portfolio management.
Looking across the nine investment styles, we see that subadvisor fees tend to be higher
for small cap funds than for large cap funds. Also, within the mid-cap and small-cap styles, subadvisor fees tend to be higher for value funds than for growth funds. Both of these patterns are
plausibly related to differences in the cost associated with different investment strategies. Deli
(2002) finds similar patterns when he compares the management fees of funds in different asset
classes. Importantly, we observe significant variation in the subadvisory fees paid within each
investment style.

26

In 153 of the 252 relationships, the subadvisory fee declines with assets under management, and we calculate the
level of the fee using the size of the subadvised fund at the end of 2002. In the other 99 relationships, the subadvisory fee schedule is flat.

21

A.3. Evidence on Outcomes of Subadvisory Fee Negotiations
Given that direct channel funds must appeal to their performance-sensitive clientele, we
predict that skilled subadvisors will enjoy the greatest bargaining power when negotiating subadvisory fees with direct channel funds, relative to those in other channels. To test this prediction, we use the hedonic pricing model introduced in Harding, Rosenthal and Sirmans’ (2003)
study of the real estate market. In a traditional hedonic pricing model, there is no role for bargaining power because the markets for underlying goods and services are assumed to be perfectly competitive. However, Harding, Rosenthal and Sirmans argue that as goods become more
heterogeneous and markets for these goods become thinner, we should expect prices to reflect
the relative bargaining powers of buyers and sellers. Because subadvisory contracts are heterogeneous and trade in thin markets, we model the subadvisory fees paid for portfolio management
services as:
SFijk = a Cijk + b Dijk + eijk
where SFijk is the subadvisory fee paid from advisor i to subadvisor j for fund k, Cijk is a vector
of contract characteristics, Dijk is a vector of family characteristics, subadvisor characteristics,
and interaction terms, and eijk is a standard error term. The coefficients on contract characteristics are estimates of the implicit market prices for the underlying services, and correspond to the
implicit market prices for managing different types of portfolios, independent of the identities of
the firms involved. In contrast, the coefficients on family and subadvisor characteristics capture
deviations from the subadvisory fees that we would expect based on contract characteristics
alone, allowing us to test predictions related to subadvisor bargaining power.
Our proxy for subadvisor skill is a dummy variable that indicates whether the subadvisor

22

specializes in the same investment style as the subadvised fund.27 Siggelkow (2003) argues that
different styles of investment (e.g., growth versus value) draw on different research and execution techniques and investment practices, resulting in distinct cultures that do not adapt well to
alternative approaches, ultimately resulting in the deterioration in fund performance as the family
offers more styles of funds. When Siggelkow compares the fund performance of families that
specialize in few Morningstar investment styles to those with broad offerings across many styles,
he finds that funds from more specialized families perform better on average. Similarly, Massa
(2003) finds that funds from more focused families outperform funds from families that offer a
large variety of styles. Given this evidence, families may perceive that subadvisors that specialize in managing assets in a particular style are likely to deliver the highest future returns in that
style, thereby increasing the bargaining power that specialist subadvisors enjoy with funds that
have performance-sensitive investors.28
For each subadvisor, we define its investment specialty as the Morningstar category in
which it internally manages the most assets (within its separate accounts or mutual fund family),
using the same nine-style categories as before. We are able to identify a subadvisor specialty in
226 of the 249 relationships for which we possess fee data (we lack asset data for 23 separate
account firms). In 90 (39.8%) of these relationships, the subadvisor’s specialty matches the investment style of the subadvised fund. In fact, in this subset of 90 funds, the average subadvisor
has 74% of their ADE assets in the specialty style. To test whether skilled subadvisors enjoy


 A natural alternative measure of skill is the subadvisor’s past risk-adjusted return within the investment style of
the subadvised fund. Unfortunately, we lack return histories for 50% of the relationships that involve separate account subadvisors and 24% of the relationships that involve subadvisors with their own retail mutual funds. Moreover, only quarterly returns are available for separate account managers, and we often have less than two years of
historical returns. Given these data limitations and the evidence in Siggelkow (2003) and Massa (2003), we prefer
to rely on our binary proxy for subadvisor skill.
28
Families with this belief may be the most likely to outsource portfolio management in the first place. The findings
of Siggelkow and Massa imply that families can offer a variety of styles without sacrificing performance only if they
specialize in certain styles in-house and outsource other styles to skilled subadvisors.
27

23

relatively more bargaining power with direct channel funds, we interact our proxy for subadvisor
skill with a dummy variable indicating whether the subadvised fund is distributed in the direct
channel. Because investors in the wholesale channel exhibit some sensitivity to extreme returns,
we also interact our proxy for subadvisor skill with a dummy variable indicating whether the subadvised fund is distributed in the wholesale channel.
As a potential proxy for subadvisor reputation, we also include a dummy variable that indicates whether the subadvisor’s name appears in the fund name. Because the identity of the subadvisor is otherwise buried in the Statement of Additional Information filing with the SEC, we
assume that including the subadvisor in the fund name (e.g., the ASAF Goldman Sachs Mid-cap
Growth Fund) indicates that the family wants to publicize the relationship to potential investors.
Fund names include subadvisor names in 59 (26.1%) of the 226 relationships that we study. To
the extent that the subadvisor’s identity resonates with the fund’s target investors, subadvisor
bargaining power (and subadvisory fees) will be higher.29 To capture differential effects in the
direct and wholesale channels, we again include interaction terms.
Table VI presents regressions of subadvisor fees on contract and firm characteristics,
where standard errors are clustered on both family and subadvisor.30 The dependent variable is
the observed subadvisor fee, reported as a percentage of total net assets, which represents the
fraction of each marginal dollar under management that flows to the subadvisor. In each regression, we control for four characteristics of the fund for which portfolio management is being contracted. First, we include the management fee of the subadvised fund. The coefficient on this

29

Starks and Yates (2008) provide evidence that mutual fund family reputations influence investors’ decisions.
Studying a discount brokerage supermarket where investors can easily choose funds from numerous families, they
find that investors display a strong tendency to cluster their choices within a single family. Massa, Reuter, and
Zitzewitz (2010) document higher demand for mutual funds that disclose the names of their fund managers. Because the effect is particularly strong among no-load funds, and return differences are modest, they interpret the
higher demand as a marketing benefit.
30
We thank Mitchell Petersen for providing code that clusters standard errors along two dimensions on his webpage,
http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/faculty/petersen/htm/papers/se/se_programming.htm.

24

variable reveals how an incremental basis point of management fee is split between the subadvisor providing portfolio management and the family providing distribution services. The fact that
it is consistently around 0.4, and often significantly different from 0.5 at the 10-percent level, is
provocative evidence that control over fund distribution is more valuable than control over portfolio management. Second, because fees tend to decline with the assets under management, we
include the natural logarithm of the total net assets of the subadvised fund.31 The negative and
significant coefficient on this variable implies that subadvisors are willing to provide a version of
quantity discounts to secure the business of large funds. Third, to control for the different costs
associated with different investment styles, we include a separate fixed effect for each investment style (except large-cap blend, the omitted category). Fourth, to control for differences in
the costs associated with providing distribution services within a distribution channel, and the
benefits associated with subadvising the average fund within a distribution channel, we include a
separate fixed effect for each channel (except other, the omitted category).
Turning to our proxies for subadvisor skill and reputation, we find evidence that subadvisor bargaining power varies across distribution channels. Outside of the direct and wholesale
channels, subadvisors that specialize in the fund’s investment style do not earn higher fees; nor
do subadvisors that allow their names to appear in the fund name. In contrast, the positive and
significant coefficients on the direct channel interaction terms indicate that skilled subadvisors
earn an additional 9.2-10.4 basis points when negotiating with families in the direct channel (pvalues of 0.053 in column (1) and 0.111 in column (3)). Furthermore, when the subadvisor name
appears in the direct channel fund name, the subadvisor earns a premium of 10.0-12.5 basis
points (p-values of 0.005 in column (2) and 0.038 in column (3)). Interestingly, in all of these

31

Because we restrict attention to funds with a single subadvisor, the size of the fund and the size of the portfolio
managed by the subadvisor are identical. When funds hire multiple subadvisors, the level of assets that are allocated
to each subadvisor is seldom disclosed.

25

cases the named subadvisor is an institutional separate account manager that is otherwise unavailable to retail investors, such as the Vanguard PRIMECAP Fund. Both premiums are economically significant relative to the median subadvisory fee of 40 basis points. The evidence
that more skilled and reputable subadvisors enjoy greater bargaining power with funds in the
wholesale channel is mixed; the coefficient on the proxy for subadvisor skill is 5.9-6.2 basis
points but the coefficient on the proxy for subadvisor reputation is not significantly different
from zero.
In column (4), we replace our individual proxies for subadvisor skill and reputation with
an index of subadvisor bargaining power that is the sum of these dummy variables. The summary index interaction reveals a similar premium of 9.2 basis points for direct channel funds (pvalue of 0.015). In contrast, the coefficient on the index is statistically indistinguishable from
zero for funds in other channels. Together, the findings in this section reinforce the idea that
families are willing to pay a premium for subadvisors that possess qualities that attract their target clientele. Our evidence is consistent with investors in the direct channel valuing performance and access to managers otherwise unavailable to small investors, allowing subadvisors with
these perceived qualities to negotiate higher subadvisory fees with direct channel families.
B. Do Direct Channel Funds Employ Managers from More Selective Colleges and Universities?
In this section, we test whether our finding from the subadvisory market that families in
the direct channel invest relatively more in acquiring skilled managers extends to a more general
sample. Specifically, we exploit data on the educational backgrounds of mutual fund managers
across the full sample of ADE funds in 2002. Our motivation is Chevalier and Ellison's (1999)
finding that managers who attend undergraduate institutions with higher average student SAT
scores earn higher risk-adjusted returns. To the extent that managers from these schools have

26

greater ability (or better outside options), they should cost more for mutual fund families to hire
and retain. At the same time, these managers should be the most attractive to actively managed
mutual funds with performance-sensitive investors, like those in the direct channel.
To test the prediction that direct channel funds will be more likely to employ managers
from the most selective U.S. colleges and universities, we use Morningstar data on the educational backgrounds of 945 actively managed domestic equity fund managers working in 2002.32
These managers come from 296 different undergraduate institutions. Of the 287 schools located
in the United States, we were able to obtain (recent) acceptance rates for 274, and the interquartile range of (recent) student math SAT scores for 251. We use these data to construct three
dummy variables related to ability. The first dummy variable identifies the 25 colleges and universities with the lowest acceptance rates within our sample (ranging from 8.8 percent for Harvard to 24.5 percent for Notre Dame). The other two variables indicate whether the mid-point of
the school’s math SAT scores is in the top quartile (above 650) or the bottom quartile (below
560) of the 251 schools in our sample. Although some managers are listed as the sole manager
of multiple funds, and other managers are listed as working alongside co-managers, we give the
undergraduate institution of each manager employed by the mutual fund family equal weight.
Consistent with our prediction, we find that mutual funds in the direct channel are significantly more likely to employ managers from the top 25 colleges and universities (30.7 percent versus 21.5 percent). The 9.2 percentage point difference is both economically and statistically significant (p-value of 0.012; standard errors clustered on family). In addition, we find that
funds in the direct channel are more likely to employ managers from high math-SAT schools
(60.3 percent versus 48.5 percent; p-value of 0.012), and less likely to employ managers from

32

Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008) use these data to study connections between mutual fund managers and the
board members of the firms in which they invest. We thank them for sharing the data for 2002.

27

low math-SAT schools (8.5 percent versus 13.1 percent; p-value of 0.028). While we recognize
that our school-level measures are noisy proxies for differences in manager ability, our findings
are nevertheless consistent with mutual funds in the direct channel investing more in skilled portfolio managers.33 Interestingly, when Chevalier and Ellison (1999) study the impact of MBA
degrees on fund performance, they conclude that “the higher returns achieved by MBAs are entirely attributable to their greater holdings of systematic risk” (p 3). In our sample, we find that
funds in the direct channel are less likely to hire managers with MBAs (53.0 percent versus 59.3
percent; p-value of 0.084).
C. Are Returns Higher in the Direct Channel?
If families in the direct channel cater to their after-fee performance-sensitive clientele by
investing relatively more in portfolio management, as our evidence above suggests, then we
should also find that funds in the direct channel earn significantly higher net and risk-adjusted
returns than similar funds in other channels. Although this test is similar in spirit to one performed by Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009), ours is motivated by a prediction on optimal family strategies given the preferences of the family’s target investors. We extend their
results by analyzing additional performance measures, as well as by comparing the typical proxy
for distribution services, whether the fund charges a sales load, to our direct channel dummy.
Table VIII reports the coefficients from six panel regressions. The sample is limited to
actively managed domestic equity funds between January 1996 and December 2002 for which
we possess data on the fund’s Morningstar investment style. The sample is further restricted to
funds for which we possess fund-level distribution channel data. The dependent variables in

33

Because Massa, Reuter, and Zitzewitz (2010) document that a significant fraction of the actively-managed mutual
funds in 2002 are anonymously managed, we only observe manager educational data for a subset of the managers
that each family employs. However, in 2002, direct channel mutual funds are slightly less likely to be anonymously
managed (9.2 percent versus 12.0), suggesting that selective disclosure is unlikely to drive the differences in undergraduate institutions.

28

columns (1) through (5) are different measures of fund i’s return in month t. In column (1), we
focus on fund i’s monthly net (after expense) return. In columns (2) and (3), we focus on fourfactor alphas estimated from fund i’s net returns between t-36 and t-1. In column (4), we focus
on four-factor alphas estimated from fund i’s gross returns (the monthly returns obtained by adding fund i’s average monthly expense back to its net returns). In column (5) we focus on the return gap measure of Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008), which is the difference between fund
i’s actual gross return and the gross return implied by the fund’s lagged reported holdings. Finally, in column (6), we focus on the active share measure of Cremers and Petajisto (2009),
which is the fraction of fund i’s assets that would need to be traded to obtain a portfolio that mirrored fund i’s benchmark. Because Cremers and Petajisto find evidence that funds that have
both high active share and high tracking error outperform their peers, the dependent variable in
column (6) is a dummy variable that identifies funds with above-median measures of both active
share and tracking error.34 All regressions include investment style-by-month fixed effects, so
that performance is measured relative to other funds with the same investment style, in the same
month; they also include numerous fund-level controls. Standard errors are clustered on month;
we obtain similar results when we instead cluster standard errors on fund i’s mutual fund family.
In all five of the specifications that include the direct channel dummy variable, the estimated coefficient on this variable is positive and statistically significant, with p-values ranging
from 0.000 to 0.028. It is also economically significant. When we focus on net returns, fourfactor alphas based on net returns, or four-factor alphas based on gross returns, mutual funds in
the direct channel outperform their peers in other channels by 8.0-8.5 basis points per month. (In
unreported specifications that focus on one-factor and three-factor alphas, the estimated coeffi
34

We thank Cremers and Petajisto for making their active share and tracking error measures available for download
at www.petajisto.net/data.html.

29

cients are 11.9 and 9.4, with p-values of 0.001 and 0.000.)35 Interestingly, column (4) reveals
that unlike Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu (2009), we find no relation between before-fee returns and
fees. However, our sample period (1996-2002) overlaps with the period (1997-2005) for which
their evidence is weakest.
When we focus on two measures of active management that were not studied by Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009), we find further support for our prediction that direct
channel funds invest more in portfolio management. Testing for differences in return gaps,
which measure the value created (or destroyed) by mutual fund manager and mutual fund family
actions that we cannot directly observe, we find that approximately half of the superior performance of direct channel funds comes from more-positive return gaps. In column (6), we find evidence that actively managed direct channel funds are actually more actively managed. Specifically, we find that direct channel funds are 10 percentage points (p-value 0.000) more likely to
have above-median values of both active share and tracking error. Since only 34 percent of ADE
funds fall into this category, 10 percentage points is economically significant. If we redefine our
dependent variable to identify funds with top-quartile values of both active share and tracking
error, only 10.8 percent of funds fall into this category, but the (unreported) coefficient on the
direct channel dummy variable is a statistically and economically significant 5.2 percentage
points (p-value of 0.000).
When we exclude the direct channel variable in column (2), the coefficient on the noload dummy variable is half as large (4.4 basis points) and only statistically significant at the 10percent level (p-value of 0.067). Moreover, in the specifications that include the direct channel

35

It is worth noting that the differences in performance that we document are unlikely to reflect differences in mutual fund survival rates across channels. When we use fund characteristics in year t-1 to predict the likelihood that
fund i survives from year t-1 to year t, we find that funds with lower performance are less likely to survive. However, we find no evidence that the survival rate of direct channel funds is different or more sensitive to performance.

30

dummy, the coefficient on the no-load dummy variable is essentially zero. In other words, the
no-load dummy variable is a noisy proxy for whether a fund is distributed through the direct
channel.
D. Revisiting the Puzzle of Active Management
Gruber (1996) finds strong demand for actively managed mutual funds despite their underperformance relative to index funds. The idea that some investors are willing to tradeoff portfolio management and broker services allows us to shed new light on this puzzle of active management. Brokers compensated through commissions have little incentive to recommend index
funds, which are available at low cost in the direct channel. Indeed, we find that the fraction of
assets invested in passively managed domestic equity funds in 2002 ranges from a high of 18.8%
in the direct channel to lows of 4.9% in the captive channel and 1.4% in the wholesale channel.
Therefore, demand for broker services becomes demand for actively managed funds. Moreover,
it becomes demand for those actively managed funds available in broker-sold channels, which
invest less in portfolio management than direct channel funds.
Because actively managed funds in the direct channel have the strongest incentive to invest in portfolio management, a more powerful test of the puzzle of active management is
whether index funds in the direct channel outperform actively managed funds, also in the direct
channel. We conduct this test in Table IX. In column (1), we regress fund i’s four factor alpha
on a dummy variable that indicates whether fund i is an index fund, and investment style-bymonth fixed effects. The estimated coefficient is 0.000 with a p-value of 0.973. In column (2),
when we control for the different characteristics of actively managed funds, the estimated coefficient on the index fund dummy is -10.8 basis points per month, but not statistically distinguishable from zero (p-value of 0.206). In other words, within the distribution channel with the

31

strongest incentive to invest in portfolio management, we find no evidence that index funds outperform actively managed funds during our sample period.
In contrast, when we focus on the sample of actively managed and index funds outside
the direct channel, we find that index funds outperform actively managed funds by as much as
8.9 basis points per month (in the specification without controls). Since index funds should have
alphas near zero (especially since we are including investment style-by-month fixed effects), the
underperformance of actively managed funds relative to index funds outside the direct channel is
closely related to the underperformance we find in Table VIII. As such, it is another way to
measure the tradeoff between investments in brokers and investments in portfolio management.
In the last two columns of Table IX, we include all of the distribution channels in a single
regression, but include separate dummy variables for actively managed funds in the direct channel, index funds in the direct channel, and index funds outside the direct channel. In column (5),
we find that all three types of funds outperform actively managed funds outside the direct channel (the omitted category) by 7.5-10.4 basis points per month; we cannot reject the hypothesis
that the estimated coefficients on all three dummy variables are equal (p-value of 0.801). In column (6), when we control for the fund-level characteristics (like the higher expenses of actively
managed funds), we once again find actively managed funds in the direct channel outperform
actively managed funds in other channels.
IV. Family Response to Clientele-Induced Constraints
The subadvisory market is a useful setting in which to test for other behavior consistent
with market segmentation. If families truly face broker-induced constraints in expanding distribution into new channels, we might expect them to pursue strategies to overcome these barriers.
In addition, if investor preferences vary substantially by channel, families should make decisions

32

with an awareness of the preferences of their target clientele. In this section, we argue that subadvisor decisions to participate in the market, and patterns in which particular pairs of firms enter subadvisory contracts, are consistent with our earlier findings.
A. Overcoming Barriers to Expand Distribution as a Motivation for Subadvising
While it is common to view subadvisory contracts from the perspective of a mutual fund
family seeking to outsource portfolio management (Chen et al (2008), Kuhnen (2009), Cashman
and Deli (2009), and Duong (2007)), we can also view them from the perspective of a subadvisor
seeking to expand distribution. Subadvising allows firms to outsource the costly distribution
services required by investors in different market segments. An intuitively appealing example of
this is the case of separate account management firms that cater to the needs of purely institutional clients, such as pension funds and endowments. Participating in the subadvisory market
allows these firms to gain retail distribution without the high fixed-costs of developing the regulatory infrastructure or additional services, such as daily NAV pricing. Subadvising also allows
mutual fund families to relax broker-induced constraints on serving investors in multiple segments. For example, the hiring of Oppenheimer Capital as subadvisor for the Preferred Value
Fund allows Oppenheimer to indirectly serve investors in Preferred’s direct channel without providing an obvious lower-cost alternative to the Oppenheimer Quest Value Fund that their own
brokers recommend in the wholesale channel. Although both funds invest in large-cap value
stocks and have a monthly return correlation of 0.96, we assume—and our evidence is consistent
with the hypothesis—that investors are unlikely to perceive them to be the same product. In Table AI, we show that 86 mutual fund families subadvise for other mutual fund families. Among
families whose primary distribution channel is direct or broker-sold, 60.8% of the subadvised
assets are in channels that broker-incentives prevent them from serving directly.

33

We find the expansion of distribution via subadvising to be economically significant. For
the 86 subadvisory firms that already have their own retail distribution, we find that the average
Herfindahl distribution channel index falls from 0.817 to 0.691 (the median falls from 0.858 to
0.724) when we account for the distribution channels that these families reach indirectly via subadvising, indicating that distribution becomes less concentrated after accounting for subadvising.36 Similarly, the average number of distribution channels they sell through increases from
2.29 to 3.73 (the median increases from 2 to 4). In each case, the difference in means or medians
is statistically significant at the 1% level. In terms of assets under management, the assets managed in new channels via subadvising account for 18.3% of the total assets managed by the average firm; for the median firm, the fraction is 5.8%, which is smaller, but still economically significant. In addition, all of the assets subadvised by separate account managers reflect increases
in their retail distribution by definition. Together, our evidence suggests that overcoming barriers to expanding distribution provides an additional motivation for firms to participate in the subadvisory market.
B. Do Families in the Direct Channel Cater to Do-It-Yourself Investors? Evidence from Contracting Partners
To provide additional evidence that mutual fund families internalize the preferences of
their target clienteles, we exploit data on subadvisor identities. To the extent that do-it-yourself
investors face the lowest search costs, they are the most likely to try to invest directly with the
subadvisor. Thus, we predict that families in the direct channel will be the least likely to hire
subadvisors that distribute their own brand of mutual funds in the direct channel. Similarly,


36

To compute a Herfindahl that accounts for subadvising, we add the TNA in the distribution channels for which
they subadvise to the TNA in their own retail channel.

34

families in the direct channel will have a greater preference for subadvisors that manage separate
accounts, since these investment vehicles are not otherwise accessible to retail investors.
In Table X, we compare the distribution channel of 252 subadvised funds with a single
subadvisor to the primary distribution channels of their subadvisors (determined based on firmlevel ADE assets) and find support for both predictions. Under the null hypothesis that the fraction of subadvisors from each distribution channel reflects the relative supply of firms in each
channel, the expected number of subadvisors pairing with direct channel subadvised funds is 9.7.
The observed number is 3, which is statistically significantly different at the 1-percent level.37
Similarly, the expected number of separate account subadvisors (29.5), is statistically significantly different at the 1-percent level from the observed number of separate account subadvisors
(46). In addition, we find that mutual funds distributed through the direct channel are statistically significantly more likely to hire institutional separate account managers as subadvisors than
funds in other channels (82.2 percent versus 41.4 percent for the other 198 single-subadvisor
funds distributed through other channels). We note that these results also hold if we consider the
full sample of subadvised funds rather than the subsample of funds with a single subadvisor (not
reported).
V. Summary and Conclusion
We study the impact of heterogeneous investor demand for broker services and portfolio
performance on market segmentation and mutual fund family behavior. The interaction between
investor heterogeneity and broker incentives to only recommend funds that investors cannot access more cheaply elsewhere leads us to predict that families will target performance-sensitive

37

To determine the relative supply of subadvisors from each channel, we compare the observed number of subadvisors that come from each channel, excluding those on the diagonal. However, inferences are similar when we include the number of subadvisors within the diagonal elements or focus on the number of firms that operate in each
channel (regardless of whether they serve as a subadvisor).

35

investors, or investors who value broker services, but not both. Using data on mutual fund distribution channels between 1996 and 2002, we find strong support for this prediction. We find
that the market for retail mutual funds is highly segmented, with some mutual fund families serving do-it-yourself investors in the direct channel, and other families serving investors in one of
the broker-sold channels. Flow-performance analysis confirms that investors in the direct channel are more performance sensitive, in that they are more likely to reward funds with inflows
when lagged returns are high and punish them with outflows when lagged returns are low.
Our evidence suggests that fund families internalize the preferences of their target investors. We predict that mutual fund families targeting performance-sensitive investors in the direct
channel will invest relatively more in portfolio management. Because traditional mutual fund
fee data do not distinguish investments in portfolio management from investments in distribution
services or profits, we hand collect fees paid by actively managed domestic equity funds to subadvisors for portfolio management in 2002. Consistent with the concern that management fees
overstate investments in portfolio management, we find that the median management fee is 80
basis points, while the median subadvisory fee is only 40 basis points. To the question of differential investments, we find that mutual fund families in the direct channel pay a significant fee
premium for skilled or reputable subadvisors. We also find that funds distributed through the
direct channel are significantly more likely to hire managers who attended the most selective
U.S. colleges and universities—managers who are likely to be more skilled, but are also more
expensive to hire and retain. Finally, within the full sample of actively managed domestic equity
funds in CRSP, we also find robust evidence that funds distributed through the direct channel
outperform comparable funds distributed through other channels by one percent per year. We
interpret these findings as evidence that mutual fund families in the direct channel do invest rela-

36

tively more in portfolio management and reap the rewards of superior performance.
Overall, our findings are consistent with a model in which investor heterogeneity causes
some mutual fund families to compete for investors on more than after-fee returns. Our evidence
that families in the direct channel invest the most in performance implies that tests for fund manager skill should focus on funds distributed in this channel. More generally, market segmentation has important implications for the relation between mutual fund fees and returns. For example, Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu (2009) document a negative relation between mutual fund fees
and before-fee returns, and argue that this relation reflects strategic price setting. Our evidence
suggests an alternative explanation. Mutual funds in broker-sold channels charge higher total
fees because they need to compensate brokers for servicing investors, and earn lower before-fee
returns, because they invest less in portfolio management. Whether our alternative better reflects
the nature of competition between mutual fund families than the model of Gil-Bazo and RuizVerdu (2008) remains an open question. However, it is worth highlighting the different welfare
implications of the two models. In Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu (2008), unsophisticated investors
would benefit from being forced to invest in a low-cost index fund in the direct channel. In contrast, when mutual funds compete by offering different bundles of portfolio management and investor services, investors who value personalized advice and self-select into broker-sold channels
are unlikely to benefit from being forced to invest in the no-broker-services direct channel, despite the higher after-fee returns.
The insight that some investors are willing to tradeoff portfolio management and broker
services also motivates us to revisit the puzzle of active management (Gruber (1996) and French
(2008)). Brokers compensated through commissions have little incentive to recommend index
funds, which are available at low cost in the direct channel. Therefore, demand for broker serv-

37

ices becomes demand for actively managed broker-sold mutual funds, which underperform. But,
to the extent that investors are rationally trading off portfolio management and broker services,
this underperformance is to be expected. A more powerful test of the puzzle of active management is whether index funds in the direct channel outperform actively managed funds in the direct channel. Within our sample, we cannot reject that active and passive mutual funds in the
direct channel perform the same on average.38
Finally, awareness of the changing nature of mutual fund distribution will be important
for future research. A recent Wall Street Journal article and Investment Company Institute publication both suggest that the broker incentives driving segmentation during our sample period
are now in flux.39 If payments to brokers for advice increasingly come directly from investors
rather than via mutual fund families, the universe of funds that brokers are willing to recommend
will likely expand, and competition is likely to focus more on after-fee returns. Understanding
how market segmentation responds to changing broker and mutual fund family incentives will be
important in future studies of investor and fund family behavior, and in tests for differences in
fund performance.
Appendix: Who Participates in the Subadvisory Market?
Previous studies of the subadvisory market focus on a mutual fund family’s incentive to
outsource portfolio management to a subadvisor. For example, Chen, Hong, and Kubik (2008),
Cashman and Deli (2009), and Duong (2007) study the performance of subadvised mutual funds
relative to internally managed funds. Because we use the identities of both the advisors and the
subadvisors in defining our variables of interest, in Table AI, we provide summary statistics on


 Gruber (1996), Glode (2009), Savov (2009), and Pastor and Stambaugh (2010) offer alternative explanations for
the puzzle of active management.
39
Damato, Karen. “Take a Load Off: Do-It-Yourself Investors Get More Fund Choices.” The Wall Street Journal
March 1, 2010, R1 and 2010 Investment Company Factbook, page 76.
38

38

the different participants in the subadvisory markets. Within each category, we also list the top
five firms, ranked by assets under management in actively managed domestic equity portfolios.
Overall, we find that 38% of the mutual fund families in the CRSP Survivor-bias Free Mutual
Fund Database in 2002 participate as either a buyer or a seller of subadvisory services for active
domestic equity funds.
The first row of Table AI contains mutual fund families that outsource portfolio management to outside firms—the sample studied by others. Buyers of subadvisory services include
such familiar names as Vanguard and American Express. The average mutual fund families buying subadvisory services is relatively large, with $9.4 billion under management, although the
median buyer has only $1.6 billion under management. The percentage of ADE funds outsourced by these families is substantial, with a mean of 62.5% and a median of 60%.
The second row contains statistics for 130 firms that sell subadvisory services, but do not
have any retail funds of their own. Because firms like Capital Guardian Trust and Fayez Sarofim
manage separate accounts for endowments and pension funds, they have established reputations
in the institutional market, but are largely unfamiliar to retail investors.40 Participating in the subadvisory market allows separate account managers to earn additional management fee revenues
without having to invest in the investor services demanded by retail mutual fund investors (e.g.,
daily NAV pricing and individual recordkeeping). In other words, while subadvised funds benefit from outsourcing costly portfolio management services, separate account managers benefit
from outsourcing costly distribution services. The typical separate account manager is roughly
comparable to the typical buyer of subadvisory services in terms of total assets under manage
40

In some cases, separate account management firms are owned by a parent with a retail distribution network. For
example, Capital Guardian Trust has common ownership with Capital Group, which also distributes the American
Funds to retail investors. We use the entity specifically named in the subadvisory contract. If the firm markets their
institutional arm as completely separate from their retail arm, we do not include those firms among the fund families
with retail distribution.

39

ment, with a mean of $9.9 billion (versus $9.4 billion), but the median separate account manager
is bigger ($2.9 billion versus $1.6 billion).
The final row contains sellers of subadvisory services that also distribute their own retail
funds. This category consists of 86 mutual fund families, including well-known ones like Fidelity, Janus, and T. Rowe Price, that are somewhat larger than the other market participants in
terms of family assets under management, with a mean of $16.8 billion and a median of $2.6 billion. The fact that mutual fund families “pick stocks” for other families has gone unnoticed in
prior studies of the subadvisory market. However, as we discuss in Section IV.A., there are two
ways for a mutual fund family to benefit from subadvising from another family. First, mutual
fund families that subadvise for other families may benefit from outsourcing costly distribution
services. Second, mutual fund families that subadvise may relax broker-induced constraints on
distribution. For example, mutual fund families in the direct channel may be able to subadvise
for families in broker-sold channels without impacting broker incentives to recommend funds.

40

REFERENCES
Bergstresser, Daniel, John M.R. Chalmers, and Peter Tufano, 2009, Assessing the costs and
benefits of brokers in the mutual fund industry, Review of Financial Studies 22, 41294156.
Berk, Jonathan, and Richard Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in rational markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269-1295.
Bork, Robert H., 1966, The rule of reason and the per se concept: Price fixing and market division, Yale Law Journal 75, 373-475.
Cashman, George, and Daniel Deli, 2009, Locating decision rights: Evidence from the mutual
fund industry, Journal of Financial Markets 12, 645-671.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2008, Outsourcing mutual fund management:
Firm boundaries, incentives and performance, Working paper, U.C. Davis.
Chen, Xuanjuan, Tong Yao, and Tong Yu, 2007, Prudent man or agency problem? On the performance of insurance mutual funds, Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 175-203.
Chevalier, Judith A., and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Are some mutual fund managers better than others? Cross-sectional patterns in behavior and performance, Journal of Finance 54, 875899.
Christoffersen, Susan, Richard Evans, and David Musto, 2009, Cannibalization, recapture and
the role of broker affiliation and compensation, Working paper, McGill University.
Coates IV, John C. and R. Glenn Hubbard, 2007, Competition in the mutual fund industry: Evidence and implications for policy, Journal of Corporation Law 33, 151-222.
Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2008, The small world of investing:
Board connections and mutual fund returns, Journal of Political Economy 116, 951-979.
Cremers, Martijn, and Antti Petajisto, 2009, How active is your fund manager? A new measure
that predicts performance, Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329-3365.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula A. Tkac, 2002, The determinants of the flow of funds of managed
portfolios: Mutual funds vs. pension funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 523-557.
Deli, Daniel, 2002, Mutual fund advisory contracts: An empirical investigation, Journal of Finance 57, 109-133.
Duong, Truong, 2007, Outsourcing in the mutual fund industry, Working paper, University of
Minnesota.

41

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Jeffrey Busse, 2004, Are investors rational? Choices
among index funds, Journal of Finance 59, 261-288.
French, Kenneth R., 2008, The cost of active investing, Journal of Finance 63, 1537-1573.
Gallaher, Steven, Ron Kaniel, and Laura Starks, 2007, Madison Avenue meets Wall Street,
Working paper, University of Texas at Austin.
Gil-Bazo, Javier, and Pablo Ruiz-Verdu, 2008, When cheaper is better: Fee determination in the
market for equity mutual funds, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 67,
871-885.
Gil-Bazo, Javier, and Pablo Ruiz-Verdu, 2009, The relation between price and performance in
the mutual fund industry, Journal of Finance 64, 2153-2183.
Glode, Vincent, 2009, Why mutual funds ‘underperform’, Working paper, Wharton.
Goyal, Amit, and Sunil Wahal, 2008, The selection and termination of investment management
firms by plan sponsors, Journal of Finance 63, 1805-1847.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets, The American Economic Review 70, 393-408.
Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds, Journal
of Finance 51, 783-810.
Harding, John P, Stuart S. Rosenthal, and C.F. Sirmans, 2003, Estimating bargaining power in
the market for existing homes, Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 178-188.
Hortacsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson, 2004, Product differentiation, search costs, and competition
in the mutual fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119, 403-456.
James, Christopher and Jason Karceski, 2006, Investor monitoring and mutual fund performance,
Journal of Banking and Finance 30, 2787-2808.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2008. Unobserved actions of mutual funds,
Review of Financial Studies 21, 2379-2416.
Keswani, Aneel, and David Stolin, 2009, Mutual fund distribution channels and investor reaction
to past performance, Working paper, Toulouse Business School.
Khorana, Ajay and Henri Servaes, 2004, The determinants of mutual fund starts, Review of Financial Studies 12, 1043-1074.

42

Kuhnen, Camelia, 2009, Business networks, corporate governance and contracting in the mutual
fund industry, Journal of Finance 64, 2185-2220.
Malkiel, Burton, 1995, Returns from investing in equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 64,
549-572.
Massa, Massimo, 2003, How do family strategies affect fund performance? When performancemaximization is not the only game in town, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 249-305.
Massa, Massimo, Jonathan Reuter, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2010, When should firms share credit
with employees? Evidence from anonymously managed mutual funds, Journal of Financial Economics 95, 400-424.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Markus Noth, and Antoinette Schoar, 2009, The market for financial advice: An audit study, Working paper, Harvard.
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert Stambaugh, 2010, On the size of the active management industry,
NBER working paper.
Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2006, Do ads influence editors? Advertising and bias in the
financial media, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 197-227.
Savov, Alexi, 2009, Free for a fee: The hidden cost of index fund investing, Working paper,
University of Chicago.
Siggelkow, Nicolaj, 2003, Why focus? A study of intra-industry focus effects, Journal of Industrial Economics 51, 121-150.
Starks, Laura and Michael Yates, 2008, Reputation and mutual fund choice, Working paper,
University of Texas at Austin.
Telser, Lester G., 1960, Why should manufacturers want fair trade? Journal of Law and Economics 3, 86-105.
Tirole, Jean, 1993, The theory of industrial organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Zweig, Jason, Will ‘12b-1’ fees ever stop bugging investors? The Wall Street Journal, December
19, 2009, B1.

43

Table I. Distribution channels for families distributing retail mutual funds
The numbers in this table are computed at the family level. Families are placed in one of seven distribution channels based on the maximum percentage of actively
managed domestic equity assets under management distributed through a particular channel according to 2002 data from the Financial Research Corporation (FRC).
(TNA of share classes missing distribution channel data is ignored.) The table does not include the twenty families representing $300 million in assets that were
dropped due to missing distribution channel data.

Distribution Channel:

Direct

Institutional

Captive

Bank

Insurance

Wholesale

Other

Total:

Number of families
in channel

169

74

17

23

16

76

77

452

Aggregate ADE
assets in channel
($Billions)

$632.9

$99.8

$88.7

$13.8

$20.4

$418.3

$40.5

$1,314.5

Top 3 families in
channel ranked by
ADE assets under
management

Fidelity
Vanguard
Janus

SEI Investments
Dimensional
Fund Advisors
Banc One

American Express
Morgan Stanley
Smith Barney

ABN AMRO
US Trust of NY
Northern Trust

Thrivent
Eclipse (NYLife)
State Street

American Funds
Putnam
AIM

General Electric
Gabelli Asset Mgmt
Goldman Sachs

Fidelity
American Funds
Vanguard

Table II. Monthly flow-performance sensitivity across distribution channels, ADE funds, 1996-2002
This table reports regressions where the dependent variable is monthly net percentage fund flow, using the standard definition of the growth in TNA less capital appreciation. The unit of observation is fund i in month t. All regressions include channel-by-style-by-month fixed effects and the following fund-level control variables,
which are also interacted with channel: lagged no-load fund dummy, lagged expense ratio, lagged 12b-1 fee, lagged log of fund TNA, lagged log of family TNA, and
current fund age measured in years. We also include dummy variables that indicate whether fund i's net return in month t-1 was in either the top or bottom 20% of
funds within the same Morningstar investment style (but across channels). The sample consists of 115,918 observations. Standard errors are clustered on fund family; pvalues are reported in parentheses.

Net flow (t-1)
* Channel dummies

Direct
0.222***
(0.000)

Institutional
0.182***
(0.000)

Captive
0.248***
(0.000)

Bank
0.022
(0.674)

Insurance
0.268***
(0.001)

Wholesale
0.313***
(0.000)

Other
0.259***
(0.000)

Net return (t-1) in Top 20%
* Channel dummies

1.339***
(0.000)

0.135
(0.521)

-0.274
(0.208)

-0.038
(0.934)

0.137
(0.560)

0.393**
(0.020)

0.307
(0.231)

Net return (t-1)
* Channel dummies

-0.047
(0.586)

0.185***
(0.000)

0.176***
(0.000)

0.164*
(0.076)

0.092
(0.132)

0.050
(0.189)

0.112*
(0.052)

Net return (t-1) in Bottom 20%
* Channel dummies

-0.839***
(0.000)

0.489**
(0.018)

0.189
(0.246)

-0.305
(0.281)

-0.051
(0.798)

-0.328**
(0.048)

-0.293
(0.205)

H0: Coefficient on lagged net flows are equal across channels
H0: Coefficient on lagged net return are equal across channels
H0: Coefficient on top 20% dummies are equal across channels
H0: Coefficient on bottom 20% dummies are equal across channels

0.001***
0.069*
0.013**
0.000***

Table III. Segmentation by distribution channel for families distributing retail mutual funds
The numbers in this table are computed at the family level. Families are placed in one of seven distribution channels based on the maximum percentage of actively
managed domestic equity assets under management distributed through a particular channel according to 2002 data from the Financial Research Corporation (FRC).
(TNA of share classes missing distribution channel data is ignored.) The last column computes the mean percent of family assets distributed through each channel using family TNA in all asset classes. The table does not include the twenty families representing $300 million in assets that were dropped due to missing distribution
channel data.


Distribution
Channel:

N

% of family ADE assets in primary ADE channel
25th
75th
pctile
Median
pctile
Mean

Mean % of
family assets in
primary channel

Direct

169

96.5%

99.7%

100%

100%

94.8%

Institutional

74

86.2%

75.0%

92.2%

100%

85.7%

Captive

17

90.3%

82.8%

96.9%

100%

86.6%

Bank:

23

89.8%

79.2%

100%

100%

86.9%

Insurance

16

94.2%

90.5%

98.4%

100%

87.5%

Wholesale

76

91.1%

87.4%

100%

100%

89.6%

Other

77

92.8%

96.5%

100%

100%

90.3%

Total:

452

92.6%

90.5%

100%

100%

90.7%

25 Largest:

25

85.8%

75.6%

94.1%

97.8%

84.5%

Table IV. Primary and secondary distribution channels in 2002
The sample below includes the 452 families for which we have distribution channel data in 2002. The primary distribution channel is the channel through which the
family distributes the largest percentage of actively managed domestic equity assets, and the secondary channel is the next largest percentage for each family. The column “None (%)” indicates that the number of mutual fund families that distribute 100% of ADE assets through a single distribution channel. The column “Broker Conflict (%)” indicates the number of families for which the primary and secondary distribution channels are broker incentive incompatible (direct and broker-sold, or captive broker-sold and wholesale broker-sold). It is not defined for families whose primary distribution channel is Institutional or Other.


Panel A. Number of Primary-Secondary Distribution Channel Pairs
Secondary Distribution channel of fund family
Primary Distribution
Insurance
channel of fund family
Direct
Institutional Captive Bank

Wholesale

Other

None (%)

Total

Broker Conflict (%)
3 (1.8%)

Direct

---

14

0

1

0

2

27

125 (74.0%)

169

Institutional

3

---

1

21

0

7

19

23 (31.1%)

74

Captive

0

7

---

0

0

0

4

6 (35.3%)

17

0 (0%)

Bank

0

4

1

---

0

0

6

12 (52.2%)

23

1 (4.3%)

Insurance

0

4

0

0

---

0

6

6 (37.5%)

16

0 (0%)

Wholesale

5

14

0

0

1

---

17

39 (51.3%)

76

6 (7.9%)

Other

6

6

1

1

1

6

---

56 (72.7%)

77

Total

14

49

3

23

2

15

79

267 (59.1%)

452

Panel B. Average fraction of Family ADE Total Net Assets in the Secondary Distribution Channel (for families in that cell in Panel A)
Primary Distribution
Secondary Distribution channel of fund family
channel of fund family
Bank
Insurance
Wholesale
Other
Direct
Institutional
Captive
Direct

---

15.9%

0

5.3%

0

6.2%

10.6%

Institutional

23.6%

---

12.2%

14.4%

0

25.5%

19.6%

Captive

0

16.0%

---

0

0

0

7.8%

Bank

0

28.6%

11.4%

---

0

0

16.5%

Insurance

0

7.4%

0

0

---

0

8.3%

Wholesale

32.0%

8.9%

0

0

14.0%

---

15.3%

Other

10.5%

23.1%

9.9%

42.8%

3.5%

30.5%

---

10 (3.3%)

Table V. Subadvisory and Management Fees for Retail Mutual Funds with a Single Subadvisor in 2002
The sample below includes 252 family-subadvisor pairs involving a single subadvisor for which we possess data on both the management fee and the subadvisory fee.
The management fee come from the CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free US Mutual Fund Database and are defined as the dollar management fee paid in fiscal-year 2002 divided
by fund average TNA in 2002. The subadvisory fee comes from the Statement of Additional Information within the 485BPOS SEC filing of the subadvised fund in
2002. It is the dollar fee paid to the subadvisory firm in fiscal-year 2002 divided by fund average TNA in 2002. The table below reports the 75th, 50th, and 25th percentiles of the management fee and subadvisory fee (in basis points) by Morningstar style category, and overall across the 252 pairs. The last three columns report the the
75th, 50th, and 25th percentiles of the percentage fee split, defined as the subadvisor fee divided by the management fee.

Subadvisory fee
(basis points)
75th
percentile
Median
45
33

25th
percentile
23

Management fee
(basis points)
75th
percentile
Median
80
74

25th
percentile
55

Subadvisor fee / Management fee
(fee split %)
75th
25th
percentile
Median
percentile
53.3
44.2
40.0

Morningstar
Style Category
Large-cap Value

N
37

Large-cap Blend

37

45

33

23

100

80

70

54.1

40.0

31.3

Large-cap Growth
Mid-cap Value

67
10

50
70

40
50

30
43

90
100

80
95

70
69

60.0
70.0

52.3
60.8

41.4
50.6

Mid-cap Blend

8

48

40

33

93

83

66

60.5

48.5

44.2

Mid-cap Growth
Small-cap Value

34
13

55
70

45
58

30
40

100
100

90
100

75
75

63.2
69.2

50.0
55.6

36.8
51.4

Small-cap Blend

9

65

50

35

100

85

70

60.0

50.0

50.0

37
252

65
54

55
40

35
30

100
100

92
80

80
70

73.3
62.5

55.0
50.0

44.4
40.0

Small-cap Growth
All styles

Table VI. The Relation between Subadvisor Fees and Contract, Family, and Subadvisor
Characteristics (2002)

The table below contains the results of four OLS regressi ons. The dependent variable in each regression equals the
subadvisory fee for the sub -sample of subadvised funds that hire a single subadvisor, and for which we possess data
on all independent variables. Standard errors are cluste red on both the family of the subadvised fund and the su badvisory firm; p-values are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

(1)
Specialist subadvisor hired dummy
Specialist subadvisor hired dummy
* Family in direct channel
Specialist subadvisor hired dummy
* Family in wholesale channel

(2)

(3)

0.019
(0.384)
0.104*
(0.053)

0.018
(0.409)
0.092
(0.111)

0.059*
(0.068)

0.062*
(0.055)

Subadvisor name in fund name dummy
Subadvisor name in fund name dummy
* Family in direct channel
Subadvisor name in fund name dummy
* Family in wholesale channel

0.034
(0.183)
0.125***
(0.005)

0.031
(0.213)
0.100**
(0.038)

-0.033
(0.503)

-0.027
(0.539)

Subadvisor bargaining power index

(4)

0.023
(0.184)
0.092**
(0.015)

Subadvisor bargaining power index *
Family in direct channel
Subadvisor bargaining power index *
Family in wholesale channel

0.016
(0.611)

Management fee

0.410***
(0.000)

0.411***
(0.000)

0.405***
(0.000)

0.401***
(0.000)

Natural log of subadvised fund assets
(millions)

-0.024***
(0.000)

-0.022***
(0.000)

-0.023***
(0.000)

-0.024***
(0.000)

Large-cap value dummy

-0.010
(0.754)

0.012
(0.735)

-0.003
(0.922)

-0.003
(0.922)

Large-cap growth dummy

0.029
(0.280)

0.059*
(0.055)

0.036
(0.187)

0.035
(0.190)

Mid-cap value dummy

0.114***
(0.001)

0.140***
(0.000)

0.111***
(0.002)

0.117***
(0.001)

Mid-cap blend dummy

0.056
(0.180)

0.056
(0.193)

0.060
(0.165)

0.056
(0.179)

Mid-cap growth dummy

0.054
(0.118)

0.057
(0.115)

0.059*
(0.083)

0.056*
(0.095)

Small-cap value dummy

0.100**
(0.012)

0.116***
(0.009)

0.107***
(0.008)

0.104***
(0.008)

Small-cap blend dummy

0.085*
(0.070)

0.096*
(0.057)

0.100**
(0.033)

0.098**
(0.034)

Small-cap growth dummy

0.109***
(0.005)

0.123***
(0.004)

0.114***
(0.004)

0.112***
(0.003)

Direct channel dummy

-0.043
(0.374)

0.004
(0.926)

-0.037
(0.460)

-0.039
(0.430)

Institutional channel dummy

0.041
(0.314)

0.050
(0.249)

0.053
(0.218)

0.050
(0.222)

Captive channel dummy

0.071*
(0.058)

0.072*
(0.092)

0.077*
(0.053)

0.077*
(0.056)

Bank channel dummy

-0.003
(0.956)

-0.000
(0.994)

0.008
(0.886)

0.007
(0.901)

Insurance channel dummy

0.007
(0.811)

0.005
(0.861)

0.007
(0.882)

0.007
(0.805)

Wholesale channel dummy

-0.098***
(0.009)

-0.068
(0.224)

-0.088*
(0.054)

-0.090**
(0.043)

Intercept

0.135**
(0.020)

0.108
(0.115)

0.119**
(0.044)

0.126**
(0.031)

N
R2
P-value test that coefficient on
management fee = 0.50
Standard errors clustered on family and
subadvisor?

226

226

226

226

0.586

0.570

0.598

0.592

0.093*

0.177

0.078*

0.063*

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Table VII. Do Mutual Fund Managers in the Direct Channel Have Different Educational
Backgrounds? (2002)
This table uses Morningstar data on the educational backgrounds of actively managed domestic equity fund managers in 2002. For each of the 945 managers directly employed by his mutual fund family, we observe the name of the
undergraduate college or university and whether he later earned an MBA. We obtain (recent) admissions rates for
274 of the 296 different undergraduate institutions from U.S. Department of Education’s National Center for Education Statistics College Navigator website. We obtain the interquartile range of (recent) student math SAT scores for
251 undergraduate institutions. We classify schools as being in the top (bottom) quartile of math SAT scores when
the midpoint of the interquartile range is above 650 (below 560). Column (1) reports the fraction of managers that
attended one of the 25 most selective U.S. undergraduate institutions (based on admission rates). Columns (2) and
(3) report the fraction of managers that attended undergraduate institutions within the top and bottom quartiles of the
math SAT score distribution. Column (4) reports the fraction of managers that obtained an MBA. Below each difference, we report two p-values. The first p-value (reported within parentheses) is from a t-test for a difference in
means, where we cluster standard errors on mutual fund family. The second p-value (reported within brackets) is
the p-value from the two-sample Wilcoxon rank-sum test.

(1)

% Managers
from Top 25
US School

(2)
% Managers from
US School with
Math SAT scores
in Top Quartile

(3)
% Managers from
US School with
Math SAT scores
in Bottom
Quartile

(4)

% Managers
with MBA

Direct channel

30.7%

60.3%

8.5%

53.0%

All other channels

21.5%

48.5%

13.1%

59.3%

9.2%

11.9%

-4.7%

-6.3%

(0.012)**
[0.001]***

(0.028)**
[0.041] **

(0.084)*
[0.066] *

Difference
(p-value; t-test)
[p-value; Wilcoxon]

(0.012)**
[0.002]***

Table VIII. Monthly Fund Returns and the Direct Distribution Channel (1996-2002)
The table below reports coefficients from panel regressions of fund i’s monthly return on fund and family characteristics. The sample is restricted to non-specialty domestic equity funds operating between January 1996 and December 2002 for which we possess investment style data from Morningstar and fund-level distribution
channel data from FRC. The return measures are fund i’s net return, fund i’s four-factor alpha estimated from net returns, fund i’s four-factor alpha estimated from
fund i’s gross returns (i.e., the monthly returns obtained by adding fund i’s average monthly expense back to its net return), and fund i’s return gap measure (i.e., the
difference between fund i’s gross returns and the gross returns predicted based on its lagged holdings, as calculated in Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008)). The dependent variable in column (6) identifies those funds with above-median values of active share and tracking error (as calculated in Cremers and Petajisto (2009)). The
fact that data on active share and tracking error are only available in those months that mutual funds disclose their holdings explains the smaller number of observations
in column (6). All regressions include style-by-month fixed effects and the following fund-level control variables: lagged no-load fund dummy, lagged expense ratio,
lagged 12b-1 fee, lagged log of fund TNA, lagged log of family TNA, current turnover, current fund age measured in years, net flows into fund i between month t-12
and t-1, and the standard deviation of net flows over this same period. The independent variable of interest is the Direct Channel dummy variable, which equals one if
75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed through the direct channel. Standard errors are clustered on month; p-values are reported in parentheses. ***, **, *
indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

(1)

Dependent variable:
Net return

(2)
Carhart
Alpha, Net
Return

(3)
Carhart
Alpha,
Net Return

(4)
Carhart
Alpha,
Gross
Return

(5)

0.085***
(0.002)

0.085***
(0.002)

0.046**
(0.028)

0.100***
(0.000)

Return Gap

(6)
Above-Median
Values of
Active Share &
Tracking Error?

Direct channel dummy (t)

0.080***
(0.017)

No-load dummy (t-12)

-0.000
(0.986)

0.044*
(0.067)

0.013
(0.575)

0.012
(0.595)

0.013
(0.418)

-0.015**
(0.033)

Expense ratio (t-12)

-0.091*
(0.066)

-0.080**
(0.046)

-0.084**
(0.038)

0.003
(0.946)

-0.045
(0.042)

0.156***
(0.000)

12b-1 fee (t-12)

0.005
(0.944)

0.050
(0.494)

0.077
(0.312)

0.076
(0.321)

0.106*
(0.056)

-0.091***
(0.000)

Ln Fund TNA (t-1)

-0.041***
(0.000)

-0.025**
(0.030)

-0.028***
(0.015)

-0.029**
(0.012)

-0.035***
(0.000)

-0.003*
(0.090)

Ln Family TNA (t-1)

0.023**
(0.013)

0.011
(0.211)

0.012
(0.167)

0.011
(0.203)

0.031***
(0.000)

-0.024***
(0.000)

Turnover (t-12)

-0.000
(0.400)

-0.000
(0.134)

-0.000
(0.106)

-0.000
(0.106)

-0.000**
(0.028)

0.000***
(0.000)

Fund age (t)

-0.001
(0.297)

-0.001
(0.342)

-0.001
(0.298)

-0.001
(0.384)

-0.000
(0.425)

0.001***
(0.000)

Net flow (t-12, t-1)

0.001
(0.532)

0.002***
(0.004)

0.002***
(0.004)

0.002***
(0.004)

0.000
(0.619)

-0.000***
(0.000)

Standard deviation net
flow (t-12, t-1)

-0.007
(0.686)

-0.014
(0.178)

-0.015
(0.133)

-0.015
(0.149)

-0.013
(0.872)

0.021***
(0.000)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Morningstar style*Month fixed
effects?
Sample size

102,223

99,292

99,292

Yes
99,278

Yes
90,061

Yes
18,552

Table IX. Monthly Fund Returns of Actively and Passively Managed Funds, Inside and Outside of the Direct Channel (1996-2002)
The table below reports coefficients from panel regressions of fund i’s monthly return on fund and family characteristics. We combine the sample of actively managed
domestic equity in Table VIII with passively managed domestic equity funds operating between January 1996 and December 2002 for which we possess investment
style data from Morningstar and fund-level distribution channel data from FRC. The return measure fund i’s four-factor alpha estimated from net returns. The Direct
channel dummy variable equals one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed through the direct channel. The ADE dummy variables equal one if fund i is
actively managed, and the Index dummy variable equals one if fund i is passively managed. Columns (1) and (2) are restricted to funds in the direct channel; columns
(3) and (4) are restricted to funds in the other distribution channels; and columns (5) and (6) include funds from each of the seven distribution channels. All regressions
include style-by-month fixed effects. Columns (2), (4), and (6) also include the following fund-level control variables: lagged no-load fund dummy, lagged expense
ratio, lagged 12b-1 fee, lagged log of fund TNA, lagged log of family TNA, current turnover, current fund age measured in years, net flows into fund i between month
t-12 and t-1, and the standard deviation of net flows over this same period. Standard errors are clustered on month; p-values are reported in parentheses. ***, **, *
indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

(1)
Dependent variable:
Sample:

(2)

Inside Direct channel

(3)
(4)
Carhart Alpha, Net Return
Outside Direct channel

Direct channel dummy (t) * ADE
fund (t)
Direct channel dummy (t) * Index
fund (t)

0.000
(0.973)

-0.108
(0.206)

(1 – Direct channel dummy (t)) *
ADE fund (t)

(5)
All Channels
0.075***
(0.001)

0.086***
(0.002)

0.104*
(0.052)

0.025
(0.681)

--0.089*
(0.074)

(1 – Direct channel dummy (t)) *
Index fund (t)

0.023
(0.651)

(6)

0.081
(0.110)

--0.015
(0.766)

No-load dummy (t-12)

0.011
(0.837)

0.031
(0.240)

-0.015**
(0.033)

Expense ratio (t-12)

-0.061
(0.508)

-0.085**
(0.048)

-0.084**
(0.037)

12b-1 fee (t-12)

0.085
(0.724)

0.099
(0.208)

0.078***
(0.302)

Ln Fund TNA (t-1)

-0.031**
(0.048)

-0.025**
(0.047)

-0.028**
(0.012)

Ln Family TNA (t-1)

0.017
(0.169)

0.010
(0.283)

0.012
(0.161)

Turnover (t-12)

-0.000*
(0.070)

-0.000
(0.557)

-0.000*
(0.098)

Fund age (t)

-0.004**
(0.342)

0.000
(0.991)

-0.001
(0.300)

Net flow (t-12, t-1)

0.002**
(0.018)

0.001**
(0.024)

0.002***
(0.005)

Standard deviation net
flow (t-12, t-1)

-0.013
(0.585)

-0.021**
(0.037)

-0.016
(0.114)

Morningstar style*Month fixed
effects?
Sample size

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

31,514

31,514

72,923

72,923

104,437

Yes
104,437

Table X. Distribution Channels of Buyers and Sellers of Subadvisory Services
The sample below includes 252 subadvised fund-subadvisor pairs for which we have distribution channel data and the subadvised fund has exactly one subadvisor. The distribution channel of the subadvised fund is defined at the fund level. We aggregate the assets within each channel across all of a fund’s share classes
and assign each fund a distribution channel category when at least 75% of its assets are sold through that channel. Otherwise, we treat the distribution channel as
missing. The subadvisor’s distribution channel is defined as the channel that has the largest percentage of family ADE TNA distributed through it. The categories direct, institutional, captive, bank, insurance, wholesale, and other represents distribution channels within the mutual fund universe. Separate account subadvisory firms are defined as firms that do not have in-house retail fund distribution. There are 23 fund-subadvisor pairs with missing distribution channel data,
and 25 pairs set to missing due to less than 75% of fund assets in one channel.

Distribution channel of subadvisory firm (seller of subadvisory services)
Distribution channel
of subadvised fund

Direct

Institutional

Captive

Bank

Insurance

Wholesale

Direct

3

1

0

0

0

Institutional

6

1

2

0

Captive

2

3

0

Bank

1

1

Insurance

19

Wholesale

Other

Separate
Account

Total

4

0

46

54

0

7

3

14

33

0

0

6

2

1

14

0

0

0

4

1

7

14

4

2

0

1

2

5

12

45

8

2

1

0

1

9

4

24

49

Other

6

1

1

0

1

6

4

24

43

Total

45

13

6

0

3

38

19

128

252

Total (%)

17.9%

5.2%

2.4%

0.0%

1.2%

15.1%

7.5%

50.8%

100%

% of sellers subadvising a fund in channel
different than their
own

93.3%

92.3%

100%

100%

66.7%

76.3%

78.9%

100%

92.9%

Table AI. Subadvisory market participants outsourcing distribution versus portfolio management, based on active domestic
equity funds in 2002

We compute firm -level summary statistics for all asset management firms that either participate as a buyer or seller in the mar ket for subadvisory services for
actively m anaged dom estic equity m utual funds. Firm s are groupe d into three categories: mutual fund fam ilies that buy subadvis ory services (i.e., outsource
portfolio management), separate account managers who sell suba dvisory services (i.e., outsource 100% of their retail distribution), and mutual fund families that
sell subadvisory services (i.e., outsource less than 100% of their retail distribu tion). Note that there are 13 mutual fund fa milies that both buy and sell subadvisory services. For m utual fund families, we obtain data on asse ts under management and number of funds from the CRSP Survivo r-Bias-Free US Mutual Fund
Database. For separate account managers, we obtain data on a ssets under management and number of separate account products fro m the Mobius M-search database.
Average
Average
Average
(median)
Average
Average
(median)
(median)
number of
Average (me(median)
number of (median) % of ADE
Top five largest firms (fami- dian) family
ADE funds
family
ADE
serve as
TNA in ADE
number
funds outlies) in this category ranked
of funds
TNA ($bil- funds in
sourced to
by ADE assets under mansubadvisor
funds ($bilin family subadvisors
lions)
N
family
agement
for others
lions)
Mutual fund families that
buy subadvisory services
(i.e., outsource portfolio
management)
Separate account managers
that sell subadvisory services
(i.e., outsource all retail fund
distribution)
Mutual fund families that
sell subadvisory services
(i.e., outsource some retail
fund distribution)

106

Vanguard
AIM
American Express
Morgan Stanley
Oppenheimer

3.1
(0.68)

9.4
(1.6)

8.1
(5)

21.2
(11.5)

62.5
(60)

0.4
(0)

130

Wellington Management
Jennison Associates
Dresdner RCM Global
Capital Guardian Trust
Fayez Sarofim

5.8
(2.2)

9.9
(2.9)

3.4
(2)

5.6
(4)

0
(0)

2.2
(1)

86

Fidelity
Janus
Putnam
T Rowe Price
American Century

8.8
(1.6)

16.8
(2.6)

9.4
(6)

25.2
(11.5)

3.0
(0)

3.5
(2)

