                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING AN OPTIMIST:
                            EVIDENCE FROM LABOR MARKETS

                                             Ron Kaniel
                                            Cade Massey
                                          David T. Robinson

                                        Working Paper 16328
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16328


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2010




We are grateful to Sheryle Dirks, Erin Gasch and Andrew Hussey for helpful comments and assistance.
We received helpful feedback on drafts of this paper from seminar participants at Arizona State, Carnegie
Mellon, Colorado, Columbia, Duke, Harvard, HKUST, INSEAD, Stockholm School of Economics,
Texas, UNC, UCLA, and the NBER Fall 2007 Corporate Finance Meetings. Dan Blanchette provided
expert assistance assembling the survey data. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Ron Kaniel, Cade Massey, and David T. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Importance of Being an Optimist: Evidence from Labor Markets
Ron Kaniel, Cade Massey, and David T. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 16328
September 2010
JEL No. J24,M51

                                             ABSTRACT

Dispositional optimism is a personality trait associated with individuals who believe, either rightly
or wrongly, that in general good things tend to happen to them more often than bad things. Using a novel
longitudinal data set that tracks the job search performance of MBA students, we show that dispositional
optimists experience significantly better job search outcomes than pessimists with similar skills. During
the job search process, they spend less effort searching and are offered jobs more quickly. They are
choosier and are more likely to be promoted than others. Although we find optimists are more charismatic
and are perceived by others to be more likely to succeed, these factors alone do not explain away the
findings. Most of the effect of optimism on economic outcomes stems from the part that is not readily
observed by one's peers.


Ron Kaniel                                          David T. Robinson
Fuqua School of Business                            Fuqua School of Business
Duke University                                     Duke University
Durham, NC 27708                                    One Towerview Drive
ron.kaniel@duke.edu                                 Durham, NC 27708
                                                    and NBER
Cade Massey                                         davidr@duke.edu
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
cade.massey@yale.edu
       There is growing evidence that personality traits shape economic behavior. For ex-
ample, consider corporate executives. Schoar (2009) finds that CEOs who start their
managerial careers during recessions have more conservative management styles than
those who do not (see also Bertrand and Schoar (2003)). Malmendier, Tate and Yan
(2010) show that CEOs who were ‘depression babies’ take on significantly less debt than
CEOs with similar characteristics but from different age cohorts.1 Going beyond execu-
tive labor markets, labor economists have demonstrated that non-cognitive skills, many
shaped in early childhood, affect a wide range of adult-life outcomes (Bowles, Gintis,
and Osborne, 2001; Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006). Each of these distinct strands
of research connects relatively time-invariant, person-specific fixed-effects to a range of
economic choices that work primarily through labor market participation channels.

       In this paper, we focus on optimism as a personality trait, and explore how it affects
labor-market outcomes in a panel of daytime MBA students at a major U.S. university.
We focus on optimism because it is so central to economic choice under uncertainty.
Virtually anyone faced with a choice today that yields uncertain payoffs in the future
must make subjective assessments of the likelihood of different future states of nature.
An optimist places more weight on favorable states of nature when making these decisions
than a pessimist does. This optimism may pertain to a narrowly framed task or event,
or it may simply be the broad, general belief that good things tend to happen more often
than bad. Indeed, holding distorted beliefs about the likelihood of a particular future
event is distinct from possessing a personality trait known as optimism.2
   1
      Kaplan, Klebanov and Sorensen (2010) measure a large number of traits and tendencies among
CEO candidates and find that traits linked to execution skills matter more for firm performance than
the group of traits that capture interpersonal skills, even though the latter matters more for hiring.
Traits appear to affect salaries as well, although the precise nature of the link is unclear. Graham, Li
and Qiu (2009) find that about half of the variation in CEO compensation is attributable to CEO fixed
effects.
    2
      Weinstein (1980), Weinstein and Klein (1996), and The College Board (1976-1977), Kruger and
Dunning (1999), Moore and Small (2007) and Burson, Larrick and Klayman (2006) all explore the
tendency to misjudge the probability of specific future events. Peterson (2000), Scheier and Carver
(1985), Seligman and Csikzentmihalyi (2000) focus on optimism as a personality trait that may or may
not be correlated with positive illusion about a specific future event. Taylor and Brown (1988) point out
that positive illusion, optimism, and the illusion of control are all traits possessed by mentally healthy


                                                    1
   This latter conception of optimism, dispositional optimism, has been studied exten-
sively by personality researchers. They have found that dispositional optimism is a
stable personality trait that predicts a wide range of long-horizon health behaviors and
outcomes.3 Importantly, because these expectations are measured in absolute terms,
rather than relative to outcomes, they may or may not reflect rational beliefs about the
likelihood of various states of nature.

   Daytime MBA students are an ideal population for studying links between disposi-
tional optimism and labor market choices: MBA students make a large investment in
human capital acquisition by exiting the labor market for two years to return to school,
and many aspire to and may later exert significant influence over large organizations.4
Earning an MBA involves an expensive, time-consuming investment with uncertain pay-
offs that accrue slowly over time as one’s career unfolds. Undertaking the MBA requires
a broad set of beliefs about one’s vocational future and how it will change as a result
of the investment, and in turn, how this will impact overall utility. At the same time,
students receive frequent feedback, and have ample opportunities to adjust their time
allocation and investment in light of changes in their future expectations.

   Thus, it is far from obvious how optimism is likely to affect economic choices and
outcomes. Standard arguments predict that optimism leads to bad outcomes, because
inappropriate probability weights placed on future states of nature cause individuals to
misallocate resources. In contrast, there are a number of reasons why optimists might
make better choices and experience better outcomes. They might be optimistic because
they are aware of latent skills or talents—their optimism might be rational given their
private information. Or it might empower those who possess the trait to persevere
in the face of initial adversity. Alternatively, the sense of well-being that stems from a
individuals.
   3
     See Peterson, Seligman, Vaillant (1998) or Friedman, Weinberg, Webb, Cooper and Bruce (1995)
for a particularly stark examples of the long-lasting benefits of dispositional optimism. Rasmussen,
Scheier, and Greenhouse (2009) provides an excellent review.
   4
     See Kuhnen (2009) for work exploring optimal search behavior that uses similar data.



                                                 2
deeply held conviction that the future will turn out favorably might allow them to adapt
more effectively to changes in the environment, or internalize negative feedback more
effectively.5

       To study these questions we measure dispositional optimism when students first
arrive in the MBA program and then observe job search behavior during the MBA,
including that related to summer internships as well as full-time jobs following gradua-
tion. Admissions records, data on classroom performance, and “beauty contest” surveys
designed to capture the perceptions of other students allow us to build a robust picture
of the investment in human capital that occurs during the MBA experience. In addition,
we follow up with alumni two years after they graduate to learn about their post-MBA
job-market experience. This survey methodology allows us to explore these competing
hypotheses in detail.

       We find strong evidence that optimists outperform their peers in the job market.
They search less intensively than their peers, and seem to place less importance on the
job search process, but nevertheless receive job offers more quickly. Moreover, they are
more likely to be promoted in the first two years after graduation, even though they are
no more likely than others to still be employed by the same firm.

       So why do optimists outperform others? One reason why optimists might outperform
others is that unobserved skill, or talent, is driving our results. Although it is impossible
to rule this out entirely (indeed, at some level this becomes an issue of semantics), there
appears to be little support for the assertion that optimism captures unmeasured skill or
luck. Dispositional optimism is unrelated to standardized test scores such as the GMAT
(verbal, quantitative, or total) as well as demographic traits that are correlated with
past success. Indeed, Satterfield, Monahan and Seligman (1997) shows that dispositional
optimism is negatively related to performance in law school.
   5
    Recent work in psychology points to coping as an important psychological process implicated in
optimism. See Rasmussen, Carver and Scheier (2006), Segerstrom, Taylor, Kemeny and Fahey (1998),
or Scheier, Weintraub and Carver (1986).


                                                3
       Moreover, there is evidence that, at least in the short run, optimists are prone to
hold distorted, inaccurate beliefs. In particular, we find that optimists think that they
will get coveted jobs with a higher probability than others. They do not; optimists are
no more likely to get a job with a preferred employer than anyone else. They also falsely
believe that they will earn more than their peers. These results stack up against stories
that hinge on optimism working through private information.

       Much more difficult to observe are interpersonal traits that affect how students are
treated by other people. Yet these traits are likely to be important, especially in a labor
market. Individuals who are, say, good looking, articulate, or more personable may be
more optimistic because they have learned to rationally anticipate favorable outcomes
when they interact with others. Good things happen to these people, making them
optimistic, which in turn perpetuates good things occurring, but the optimism per se
does not cause the good things in life to occur.

       To test this explanation we built a “beauty contest” into our survey. Near the
end of the two-year MBA program, students were asked to choose from among their
section-mates the five most charismatic people, the five most likely to be CEO, and
the five most optimistic.6 If dispositional optimism were simply capturing interpersonal
charm, we would expect to see the ex ante optimism measurements cease to explain
job search outcomes when we controlled for charisma. Instead, what we find is that
dispositional optimism continues to explain outcomes even when we control for these
outward measures. Outward measures explain at most about 1/3 of the overall effect.

       The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1 we describe the student survey and
the related archival data that allow us to study optimism and labor-market outcomes.
Section 2 explores the demographics of optimism, and considers how optimism might
be related to charisma and other measures of socialability. We consider how optimism
   6
    In the MBA program we studied, the class is divided into six sections of approximately sixty
students. The survey asked students for their rankings of their section-mates, not those outside their
section.


                                                  4
relates to job-search behavior in Section 3, while in Section 4, we consider how optimism
to job-search outcomes. To see how optimism relates to performance on the job, we
report the key findings from a 2009 follow-up survey of 2007 graduates in Section 5.
Section 6 explores a range of potential explanations for our findings. Section 7 concludes.



1     Data

The key data source behind our study is an eight-wave online survey of daytime MBA
students at a midatlantic university that we conducted between August 2005 and May
2007. Like most daytime MBA programs at US schools, this is a two-year program in
which the summer after the first year of classes is typically spent in one or more paid
internships with potential future employers. The internship is a valuable opportunity not
only for students to learn how well they match to particular employers, industries, and
job functions, but also for employers to learn whether the student in question merits
a job offer. Some students return from the summer internship with a job offer from
their summer employer, and many of these students accept that job. Others continue
searching in the second year for a full-time job offer which typically begins in the summer
after graduation.

    The data collection and survey procedure is detailed in the Appendix, but can be
briefly summarized as follows. Students complete four online surveys during each school
year. The first is conducted during the orientation period, prior to the beginning of
classes, and consists of the Life Orientation Test - Revised (LOT-R), a measure of
generalized expectations that is the most common instrument for assessing dispositional
optimism (Scheier and Carver., 1985; Scheier et al., 1994). This tool consists of 10 items
such as, “In uncertain times, I tend to expect the best”, each of which the participants
rate on a scale ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree.” Setting aside the
four filler items, there are 6 items, each with a 5-point scale, so the theoretical range


                                            5
is 6-30. The full text of the LOT-R, including the filler questions, is contained in the
Appendix.

   Subsequent surveys consist of 10-15 questions about expectations for future academic
performance, as well as their preferences and expectations in their career search. For
example, we ask a variety of questions about job-market expectations, as well as about
the relative importance of various dimensions of the MBA experience. In particular,
students are asked to rank on a scale of 1 to 3 the following three dimensions of the
program: the importance of friends made in the program, the importance of getting a
good job, and the importance of grades.

   The fifth round of the survey is conducted at the beginning of the second year of the
program, and included retrospective questions about the quality of their experience with
their summer employer(s) (including whether they received a job offer from a summer
internship) along with standard job-market expectations. The remaining rounds were
conducted in the spring of the final year and included retrospective questions about the
overall quality of their experience as well as their recollections of time allocations across
job-search tasks and school work.

   Students who complete a survey receive a $5 gift card to a national coffee chain, as
well as entry into a drawing for a $100 gift certificate to a local restaurant. To create
incentives for thoughtful predictions, we enter participants into a lottery for a $1,000 gift
certificate based on their predictions, where the likelihood of winning is set proportional
to the ex post accuracy of their prediction. Using archival data, we compute actual
GPAs and deciles for each student in each term. We then compare these archival data
with the survey responses to assess the accuracy of participants expectations.

   A total of 232 first-year M.B.A. students (a 53% response rate) participated in the
first year of the study. Table 1 illustrates the fact that participant demographics closely
match the student population. There were some important differences, however. Survey
participants were generally younger, more likely to be US citizens, more likely to be

                                             6
white and less likely to be Asian. They earned more in their prior jobs and had better
grades and GMAT scores.7


                                       Table 1 about here


    To create incentives for participation, a second $1,000 gift certificate is raffled to those
who completed all eight waves of the survey. Of the 232 respondents who completed all
four waves of the first survey, approximately 180 returned to the survey for the second
year of the survey. Their demographic characteristics closely match those of the first
year survey sample.

    A third section of data was created by matching the student’s survey responses to
archival data from the admissions office and the career management center. Admissions
data gives us background demographic characteristics, as well as GMAT scores. The data
from the career management center track the receipt and acceptance of job offers. In
addition, the career management center maintains a bidding system for interview slots;
this allows us to tabulate the number of bids that each student places as a measure of
search intensity.



2     Explaining Dispositional Optimism

Before exploring the role that dispositional optimism plays in affecting labor-market
outcomes, we first investigate the socio-demographic determinants of optimism. Table
2 reports this analysis.

    Column (1) of Table 2 simply regresses the LOT-R score on a vector of demographic
and admissions controls. Males are more optimistic than females. Students who come
   7
     To verify that underlying demographic differences between the subject pool and the student pop-
ulation are not responsible for our findings, we have repeated our analysis on only the students who
participated in the first four rounds of the survey. This has no effect on our findings.


                                                 7
in from more lucrative prior jobs are significantly less optimistic, but this effect may be
attributable to their prior industry. There is little variation along other dimensions.

   One important possibility is that the LOT-R simply measures likeability or social
grace. In other words, respondents who favor questions like “In general, good things
tend to happen to me more than bad” could feel that way because they are naturally
charming people who are used to good things happening to them. This would yield
substantially different interpretations for our findings than than those focused on the
psychological processes distinguishing optimists from others.


                                   Table 2 about here


   To control for this possibility, we conducted a form of a beauty contest near the end
of the MBA. In particular, at the end of the second year, students were asked to identify
the five people from their first-year section who were the most charismatic, the most
likely to one day become CEO, and the most optimistic. By tallying up the votes that
each person receives, we constructed measures that are labeled Charisma, Future CEO,
and Outward optimism in Table 2. These appear in the remaining columns. A table
of raw correlations between the LOT-R and the beauty contest variables is reported in
Appendix A.

   Column (2) shows that LOT-R loads reliably on charisma, though the effect size is
modest. The median survey respondent received 1 vote from their section mates; the
mean number of votes was 2.67 and the standard deviation was around 4.5. This means
that a two-standard-deviation shift in charisma raises the LOT-R by about one unit
(i.e., going from agree to strongly agree on a single question).

   The remaining columns illustrate that that outward optimism is positively related to
the LOT-R, but that in general, the other measures from the beauty contest are driven
out by charisma. In sum, individuals who enter the MBA with high dispositional opti-
mism scores are indeed later perceived to be more charismatic by their peers. Because

                                            8
of this, we will introduce these variables as controls when we explore outcomes that
occur after the MBA (i.e., after the charisma-related variables were obtained), and in
robustness checks we include these along with the LOT-R in Table 9.



3     Job-Search Beliefs and Behaviors

Our first link between optimism and labor-market outcomes is in the relation between
optimism and the job-search experience of MBA students. We investigate this in two
ways. First, we relate optimism to personal beliefs about the job importance. Since the
entire MBA experience is, at some level, a complex job-search and matching process,
this helps us understand how optimism relates to the perceived expected payoffs of
additional job search. Next, we relate optimism to actual search behavior by measuring
the number of bids that students place in the on-line bidding system, as well as the
number of companies they contacted at various points during the job-search process.
These tests all point in the same direction; namely, that optimists engage less intensively
(or more efficiently) in search.



3.1    The Importance of a Job

One of the questions we asked students was how they ranked three facets of the MBA
experience: the friends they make, the job they get upon completion of the degree,
and the grades they receive. Students scored these three options with a 1, 2 or 3 to
indicate most important to least important. In Table 3, we use the response to this
question as a proxy for search intensity and model its determinants. In particular, we
model the probability that a respondent answers that the job they get upon graduation
is the foremost consideration in their minds. Approximately 38% of students report that
the job they get upon graduation is more important than the friends they make in the



                                            9
program or the grades they earn in classes.


                                         Table 3 about here


       Table 3 illustrates that optimists are significantly less likely to place the greatest
importance on getting a job. This holds across a wide range of specifications that
control for demographic and admissions characteristics. Males are no different than
females in their tendency to report jobs as the item of primary importance. There are
no meaningful differences across white, hispanic, or asian ethnicities, and while black
respondents are less likely to place importance on jobs, they comprise a very small
fraction of the respondent pool.8

       Thus, Table 3 indicates that optimists place less importance on getting a job relative
to the other facets of the MBA experience. In the next subsection, we explore how this
translates into job-search behavior.



3.2       Job-Search Activity

Considering students’ choices in the job-search process allows us to move from beliefs
about job importance to the actions they take pursuing jobs. In Table 4 we measure
behaviors associated with job importance by modeling students’ search behavior. In
particular, we track the number of bids placed by students in the interview bidding
system that auctions interview slots to interested students, and the companies that
they report interviewing with. These measures are possibly distinct because interview
   8
    Approximately ten percent of the student population, and the same fraction of our respondent pool,
is made up of students who attend the MBA program under the sponsorship of their prior employer. This
sponsorship typically comes with an obligation to return to that employer after the degree is completed
(although this is sometimes negotiated away). It is not surprising, then, that they are unlikely to report
jobs as the most important factor. Indeed, over two-thirds of sponsored respondents list jobs as the least
important factor of the three. Presumably, those who did not had in mind something like a promotion
that would be contingent on their performance in the program when they offered that response.



                                                   10
bidding system will not capture the job-search behavior of students who conduct their
job searches outside of the purview of the school’s career services center.


                                        Table 4 about here


       The table shows a strong negative relationship between the LOT-R and job search.
In Panel A, we use Poisson regressions to estimate the count of bids as a function of
optimism and a series of controls. More optimistic students place fewer bids. In addition
to ethnic and demographic controls (gender, age, and marital status), which have no
effect, this effect holds even when we include some important controls for expected job-
search behavior.9 In particular, controlling for whether the student is sponsored, how
much importance they attach to jobs, and how many total job offers they expect to
receive, optimists place fewer bids.

       Of course, one possible explanation for the results in Panel A is that optimists are
more likely to search outside the normal channels, and thus are not captured well by the
interview bidding system. To allow for this possibility, we asked the students in round
6 of the survey how many companies they contacted for jobs. This is the dependent
variable in Panel B. The interpretation is identical to Panel A; optimists search less
intensely.10



3.3       Search Yields

Next, we explore regressions that model the success rate of the job-search process. This
is found in Table 5. This table shows that optimists have higher search yields.
   9
     The negative loading on the dummy for US citizen captures the fact that foreign nationals will
search on the US job market in addition to their home country job market, whereas fewer US citizens
search globally for jobs.
  10
     Panel B reports OLS regressions. We obtained similar results in Panel B when we ran count
regressions instead. In Poisson specifications of Panel B, the point estimate on Optimism is about twice
that of Panel A.


                                                  11
                                       Table 5 about here


       The dependent variable in Table 5 is the ratio of interviews obtained divided by
interview bids submitted. OLS regressions are reported in each column. Since the
median student gets about one job offer for every six bids, the loading on optimism
indicates that a one standard deviation increase in optimism is associated with about
a 10% improvement in search efficiency at the median.11 Or put differently, comparing
the coefficients in column (2), the effect of optimism is about 10% that of the effect
of either citizenship or gender.12 Comparing across alternative specifications in Table
5, the effect of optimism is robust to a variety of controls for ethnicity, demographics,
MBA performance, and labor-market beliefs.



4        Job-Search Outcomes

Now we shift the focus from beliefs to outcomes. First we explore first-year internship
outcomes, as well as how well students assess the probability that they get a highly
coveted job. After that, we explore the determinants of receiving the final job offer. As
a final step, we investigate how long it takes respondents to accept the job that they
ultimately accept.



4.1       Internship Outcomes

Although we are ultimately interested in final labor-market outcomes for MBA students,
many students report that they take a job with their first-year summer employer. Also,
the summer internship is a key component of the job-search process, even for those who
  11
     The mean is about one interview for every three bids, but this is skewed by the fact that some
students are called for interviews without bidding.
  12
     Other demographic and ethnicity controls are included in the estimation, but are suppressed for
brevity’s sake.


                                                12
take jobs elsewhere. Therefore modeling internship outcomes is an important ingredient
to understanding the overall relation between optimism and labor-market outcomes. We
provide this analysis in Table 6.


                                    Table 6 about here


   The dependent variable in Table 6 is a dummy variable for whether the respondent
reported that they had an internship offer as of round 4 of the survey, which coincided
with the beginning of the final term of the first year (i.e., the second half of the spring
semester). Since most of the interviews for internships occur in the early spring, this is
an indication of job-search success, albeit a crude one. Nevertheless, it gives us some
preliminary insight into differences in job-market outcomes that optimists experience.

   The independent variables include optimism, demographic and admissions controls,
as well as controls for a respondent’s subjective beliefs about the number of intern-
ships they would receive, and a dummy for whether they were sponsored by their prior
employer.

   Across model specifications, optimists are more likely to have secured a summer
internship by the beginning of their fourth term. A one-standard deviation increase
in the LOT-R raises the probability of having secured an internship by 1.4 to 2.0%.
The demographic controls indicate that younger, white females have the best success
at obtaining internships early. Beliefs about the number of internships have no bearing
on the outcome here, however being sponsored by one’s employer substantially lowers
the probability of having secured an internship. This last fact is attributable to the fact
that for most sponsored students, their summer return to employment does not count
as an internship, since they return to their previous employer.

   Note that while we are not measuring the perceived quality of the internship per
se, we are in effect measuring whether the respondent has terminated the search for an
internship. Therefore, we are observing whether an internship offer has been received

                                            13
that meets or exceeds their reservation level. Viewed in this light, the findings indicate
that optimists face better job-search outcomes in the first phase of the job search, namely
securing a summer internship.



4.2     Final Employment Outcomes

Next we turn to models that estimate the hazard of receiving a full-time job offer. Since
many students receive multiple offers before making a final decision, and nearly everyone
receives an offer by the time they graduate, we model the amount of time to the first
job offer.

   Table 7 reports estimates from a Cox Proportional Hazard model, in which the
baseline hazard rates are stratified by job field. There are thirteen fields broken across
finance, management, marketing, and consulting, but the results reported here are robust
to coarser fields that only control for broad job category.


                                   Table 7 about here


   This table shows that being more optimistic raises the hazard of receiving a job
offer. The point estimate is expressed as a proportional shift in the baseline hazard;
in particular, point estimates greater than one raise the hazard while point estimates
below one lower the hazard. The effect of optimism on the hazard of receiving a job offer
is generally significant at the 1% level, but when we include the variable that captures
whether the internship resulted in a job offer at the end of the summer, the significance
of optimism falls to the 5% level. In part, this is due to the fact that optimists are
more likely to receive a job offer from their summer employer. (They are not, however,
more likely to go to work for the company that gave them the summer internship, even
conditional on having received the offer.)



                                             14
   A number of demographic controls are significant determinants of job-search dura-
tions, yet these do not drive out the significance of the LOT-R. U.S. citizens receive jobs
much faster; this presumably reflects both the additional difficulty in obtaining jobs for
visa applicants as well as the additional waiting times associated with overseas offers.
Echoing the results for initial internship placement, female respondents experience the
shorter times to first job offer. Older respondents wait longer to receive their first job,
but this effect loses significance when we control for whether the internship resulted in
an immediate job offer. This is because older respondents are significantly less likely to
leave their summer internships with a job offer in hand.

   In contrast, the job importance parameter is important for determining durations of
unemployment. As one might expect, job importance raises the hazard of obtaining a
first job offer, significantly if we include controls for whether the internship resulted in
an offer.

   Because the hazard functions modeled in Table 7 are stratified by the intended field
of entry, the findings presented here cannot be readily explained by the fact that op-
timists—perhaps because they care less about jobs, as potentially evidenced in Table
3—simply select into occupations where there is a relative surplus of jobs, making sat-
isfactory search outcomes easier to obtain. If this were not the case, one could conclude
that the findings were attributable to the fact that optimists were satisfied with lower
quality jobs. Indeed, the findings in Table 7 indicate that within occupational cate-
gories, optimists have better labor-market outcomes. Nevertheless, we take this issue up
in greater detail in the next subsection.



4.3    Do Optimists Accept Lower Quality Jobs?

One interpretation of the preceding results is that in a number of ways optimists do
better in the labor market without trying as hard. This can be seen by the fact that


                                            15
they receive job offers more quickly in spite of placing less importance on job outcomes.
Of course, the alternative interpretation is that they simply do not care as much about
the quality of the job, and therefore are happy to accept a job that others might prefer
to turn down.

   In unreported analysis, we explored this option in a number of ways. First, as we have
discussed above, we model the probability of receiving a permanent job offer from one’s
internship, and compare that with the probability of accepting that offer. Optimists
are more likely to receive permanent offers from the internships, but no more likely to
accept them. These findings speak for optimists being more, not less, choosey.

   In addition, we calculated the waiting time between receiving and accepting a job
offer. Optimists do not more quickly accept the job offer they receive. Waiting times do
not load on the LOT-R in any of the specifications we considered. This speaks against
the possibility that our findings are stemming from optimists simply being content with
lower quality jobs. We also considered variation in the salary and structure of salary
(i.e., the fraction of total salary that was bonus). Again, relative to their peers who
entered the same industry, optimists are no different than others in terms of their salary
packages. They are paid neither more nor less than their counterparts. Finally, we
considered how choosey optimists were by looking among the subset of students who
had multiple job offers for which we could compare starting salaries. About 1/3 of
students take a job that is not the highest salary offer they receive, but these students
are no more or less likely to have high LOT-R scores.

   In short, there is no evidence that the smoother job-search experience of optimists
is attributable to optimists accepting lower quality jobs. If anything, optimists are
choosier.




                                           16
5        What happens after they graduate?

The final step in the analysis is to consider what happens to students after they graduate.
How does their optimism translate into performance on the job?

       To study this question, we conducted a follow-up survey in the fall of 2009 for students
who graduated in 2007. To keep the response rate as high as possible, we focused on
the smallest set of questions that would yield identifiable variation in outcomes. In
particular, we asked whether students were still with their current employer, and whether
they had been promoted.

       The first panel of Table 8 models the probability that the respondent is still at the
same job they entered upon graduation. This is not explained by optimism, or by any
of the other covariates. Thus, job tenure is orthogonal to the variables of interest. In
contrast, Panel B focuses on whether the respondent received a promotion. It shows
that regardless of specification, optimism has a strong positive effect on the probability
that a respondent receives a promotion. Since about 20% of the respondents report that
they have been promoted, the magnitude of the point estimate translates into about a
5-10% increase in the probability of being promoted.


                                         Table 8 about here


       In both panels, we include a series of robustness checks. Columns (2) through (4)
of each panel include ethnicity dummies as well as demographic controls and admis-
sions controls. These have little effect on the loading on optimism, and indeed are not
significant in their own right. Importantly, however, the dummy for whether the stu-
dent entered a finance job has a strong negative impact on the probability of being
promoted.13
  13
    This industry effect most likely is particular to this time period, in which the financial sector was
particularly hard hit by the financial crisis.


                                                   17
    In addition to the standard battery of demographic and admissions controls, we also
included the beauty contest variables measured at the end of the MBA. Charisma, future
CEO and outward optimism have no impact on being promoted. This is noteworthy, at
least for charisma and future CEO, because optimism loads heavily on these external
measures. Thus, even though optimists do appear to be more charismatic, this greater
interpersonal skill does not seem to play a role in job-market outcomes.



6     Exploring Explanations for our Findings

The results up to now suggest that optimists perform better in the job-search process
and in the jobs they take after graduation. In this section we explore two explanations
for this pattern in which optimism is more of an effect than a cause. Both explanations
center around the idea that optimists possess private information about their future
success and thus rationally forecast their own outcomes to be better than others.



6.1    Projecting optimism outward to others

A natural question that arises given the correlation between the LOT-R and the beauty
contest measures is whether the links between optimism and job-search behavior are
driven by outward perceptions of optimists. For example, perhaps the outward disposi-
tion of optimists causes others to look favorably upon them, and this results in faster,
more efficient and successful job searches. We take up this question in Table 9 by us-
ing key regressions from previous tables to set up a horse race between “internal” and
“outward” optimism.


                                  Table 9 about here




                                          18
   Column (1) repeats the analysis in Table 4, Panel B, with regressions of the number
of companies contacted on demographic controls, LOT-R and measures taken from the
beauty contest. Column (2) estimates a Probit of obtaining an internship offer in the
beginning of the Spring, which follows Table 6. Column (3) studies search efficiency,
following the analysis in Table 5. Column (4) estimates hazards of first job offers,
following Table 7. Each column contains three panels of estimates. In Panel A, we
conduct a horse race between optimism and charisma. In Panel B, the race is between
optimism and the likelihood of becoming a future CEO. In the third panel, we compare
optimism as measured by the LOT-R with the optimism that is perceived by others.

   We must take caution in interpreting the coefficients, as the beauty contest variables
were measured after the dependent variables in each of the four columns were measured.
However, if we assume that optimism, as measured by the LOT-R, has had a similar
outward effect on the peers of respondents in prior settings (i.e., if optimistic MBA
students were also charismatic as high school students, as college students, or in their
prior jobs), then we can interpret the beauty contest variables as proxies for the charisma
of the respondent when they entered the program. On the other hand, if peer assessments
of success and charisma are influenced by the outcomes of the job-search process, then
this interpretation is invalid.

   Nevertheless, each panel of Table 9 shows that LOT-R impacts key features of the
job-search process above and beyond its correlation with the perceptions of others. Of
the three beauty contest variables, peer perceptions of the likelihood of being a future
CEO mimic the LOT-R most closely (see the middle panel). The loadings are similar
in magnitude and both variables are statistically significant in all four specifications.
Charisma is important in columns (3) and (4), which capture search efficiency and the
hazard of a job offer, but not in the first two columns. Interestingly, peer perceptions of
optimism are insignificant. Across all specifications, however, the LOT-R continues to
be significant and of approximately the same magnitude as in the baseline specifications.



                                            19
   This, in turn, allows us to offer a nuanced perspective on the issue of causation. The
question, ‘Does optimism cause X?’ can be interpreted in several ways. Based on work
in labor economics suggesting that non-cognitive skills are fixed at a relatively young
age in life (see Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006, for example), it is probably not
fruitful to speculate about how a randomly chosen individual’s behavior would change
if they were exogenously made to be more optimistic. The analysis in Tables 5 and 9,
however, suggests that an individual would experience more favorable outcomes if she
were more able to behave in a way that made other individuals think she were optimistic.
This follows from the fact that the loadings on the beauty contest variables are similar
in sign and magnitude to the LOT-R variable. Thus, if we interpret causation from
a purely behavioral or empirical perspective, the results suggest that indeed, optimism
does cause better job-search outcomes. But Tables 5 and 9 also tell us that ‘faking it’ has
its limits: the fact that optimism affects outcomes above and beyond its correlation with
beauty contest variables indicates that a truly optimistic person would still experience
better outcomes than someone who was not but who instead pretended to be. This in
turn, suggests a third interpretation to the question of causation: what if we delegated
important tasks or decisions to optimists? Under this interpretation of causation, the
results clearly indicate that a less optimistic individual would experience better outcomes
by delegating tasks to an optimist.



6.2    Do optimists have private information?

Another way in which optimists may be making rational forecasts of their labor-market
outcomes is if they have private information about their job-search outcomes. Pre-
sumably a respondent who knew they had a high probability of getting a desirable job
would not only face good labor market prospects, but this private information might
cause them to appear optimistic more generally.




                                            20
   To explore this possibility, we make use of a series of questions in Round 5 of the
survey that ask students about the two companies they would most like to work for.
First, they are asked to name the companies they find most desirable. Next, they are
asked to provide their estimate of the probability that they will get a job at one of these
two companies. Finally, since we know the identity of their ultimate employer, we can
determine whether they in fact became employed by one of these firms. Thus, we can
ask whether optimistic respondents possess inside information about their job-search
outcomes.

   We examine this in Table 10. In the first three columns, the dependent variable
is the probability of obtaining a match at one of the two companies. Probabilities are
reported as numbers between 0-100, so the loading on optimism indicates that a one-
standard-deviation shift in optimism is associated with a 1-2% increase in the probability
of getting the job they want. This result is highly statistically significant, even if the
magnitude of their probability differential is not large. (In unreported regressions, we
tested whether this is driven by greater numbers of optimists reporting that they are
100% likely to get the job. We also controlled for job offers. These are not driving this
result.)


                                   Table 10 about here


   Column (1) includes only optimism, while column (2) introduces gender and age.
There is a strong negative loading on gender—males assign about 10% lower probability
to receiving the desirable job—but including this variable strengthens the loading on
optimism. In column (3) we include citizenship, marital status, ethnicity, and intended
job category, and these strengthen the loading on optimism even further. Dispositional
optimists clearly assign higher probabilities to receiving the jobs they find desirable.

   Next we ask whether these expectations materialize. We do this by running Pro-
bit models in which the dependent variable is a dummy for whether the respondents

                                            21
ultimate employer matches of the companies they indicated as most desirable. There
is no effect on optimism. This holds regardless of whether we control for the stated
probability. Note also that the stated probabilities are informative; respondents with
high subjective probabilities of receiving the job are more likely to receive it. There is
simply no additional impact attributable to optimism.

   Taken together, these results indicate that optimists falsely believe that they have
a good chance of receiving the jobs that they consider to be desirable. In unreported
tables, we have also included beliefs about starting salaries. These beliefs were obtained
by asking respondents at various survey periods to state their beliefs about their own
starting salary, and then to state beliefs about the median MBA graduate in the same
program. Optimists think that they will earn more than their peers, even though these
expectations turn out to be wrong. This evidence speaks against the idea that the link
between optimism and positive job-search outcomes is driven by private information.
Indeed, optimists may think they have private information. But this turns out to be
incorrect.



6.3    How Does Optimism Affect Long-term Outcomes

The previous sections have presented evidence against a number of potential mechanisms
for the link between dispositional optimism and labor-market outcomes, including many
offering an alternative to a belief-based explanation. Optimists are not simply more
skilled, at least not as measured on a wide range of observable characteristics. They do
not choose different industries to work in. They do not appear to be less selective about
their employers. They do not have specific inside information that provides a basis for
their positive generalized expectations. And, importantly, the behaviors driving these
results matter above and beyond the qualities observed by their peers.




                                           22
   What then does relate dispositional optimism to labor-market outcomes? A number
of candidate mechanisms have a mixed impact, theoretically. For example, optimists
may be more motivated to work hard to achieve goals since they believe their additional
effort will be rewarded. But they may also be less motivated to work hard to achieve
goals if they believe the goal is likely to be achieved anyway, or that all will be okay
regardless of whether it is achieved. Similarly, optimism might help overcome excessive
risk aversion (Kahneman and Lovallo, 1993), but also can lead to excessive risk taking
via economic- (Puri and Robinson, 2007) or health-related (Weinstein, 1982) choices.

   But there are other consequences of optimism that are unequivocally positive. One of
the strongest correlates of dispositional optimism is positive coping (Scheier et al., 1994).
Optimists are more likely to actively engage problems, positively reframe situations, plan
a course of action, and rely on social support (Scheier et al., 1986). The evidence we find
that is consistent with this is the high priority optimists place on developing relationships
while in school. Indeed, the likelihood of listing relationships as the top priority (vs.
grades and job) has one of the strongest relations to the LOT-R of anything we observe.

   Related work in psychology provides evidence that optimists are more willing to
disengage from unrealistic courses of action (Aspinwall and Richter, 1999) and re-engage
in new ones (Rasmussen et al., 2006). This line of inquiry is particularly important
considering that the self-regulation model underlying dispositional optimism (Scheier
and Carver, 1985) would otherwise suggest optimists will over-persist on unrealistic
goals. We find evidence consistent with optimal persistence by optimists, as they are
as likely as pessimists to switch fields of interest during their first year of school but
actually less likely in their second. Given our broader results, this particular balance
between flexibility and persistence seems to be rewarded in the labor market.

   A final set of mechanisms that are unequivocally positive for optimism are self-
fulfilling prophecies (cf. Murray et al., 1996). While it has long been established that
peoples expectations for others influence their behavior (cf., Snyder et al., 2003), there


                                             23
is growing evidence that peoples expectations for themselves influence behavior (Shih
et al., 1999). To the extent that this occurs, we would expect those with optimistic
beliefs to perform better even after controlling for all objective circumstances, observed
and unobserved. This is a potentially very important process that deserves greater
attention, but requires an experimental setting.

    Each of these channels provides a psychological mechanism for the observed connec-
tion between dispositional optimism and the economic outcomes we observe. Our data
do not allow us to test these mechanisms directly. Of course, because we cannot ma-
nipulate the trait of interest directly we cannot conclude that there is no omitted factor
associated with optimism that is truly driving the behavior we observe. This problem
is endemic to research on traits. Our survey design has allowed us to narrow the range
of possible mechanisms by which optimism relates to important outcomes such as job
searches. Further narrowing is an important task for future research.



7     Conclusion

Psychologists distinguish between two types of optimism: dispositional and situational
optimism—or, paraphrasing from Peterson (2000), big optimism and little optimism.
The distinction is between personality and perception. Big optimism is a broad, perva-
sive view of the future in which favorable outcomes are perceived to be more likely than
is perhaps warranted. Do good things tend to happen to me more than bad? Answers to
questions like this reflect dispositional optimism. Little optimism, on the other hand, is
a belief that an outcome in a particular domain is more likely than it perhaps actually is.
Will my division outperform the other divisions in my firm? How likely is it that I will
sink this putt? Answers to these questions reflect a more narrow, situational optimism.

    The vast majority of empirical work in behavioral finance and economics has focused
on the latter conception of optimism, and pointed out the bad outcomes associated with

                                            24
overconfidence in one’s own ability or over-optimism about future outcomes. In short,
for most economists, the optimism glass is half empty, not half full.

   This paper is different. We focus on dispositional optimism, a personality trait,
and show how it is related to a range of positive outcomes in the labor market. At
some level, our aim is to provide a psychological microfoundation for a growing body
of empirical work in economics that illustrates the importance of traits for economic
outcomes. Indeed, we find that optimists search more efficiently for jobs, get jobs faster
and more easily than others, and are more likely to be promoted after two years’ time.
In many respects, this supports the view of optimism espoused in Taylor and Brown
(1988, 1994), who argue that optimism has salutary consequences.

   Perhaps the key advantage of our research strategy over past studies linking optimism
to economic outcomes is the timing of our measurement. By creating our own panel, we
can measure optimism when MBA students first arrive, before they experience success
or hardship in the MBA program, thus avoiding the look-back bias that complicates
most cross-sectional work. Indeed, by explicitly linking ex ante optimism measurements
to ex post measures of how respondents are viewed by others, we can also control for
explanations that center around the likeability of optimists driving their success. To be
sure, optimists are certainly more charismatic, but this charisma is not responsible for
their labor market success.

   The effect sizes we measure are small. Indeed, this is common in other studies
linking optimism to economic choices. For example, Landier and Thesmar (2009) report
modest, but highly statistically significant, effects of optimism on lending choice among
French entrepreneurs. In a recent review of 84 studies relating dispositional optimism
to health outcomes, researchers found systematic but relatively small effects, averaging
0.17 standard deviations (Rasmussen et al 2009).

   Nevertheless, optimism may have a large effect on cumulative circumstances (such
as longevity) through the accretion of small choices over time. Because dispositional

                                           25
optimism is ubiquitous to a wide range of decision settings, it affects multiple interac-
tions and decision throughout the day, every day. Thus, dispositional optimism has a
unique potential to shape lives, even if only one thin layer at a time. The accretion, or
accumulation, of small choices into larger outcomes may be the most parsimonious way
to understand how personality traits fixed early in life manifest in large, long-lasting
effects later in life.

    By what means does this accretion occur? While there is considerable evidence
that dispositional optimism is positively related to many favorable outcomes, especially
regarding health, there is relatively little on the mechanisms underlying that relation.
Recent work in psychology points to the possibility that dispositional optimists are
better able to internalize negative feedback than others, and that they have better
coping skills. Life is filled with innumerable occasions in which people must carefully
balance competing forces: the desire to abandon a goal when it proves unattainable or
undesirable, and the need to stay the course when temporary setbacks occur. Coping
and resilience are surely a part of the complex balance, and indeed may be a central
component of the non-cognitive skills that labor economists have identified as important
for work-life success. Given the concurrent efforts taking place in psychology, as well as
in numerous areas of economics, a full account of the link between dispositional optimism
and economic outcomes is a rich area for future research.




                                           26
    References

Armor, D.A., and S.E. Taylor, 1998, Situated Optimism: Specific outcome expectancies and
          self-regulation, in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (Princeton Univer-
          sity Press, Princeton, NJ ).
Aspinwall, L.G., and L. Richter, 1999, Optimism and self-mastery predict more rapid dis-
          engagement from unsolvable tasks in the presence of alternatives, Motivation and
          Emotion 23, 221–245.
Aspinwall, L.G., and S.E. Taylor, 1992, Modeling Cognitive Adaptation - a Longitudinal
          Investigation of the Impact of Individual-Differences and Coping on College Ad-
          justment and Performance, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 63, 989–
          1003.
Aspinwall, L. G., and S.M. Brunhart, 1996, Distinguishing optimism from denial: Optimistic
          beliefs predict attention to health threats, Personality and Social Psychology Bul-
          letin 22, 993–1003.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with Style: The Effect of Man-
          agers on Firm Policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169–1208.
Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne, 2001, The Determinants of Earnings: Skills, Prefer-
          ences, and Schooling, Journal of Economic Literature 39, 1137–1176.
Burson, K. A., R.P. Larrick, and J. Klayman, 2006, Skilled or unskilled, but still unaware
          of it: How perceptions of difficulty drive miscalibration in relative comparisons,
          Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 90, 60–77.
Danner, Deborah, David Snowdon, and Wallace Friesen, 2001, Position Emotions in Early
          Life and Longevity: Findings from the Nun Study, Journal of Personality and
          Social Psychology 80, 804–813.
Friedman, L.C., A.D. Weinberg, J.A. Webb, H.P. Cooper, and S. Bruce, 1995, Skin can-
          cer prevention and early detection intentions and behavior, American Journal of
          Preventive Medicine 11, 59–65.
Graham, John, Campbell Harvey, and Manju Puri, 2008, Managerial Attitudes and Corpo-
          rate Decisions, Working paper series Duke University.
Graham, John, Xi Li, and Jiaping Qiu, 2010, Managerial Characteristics and Executive
          Compensation, Working Paper, Duke University.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua, 2006, The Effects of Cognitive and
          Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior, Journal
          of Labor Economics 24, 411–482.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Dan Lovallo, 1993, Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts - a Cognitive
          Perspective on Risk-Taking, Management Science 39, 17–31.
Kaniel, Ron, Cade Massey, and David T. Robinson, 2010a, Optimism and Economic Crisis,
          Working Paper, Duke University and Yale University.
Kaniel, Ron, Cade Massey, and David T. Robinson, 2010b, Optimism without Illusion: The
          Impact of Experience on Expectations, Working Paper, Duke University and Yale
          University.

                                               27
Kaplan, Steven, Mark Klebanov, and Morten Sorenson, 2010, Which CEO Characteristics
           and Abilities Matter?, Journal of Finance forthcoming.
Kruger, J., and D. Dunning, 1999, Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties in recognizing
           one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments, Journal of Personality
           and Social Psychology 77, 1121–1134.
Kuhnen, Camelia, 2009, Searching for jobs: Evidence from the labor market for MBA grad-
           uates, Working Paper.
Landier, Augustin, and David Thesmar, 2009, Financial Contracting with Optimistic En-
           trepreneurs, Review of Financial Studies 22, 117–150.
Malmendier, Ulrike, Geoff Tate, and Jonathan Yan, 2010, Managerial Beliefs and Corporate
           Financial Policies, NBER Working Paper 15659.
Maruta, T., RC Colligan, M Malinchoc, and KP Offord, 2000, Optimism-Pessimism As-
           sessed in the 1960s and Self-Reported Health Status 30 Years Later, Mayo Clinic
           Proceedings 75, 140–143.
McNulty, J.K., and B.R. Karney, 2004, Positive expectations in the early years of marriage:
           Should couples expect the best or brace for the worst?, Journal of Personality and
           Social Psychology 86, 729–743.
Moore, D.A., and D.A. Small, 2007, Error and bias in comparative judgment: On being
           both better and worse than we think we are, Journal of Personality and Social
           Psychology 92, 972–989.
Murray, SL, JG Holmes, and DW Griffin, 1996, The Self-fulfilling Nature of Positive Illu-
           sions in Romantic Relationships: Love Is Not Blind, but Prescient, Journal of
           Personality and Social Psychology 71, 1155–1180.
Nes, L.S., and S.C. Segerstrom, 2006, Dispositional Optimism and Coping: A Meta-Analytic
           Review, Personality and Social Psychology Review 10, 235.
Peterson, C., 2000, The Future of Optimism, American Psychologist 55, 44–55.
Puri, Manju, and David T. Robinson, 2007, Optimism and Economic Choice, Journal of
           Financial Economics 86, 71–99.
Rasmussen, M. Scheier, and J.B. Greenhouse, 2009, Optimism and Physical Health: A meta-
           analytic review, Annals of Behavioral Medicine 37, 239–256.
Rasmussen, H.N., C. Wrosch, M.F. Scheier, and C.S. Carver, 2006, Self-regulation processes
           and health: The importance of optimism and goal adjustment, Journal of Person-
           ality 74, 1721–1747.
Satterfield, J.M., J. Monahan, and M.E.P. Seligman, 1997, Law School Performance Pre-
           dicted by Attributional Style, Behavioral Sciences and the Law 15, 1–11.
Scheier, M.F., and C.S. Carver, 1985, Optimism, coping, and health: Assessment and impli-
           cations of generalized outcome expectancies, Health Psychology 4, 219–247.
Scheier, M.F., C.S. Carver, and M.W. Bridges, 1994, Distinguishing Optimism from Neuroti-
           cism (and Trait Anxiety, Self-Mastery, and Self-Esteem) - a Reevaluation of the
           Life Orientation Test, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67, 1063–1078.
Scheier, M.F., J.K. Weintraub, and C.S. Carver, 1986, Coping with Stress - Divergent Strate-
           gies of Optimists and Pessimists, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 51,


                                                28
          1257–1264.
Schoar, Antoinette, 2009, CEO Careers and Style, Working paper, MIT.
Schulz, R., J. Bookwala, J.E. Knapp, M. Scheier, and G.M. Williamson, 1996, Pessimism,
          age and cancer mortality, Psychology and Ageing 11, 304–309.
Segerstrom, S.C., 2001, Optimism and attentional bias for negative and positive stimuli,
          Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 27, 1334–1343.
Segerstrom, S.C., S.E. Taylor, M.E. Kemeny, and J.L. Fahey, 1998, Optimism is associated
          with mood, coping, and immune change in response to stress, Journal of Person-
          ality and Social Psychology 74, 1646–1655.
Seligman, M.E.P., and M. Csikzentmihalyi, 2000, Positive Psychology: an introduction,
          American Psychologist 35, 5–14.
Shih, M, TL Pittinsky, and N Ambady, 1999, Stereotype Susceptibility: Identity Salience
          and Shifts in Quantitative Performance, Psychological Science 10, 80.
Snyder, Mark, Elizabeth D. Tanke, and Ellen Berscheid, 2003, Social Perception and In-
          terpersonal Behavior: On the Self-Fulfilling Nature of Social Stereotypes.Worth
          Publishers New York 10th edn.
Taylor, S.E., and J.D. Brown, 1988, Illusion of well-being: a social psychological perspective
          on mental health, Psychological Bulletin 103, 193–210.
Taylor, S.E., and J.D. Brown, 1994, Positive Illusions and Well-Being Revisited: Separating
          Fact from Fiction, Psychological Bulletin 116, 21–27.
The College Board, 1976-1977, Student descriptive questionnaire. (Educational Testing Ser-
          vice Princeton, NJ).
Weinstein, Neil, and William M. Klein, 1996, Unrealistic Optimism: Present and Future,
          Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 15, 1–8.
Weinstein, Neil D., 1980, Unrealistic optimism about future life events, Journal of Personality
          and Social Psychology 39, 806–820.




                                                29
                      Table 1: Participation Characteristics

This table presents demographic characteristics for the proportion of the student population that
participated in our survey, as well as for the student population as a whole. Prior Salary is the
highest reported salary that an incoming student reported earning in a job prior to attending
the MBA. GMAT total, verbal and quantitative are scores on standardized entrance exams for
the MBA degree. Business, engineering, arts denotes the fraction of each sample that earned an
undergraduate degree in business administration, engineering, or arts and sciences. Grade point
average is on a 4.0 scale. 232 students participated in the first four waves of the study.


Variable:                 Overall            Declined       Participated            t-test
Male                        0.78               0.77             0.78                -0.26
Age                        29.13               29.53           28.88                 1.93
Married                     0.34               0.32             0.36                -0.97
US Citizen                 0.53                 0.41            0.61                -3.94
Prior Salary              59,053              51,862          63,547                -2.48

Ethnicity
White                       0.45                0.38             0.49                -2.04
Asian                       0.37                0.43             0.33                1.97
Black                       0.03                0.03             0.02                0.70
Hispanic                    0.05                0.03             0.06                -1.39
Other                       0.11                0.12             0.10                 0.70

GMAT Scores
Total                     701.00              694.56            705.09               -2.49
Verbal                    38.98               37.64              39.83               -4.55
Quantitative               46.58              46.90             46.38                1.38

Grade Point Average, by term
Term 1             3.57                         3.52             3.60                -3.03
Term 2             3.46                         3.39             3.50                -3.69
Term 3             3.49                         3.44             3.52                -2.32
Term 4             3.52                         3.46             3.56                -3.12

Undergraduate degree
Arts               0.33                         0.33             0.33                0.03
Business           0.18                         0.22             0.16                 1.50
Engineering        0.21                         0.18             0.24                -1.43




                                               30
                             Table 2: The Demographics of Optimism

This table models optimism as a function of demographic characteristics, talent measures, and measures of how subjects
are perceived by others. Prior Salary is the maximum reported salary prior to attending the MBA program, and is
expressed in 10K units. Charisma, Future CEO, Optimist and Best friend are scores that each respondent received from
a school-wide survey asking, for instance, “Who is the most charismatic? Name the top 5.” One, two and three asterisks
denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses below
point estimates.


                              (1)            (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
Charisma                                  0.127***                                                            0.101*
                                           (0.04)                                                             (0.06)
Future CEO                                                   0.079                                             0.034
                                                             (0.06)                                           (0.07)
Optimist                                                                    0.115**                            0.058
                                                                             (0.05)                           (0.06)
Best friend                                                                                  -0.008           -0.091
                                                                                             (0.11)           (0.11)
White               1.228                    0.813           1.001           0.900           1.041             0.866
                   (0.80)                   (0.82)          (0.82)           (0.82)          (0.84)           (0.82)
Black               1.346                    1.404           1.274           1.233           1.183             1.283
                   (1.99)                   (1.99)          (2.02)           (2.01)          (2.02)           (2.02)
Hispanic           -0.279                   -0.454          -0.401           -0.529          -0.539           -0.393
                   (1.40)                   (1.41)          (1.43)           (1.43)          (1.43)           (1.43)
Asian               0.171                   -0.007           0.089           -0.084          -0.070            0.048
                   (0.81)                   (0.83)          (0.84)           (0.84)          (0.85)           (0.84)
Male               1.070*                   1.055*          1.082*          1.289**         1.222**           1.098*
                   (0.60)                   (0.60)          (0.62)           (0.61)          (0.61)           (0.61)
Married             0.215                    0.410          0.278             0.379           0.375            0.310
                   (0.50)                   (0.50)          (0.50)           (0.50)          (0.51)           (0.51)
Age                -0.066                   -0.072          -0.076           -0.077          -0.090           -0.077
                   (0.08)                   (0.09)          (0.09)           (0.09)          (0.09)           (0.09)
Prior salary     -0.013***                -0.014***       -0.014***        -0.013***       -0.013***        -0.014***
                   (0.00)                   (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)
GMAT               -0.001                    0.000          -0.003            0.000          -0.002           -0.000
                   (0.01)                   (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
Bus. degree         0.834                    0.963          0.883             0.904           0.924            0.933
                   (0.67)                   (0.68)          (0.68)           (0.68)          (0.68)           (0.68)
Arts/Sci. degree   0.910*                   0.861*         1.009**           0.937*         1.060**           0.825*
                   (0.50)                   (0.50)          (0.50)           (0.50)          (0.50)           (0.50)
Constant         23.643***                22.663***       25.013***        22.822***       25.256***        23.172***
                   (4.87)                   (4.78)          (4.82)           (4.93)          (5.02)           (5.05)
Observations         321                      310             310              310             310              310
R-squared            0.07                     0.10           0.09             0.09            0.08              0.11

                                                        31
    Table 3: The Importance of Job over Friends and Grades

The dependent variable is a dummy for whether the respondent attaches primary im-
portance to the job they receive upon graduation, as opposed to the friends they make
or the grades they earn. Right-hand side variables include optimism, gender, ethnicity
controls, age, and a dummy for whether the student’s enrollment was sponsored by an
employer. Point estimates are reported as the changes in the probability associated with
a one-standard deviation change in a continuous variable, or else a shift from 0 to 1 in
a binary variable. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses below marginal
probabilities.


                         (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)
Optimism             -0.024***       -0.023***       -0.023***          -0.025***
                       (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)             (0.01)
Male                                    0.028          0.019               0.012
                                       (0.07)          (0.07)             (0.07)
White                                  -0.117          -0.116             -0.106
                                       (0.09)          (0.10)             (0.10)
Black                                 -0.307**        -0.289*            -0.296**
                                       (0.14)          (0.15)             (0.14)
Hispanic                               -0.193          -0.203             -0.184
                                       (0.13)          (0.13)             (0.13)
Asian                                  -0.090          -0.100             -0.047
                                       (0.10)          (0.10)             (0.11)
Age                                     0.006          0.002               0.005
                                       (0.01)          (0.01)             (0.01)
US Citizen                                             -0.006             -0.062
                                                       (0.08)             (0.08)
Married                                                 0.097              0.095
                                                       (0.06)             (0.07)
Sponsored                                                               -0.447***
                                                                          (0.05)
Observations             323             323             322                321




                                          32
                              Table 4: Job Search Intensity

Panel A reports poisson regressions in which the dependent variable is the number of bids that a
respondent placed in the auction system for interview slots in the career management center. Panel
B reports OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is the number of companies contacted for
interviews (this includes on- and off-campus efforts) as reported by the student. Dummies for white,
black, hispanic, and asian ethnicity are estimated but not reported (none are significant, except for
white ethnicity in Panel B, which is negative). Demographics include a gender dummy, age, and
marital status. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses below point estimates. Constants
are estimated but suppressed. Panel A includes 320 observations; Panel B, 230 observations.


                                 Panel A: Interview Bids
                            (1)         (2)          (3)                    (4)        (5)
Optimism                  -0.026*     -0.025*      -0.027*               -0.025*    -0.024*
                           (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)                (0.01)     (0.01)
US Citizen                                        -0.303**              -0.367*** -0.397***
                                                    (0.13)                (0.12)     (0.11)
Sponsored                                                               -1.421*** -1.209***
                                                                          (0.29)     (0.28)
Job importance                                                                     0.251**
                                                                                     (0.11)
Total offers                                                                       0.147***
                                                                                     (0.03)
Ethnicity                   No              Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes
Demographics                No              Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes


                            Panel B: Companies Contacted
                            (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)
Optimism                -0.909*** -0.670*** -0.754*** -0.747*** -0.700***
                          (0.22)     (0.20)     (0.21)    (0.21)    (0.22)
US Citizen                                    -8.281*** -8.945*** -8.942***
                                                (2.46)    (2.31)    (2.27)
Sponsored                                                 -5.553    -3.033
                                                          (5.41)    (5.82)
Job importance                                                      4.097*
                                                                    (2.32)
Total offers                                                       1.994**
                                                                    (0.83)
Ethnicity                   No        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
Demographics                No        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
R-squared                  0.04       0.14       0.18      0.19      0.23



                                                 33
                   Table 5: Optimism and Search Efficiency

The dependent variable is job search efficiency: the number of interviews the student received
scaled by the number of bids that a respondent placed in the auction system. Dummies for
white, black, hispanic, and asian ethnicity are estimated but not reported (none are significant).
Age and marital status are estimated as demographic controls but are suppressed. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses below point estimates. Panel A includes 320
observations; Panel B, 230 observations.


                            (1)             (2)       (3)                         (4)
Optimism                  0.018**        0.018** 0.021***                      0.020**
                           (0.01)         (0.01)    (0.01)                      (0.01)
Male                                    -0.181*** -0.188**                     -0.187**
                                          (0.07)    (0.07)                      (0.07)
US Citizen                               0.184**   0.183**                     0.182**
                                          (0.08)    (0.08)                      (0.08)
GMAT (total)                                        -0.001                      -0.001
                                                    (0.00)                      (0.00)
Prior salary                                         0.001                       0.001
                                                    (0.00)                      (0.00)
GPA(term 1)                                          0.095                       0.094
                                                    (0.14)                      (0.14)
Job Importance                                                                  -0.060
                                                                                (0.06)
Constant                   -0.081          0.019           0.079                 0.138
                           (0.17)          (0.36)          (0.77)               (0.77)
Observations                268             267             265                   265
Ethnicity                   Yes             Yes             Yes                   Yes
Demographics                Yes             Yes             Yes                   Yes
R-squared                   0.02            0.09            0.10                  0.11




                                               34
                              Table 6: First-year Internship Outcomes

The dependent variable is a dummy for whether the respondent had successfully secured a summer internship by the
beginning of Term 4, which occurs in late March. Point estimates are reported as changes in the probability associated
with a one-standard deviation change in a continuous variable, or else a shift from 0 to 1 in a binary variable. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses below marginal probabilities.


                                   (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)                    (5)
Optimism                        0.023***        0.019**        0.021***         0.022***              0.019**
                                 (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.01)                 (0.01)
Male                                            -0.163**        -0.177**        -0.175**              -0.194**
                                                 (0.07)           (0.07)         (0.07)                 (0.08)
Black                                           -0.432**       -0.484***       -0.478***             -0.531***
                                                 (0.21)           (0.18)         (0.18)                 (0.15)
White                                             0.109           -0.011          0.005                 -0.043
                                                 (0.10)           (0.11)         (0.11)                 (0.11)
Hispanic                                          0.046            0.013          0.032                 0.025
                                                 (0.15)           (0.15)         (0.15)                 (0.16)
Asian                                            -0.063           -0.073         -0.041                 -0.083
                                                 (0.10)           (0.10)         (0.10)                 (0.11)
Age                                             -0.023**        -0.023**        -0.022**             -0.035***
                                                 (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.01)                 (0.01)
US Citizen                                                       0.184**         0.153*               0.161**
                                                                  (0.08)         (0.08)                 (0.08)
Married                                                           0.130*         0.126*               0.148**
                                                                  (0.07)         (0.07)                 (0.07)
Sponsored                                                                       -0.254**               -0.199*
                                                                                 (0.11)                 (0.12)
Expected internships                                                                                     0.043
                                                                                                        (0.03)
Observations                        263            263             262              261                   250




                                                         35
   Table 7: Stratified Hazard Estimates of Receiving First Job Offer

This table reports Cox proportional hazard models of the hazard of receiving a job offer. The
hazard of a job offer between time t and t + 1 is the probability of receiving an offer in that
interval conditional on not yet having received an offer. The baseline hazard is stratified according
to the intended field of employment (Marketing, Management, different types of finance jobs,
Consulting). Point estimates are reported as hazard impact factors; i.e., they scale the baseline
hazard up or down multiplicitavely by the magnitude of the point estimate. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses below point estimates. Job Importance is a dummy for whether the
student reported that his/her top priority was the job they received upon graduation. Intern Job
Offer is a dummy for whether they received an offer from the employer with whom they held a
summer internship. Sponsored is a dummy for whether their enrollment was sponsored by an
employer. GPA BTA is the degree to which the student’s expectations of their first term grade
point average exceeded their actual GPA.


                            (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)                (5)
Optimism                 1.060***        1.049**       1.063**        1.088**           1.091**
                          (0.02)          (0.02)        (0.03)         (0.04)            (0.04)
Male                                       0.981         0.927        0.595**          0.596**
                                          (0.19)        (0.18)         (0.13)            (0.13)
White                                      1.361         1.287         1.598             1.613
                                          (0.42)        (0.42)         (0.52)            (0.53)
Black                                      0.963         1.806         0.674             0.682
                                          (0.63)        (1.35)         (0.66)            (0.67)
Hispanic                                   1.805         1.629         1.663             1.652
                                          (0.78)        (0.73)         (0.83)            (0.83)
Asian                                      1.114        1.206          1.113             1.120
                                          (0.33)        (0.36)         (0.39)            (0.39)
Age                                       0.945*       0.929**         0.978             0.980
                                          (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.04)            (0.04)
US Citizen                                1.589*        1.547*       1.865***           1.855**
                                          (0.38)        (0.36)         (0.45)            (0.46)
Married                                                 1.369*         1.198             1.183
                                                        (0.24)         (0.23)            (0.23)
Job importance                                          1.159         1.381**           1.375**
                                                        (0.12)         (0.18)            (0.18)
Intern job offer                                                     4.998***          5.039***
                                                                       (1.13)            (1.14)
Sponsored                                                                                0.894
                                                                                         (0.49)
Observations                 209            209           197            164              163




                                                36
                         Table 8: Getting Promoted

The dependent variable in Panel A is a dummy for whether the respondent was still
working at the same company as the one they joined upon graduation. The depen-
dent variable in Panel B is a dummy for whether they had been promoted in that job.
Dummies for white, black, hispanic, and asian ethnicity are estimated but not reported
(none are significant). Demographics include a gender dummy, age, and marital status.
Admissions controls include prior salary at the job before earning the MBA, the total
GMAT score, undergrad degree, and US Citizen. Finance is a dummy for whether the
respondent went into investment banking, sales and trading, VC/PE, asset management,
or another finance area (including possibly corporate treasury). None of these omitted
controls is significant in either Panel A or Panel B. Point estimates are reported as
changes in the probability associated with a one-standard deviation change in a contin-
uous variable, or else a shift from 0 to 1 in a binary variable. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses below marginal probabilities. 323 observations are used, but 10
are lost to attrition in columns (3) and (4).
                       Panel A: Remaining at the job
                                (1)      (2)        (3)                           (4)
Optimism                       0.002    0.001      0.003                         0.004
                              (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.01)                       (0.01)
Charisma                                           0.003                         0.025
                                                   (0.01)                       (0.02)
Future CEO                                                                      -0.022
                                                                                (0.02)
Outwardly optimistic                                                            0.004
                                                                                (0.01)
Finance                                          -0.110         -0.097          -0.099
                                                 (0.07)         (0.07)          (0.07)
Ethnicity                            No           Yes            Yes              Yes
Demographics                         No           Yes            Yes              Yes
Admissions                           No           Yes            Yes              Yes

                     Panel B: Promotion Probabilities
                               (1)      (2)        (3)                            (4)
Optimism                     0.014** 0.012** 0.013**                           0.014**
                              (0.01)   (0.01)    (0.01)                         (0.01)
Charisma                                          0.005                          0.022
                                                 (0.01)                         (0.02)
Future CEO                                                                      -0.018
                                                                                (0.01)
Outwardly optimistic                                                            0.005
                                                                                (0.01)
Finance                                         -0.123**       -0.111**       -0.109**
                                                 (0.05)         (0.05)          (0.05)
Ethnicity                            No            Yes            Yes             Yes
Demographics                         No            Yes            Yes             Yes
Admissions                           No            Yes            Yes             Yes
                                           37
Table 9: A Horserace Between Internal Optimism and Projected Traits

   This table repeats key regressions from previous but includes variables obtained from
   the beauty contest conducted at the end of the MBA. Each Panel contains a separate set
   of regressions, where the dependent variables are taken from earlier tables in the paper.
   Column (1) is the number of companies contacted. (See Table 4, Panel B.) Column (2)
   is obtaining an internship offer in Spring (see Table 6). Column (3) search efficiency
   (see Table 5). Column (4) is the hazard of a job offer (see Table 7). Each specification
   includes the control variables indicated in the most complete model specification in that
   table.


                       Panel A: Optimism and Charisma
                           (1)      (2)      (3)          (4)
   LOT-R               -0.568*** 0.019** 0.016*        1.087**
                         (0.21)   (0.01)   (0.01)       (0.04)
   Charisma              -0.187    0.007 0.023***     1.075***
                         (0.14)   (0.01)   (0.01)       (0.02)


         Panel B: Optimism and Expected Future Success
                    (1)     (2)       (3)           (4)
   LOT-R        -0.567*** 0.019** 0.018*         1.093**
                  (0.21)   (0.01)   (0.01)        (0.04)
   Future CEO -0.471*** 0.027* 0.017***          1.053**
                  (0.14)   (0.02)   (0.01)        (0.02)


            Panel C: Optimism and Perceived Optimism
                     (1)     (2)       (3)           (4)
   LOT-R         -0.625*** 0.020** 0.019**        1.085**
                   (0.21)   (0.01)   (0.01)        (0.04)
   Optimist        0.172    0.006     0.008        1.051
                   (0.20)   (0.01)   (0.01)        (0.03)




                                             38
   Table 10: Do Optimists Have Private Information about Job Search Outcomes?

This table explores how respondents match to desirable companies. In round 5 of the survey, respondents are asked to
name the two companies they would most like to work for. Then they are asked to state the probability that they will
receive a job offer from one of these two companies. In the first three columns, the dependent variable is the stated
probability of receiving a job offer. In columns (4)-(6), the dependent variable is a dummy for whether the respondent
actually takes a job at this company. Job probability (the dependent variable in columns (1)-(3)) is included as a regressor
in column (6). Job category is a control for the stated field of interest at the time of the survey. Ethnicity controls are
included in columns (3) and (6) but suppressed for brevity. A constant is estimated in each model but suppressed for
brevity.


                                            Beliefs                                            Outcomes
                            (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)         (5)        (6)
Optimist                 1.269***         1.352***          1.679***              0.008       0.009      0.005
                          (0.38)           (0.36)             (0.40)              (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)
Male                                     -10.861***        -13.308***                        -0.026     -0.033
                                           (3.60)             (4.13)                         (0.06)     (0.11)
Age                                        -0.389             0.169                           0.000    -0.031*
                                           (0.53)             (0.57)                         (0.01)     (0.02)
US citizen                                                   9.982**                                     0.017
                                                              (4.14)                                    (0.11)
Married                                                       4.646                                   0.218***
                                                              (3.31)                                    (0.08)
Prior salary                                                  0.028                                   0.006***
                                                              (0.02)                                    (0.00)
GMAT                                                        0.133***                                    -0.000
                                                              (0.05)                                    (0.00)
Bus. degree                                                   3.456                                     0.224*
                                                              (5.73)                                    (0.13)
Arts degree                                                   2.632                                      0.072
                                                              (3.38)                                    (0.09)
Job Probability                                                                                        0.004**
                                                                                                        (0.00)
Ethnicity                    No               No               Yes                 No          No         Yes
Job Category                 No               No               Yes                 No          No         Yes
Observations                201              201               199                 323         323        183
R-squared                   0.05             0.12              0.29                 .           .          .




                                                          39
Appendix A.              Data Description

The data used for this paper come from four distinct sources: (1) an online survey
administered to MBA students 8 times during their two year program; (2) data from the
admissions office, detailing demographics, GMAT test scores and prior work experience;
(3) data from the Career Management Center detailing their participation in an interview
bidding system, through which students bid on interview slots for jobs at companies that
participate in recruiting at the school in question; and (4), data from a follow-up survey
conducted two years after graduation. This appendix provides more detail about each
of these data sources.


The Books and Bucks Survey

The first source of data is an eight-wave survey administered on-line to MBA students.
Each time the survey was administered, the students were contacted via email and made
aware of a voluntary, anonymous survey that could be accessed through a banner on the
school’s student intranet. The length of the survey varied each time, but was designed
to take around 5-10 minutes to complete.
   An overview of the material included in the survey is contained in Table 11.

                              Table 11: Survey Overview
        Survey    Survey               Expectations:
        Round     Timing      LOT-R Grade Job Hindsight              Satisfaction
          1      Aug. 2005      X         -      -      -                  -
          2      Aug. 2005      -        X      X       -                  -
          3      Jan. 2006      -        X      X       -                  -
          4      Mar. 2006      -        X      X       -                  -
          5      Aug. 2006      -        X      X       X                 X
          6      Jan. 2007      X        X      X       X                  -
          7      Mar. 2007      -        X      X       X                  -
          8      Apr. 2007      -         -      -      X                 X


Survey 1 was conducted in early August, 2005, when the students were still in the
preterm orientation program. It consisted solely of the LOT-R test, which is described
in its entirety below. Survey 2 was conducted in late August, 2005, and consisted of
questions asking students to state their expectations of their classroom and job-search
performance. A similar set of questions was used in Surveys 3 and 4.
   Survey 5 was conducted when the students returned for the second year of school,
and mimicked surveys 2, 3, and 4, with the addition of questions surrounding whether

                                           40
their summer internship matched their expectations. Surveys 6 and 7 were similar to
surveys 3 and 4, but included an additional LOT-R test to validate the measure in our
data. Kaniel, Massey and Robinson (2010a) explores the within-person stability of the
LOT-R over time. Surveys 7 and 8 occurred at the beginning and end of the final term;
the final survey includes retrospective questions on satisfaction during the MBA.
    In addition to the responses obtained from each online survey, we also have access to
the actual grade each student received in each class, allowing us to compare expectations
of classroom performance with actual classroom performance. This is explored in detail
in Kaniel, Massey and Robinson (2010b).


The Life Orientation Test-Revised

The following is a reproduction of the LOT-R obtained from Professor Charles Carver.
This is based on Carver, Scheier and Bridges (1994). Items in brackets are fillers.
Negative responses are reverse scored so that scale runs from 5-30.

  A I agree a lot (5 points)
   B I agree a little (4 points)
  C I neither agree nor disagree (3 points)
  D I DISagree a little (2 points)
   E I DISagree a lot (1 point)

  1. In uncertain times, I usually expect the best.
  2. [It’s easy for me to relax.]
  3. If something can go wrong for me, it will.
  4. I’m always optimistic about my future.
  5. [I enjoy my friends a lot.]
  6. [It’s important for me to keep busy.]
  7. I hardly ever expect things to go my way.
  8. [I don’t get upset too easily.]
  9. I rarely count on good things happening to me.
 10. Overall, I expect more good things to happen to me than bad.

                                             41
The Best in Show Survey

The following table reports the pairwise correlations between the LOT-R and the vari-
ables obtained from the beauty contest.

                                     Table 12: Projecting Optimism
 This table presents correlations between the LOT-R measure conducted in August, 2005 and the responses from a “beauty
 contest” conducted in May, 2007. Charisma(Own) tallies the number of votes each person received “Who is the most
 charismatic person in your section? Name the top 5.” Charisma (BC) tallies the votes for “Who is the person viewed as
 most charismatic by others in your section? Name the top 5.” Similarly, Future CEO (own/bc) tallies responses to “(Who
 do you think/Who do others think) is most likely to be CEO? Name the top 5.” Optimist (own/BC) tallies answers to
 “Who (do you think/do others think) is the most optimistic person in your section? Name the top 5.” Best friend is the
 number of votes each person received for “Name your five closest friends.”
                                             Charisma           Future CEO           Optimist               Best
                  LOT-R                     Own    BC           Own     BC          Own   BC               Friend
 LOT-R               .
 Charisma(Own)     0.181   .
 Charisma(BC)      0.202 0.943   .
 Future CEO (Own) 0.125 0.456 0.417    .
 Future CEO (BC)   0.147 0.552 0.542 0.933   .
 Optimist (CEO)    0.128 0.545 0.504 0.059 0.080   .
 Optimist (BC)     0.138 0.620 0.594 0.088 0.136 0.944                                          .
 Best Friend       0.054 0.370 0.343 0.093 0.152 0.309                                        0.338            .



Career Management Data

The online surveys are augmented by data from the Career Management Center. Com-
panies that recruit on campus maintain a list of students who are directly invited for
interviews, and they also allocate a certain number of interviews to the auction. Stu-
dents use non-transferable, non-redeemable points to bid on interview slots. In addition,
the Career Management Center maintains a database recording any and all job offers
that students receive (including offers that are not accepted). This database records
the date of the offer, a flag for whether it was accepted, the date of the acceptance if
accepted, the starting salary, and the signing bonus.


Admissions Data

The data used in this paper also include data obtained from the admissions office. These
data include the variables listed in Table 2.



                                                        42
