NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF PATENT PROTECTION IN (CLEAN/GREEN) TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
Bronwyn H. Hall
Christian Helmers
Working Paper 16323
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16323

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

Parts of this survey are based on presentations by the first author to a WIPO Conference in Mexico
City, January 2008 and a KDI Conference in Seoul, February 2010. We are grateful to participants
at those conferences and to Estelle Derclaye and Fabio Montobbio for comments on an earlier draft.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Christian Helmers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The role of patent protection in (clean/green) technology transfer
Bronwyn H. Hall and Christian Helmers
NBER Working Paper No. 16323
September 2010
JEL No. O19,O33,O34,Q54,Q55,Q58
ABSTRACT
Global climate change mitigation will require the development and diffusion of a large number and
variety of new technologies. How will patent protection affect this process? In this paper we first review
the evidence on the role of patents for innovation and international technology transfer in general.
The literature suggests that patent protection in a host country encourages technology transfer to that
country but that its impact on innovation and development is much more ambiguous. We then discuss
the implications of these findings and other technology-specific evidence for the diffusion of climate
change-related technologies. We conclude that the “double externality” problem, that is the presence
of both environmental and knowledge externalities, implies that patent protection may not be the optimal
instrument for encouraging innovation in this area, especially given the range and variety of green
technologies as well as the need for local adaptation of technologies.

Bronwyn H. Hall
Dept. of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
Christian Helmers
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE, United Kingdom
c.r.helmers@lse.ac.uk

Table of Contents
1.
2.
2.1
2.2
2.3
3.
3.1
3.2
3.3
4.
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
5.
6.

Introduction .................................................................................................................3
Technology transfer ....................................................................................................7
Technology transfer through trade.......................................................................8
Technology transfer through FDI ........................................................................8
Technology transfer through licensing ..............................................................11
Technological development ......................................................................................12
Theory ................................................................................................................12
Empirical cross country evidence ......................................................................13
Case studies .......................................................................................................15
Implications for climate-related technologies ...........................................................18
The challenge of climate change .......................................................................18
Climate change-related technologies .................................................................19
Climate change-related policy intervention .......................................................20
Climate change-related technology development ..............................................22
Climate change-related technology transfer ......................................................24
Conclusion ................................................................................................................27
References .................................................................................................................30

2

The role of patent protection
in (clean) technology transfer
Bronwyn H. Hall2
Christian Helmers3
August 2010

1.

Introduction

The worldwide challenge of climate change mitigation has led to an increased interest in
the mechanisms that encourage the development and adoption of new technologies. In
particular, recent rapid economic growth in several large developing economies has
focused policy attention on the role of technology transfer and technology development in
countries that are not generally on the technology frontier in facilitating the use of clean
technologies. In addition to the obvious fact that raising the standard of living in such
countries to levels enjoyed in the West without a great deal of energy and environmentrelated innovation would have detrimental consequences for global warming, it is also true
that rapid growth means a great deal of new investment, and new investment is an
opportunity for substantial upgrading of technologies. At the same time, according to
existing forecasts, the countries contributing most to climate change are not those that will
be affected most heavily by the consequences. The geographical disparity, placing
developing countries at a disadvantage, poses additional incentive problems to the
development and transfer of green technologies and the setting of research priorities.
The emission of greenhouse gases leads to a range of well-documented consequences, such
as increases in the average global temperature, greater variation in temperatures across
time, increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather-related events, and average
sea-level rise (IPCC, 2007). The potential damages induced by climate change are
manifold, in particular for developing countries where climate change is expected to have
its most severe repercussions. Developing countries depend to a large extent on the
agricultural sector, which is particularly vulnerable to climatic changes (World Bank,
2010). Climate change may also have a negative impact on public health in developing
countries by for example increasing malaria morbidity and mortality (Tol, 2008; WHO,
2009). Another important consequence is the increased risk of natural disasters, mostly in
coastal areas of developing countries. Contemplating these risks, climate change may also
increase the likelihood of displacement, political unrest and violent conflict in developing
countries. Developing countries, therefore, have a strong interest in containing climate
change and mitigating its consequences through the development and diffusion of green
technologies.
2

University of California at Berkeley and University of Maastricht. bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu

3

CEP LSE and CSAE University of Oxford. c.r.helmers@lse.ac.uk

3

The development and diffusion of technology in the context of climate change poses a
formidable challenge due to the presence of a “double externality”:
First, environmental pollution is a textbook example of an activity producing a negative
externality, i.e., “an unintended consequence of market decisions which affect individuals
other than the decision maker” as the social costs associated with pollution exceed private
costs (Stavins, 2008,1). Second, knowledge required for the development of (green)
technologies is characterized by non-excludability, i.e., other actors cannot be excluded
from accessing and using the knowledge produced by the original source and non-rivalry
or non-exhaustibility of knowledge, i.e., if one actor uses some specific knowledge, the
value of its use is not reduced by other actors' also using it. Due to these characteristics,
“firms can acquire information created by others without paying for that information in a
market transaction, and the creators (or current owners) of the information have no
effective recourse, under prevailing laws, if other firms utilize information so acquired”
(Grossman and Helpman, 1991,16). In this sense, incomplete appropriability of knowledge
represents an externality and thus leads to a gap between private and social returns to
innovation.4 Addressing these externalities individually is challenging; in reality, however,
the two externalities also interact, which further compounds the problem (Jaffe et al.,
2005). For example, there is enormous uncertainty linked to both climate change and to the
development and effectiveness of new technologies. The interaction of uncertainties
associated with climate change and innovation complicates the design of appropriate
policy interventions to mitigate the impact of and also adapt to climate change (Heal and
Kriström, 2002). What is more, both externalities act on a global scale, which poses a
particularly difficult problem in their mitigation.
The presence of the dual externality problem implies that at least two different policy
instruments are needed. For example, addressing environmental externalities and
knowledge spillovers simultaneously through targeted R&D subsidies is likely to fail,
largely because two sets of actors are involved; the producers of technology will respond
to the subsidy, but adoption of green technologies resulting from subsidized research will
not occur at an optimal scale in the absence of a policy intervention directly targeting
diffusion (we discuss this “energy efficiency paradox” further below). Because of the
presence of sunk switching costs, for potential users to be persuaded to replace existing
technologies with green ones requires either a clear price signal that energy costs are high,
(and will stay high), or subsidies that can overcome the sunk costs.5 Acemoglu et al.
(2009) make the same argument in an endogenous growth model that allows for
technological change directed either towards carbon-emitting or green technologies. In a
setting in which polluting technologies are initially more productive, the authors show that
research subsidies are needed to redirect innovation towards climate change-related
4

For a recent discussion of this point see Chapter 1.5 in Greenhalgh and Rogers (2010).

5

While subsidies can lead to diffusion, they may fail to lead to actual use of a new technology. For example,
in the case of improved cooking stoves (ICS) that rely on biomass in developing countries, subsidies have
been used to help overcome the large up-front investment involved in the replacement of a traditional stove
by an ICS. Barnes et al. (2003) suggest that while subsidies have promoted diffusion, they did not guarantee
the actual use of ICS which depended mostly on how suitable the design of the stove was to specific local
needs. For example, traditional stoves also fulfilled functions other than cooking, such as heating and
protection from insects, whereas the design of ICS did not provide these additional benefits (Agarwal, 1983).

4

technologies. However, a tax penalizing carbon emissions is also needed to address the
environmental externality. Their analysis suggests that policy intervention in the form of
subsidies and taxes is needed only temporarily, although delaying the intervention is
costly.
IP has been widely studied as a means to addressing the externality that results from
imperfect appropriability of knowledge. The trade-off between a static efficiency loss due
to higher prices in the presence of patents and potential dynamic gains from providing
incentives for investment in innovation is well-known (Nordhaus, 1969). However, given
the presence of the environmental externality, potential interactions between the
environmental and knowledge externalities, the global dimension of the problem and the
vast range of different green technologies applicable to the problem, the question of the
role of IP protection in promoting the development and transfer of technology needs to be
re-examined. In particular, when compared to other forms of stimulating innovation such
as subsidies or tax credits, the IP instrument has the well-known welfare cost that it tends
to grant firms short term market power, which leads to lower output and higher prices for
innovation. In the presence of the second (negative) environmental externality, this welfare
cost is likely to be greater because social welfare is enhanced by the rapid diffusion of
green technology. Therefore, patents may not be the preferred policy instrument for
encouraging innovation in this area if they fail to create a competitive market for
technology that leads to more diffusion than would be achieved in their absence.
The question of the role of IP is important in light of the ongoing discussion on how to
address climate change. In its latest report, the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) Ad-hoc Working Group on Longterm Cooperative Action (AWGLCA) proposed specific IP-related regulations for the post-Kyoto framework on climate
change. The regulations proposed by developing countries include patent pooling, royaltyfree compulsory licensing of green technologies, excluding green technologies from
patenting, and even revoking existing patent rights on green technologies (UNFCCC,
2010). In fact, these exceptions to standard patent regulations are already partially
contained in the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) which allows for exceptions to the exclusive rights of patents for public policy
reasons and provides for the possibility of compulsory licensing (Derclaye, 2008; Rimmer,
2009).6 The Doha Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health goes a step further in the area
of pharmaceutical patents. Considering the public good character of environmental
protection in the recent debate on climate change-related technology transfer from
developed to developing countries, a parallel has been drawn between implications for
developing countries from patent protection in the pharmaceutical sector and green
technologies (Abbott, 2009).
In contrast, industrial economies such as the U.S. are committed to ‘prevent any
weakening of, and ensure robust compliance with and enforcement of, existing
international legal requirements . . . for the protection of IP rights related to energy or
environmental technology (U.S. House of Representatives as quoted in Rimmer, 2009).
6

Articles 7, 8, 27.2, 31 TRIPS. Note that despite the possibility of compulsory licensing, its benefits are
limited inasmuch as the licensor cannot be obliged to transfer the corresponding know-how to the licensee
(Derclaye, 2008).

5

Derclaye (2009) argues that the patent system should even be used to promote green
technologies and eliminate technologies that lead to increased CO2 emissions. In
accordance with this view, the USPTO launched in December 2009 its 12-month “Green
Technology Pilot Program,” under which patents related to green technologies benefit
from a substantially accelerated examination process. The UKIPO launched a similar
initiative in May 2009. The underlying assumption is that speedier grants of patents will
spur the development and diffusion of green technologies.7 But is the existing evidence
consistent with this view?
If we unpack the question about the relationship between the strength of the patent system
and innovation in developing countries in a general context, we find that there are at least
two separate but related questions whose answers may be at odds with each other. The first
is whether stronger patent protection in a host country encourages technology transfer to
that country. In particular, how does the presence of patent protection affect the behavior
of foreign firms that may potentially invest in the country, sell technology to firms in the
country, or form joint ventures with domestic firms? The second question is whether
stronger patent protection encourages technology development in the country itself. That
is, how does it affect the behavior of domestic firms? The first question has been easier to
answer, but the second is more important for the development of the country in question.
The second question may be particularly important in the context of climate change, as
required technologies may not be the same in developed and developing countries. In this
case, industrialized economies may not have the incentives to engage in the development
of technologies exclusively or predominantly required by developing countries. This forces
developing countries to provide incentives to either adapt existing technologies to their
specific needs or to develop these technologies domestically.
With respect to the first question, a priori it seems clear that stronger IP protection in the
host country should encourage (or at least not discourage) the (active) transfer of
technology in embodied form through imports of capital goods, by foreign firms to their
subsidiaries and possibly to domestic firms, either via direct investment in the form of
partnership or licensing. Note that this argument presumes that the intellectual property
rights (IPRs) are enforceable, which is not an innocuous assumption. Also, note that such
transfer may or may not help the local development of innovation skills and human capital
in particular when only embodied knowledge is transferred. With respect to the second, it
also seems clear that stronger IP protection could encourage the innovative activities of
domestic firms, but could also discourage learning via imitation and therefore inhibit
technological catch-up. Which effect dominates also depends on the level of technological
development already attained in the host country as technology transfer requires absorptive
capacity in the recipient country.
The available evidence, which we summarize later in the paper, suggests that, “one-sizefits-all” harmonization of intellectual property rights is not welfare-enhancing for less
developed countries (and possibly not even for emerging economies), although for large
7

Note that the definition of eligible patents under these fast-track schemes appears to be somewhat arbitrary
given the difficulty of defining objective technology-based criteria (for the USPTO classification see the
Federal Register Vol. 74, No. 234). This is particularly evident in the case of the UKIPO `green channel’,
where applicants are only required to explain themselves in writing why the technology for which patent
protection is sought is green (see http://www.ipo.gov.uk/p-pn-green.htm).

6

emerging economies there is also little evidence that it would lead to a welfare loss. With
respect to climate change-related technologies, as suggested by the World Bank 2010
World Development Report, “[t]here is no evidence that overly restrictive IPRs have been
a big barrier to transferring renewable energy production capacity to middle-income
countries. . . . In low-income countries, weak IPRs do not appear to be a barrier to
deploying sophisticated climate-smart technologies.” (World Bank, 2010,310). Moreover,
the available evidence suggests that the parallels in terms of IP protection drawn between
the pharmaceutical industry and green technology are not warranted. A large range of
different technologies can achieve emission reductions, and for a significant share of these
green technologies, the underlying technology is mature and in the public domain. Most
technological progress is expected to come from incremental improvements of existing offpatent technologies. While such incremental innovation may be patentable, it leaves ample
scope for competing technologies and therefore limits the role specific patents may play
for technological progress in this area (Johnson and Lybecker, 2009a).8 This suggests that
insights from the existing experience with technology development and transfer in certain
technological areas such as pharmaceuticals may not translate directly to green
technologies.
This paper specifically addresses the implications of the IP-technology transfer
relationship for climate change mitigation in developing countries. However, we note that
there are already a number of useful surveys of the general topic available in the literature.9
2.

Technology transfer

International technology transfer typically takes place via trade, foreign direct investment,
joint ventures with local partners, or simple technology licensing, although in the latter
case, some tacit knowledge probably also needs to be transferred.10 In all of these cases,
foreign firms run the risk that imitation by local firms may erode some of their profits from
these activities, so the presence of enforceable IPRs should encourage these activities.11 In
8

Supporting this line of argument, Arora and Gambardella (2010) provide evidence from the chemical
industry in which quick and extensive diffusion of new technologies occurred in the presence of effective
patent protection. Arora and Gambardella argue that diffusion was possible despite strong patent rights
because firms were able to develop variants of patented chemical processes which led to effective
competition in the market for technology.
9

For earlier surveys on technology transfer and IP see Branstetter (2004), Maskus (2004), ICTSD, and
UNCTAD (2003); for surveys on innovation and climate change see Popp et al. (2010), Popp (2010), and
World Bank (2010, Chapter 7).
10

See Keller (2004, 2010) for overviews of the literature on international technology diffusion.

11

Wright and Pardey (2006) note that there is often confusion regarding the scope of patent protection. A
patent is only valid in the country in which it is registered, which means that firms in countries where a
technology is not protected can use the technology without infringing the patent. At the example of patents
on transgenic traits, Wright and Pardey argue that despite strong IPR protection in the US where most
cultivars with transgenic traits have been developed, technology diffusion to developing countries was not
hampered. Wright and Pardey (2006) argue that it is rather the lack of public investment in agricultural
research that accounts for the lack of innovation in developing countries in this area than IPR protection. The
authors suggest that adaptation of new traits might even be faster in developing countries if stronger IPR
protection were in place.

7

fact, Edith Penrose goes as far as to argue that for developing countries, “the only
economic advantages to be gained from granting foreign patents lies in the possibility that
in one way or another such grants will induce the introduction of foreign technology and
capital.” (Penrose, 1973,770). Obviously, in the cases of more advanced technology, the
imitation risk is highest when the host country has the capacity to adopt and develop such
technology, which implies that the risk is generally greater in middle income countries
than in low income countries. This risk is further increased if technologies require local
adaptation in order to fit local needs and regulatory requirements and standards. At the
same time, if IPR protection is strong, foreign firms may prefer to license technologies
instead of choosing to be a local presence, which could decrease the amount of (tacit)
knowledge transferred. This decision may also be influenced by the ability of foreign firms
to enforce license contracts. However, it is also conceivable that stronger IPRs increase the
incentives for firms to exploit IPRs themselves instead of licensing out. It is likely that
these relationships differ by industry and type of activity, i.e., manufacturing or
distribution.
How true is this in practice? That is, what is the evidence that local IP protections matter
when a firm considers transferring its technology to another country?
2.1

Technology Transfer Through Trade

Maskus and Penubarti (1995) provide some empirical evidence for a positive correlation
between the strength of patent enforcement and the level of manufacturing imports
originating in Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD)
countries using a cross-section of twenty-eight manufacturing sectors across forty-seven
developed and developing countries. The authors found that the level of manufacturing
imports is positively correlated with the strength of patent enforcement in the importing
countries. The authors also account for the potential endogeneity of the patent enforcement
measure by using an instrumental variable approach (although finding valid instruments in
this context is a difficult task). In a similar analysis, Smith (1999) looks at the correlation
between U.S. exports and IPR protection in developing countries by estimating a gravity
equation. Smith distinguishes among countries with differing degrees of threatened
imitation -that is, the importing country’s ability to imitate. She finds a positive correlation
between U.S. exports and the importing country’s strength of IP protection only for
countries with high risk of imitation. These findings have been confirmed more recently by
Awokuse and Yin (2010) who look specifically at the relationship between imports and
IPR protection in China using panel data for 1991-2004. In addition to a patent right index,
Awokuse and Yin use patent applications by foreign applicants as a measure for the
strength of IPRs in China. Awokuse and Yin find that imports by China increase with
stronger patent rights protection and that this effect is strongest for high-tech industries.
These results suggest that trade serves as a channel for international technology transfer,
and that developed countries are wary of transferring knowledge in embodied form to
countries with strong imitative capacity and weak IPR enforcement.
2.2

Technology Transfer Through FDI

The first author to empirically look at Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) as a channel for
technology transfer was Edwin Mansfield in a 1991 survey of approximately 100 U.S.
8

multinational firms (Mansfield, 1994) and their experiences with sixteen countries from all
over the world. Broadly speaking, his findings were that most U.S. multinationals evaluate
the strength of IP protections in the host country before making investments abroad; the
effects varied by industrial structure and, not surprisingly, were especially strong in the
case of R&D facilities and in the chemical and or pharmaceutical sector. In assessing the
evidence, Mansfield was careful to point out the three factors that led to the firm’s
perception of IP strength: (1) does the law protect their technology?; (2) is there adequate
legal infrastructure in the country to enable enforcement?; and (3) do the relevant
government agencies treat foreign entities the same as domestic entities in this area? All
three were to be taken into account in answering the survey.
In Lee and Mansfield (1996), these data are augmented with data on actual foreign direct
investment by U.S. firms in the countries during four years from 1990 to 1993, and simple
regressions are used to show that FDI does indeed vary with the perceived strength of IP
protection. Mansfield (2000) performs a similar exercise using data on firms in Japan and
Germany as well as the U.S. and finds even larger effects. Given the relatively small
sample size in the U.S. study (effectively sixteen countries, although there are forty-eight
observations due to the time dimension), this result is reassuring.
Heald (2003) critiques the strength of the conclusions drawn from this study as making too
little a distinction among the different kinds of IP rights that might be used. In particular,
although the study is often cited to show that patents are important for technology transfer,
Heald argues that trade secrecy may have been equally important in the eyes of the survey
participants. The original Mansfield article cites a number of comments by survey
participants that suggest disclosure of proprietary information is what they fear most. As
Heald points out, this information is already disclosed if the invention has been patented
elsewhere, so the presence or absence of local patent protection may be irrelevant. Turner
and Heald (2004) propose a new survey that distinguishes among the various kinds of IP
rights, but unfortunately, their survey achieved response rates that were too low for valid
analysis (Turner, 2010, private communication with author).
In a major study of U.S. multinational firm behavior in response to the strengthening of
patent systems in sixteen middle income countries during the 1990s, Branstetter et al.
(2006) found that royalty payments received for technology, R&D spending by the firm’s
local affiliates, and foreign-origin patent applications at the USPTO all increased following
these changes, especially if the firm in question was already a heavy patent user and
therefore presumably dependent on patents to secure returns to innovation.
Javorcik (2002) studies the relationship between a country’s probability of receiving FDI
and its level of IP protection for twenty-four Eastern bloc transition economies for the
period 1989-1994. Javorcik uses the Ginarte and Park (1997) IPR index which measures
statutory IP enforcement and complements it with information on actual IPR enforcement.
Her findings suggest that the level of IPR protection is positively correlated with the
propensity to receive FDI in high-tech sectors.12 In countries with weak IPR protection,
FDI focuses on distribution activities instead of the establishment of local production
facilities. In a similar analysis, Park and Lippoldt (2008) analyze the relationship between
12

“High-tech sectors” were defined as including: (1) drugs, cosmetics, and health care products; (2)
chemicals; (3) machinery and equipment; and (4) electrical equipment.

9

the strength of IPRs and technology transfer measured as inward FDI stocks and imports of
goods and services for a sample of 120 countries over the period 1990-2005. The authors
construct separate Ginarte-Park type indices for patents, trademarks, and copyrights to
measure the strength of IP protection in a given country. The authors find the patent rights
index is positively correlated with all three measures of technology transfer. This positive
relationship is weaker for trademarks and copyrights. With regard to technology transfer to
developing countries, Park and Lippoldt find a positive association between stronger patent
rights and high-tech imports such as pharmaceuticals, chemicals, and office and telecom
equipment. Their data also suggests a positive correlation between the number of patents
held by non-residents in developing countries and the amount of FDI and imports of goods
and services received. The authors argue that this shows that foreigners transfer new
technologies in the presence of strong IP rights.
The literature reviewed above treats FDI as a single homogenous channel of technology
transfer. Ito and Wakasugi (2007) distinguish between different types of FDI. They
estimate the probability of affiliates of Japanese manufacturing multinational companies
engaging in R&D in a sample of developed and developing host countries where they
distinguish between affiliates conducting R&D at the plant site without the establishment
of a research laboratory, and at both the plant site and a research laboratory. Ito and
Wakasugi interpret the former as a sign that an affiliate conducts only R&D to adapt
existing technologies to the host market, whereas the latter is regarded as “knowledge
sourcing R&D” which involves the creation of new knowledge and technologies. Ito and
Wakasugi find a positive correlation between the strength of a host country’s IPR
enforcement regime measured as a patent right index and the probability of a Japanese
affiliate conducting knowledge sourcing R&D. Since this type of R&D can be expected to
have the largest technology transfer component, the finding also suggests that stronger
IPRs are correlated with increased technology transfer through the channel of FDI.
While this literature suggests that IPR enforcement is important, there may be a large
number of other factors that also influence multinational companies’ decisions to engage in
FDI. Fosfuri (2004), for example, compares the importance of IPR protection and country
risk in determining international investment activities of large multinational chemical
processing firms in seventy-five countries during the period 1981-1996. Fosfuri has
information on three modes of international activity of the firms in the sample, i.e., whollyowned operations, joint ventures, and licensing. He finds firms to be sensitive to the
measure of country risk, measured by the Institutional Investor Credit ratings, with all
three forms of a foreign firm’s engagement being negatively correlated with country risk in
the host economy. In contrast, the level of IPR protection is not correlated in a statistically
significant way with any form of foreign firms’ engagement in the host economy. This
may be partly explained by the fact that the measure of IPR protection is based on statutory
protection and might differ from actual enforcement.13 It suggests that IPRs are only part
of a more complex set of FDI determinants.
Does this also help explain why we often see foreign R&D investments in countries with
weak IPR enforcement? Zhao (2006) looks into this seeming conundrum, analyzing data
on 1,567 holding companies headquartered in the U.S. and active in forty-eight developing
13

Fosfuri (2004) also uses the index proposed by Ginarte and Park (1997) – see also Section 3.

10

and developed countries. Zhao shows that patents filed at the USPTO by these companies
receive more forward citations within a holding company if at least half of the inventors of
the patent are located in a country with weak IPR protection. Zhao interprets this selfcitation pattern within a holding company as evidence for disproportionately more
knowledge exchange internal to the holding company in the case of research undertaken in
countries with weak patent protection. Hence, the results suggest that multinational
companies conduct R&D in countries with weak IPR protection when the resulting
innovation is integrated into larger global R&D projects of the holding company. In this
case, the value of an innovation emerges only when it is integrated and complemented with
knowledge and resources held by the company abroad. Therefore, the potential loss due to
imperfect appropriability of knowledge in these countries is counterbalanced by
inexpensive researchers in developing countries, and this explains a company’s’
willingness to engage in FDI in developing countries with weak IPR protection. Chen
(2008) suggests that the availability of a large pool of highly-skilled, specialized scientists
is even more important than low wages. He investigates the motives of multinational
companies to establish R&D labs in Beijing. The results of his qualitative survey of
eighteen R&D labs established by multinational companies in Beijing also reveals a range
of other relevant location-specific factors such as the possibility to conduct joint research
projects with local research institutions and competitive pressures on local markets to
generate innovative products.
In summary, the literature indicates a positive correlation between FDI and the level of IPR
enforcement. Considering the extensive evidence on FDI serving as a channel for
technology transfer, this implies a positive relation between IPR enforcement and
technology transfer through the channel of FDI. However, the literature also points to other
important factors in attracting FDI, such as country risk and the availability of low-cost
highly-skilled labor.
2.3

Technology Transfer Through Licensing

Arora and Ceccagnoli (2006) use data from the 1994 Carnegie Mellon Survey on U.S.
manufacturing firms conducting R&D to investigate the relationship between firm
licensing behavior and the strength of patent protection. The authors find that the effect of
stronger patent protection on licensing depends on whether the firm owns specialized
complementary assets. If they do not, stronger patent protection increases their propensity
to license their technology. If they have such assets, stronger patent protection leads them
to patent more but not necessarily to license more. Hence, the positive association between
the strength of patent protection and licensing found by the authors comes from firms’
increased patenting activity rather than a direct increase in firms’ licensing activities.
Smith (2001) uses a sample of U.S. firms to analyze how the strength of patent regimes
abroad influence the way in which these firms service foreign markets. She finds a stronger
positive association between licenses by U.S. firms in countries with stronger IPR
enforcement than for exports and sales by affiliates. Smith interprets her findings as
evidence that strong IPRs give incentives to U.S. firms to transfer knowledge to foreign
companies through licensing. Yang and Maskus (2009) support Smith’s findings in a
theoretical model. Yang and Maskus show that stronger IPRs give incentives to firms from
industrialized countries to license technology to firms in developing countries. If these
11

developing country firms have sufficient absorptive capacity, licensing may lead them to
increase exports and therefore enhance welfare in the developing country.
In summary, the main conclusions from the empirical evidence on IP and technology
transfer are the following: first, the strength of IP protection does seem to facilitate
technology transfer to middle income countries that already have innovative capacity or are
capable of imitation. Technology licensing, imports, and foreign direct investment in these
countries respond to stronger IP regimes. The existing evidence also suggests that
absorptive capacity is important. It facilitates technology transfer through licensing, which
is the channel involving the most disembodied technology transfer external to the
multinational company. These conclusions appear consistent with the idea that a certain
level of absorptive capacity is necessary to make use of and learn from imported
technology, but if a country has the capacity to do so, they are more likely to receive the
technology if the foreign firm from which it comes feels that its ownership rights will be
protected. If the absorptive capacity is present but IP protection is weak, foreign firms will
tend to establish distribution rather than manufacturing subsidiaries. Despite evidence that
IP protection sometimes encourages technology transfer, it is important to remember that
firms typically do not rank IPRs highly as an influence on the technology transfer decision,
except in the cases of R&D facilities and very advanced technologies. Thus, specific
situations will require specific evaluations.
3.

Technological Development

The results on IP and technology transfer seem sensible and consistent with a priori
intuition. However, as suggested in the introduction, the more important question for
policy is the degree to which strong IPRs impact innovation and development within a
developing country. Does stronger patent protection help to enable and increase that
country’s own innovative capacity? Economists have approached this question in three
different ways: (1) using theoretical analysis; (2) looking at the empirical relationship
between IP and innovation across countries; and (3) using individual case studies of
changes in patent law.
3.1

Theory

Chin and Grossman (2000) use a highly stylized model to assess welfare effects on
developing countries adopting patent protection for innovations from developed economies
in the presence of North-South trade. Under a number of restrictive assumptions, Chin and
Grossman find for their two-country model that the Southern country’s welfare is lower
when granting patent protection to innovations from the North. In contrast, the North
always gains from patent protection in the South. Deardorff (1992) reaches a similar
conclusion for his static two-country model, suggesting that global welfare may even
decrease if patent protection is extended to the South. Grossman and Lai (2004) look at the
choice of levels of IP protection among groups of countries that are subject to knowledge
spillovers. They find that, in general, non-cooperative equilibria among these countries
result in stronger IP protection in developed countries than in the less developed countries.
Angeles (2005) uses a simple North-South model with IPRs in the North and finds that the
welfare effects of adding IP protection in the South depends on the relative income levels
12

in the North and South; the larger the gap, the less desirable IP protection in the South is
for total social welfare.
Scotchmer (2004) considers a case where each country can choose to have innovation
provided either by IP protection for innovators or by public sponsorship of innovation. In
this case, national treatment of innovators and harmonization across countries both lead to
too much IP protection and too little public sponsorship in all of the countries relative to
the social welfare optimum. Small countries will favor more extensive harmonization of IP
rights than large countries if everything else is equal, because the consumer surplus they
generate is in other countries for the most part. In addition, more innovative countries will
favor more extensive IP rights.
3.2

Empirical Cross Country Evidence

Few well-designed natural experiments exist for the study of IP protection and innovative
activity, and most are not specifically addressed to the development question. There are,
however, a fairly large number of simple cross country studies, both contemporary and
historical. These studies vary in quality due to the presence of simultaneity between the
development of an economy and the development of an IP system, although some of the
authors have attempted to find instrumental variables to mitigate this problem.
There are two large scale historical studies, both of which take advantage of the variability
of patent systems around the world in the 19th century. Lerner (2002) compares patenting
activity in the UK across countries with various strengths of the patent system and finds
that patenting by domestic entities at the UK patent office actually declines when their
patent system is strengthened, whereas patenting by foreign entities increases. Moser
(2005) uses Crystal Palace exhibits as a proxy measure of innovative activity and finds that
countries with stronger patent systems do not produce more innovation, but that innovation
in countries with weak or no patent systems tends to favor technologies that can be
protected by trade secrets. Thus, both of these investigations fail to find strong overall
effects of patenting on innovation in the 19th century.
In the first study of this kind using contemporary data, Park and Ginarte (1997) use
aggregate data for sixty countries during 1960-1990 and an index of the strength of IP
rights (subject matter coverage, term length, etc.). Using a simultaneous equations model
of economic growth, investment, schooling, and R&D investment, they found that the
strength of IP rights was positively associated with investment and R&D investment in
countries with above-median income, but not for less-developed countries. IP rights had no
independent effect on growth above and beyond that contributed by investment and R&D.
However, Ginarte and Park (1997) also show that the strength of IP rights in high income
countries (but not in low income countries) can be predicted by prior R&D intensity, which
raises some questions about the simultaneity of IP protection and a country's orientation
towards R&D and innovation. That is, it is possible that the demand for IP protection
increases when a large share of the industrial base is engaged in innovative activities. In a
more recent study, Allred and Park (2007) use an updated patent rights index to look at the
relation between IPR protection and patenting at the country level for a sample of 100
countries during 1965-2000. Allred and Park find a non-linear relationship between the
IPR index and domestic patenting – for low values of the index, a strengthening of IPR
enforcement is negatively correlated with patent counts whereas the relationship is positive
13

beyond a threshold level of the index. Also using the Ginarte-Park patent rights index, Park
and Lippoldt (2008) find for their analysis a positive correlation between patent strength
and the number of patent applications by developing countries as well as R&D intensity,
i.e., R&D expenditure as a percentage of GDP. The authors interpret this as evidence for
stronger IP rights to be beneficial for the domestic development of technology in
developing countries.
The study by Kanwar and Evenson (2003) looks at the variation across countries in R&D
spending as a function of the Ginarte-Park index over the 1981-1990 period for a sample of
thirty-two countries and finds similar results, with stronger IP protection related to higher
R&D intensity. While the authors find a positive correlation between the IP rights index
and R&D intensity, the study makes no attempt to explore the potential endogeneity of the
relationship as higher levels of IP protection might drive higher levels of R&D spending
and vice versa. The potential endogeneity is investigated directly in Kanwar and Evenson
(2009) for a similar sample of forty-four developed and developing countries (1981-2000).
To account for potential endogeneity of R&D intensity in their regression of the patent
rights index on R&D intensity, Kanwar and Evenson (2009) use three instruments: (i) one
period lagged scientific and engineering journal publications, (ii) the percentage gross
enrollment rate in tertiary education and (iii) in secondary education. The authors argue
that these instruments are valid when also controlling for per capita income and education
levels in the equation of interest.14 Comparing the results obtained using a specification
with and without instruments, Kanwar and Evenson cannot reject equality of the estimates,
suggesting exogeneity of the R&D intensity variable. Moreover, Kanwar and Evenson
(2009) do not find a robust correlation between R&D intensity and IP strength.
Chen and Puttitanum (2005) look at sixty-four developing countries during the 1975-2000
period, using a two equation model where the strength of IPRs is a function of the
development level, trade openness, economic freedom, membership in the WTO, whereas
innovation (proxied by patenting at the US Patent Office) is a function of IPR strength,
development level (GDP per capita), economic freedom, and population. Thus, the
instruments for IPR strength are confined to trade openness and WTO membership, which
makes identification rather weak. Nevertheless, they show that IPRs have a positive effect
on innovation and also that there is a U-shaped relationship between IP strength and the
level of development, with IP strength first decreasing and then increasing. Because they
included a quadratic for GDP per capita in the IPR equation but not in the innovation
equation they cannot say whether the innovation-IP relationship is also U-shaped.
Qian (2007) performs a thorough analysis of the effects of introducing pharmaceutical
product patents in eighty-five countries during the years 1978-1999 using matched samples
and fixed country-effect estimation. She finds that national patent protection does not
stimulate domestic innovation activities except at higher development levels, and that
above a certain level of patent protection, innovation activities are actually reduced.
McCalman (2001) develops a growth model of bilateral technology transfer and tries to
quantify the welfare effects of patent harmonization due to the TRIPS agreement. He finds

14

An overidentification test suggests exogeneity of the instruments. However, the test can only indicate
validity of a subset of the instruments and not of all three instruments.

14

large transfers to the U.S. from developing countries, and also from Canada, the UK, and
Japan.
A few conclusions have emerged from this body of work. First, introducing or
strengthening a patent system (lengthening the patent term, broadening subject matter
coverage or available scope, improving enforcement) results in an increase in patenting
and also in the use of patents as a tool of firm strategy (Lerner, 2002; Hall and Ziedonis,
2001), although there is some evidence that the opposite is the case at very low levels of
IPR protection (Allred and Park, 2007). This is to be expected, but it is much less clear that
these changes result in an increase in innovative activity (Lerner, 2002), although they may
redirect energies toward patentable activities and away from those that can be kept secret
within the firm (Moser, 2005).15A third finding from the empirical literature is that if there
is an increase in innovation due to patents, it is likely to be centered in the pharmaceutical,
biotechnology, and medical instrument areas, and possibly specialty chemicals.16 Yet
evidence provided by Wright and Shih (2010) and Lei et al. (2009) for the agricultural
biotechnology sector in the U.S. cautions that the overall effect of stronger IPR protection
on innovation may be negative.
Fourth and finally, the existence and strength of the patent system affects the organization
of industry by allowing trade in knowledge, which facilitates the vertical disintegration of
knowledge-based industries and the entry of new firms that possess only intangible assets
(Hall and Ziedonis, 2001; Arora et al., 2003; Arora and Merges, 2004). The argument is
that by creating a strong property right for the intangible asset, the patent system enables
activities that formerly had to be kept within the firm because of secrecy and contracting
problems to move out into separate entities. Although limited to two (large) sectors,
research supports this conclusion in the chemical and semiconductor industries.
3.3

Case Studies

The case study evidence on innovation and development is somewhat mixed. For example,
Western Europe, and in particular the UK and Germany, had patent protection during most
15

Wright and Shih (2010) provide an example of how a significant strengthening of IPRs in agricultural
biotechnology in the US during the 1980s has led to an increase in private investment in applied research, but
has had a negative impact on basic public research. Wright and Shih (2010) argue that the possibility to
protect plant varieties has led to a narrow focus on applied research in private sector investment. Patentability
also led to a proliferation of fragmented IPRs in this technology field which caused the industry to
concentrate to avoid costly IPR sharing. Due to its applied character, private sector investment still relies on
public basic research. Wright and Shih (2010), however, report that scattered upstream IPRs impede access
to research inputs needed in publicly funded downstream research. Lei et al. (2009) make the important point
that IPRs as such are not responsible for this lock-in effect. On the one hand, their survey among academic
agricultural biologists reveals that academic scientists find it increasingly difficult to innovate because of
IPRs, mostly due to material transfer agreements (MTAs). On the other hand, Lei et al. (2009) point out that
IPR protection is an obstacle principally because “it induces institutional administrators, whose financial
priorities scientists do not generally share, to encourage or mandate the use of MTAs in exchange of such
tools.” (Lei et al., 2009: 39).
16

This conclusion relies mostly on survey evidence from a number of countries which shows rather
conclusively that patents are not among the most important means to appropriate returns to innovation,
except perhaps in pharmaceuticals, medical devices, biotechnology, and some specialty chemicals
(Mansfield, 1986; Levin et al., 1987; Cohen et al., 2001; Arora et al., 2001; Graham et al., 2010).

15

of the industrial revolution, and there were some episodes where such protection appeared
to slow rather than hasten technological change (Kanefsky, 1978, as cited by Nuvolari,
2001). Episodes of invention and innovation without patents also existed.17 The German
chemical industry in the nineteenth-century experienced robust growth during a period
when patents were available on processes but not on products (Murmann, 2003). Allen
(2006) also provides evidence suggesting that the invention and fast diffusion of machines
during the industrial revolution were the result of a combination of relatively high wages
and cheap energy in Britain. This created incentives to substitute energy for labor through
inventions biased towards saving labor. Allen (2006) suggests that while patents may have
played a role in providing incentives to inventors, the main driver of the inventions during
the industrial revolution in Britain were relative factor prices rather than changes in the IP
system. This idea of induced technological change, i.e., changes in relative factor prices
inducing technological change to reduce the input of the relatively more expensive factor,
goes back to Hicks (1932). In fact, Allen (2006) points out that the enactment of the
English patent law in 1624 before the onset of the industrial revolution appears to have had
little impact on innovation in the seventeenth-century.
Several authors have pointed to the fact that a number of successful cases of technological
development appear to have taken place in the absence of strong patent protection until a
certain level had been reached. The United States did not have national treatment of
foreign patent applicants until the signing of the Paris convention in 1883, and domestic
inventors were therefore free to copy inventions from the U.K., among others, during most
of the nineteenth century. This encouraged local technology development and learning by
imitation. Taiwan has followed a similar pattern, with little use of IP protection, especially
internationally, until innovators in the country had developed a successful imitation
strategy. Taiwanese inventors only began patenting at the USPTO in 1975 and then
significantly increased their patenting in 1985.
As Kim (2002,6) says in summarizing his review of Korean technological development:
strong IPR protection will hinder rather than facilitate technology transfer
and indigenous learning activities in the early stage of industrialization
when learning takes place through reverse engineering and duplicative
imitation of mature foreign products. It is “only after countries have
accumulated sufficient indigenous capabilities with extensive science and
technology infrastructure to undertake creative imitation in the later stage
that IPR protection becomes an important element in technology transfer
and industrial activities.”
It is noteworthy that Korea joined the Paris convention only in 1981, greatly strengthening
its patent and copyright laws in 1986, and that patenting by Korean inventors in the United
States increased significantly only in 1988 (Kumar, 2003).
In Japan, the story is not as clear. Japan has had a patent system since the nineteenth
century. After defeat in World War II, a patent system of one claim per patent that allowed
17

For examples, see Foray and Hilaire-Perez (2001) on the Lyons silk weaving cooperative, Allen (1983) on
the iron industry of Cleveland (UK) over the period 1850-1875, and Nuvolari (2001) on the cooperative
incremental development of Cornish pumping equipment (a policy that was a response to the mine owners’
experience with aggressive patent enforcement by Watt).

16

for utility models, pre-grant opposition, and early disclosure clearly designed for
incremental and or adaptive invention was in place. In addition, the Ministry of
International Trade and Industry took an active role in negotiating technology transfer
licensing agreements from foreign firms, and during the same period incoming FDI faced
difficulties (Maskus, 2004). La Croix and Kawaura (1996) point out that the introduction
of pharmaceutical product patents in 1975 in Japan did increase R&D in that sector.
Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001) show that the strengthening of the Japanese patent
system in 1988-1993 did not result in increased R&D spending by Japanese firms, and
Branstetter and Nakamura (2003) report that further reforms in the 1990s did not increase
innovative performance (measured as the productivity of R&D) either.
Kumar (2003) provides an overview of the historical relationship between IPRs,
technology, and economic development in the East Asian countries, and his study reaches
much the same conclusions as Kim (2002): “Japan, Korea, and Taiwan have absorbed
substantial amounts of technological learning under a weak IPR protection regime during
the early phases.”
Ryan (2010) reaches a different conclusion for his case studies in the bio-medical sector in
Brazil. Brazil represents an interesting setting to study the effect of the presence of patents
on technology development as it introduced product patents on pharmaceuticals only in
1996. Ryan concludes from the study of five innovation projects in the bio-medical
industry that the introduction of pharmaceutical product patents has led domestic
companies to invest in the development of new drugs and thus promoted domestic
innovation. However, Ryan shows that cooperation with public sector research institutions
was crucial in allowing private firms to innovate. He also finds that existing experience
with manufacturing generics was very helpful for the firms when the patent regime
changed to one where innovative new products were favored.
Finally, Léger (2005) investigates the role of IPRs in the maize breeding industry in
Mexico. IPRs relevant to this industry include patents, plant breeders’ rights, and
trademarks. Through interviews with twenty-five breeders representing the population in
the industry, Léger finds an extremely low use of IPRs in the industry. Her qualitative
evidence gathered through interviews with breeders suggests that the low use of IPRs is
due to a lack of information on the IP system among local breeders, high perceived costs
associated with obtaining IPRs, as well as difficulties enforcing the rights. As a result,
local breeders do not perceive IPRs to increase incentives for R&D. In contrast, IPRs were
found to be more important to multinational companies and are thought to provide
incentives to foreign breeders to adapt technologies to Mexican needs.
In conclusion, the literature on the link between IP and domestic development of
technology does not lead to a clear conclusion. While there exists some coherent evidence
pointing to the importance of IPRs for domestic innovation, especially in certain industries,
there is also convincing (historical) evidence questioning the robustness of this
relationship.

17

4.

Implications for Climate­Related Technologies

This section of the paper discusses climate change-related technology development and
transfer from developed to developing countries. The global public good character of
environmental protection adds another layer of complexity to the issue of IP protection and
technology development and transfer discussed so far. The double externality involved in
climate change-related technologies implies that additional policy intervention is
necessary. This section, therefore, also discusses different forms of policy intervention
targeted at the environmental externality, notably market-based regulations such as carbon
taxes and top-down interventions like mandatory renewable energy shares in total energy
consumption or the replacement of incandescent light bulbs with energy-saving or halogen
light bulbs.
4.1

The Challenge of Climate Change

While current estimates differ, there is broad consensus that the world-wide expected
welfare loss in terms of GDP due to climate change is substantial (Stern, 2006). Existing
figures suggest that drastic reductions in carbon emission levels are needed within the
current century to keep global warming below the critical level of an average of 2C over
pre-industrial revolution levels (Popp, 2010).
World-wide average estimates, however, mask enormous heterogeneity across and within
countries (Yohe and Schlesinger, 2002). Tol (2009) reviews a number of recent estimates
of the expected impact of climate change on GDP and shows that developing countries
represent by far the most heavily affected regions. The differences in welfare losses
between developed and developing countries among the estimates reported in Tol (2009)
vary between 2.9 percentage points (Hope, 2006) and 36.4 percentage points (Rehdanz and
Maddison, 2005).18 Some of the studies reviewed in Tol (2009) even suggest small net
benefits from moderate global warming of the order 1-2C for some industrialized
economies. This enormous inequality in the consequences of climate change between
developed and developing countries results mostly from the climatic conditions prevailing
in developing countries that will deteriorate disproportionately more as a consequence of
even moderate increases in average temperatures. However, part of the vulnerability to
climate change stems also from developing countries’ reliance on the agricultural sector
and less ability to adapt to climate change due to a lack of appropriate technologies.
The main challenge in providing incentives for the development and transfer of green
technologies is the double externality problem discussed in the introduction. In addition,
the development and adoption of green technologies may involve large sunk costs paired
with long time lags in pay-back thresholds, as well as a large amount of uncertainty about
future price developments and regulatory changes. The relevant question is whether IP
protection - at least partially - addresses these issues.
18

There is a large body of literature analyzing the impact of climate change on specific developing countries
suggesting potentially large welfare losses, although outcomes vary substantially depending on the
assumptions made on the extent of climate change reflecting the prevailing uncertainty in this context. The
considerable projected income losses in developing countries are to a significant extent explained by their
dependency on the agricultural sector, which is most directly affected by climate change (Winters et al.,
1998).

18

4.2

Climate Change-Related Technologies

Climate change is ascribed to the emission of greenhouse gases which include long-lived
gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O) as well as
short-lived gases such as water vapor and ozone (O3). The most important greenhouse gas
by volume is CO2, which is emitted during the fossil fuel combustion process.
The dramatic reduction in carbon emissions needed to counter climate change can be
achieved through reduced energy consumption per unit of output holding current
technologies fixed (energy efficiency) and the introduction of new technologies that lower
carbon emissions per unit of energy consumed holding energy use fixed (carbon
efficiency). The most promising path is to combine both a reduction in energy
consumption and the introduction of new technologies requiring less energy for the same
output. An alternative is to reduce emissions by reducing total economic activity, holding
energy and carbon efficiency constant.19 Since this alternative is undesirable, in particular
to developing countries, the development and diffusion of technologies that allow
increasing both energy and carbon efficiency is needed. Note that achieving the proper
balance between these two is something for which the price system (carbon taxes or
tradable emissions permits) is well-suited, in that it would allow individual consumers to
signal their preferences.
Green technologies cover a broad range of fundamentally different types of innovation,
including alternative energy resources, technologies employing alternative energy sources,
energy storage, distribution and management technologies, recycling and waste
technologies, industrial processes, and technologies for capture, storage, and sequestration
or disposal of greenhouse gases (Popp, 2010). The underlying technology behind green
innovations differ greatly, and range from high-tech innovation such as genetically
modified crops to low-tech innovations such as mechanical farming techniques. These
technologies differ in other ways as well, for example the fixed costs of innovation and
adoption involved and their applicability across industries and climatic zones. Also, the
degree to which IPRs are relevant varies considerably over the broad range of green
technologies. Whereas inventions in some technological fields, such as biotechnology, rely
to a large extent on patenting, other technologies like irrigation systems or construction
techniques may be largely free of patenting.20 For some technologies, IPRs may protect
only components of a technology while for others, IPRs protect the end-product. Similar to
the agricultural sector, the need for local adaptation of green technologies to extremely
heterogeneous local conditions may also limit the effect of IPRs. Wright and Shih (2010),
for example, report that even in agricultural biotechnology where strong IPRs exist,
heterogeneity of technology users across space has limited firms’ability to charge high
mark-ups.
19

Gans (2010) uses an endogenous growth model to show that under some conditions even policies targeted
towards energy efficiency or carbon reductions can reduce overall output enough to discourage
environmentally friendly innovation.

20

Smithers and Blay-Palmer (2001), for example, look at how soybean growers in Ontario, Canada have
adapted to climate change by employing mechanical and biological innovations. Smithers and Blay-Palmer
point out that most mechanical technologies are not protected by IP rights, only more recent modifications of
existing technologies are.

19

Apart from potentially different technologies needed in developed and developing
countries, developed countries mainly face the problem of replacing existing technology
with technology that is more carbon/energy efficient. In developing countries, the
challenge consists largely in implementing green technologies from the outset. This
distinction may lead to different incentives for the adoption of new green technologies. In
particular, the benefit-cost trade-off may be more favorable in developing countries due to
lower sunk (switching) costs.
4.3

Climate Change-Related Policy Intervention

Given the double externality problem, a combination of policy interventions that address
both the imperfect appropriability and the environmental externality are needed. Policy
intervention can affect relative prices and quantities or directly mandate the use of
emission-reducing technologies. Nordhaus (2009) provides a summary of the implications
of economic analysis for climate change policies overall. His message is that the only
reliable way to send the correct signals to the many agents whose actions affect global
warming (innovators, producers, and consumers) is a carbon tax, and that such a tax leads
to undesirable effects unless it is global. He argues that the cap and trade system does not
send reliable price signals because it induces too much fluctuation in the pricing of
emissions, and it is also subject to excessive rent-seeking. However, it has become clear
that even if such a tax is the most desirable policy option, it is going to be very difficult to
achieve. This is the background to the more specific policies that we consider here.
Most such specific policy interventions have the primary objective of limiting carbon
emissions, which addresses the environmental externality directly. By doing so, they also
provide incentives for the development and diffusion of green technologies, indirectly
addressing the knowledge spillover externality. Such induced innovation can be achieved
through a large range of regulatory policies, the broadest of which are emission taxes and
the so called cap-and-trade scheme, where a limit on total emissions is set and tradable
emission rights are sold.21 Top-down regulations include emissions performance standards,
which set an emission target but no specific regulations about how a target should be met,
such as renewable portfolio standards or restrictions on the use of technologies such as on
incandescent light bulbs. Other forms of top-down regulation include climate change
mitigation such as reforestation. Regulatory interventions can be local or global in scale.
Global harmonization of regulations can give rise to scale effects and thus provide
multiplier effects (World Bank, 2010).
There are also policy interventions targeting the development of technologies more broadly
in the form of R&D incentive schemes, for example subsidies and tax credits. If these
policies favor green technologies, in principle they can address both the knowledge
spillover and environmental externality. Popp (2010) argues that R&D subsidies serve as
an incentive to develop green technologies while regulatory policies are essential in
promoting the diffusion of the new technologies. Thus, specific R&D incentives should be
applied in tandem with regulatory policies; such combined policy intervention is
particularly important for technologies that only achieve improved carbon efficiency
21

See Scotchmer (2009) for a theoretical comparison of the relative effectiveness of emissions taxes and the
cap-and-trade regulation.

20

without increasing energy efficiency, in which case social benefits exceed private benefits
by far. An example is carbon control equipment such as catalytic converters for
automobiles.
While such R&D incentive schemes may be effective in promoting the development of
green technology, there is some concern that increased R&D expenditure on green
technology may crowd out other R&D expenditure and therefore lead to an ambiguous net
welfare outcome. In general equilibrium of course, the crowding out is welfare-enhancing
by design – by fully incorporating the social welfare cost of environmental degradation in
the incentives for R&D directions, policy-makers have ensured that R&D directed towards
green technologies is valued more by society than other R&D. But in the short run, there
are some effects that make the general equilibrium outcome harder to achieve. These
include a lack of scientists and engineers needed for increased R&D spending and a
concomitant rise in their wages (David and Hall, 2000; Goolsbee, 1998), or a lack of
scientists and engineers with the relevant expertise. The opportunity cost of climate
change-related R&D (and that of processing and administering IPRs) is particularly
relevant to developing countries where resources are heavily constrained.
Popp (2004) provides evidence that even in the presence of substantial crowding out, there
are net social benefits from climate change-related R&D. Gerlagh (2008) provides an
explanation for Popp’s findings showing that increased R&D on green technology mostly
crowds out R&D devoted to carbon-producing technologies rather than other carbon
neutral R&D. These results are echoed by Popp and Newell (2009) at the firm-level. These
authors confirm that crowding out occurs mostly for innovations enhancing the
productivity of fossil fuels. However, as Nordhaus (2009) points out, an appropriate carbon
tax can send the right signals for clean technology development and would allow for the
preservation of neutrality in any R&D subsidies.
There is some empirical evidence from developing countries on the effectiveness of policy
interventions in promoting green technologies. Fisher-Vanden et al. (2006) investigate the
increase in energy efficiency and drop in total energy consumption in China during the
period 1997-1999 using a panel of 2,582 large and medium-sized Chinese firms. Apart
from shifts in output across industries, the authors find evidence that increases in energy
prices as well as the development of new technologies measured as R&D expenditure
account for the drop in energy intensity and use. Although the analysis does not single out
the effect of increased energy prices as a consequence of the elimination of state-set energy
prices on firm-level R&D expenditures, it may be suspected that the negative association
between energy intensity and R&D expenditures found by Fisher-Vanden et al. (2006)
reflects firms’ innovative responses to increased energy prices. Evidence for a positive
correlation between energy prices and innovation has also been found in the U.S. by Popp
(2002), and at a more aggregate level by Dechezleprêtre et al. (2009), who look at the
share of climate change-related patenting in total patents and oil prices over the period
1978-2005.
Jaffe and Palmer (1997) provide some additional insights by looking at the association
between costs of complying with environmental regulation and innovation measured as
R&D and U.S. patent applications by U.S. corporations for 2- and 3-digit manufacturing
industries in the U.S. Jaffe and Palmer find a positive correlation between lagged
environmental compliance expenditures and R&D, although they find no statistically
21

significant correlation between compliance expenditures and patenting. The authors
suggest that a possible explanation for their findings is that environmental regulations lead
to incremental R&D which does not lead to patentable research output. This would imply
that environmental regulation triggers R&D that is tailored towards complying with the
regulations, rather than the invention of genuinely new technologies. However, this study
is an aggregate industry level study, with identification coming from the time series
behavior of the key variables. Thus, strong conclusions are not warranted, as the authors
are careful to point out.
The international nature of the environmental externality increases the complexity of
policy regulation considerably. If international differences in regulatory stringency and
enforcement exist, incentives arise for pollution-intensive companies to conduct their
activities where environmental regulations are least costly. Dean et al. (2009) use data on
FDI in the form of equity joint ventures in the manufacturing sector in China for the period
1993-1996 to investigate whether differences in de facto environmental regulations have
an impact on foreign investors’ location choice within China, since environmental
stringency varies across Chinese provinces. Dean et al. construct a measure of regulatory
stringency based on the average collected levy per ton of wastewater at the province level.
They find that projects in high-pollution sectors by investors from Hong Kong, Macao,
Taiwan, Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines avoid provinces with high pollution
taxes. Projects from investors such as the U.S., E.U. and Japan do not appear to respond to
environmental regulatory stringency in their location choice. The interpretation is that
firms from developed economies employ greener technologies and are therefore less
sensitive to environmental levies. Still, this does not imply that firms located in OECD
countries do not react to domestic environmental regulation by re-locating production. For
example Hanna (2010) shows that US-based multinationals reacted to increased
environmental regulatory stringency introduced by the Clean Air Act Amendments in the
U.S. by expanding existing FDI activities abroad, albeit not disproportionately more so in
developing countries.

4.4

Climate Change-Related Technology Development

To answer the question of whether IP rights hinder the development and transfer of green
technologies, a report by Copenhagen Economics (2009, commissioned by the European
Commission) analyzes patent data for seven green technology fields for a sample of thirtyeight developing and emerging countries over the period 1998-2008.22 The study notes a
strong increase in green technology patent counts designating a small group of emerging
economies including Brazil, China, and India. The increase in green technology patents
designating these countries is in solar energy, fuel cells, and wind energy. However, in the
least-developed countries included in the sample, patents for green technologies are absent,
as are patents in general. The absence of patents on green technologies in the leastdeveloped countries leads the report to conclude that IPRs do not represent a barrier to the
development and transfer of green technology in the least developed countries. However,
one could argue equally well that the absence of these patents means that firms do not view
22

The technologies are wind, solar energy, fuel cell, geothermal, ocean, biomass and waste.

22

the countries as profitable markets for green technology innovations. One possible
explanation for the absence of IPRs in these countries is their reliance on low-tech
innovations. If these low-tech innovations correspond to the environmental challenges in
these countries, this suggests that the low patent counts found for green technologies are
not the result of market failure and that there is no specific role for IPRs in this context.23
Lanjouw and Mody (1995) look at the distribution of climate change-related patents for
seventeen countries, including OECD members and a heterogeneous set of low- and
middle-income countries.24 They find a large concentration of climate change-related
patents among Japan, U.S., and Germany.25 Given the time period analyzed, 1971-1988,
China still lags far behind, although the number of environmental patents granted in Brazil
is already noticeable. Dechezleprêtre et al. (2009) extend the work by Lanjouw and Mody
and use a more a comprehensive database (PATSTAT) to investigate in more detail the
geographical distribution of inventions in thirteen climate change-related technologies
between 1978 and 2005.26 The authors use patent families as a measure for domestic
inventions and patents of the same family as a measure of technology transfer where the
country of residence of the inventors of the first patent application is regarded as the
originating country of the technology.
Similarly to Lanjouw and Mody, Dechezleprêtre et al. (2009) use the PATSTAT data and
find that the overwhelming share of inventors of granted patents between 1978 and 2003
reside in Japan, the U.S., and Germany, and account together for nearly sixty percent of all
patents in the chosen technological fields. China is the only developing country within the
top ten countries, accounting for a share of eight percent of patents. However, it is worth
noting that inventors in the top three countries account for eighty-two per cent of USPTO
patents overall during this period, while China accounts for less than one per cent, so that
in fact climate change-related patenting is probably less concentrated than patenting as a
whole.
How should these results be interpreted? The insights that can be gained from studies such
as Lanjouw and Mody (1995) and Dechezleprêtre et al. (2009) are limited because they can
only describe patenting patterns that are the outcome of the interaction of a range of factors
and do not shed light on the causal determinants of the observed patent counts and their
geographical distribution. However, they do suggest that technological change in this area
may be more widely dispersed than in other areas, probably reflecting the fact that it is a
relatively recent area of innovation in which some developing countries benefit from
23

Shafik (1994) provides cross-country evidence for a panel of 149 countries over the period 1960-1990
suggesting that countries tackle different environmental problems at different stages of their development.
Hence, Shafik suggests that less developed economies might be less interested in patented frontier
technologies than emerging economies.

24

The technological fields are industrial and vehicular air pollution, water pollution, hazardous and solid
waste disposal, incineration and recycling of waste, oil spill clean-up, and alternative energy.

25

As discussed further below, eighty-two per cent of all USPTO patents granted between 1971 and 1988
were held by inventors in these three countries, so this result is not surprising.

26

These are wind, solar, geothermal, marine energy, biomass, hydropower, waste-to-energy, methane
destruction, climate-friendly cement, thermal insulation in buildings, heating, electric and hybrid vehicles,
and energy efficient lighting.

23

geographical advantages. Another important issue regards the identification of patents
covering climate change-related technologies. There are substantial differences in the
definition of the relevant technology classes across the different studies discussed above.27
In part, differences are accounted by changes in the IPC system and relevant technologies
over time; yet, some arbitrariness remains making comparisons of results across the
different studies difficult.
Popp (2001) looks directly at the association between energy patents and energy
consumption for the U.S. between 1959 and 1991. He finds negative elasticities of energy
consumption with respect to energy patents in eight out of thirteen manufacturing sectors.
When combined with findings by Popp (2002) that show a positive elasticity of the share
of energy patents in total patents with respect to energy prices, these results suggest that an
increase in energy prices induces innovation measured as patent counts which are
negatively correlated with energy consumption. This research, therefore, suggests that
there is a positive correlation between energy prices, green patenting, and a fall in energy
consumption.
There are several conclusions that can be drawn from our discussion. First, while there is a
growing body of literature on the determinants of the development of green technologies
focusing on the range of available policy interventions, the existing literature specifically
addressing the link between IPRs and the development of climate change-related
technologies is surprisingly small, and it is even more so with regard to developing
countries. Second, the sparse existing evidence suggests above all that there is substantial
heterogeneity amongst developing countries. A small number of countries, above all
Brazil, China, India, and Mexico, are engaging in the development of green technologies
and gaining a noticeableshare in the worldwide technology market for certain technologies,
mostly in the area of renewable energies. Since these countries also have strengthened their
IP systems in the recent past, it may be tempting to conclude that there is a positive
relationship between IPRs and the development of climate change-related technologies.
This conclusion, however, is not warranted based on the available evidence, as this
relationship may be confounded with a whole range of other factors. Work from the U.S.,
however, suggests that there may exist a positive association between green technology
patents and reductions in energy consumption.
4.5

Climate Change-Related Technology Transfer

Similar to the development of green technologies discussed in the preceding section, the
diffusion of technologies that merely achieve improved carbon efficiency without
increasing energy efficiency will not occur without some form of regulation or subsidy
(Snyder et al., 2003). In contrast, technologies increasing energy efficiency may be
adopted and diffused without policy intervention as private benefits may exceed private
costs (Rose and Joskow, 1990). Yet diffusion may still be suboptimal from a social
perspective if the cost of adoption does not factor in social benefits. Diffusion may also not
occur in the presence of market failures and behavioral biases in decision-making
(Gillingham et al., 2009). Indeed, it has been observed that diffusion of green technologies
27

Technologies are identified by patents’ IPCs (International Patent Classification) which represent a patent
and utility model specific technology-oriented classification system.

24

is lower than a comparison of private costs and benefits would suggest. There are several
explanations for the so called “energy efficiency paradox” (Jaffe and Stavins, 1994). These
are high discount rates used by consumers, large up-front fixed costs, credit constraints,
agency problems and uncertainty about future price developments.
While there exist a number of studies on international technology transfer from developed
to developing countries, “compared to the more general literature on international
technology transfer, applications pertaining to the environment are scarce” (Popp et al.,
2009, 50), and even scarcer when it comes to developing countries.
Lanjouw and Mody (1995) find in their analysis of climate change-related patents for
seventeen OECD and developing countries substantial evidence that technology transfer
occurs from developed to developing countries, but not in the other direction, since very
few patents in OECD countries are granted to developing countries. At the same time,
Lanjouw and Mody find that a non-negligible share of patents in developing countries are
granted to domestic inventors. Interpreting the evidence, Lanjouw and Mody suggest that
developing countries engage mostly in adaptation of technologies transferred from OECD
countries. This interpretation is confirmed by assessing the importance of patents granted
to OECD inventors in developing countries. Using citation data and family size as
measures of a patent’s importance, Lanjouw and Mody find that patents granted to OECD
inventors in developing countries are of a broad nature and most likely not tailored to local
needs. In their similar, albeit more recent analysis of global patenting in climate changerelated technology fields, Dechezleprêtre et al. (2009) show that most technology transfer
in green technologies occurs within OECD countries. Among non-OECD countries, only
China registered a noteworthy share of patent filings by OECD applicants. These results
should be interpreted with caution as Lanjouw and Mody (1996, 561) note that the “extent
of foreign patenting is a crude measure of technology transfer.”
Barton (2007) chooses instead a case study-based approach looking specifically at three
specific sectors (photo-voltaic, bio-mass, and wind energy) in Brazil, China, and India. He
finds IPRs to have little impact on technology transfer in these sectors. Barton suggests
that competition among technology suppliers within the three technological fields analyzed
act as an effective constraint to firms’ attempts to exploit their patent rights. At the same
time, the prevailing oligopolistic market structure poses a risk for collusion and thus a
barrier to entry for new small firms, which, according to Barton (2007), represents a more
important threat to technology development than IPRs. However, Barton notes that in the
area of wind energy, there exists some evidence for firms using their patents as a strategic
competitive tool and there is also some risk that new broad patents might hinder future
innovation.
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its Kyoto
Protocol also introduced market-based interventions designed to promote technology
transfer between developing and developed countries (so called Annex 1 countries).28,29

28

Annex 1 countries are developed countries and countries in transition, including the members of the
European Union, Iceland, Norway, Switzerland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, the U.S., Turkey,
Belarus, Ukraine, and the Russian Federation. Annex 2 countries are the developed country subset of this
grouping.

25

The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) allows polluters in developed countries to
receive Certified Emission Reduction (CER) credit for undertaking projects in developing
countries that reduce emissions and is regarded as “one of the most innovative tools of the
Kyoto Protocol” (Dechezleprêtre et al., 2008, 1273). Firms in developed countries have
incentives to engage in the CDM, as it is usually cheaper to achieve required emission
reductions in developing countries. However, the incentives provided by CDM go beyond
the cheaper fulfillment of emission reductions as it allows firms to engage in new markets.
For example, Costa et al. (2008) provide case study evidence for the Dutch waste
management industry showing that firms not subject to emission limits also engage in
CDM projects. While allowing developed countries to achieve emission targets at reduced
cost, the CDM is designed to lead not only to embodied, but also to disembodied
technology transfer to developing countries. The CDM scheme, therefore, offers an
opportunity to analyze the extent of existing technology transfer between developed and
developing countries.
Dechezleprêtre et al. (2008) uses a dataset of 644 CDM projects to investigate the extent of
technology transfer occurring through the CDM scheme. The authors find that only fortythree percent of all projects include some form of technology transfer component, although
these projects account for eighty-four percent of total expected annual CO2 emission
reductions by all projects. Thirty-four percent of projects include disembodied technology
transfer. They also show that the share of projects including technology transfer varies
substantially across technology classes. With regard to the geographical distribution of the
CDM projects, Dechezleprêtre et al. find a strong concentration (seventy-three percent) in
Brazil, China, India and Mexico. Nevertheless, there is also substantial heterogeneity
within this group, as fifty-nine percent of Chinese projects involve technology transfer but
only twelve percent of Indian projects. Unfortunately, Dechezleprêtre et al. (2008) do not
relate their data on CDM projects to information on IPRs, except via a technological
capability variable provided by Archibugi and Coco (2004) that incorporates previous
patenting in the country. This measure yields mixed results across sectors; it is positively
correlated with technology transfer in the energy and chemical industries and negatively so
in the agricultural sector.
In an analysis of similar data, Doranova et al. (2009) show evidence for a negative
correlation between USPTO patenting in climate change-related technologies by a CDM
project host country and the probability that the CDM project relies on local technologies
instead of transferring foreign technology. Taken at face value, this suggests that countries
with patents in climate change-related technologies are more likely to benefit from foreign
technology transfer through CDM projects possibly because they are at a more advanced
stage of development. A conclusion that can be drawn from the analysis of CDM projects
is that there exists considerable heterogeneity among developing countries in attracting
CDM projects. However, the analysis is limited in terms of its insights with regard to the
role of IPRs in technology transferred in CDM projects.

29

Another mechanism instituted by the Kyoto Protocol promoting technology transfer is the Joint
implementation (JI) scheme. However, JI is limited to Annex 1 countries and therefore concerns mostly
technology transfer to Eastern European economies from Annex 2 countries (Youngman et al., 2007).

26

There are also private initiatives that are not directly induced by regulation that promote
transfer of green technologies. An example of open access to climate change-related IPRs
is the Eco-Patent Commons initiative coordinated by the business association World
Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD).30 A number of large
multinational companies have pledged to grant patents in climate change-related
technological fields that can be used without a license.31 A quantitative analysis of the
effect of putting these patent rights in the public domain on technology development and
transfer could shed light on the importance of IPRs for technology transfer in the context
of climate change. Of course, a cynic could interpret these patent donations as an
indication that the companies do not perceive any profit opportunities from using these
patents that are large compared to the public relations benefit from making them available.
Another promising avenue for green technology transfer is the joint projects between
private companies, such as the DESERTEC project officially launched in July 2009.32 The
project envisions the large-scale production of energy through solar thermal power plants
and windmills in the deserts of North Africa and the Middle East to supply these regions as
well as the EU with renewable energy through a high-voltage direct-current grid
connecting these three regions. The project is carried out by a consortium of European and
Algerian companies, although it is expected to soon also include Moroccan, Tunisian, and
Egyptian firms. An investigation of the role played by patented technologies in the project
could deliver additional insights on their effect on international cooperation among firms.
The review of the existing literature on technology transfer in the context of climate
change-related technologies provides little conclusive evidence. Studies looking at
patenting by foreign companies as a measure of technology transfer suggest that most
technology exchange is occurring between OECD countries. Case-study based evidence
attributes no significant role to IPRs in transferring technology. The available evidence for
the role of patents in promoting technology transfer provides tentative evidence at best for
patents fostering technology transfer. Yet, this result is inline with the evidence found in
the general literature on the link between IPRs and technology transfer discussed in
Section 2.

5.

Conclusion

The objective of this paper was to review the existing evidence on the link between IPRs
and the development and transfer of climate change-related technology. For this purpose,
we also reviewed the established literature on the broader nexus between IPRs and
development and transfer of technology.

30

http://www.wbcsd.org/web/epc.

31

As of February 2010, a selection of patents assigned to Bosch, DuPont, Fuji-Xerox, IBM, Nokia, Pitney
Bowes, Ricoh, Sony, Taisei, The Dow Chemical Company, and Xerox are available under Eco-Patents
Commons.
32

http://www.desertec.org.

27

The general overview suggests the following conclusions:






Stronger patent enforcement encourages patenting in general, although it is not
clear that the increase in patenting reflects increased underlying innovation or the
increased use of patents as a strategic tool. IPR protection may also redirect
research to applied and patentable research with potential negative effects for the
generation of fundamental drastic innovation.
Stronger patents encourage technology transfer in the form of imports, FDI, and
licensing to developing countries.
Stronger patents have little effect on technology transfer to the lowest income
countries.
It is difficult to find clear evidence that stronger patents positively impact
innovation except in chemical-related sectors including pharmaceuticals. Many
other factors matter, so the experiments are often not clear. We do not observe
enough variation in patent systems, and there is little evidence on how much time
firms need to respond to changes in IPR regimes. It is also rare to have an
independent measure of innovation (other than patents) that allows to disentangle
changes in innovation and patenting, so ingenuity is required.

Regarding the link between the development of green technologies and IPRs, we draw the
following conclusions:






Climate change-related technologies comprise a vast range of fundamentally
different technologies addressing distinct climate change-related problems.
Patenting propensities and patent effectiveness differ substantially across different
technological fields. This makes it highly unlikely that a single, universal
mechanism characterizes the nexus between IPRs and the generation and diffusion
of green technologies within countries. Also, since different technologies are
appropriate for different countries depending on their location, industrial structure,
and stage of development, it is highly unlikely that a single, universal mechanism
characterizes the nexus between IPRs and the generation and diffusion of green
technologies across countries.
IPRs can address the gap between private and social returns to innovation that
results from the public good characteristics of knowledge. However, IPRs are not
designed to remediate environmental externalities. As a result, patent protection
offers only a limited instrument for mitigating environmental externalities.
Therefore, it may be more conducive to frame the discussion of IPRs and green
technology within a setting defined by policy interventions specifically designed to
address environmental externalities.
There are a number of other issues apart from IPRs that are of first-order
importance in setting incentives for the development and transfer of technologies,
most notably large uncertainty regarding the innovative process of new
technologies (Johnson and Lybecker, 2009b). Developing countries themselves
may also generate powerful distortions inhibiting the production and transfer of
green technologies. A report by Copenhagen Economics (2009) suggests that
subsidies for the consumption of fossil fuels in some developing countries, such as
Venezuela, Iran and Indonesia, may represent a significant barrier to the
28







development and transfer of green technologies in these countries. Barton (2007)
suggests that import tariffs on photo-voltaic and wind technology in place in India
and China may also act as a barrier to technology development and transfer. In
contrast, import tariffs and subsidies for biofuels in place in industrialized
countries, above all the E.U. and the U.S., hamper the development of this industry
in developing countries, such as Brazil (World Bank, 2010). Similarly, in January
2009, the U.S. customs agency decided that imports of solar panels to the U.S.
should be treated as imports of electric generators and thus subject to a duty of 2.5
percent. Such import barriers on green technologies represent a complex issue
because there must be policy interventions in place in developed countries
dedicated to market creation (Taylor, 2008) such as subsidies, to promote demand
for green technologies produced in developing countries. From a political economy
perspective, it is unclear how far developed economies are willing to subsidize
demand for green technology from abroad. This problem has already emerged in
the case of feed-in price regulation in Germany, which caused a large increase in
imported solar panels from China.
Existing studies using patent counts to describe the geographical distribution of
inventors of green technologies and their international transfer are by construction
limited in terms of insights they can deliver. While useful in improving our
understanding of the patenting distribution in green technologies across sectors,
countries and time, these studies cannot deliver an answer to the question of
whether IPRs help or hinder the development and transfer of green technologies.
Furthermore, to-date there exists no consensus with regard to the definition of
relevant technology classes as identified by patents’ IPCs. However, any
interpretation of results hinges crucially on this definition.
The limited existing evidence suggests that there are two groups of developing
countries. In the first group are emerging economies, such as Brazil, China, India,
and Mexico, and in the second group a larger number of less-developed countries.
Similar to the conclusion drawn from the general literature on technology
development and transfer, the evidence on green technologies suggests that a
strengthening of IPRs for the group of emerging economies will most likely have a
positive impact on the domestic development of technology and its transfer from
developed economies. The available evidence does not allow drawing a similar
conclusion in the case of less developed countries.
On the whole, the existing evidence on the role of IPRs in promoting the
development and diffusion of climate change-related technologies is surprisingly
sparse and does not provide sufficient insight to reach any substantial conclusion.
This calls for additional efforts in investigating the relationship between IPRs and
green technologies specifically in developing countries.

29

6.

List of References

Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, L. Bursztyn, and D. Hemous (2009). The Environment and Directed
Technical Change. NBER Working Paper No. 15451.
Agarwal, B. (1983). Diffusion of Rural Innovations: Some Analytical Issues and the Case of
Wood-burning Stoves. World Development, 11 (4), 359-76.
Allen, R. C. (1983). Collective Invention. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 4 (1),
1-24.
Allen, R. C. (2006). The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective: How Commerce
Created The Industrial Revolution and Modern Economic Growth. mimeo Oxford
University Department of Economics.
Allred, B. and W. Park (2007). Patent rights and innovative activity: evidence from national and
firm-level data. Journal of International Business Studies, 38, 878-900.
Angeles, L. (2005), Should Developing Countries Strengthen their Intellectual Property Rights? BE
Journal
of
Macroeconomics
5
(1),
article
23.
Available
at
http://www.bepress.com/bejm/topics/vol5/iss1/art23/
Archibugi, D., and A. Coco (2004). A new indicator of technological capabilities for developed and
developing countries. World Development, 32 (4), 629–654.
Arora, A., Ceccagnoli, M. and Cohen, W. (2003). R&D and the patent premium. Cambridge, MA:
NBER Working Paper No. 9431.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A. and Gambardella, A. (2001). Markets for Technology: The Economics of
Innovation and Corporate Strategy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Arora, A., and R. P. Merges (2004). Specialized Supply Firms, Property Rights, and Firm
Boundaries. Industrial and Corporate Change 13, 451-475.
Arora, A., and M. Ceccagnoli (2006). Patent Protection, Complementary Assets, and Firms’
Incentives for Technology Licensing. Management Science, 52 (2), 293-308.
Arora, A. and A. Gambardella (2010). Implications for Energy Innovation from the chemical
industry. NBER Working Papers 15676, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Awokuse, T.O. and H. Yin (2010). More Bilateral Trade? Evidence from China’s Imports. World
Development, in press.
Barnes, D. F., K. Openshaw, K.R. Smith and R. van der Plas (1993). The Design and Diffusion of
Improved Cooking Stoves. World Bank Research Observer, 8 (2), 119-141
Barton, J. H. (2007). Intellectual Property and Access to Clean Energy Technologies in Developing
Countries. ICTSD Issue Paper No. 2.
Branstetter, L. G. (2004). Do Stronger Patents Induce More Local Innovation? Journal of
International Economic Law 7(2), pp. 359-70.
Branstetter, L. G., R. Fisman, and C. F. Foley (2006). Do Stronger Intellectual Property Rights
Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-Level
Panel Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1), 321-349.
Branstetter, L. G., and Y. Nakamura (2003). Is Japan's Innovative Capacity in Decline? In
Blomström, M. (ed.), Structural impediments to growth in Japan. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press. Also National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No.
9438.

30

Chen, Y. (2008). Why Do Multinational Corporations Locate Their Advanced R&D Centres in
Beijing? Journal of Development Studies, 44 (5), 622-644.
Chen, Y., and T. Puttitanum (2005). Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation in Developing
Countries. Journal of Development Economics, 78 (2), 474-493.
Chin, J., and G. Grossman (1990). Intellectual property rights and north–south trade. In: Jones, R.,
and A. Krueger (Eds.), The Political Economy of International Trade. Basil Blackwell,
Cambridge.
Cohen, W. M., Goto, A., Nagata, A., Nelson, R. R. and Walsh, J. P. (2002). R&D spillovers,
patents and the incentives to innovate in Japan and the United States. Research Policy 31,
1349–67.
Copenhagen Economics A/S and the IPR Company A/S (2009). Are IPRs a Barrier to the Transfer
of Climate Change Technology?. Report commissioned by the European Commission (DG
Trade).
Costa, I., A. Doranova and G.-J. Eenhoorn (2008). Beyond the emission market: Kyoto and the
international expansion of waste management firms. UNU-Merit Working Paper Series
#2008-020.
David, P. A. and B. H. Hall (2000). Heart of Darkness: Public-Private Interactions Inside the R&D
Black Box. Research Policy 29, 1165-1183.
Dean, J. M., M. Lovely, and H. Wang (2009). Are foreign investors attracted to weak
environmental regulations? Evaluating the evidence from China. Journal of Development
Economics, 90, 1-13.
Deardorff, A.V. (1992). Welfare Effects of Global Patent Protection. Economica, 59 (233), 35-51.
Dechezleprêtre, A., M. Glachant, and Y. Ménière (2008). The Clean Development Mechanism and
the international diffusion of technologies: An empirical study. Energy Policy, 36(4),
1273–1283.
Dechezleprêtre, A., M. Glachant, and, I. Hascic, N. Johnstone and Y. Ménière (2009). Invention
and Transfer of Climate Change Mitigation Technologies on a Global Scale: A Study
Drawing on Patent Data. Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei Nota di Lavoror No. 82.2009.
Derclaye, E. (2008). Intellectual Property Rights and Global Warming. Marquette Intellectual
Property Law Review, 12:2, 264-297.
Derclaye, E. (2009). Patent law's role in the protection of the environment - re-assessing patent law
and its justifications in the 21st century. International Review of Intellectual Property and
Competition Law, 4.
Doranova, A., I. Costa and G.-J. Eenhoorn (2009). Knowledge Base Determinants of Technology
Sourcing in the Clean Development Mechanism Projects. UNU-Merit Working Paper
Series #2009-015.
Fisher-Vanden, K., G. H. Jefferson, H. Liu, and Q. Tao (2004). What is driving China's decline in
energy intensity?. Resource and Energy Economics, 26(1), 77-97.
Foray, D., and L. Hilaire-Perez (2001). The Economics of Open Technology: Collective
Organization and Individual Claims in the "Fabrique Lyonnaise" During the Old Regime.
In C. Antonelli, D. Foray, B. H. Hall and W. E. Steinmueller (eds.), Essays in Honor of
Paul A. David. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

31

Fosfuri, A. (2004). Determinants of international activity: evidence from the chemical processing
industry. Research Policy 33 (10), 1599-1614.
Gans, J. S. (2010). “Innovation and Climate Change Policy.” Melbourne, Australia: Melbourne
Business School. Available at http://www.mbs.edu/jgans
Gerlagh, R. (2008). A Climate-Change Policy Induced Shift from Innovations in Carbon-Energy
Production to Carbon-Energy Savings. Energy Economics, 30, 425-448.
Gillingham, K., R.G. Newell, and K. Palmer (2009). Energy Efficiency Economics and Policy.
Annual Review of Resource Economics, 1, 597-620.
Ginarte, J. C., and W. G. Park (1997). Determinants of patent rights: A cross-national study.
Research Policy 26 (3), 283-301.
Goolsbee, A. (1998). Does government R&D policy mainly benefit scientists and engineers?
American Economic Review 88(2), 298-302.
Graham, S. J. H., R. P. Merges, P. Samuelson, and T. Sichelman (2010). High Technology
Entrepreneurs and the Patent System: Results of the 2008 Berkeley Patent Survey.
Berkeley Technology Law Journal 24(4), 1255-1328.
Greenhalgh, C., and M. Rogers (2010). Innovation, Intellectual Property, and Economic Growth.
Princeton University Press.
Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1991). Innovation and growth in the global economy. MIT
Press.
Grossman, G. M., and E. L.-C. Lai (2004). International Protection of Intellectual Property.
American Economic Review 94 (5), 1635-1653.
Hall, B. H. and Ziedonis, R. H. (2001). The patent paradox revisited: an empirical study of
patenting in the U.S. semiconductor industry, 1979–1995. RAND Journal of Economics 32,
101–28.
Hanna, R. (2010). US Environmental Regulation and FDI: Evidence from a Panel of US-Based
Multinational Firms. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 158-189.
Heal, G. and B. Kriström (2002). Uncertainty and Climate Change. Environmental and Resource
Economics, 22, 3-39.
Heald, P. J. (2003). Misreading a canonical work: An analysis of Mansfield’s 1994 study. Journal
of Intellectual Property Law 10, 309-318.
Hicks, J.R. (1932). The Theory of Wages. MacMillan, London.
Hope, C. W. (2006). The Marginal Impact of CO2 from PAGE2002: An Integrated Assessment
Model Incorporating the IPCC’s Five Reasons for Concern. Integrated Assessment
Journal, 6(1), 19–56.
ICTSD and UNCTAD. (2003). Intellectual Property Rights, Implications for Development Policy.
Discussion Paper, Geneva, Switzerland: ICTSD and UNCTAD.
IPCC (2007). Climate Change 2007 – Synthesis Report.
Ito, B. and R. Wakasugi (2007). What factors determine the mode of overseas R&D by
multinationals? Empirical evidence. Research Policy, 36, 1275-1287.
Jaffe, A. B. and R. N. Stavins (1994). The energy paradox and the diffusion of conservation
technology. Resource and Energy Economics, 16(2), 91-122

32

Jaffe, A. B. and K. Palmer (1997). Environmental Regulation an Innovation: A panel data study.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 79(4), 610-619.
Jaffe, A. B., R. G. Newell, and R. N.Stavins (2005). A tale of two market failures: Technology and
environmental policy. Ecological Economics, Vol. 54(2-3), 164-174.
Johnson, D. K. and K. M. Lybecker (2009a). Innovating for an Uncertain Market: A Literature
Review of the Constraints on Environmental Innovation. Colorado College Working Paper
No. 2009-06.
Johnson, D. K. and K. M. Lybecker (2009b). Challenges to Technology Transferr: A Literature
Review of the Constraints on Environmental technology Dissemination. Colorado College
Working Paper No. 2009-07.
Kanefsky, J. and J. Robey (1980). Steam Engines in 18th-Century Britain: A Quantitative
Assessment. Technology and Culture 21 (2), 161-186
Kanwar, S. and R. Evenson (2003). Does Intellectual Property Protection Spur Technical Change?
Oxford Economic Papers 55, 235-264.
Kanwar, S. and R. Evenson (2009). On the Strength of Intellectual Property Protection that Nations
Provide. Journal of Development Economics, 90, 50-56.
Keller, W. (2010). International Trade, Foreign Direct Investment, and Technology Spillovers. In
Hall, B. H. and N. Rosenberg. (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation.
Amsterdam: Elsevier-NorthHolland, pp. 793-829.
Keller, W. (2004). International Technology Diffusion. Journal of Economic Literature. Vol. XLII,
752-782.
Kim, L. (2002). Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property Rights: The Korean Experience.
BRIDGES, ICTSD 6 (8), November-December.
Kumar, N. (2003). Intellectual Property Rights, Technology and Economic Development:
Experiences of Asian Countries. Economic and Political Weekly 38 (3), 209-226.
La Croix, S. J. and A. Kawaura (1996). Product Patent Reform And Its Impact On Korea's
Pharmaceutical Industry. International Economic Journal 10(1), 109-124,
Lanjouw, J.O. and A. Mody (1996). Innovation and the international diffusion of environmentally
responsive technology. Research Policy, 25(4), 549-571.
Lee, J.-Y., and E. Mansfield (1996). Intellectual Property Protection and U.S. Foreign Direct
Investment. Review of Economics and Statistics 78 (2), 181-186.
Léger, A. (2005). Intellectual Property Rights in Mexico: Do They Play a Role? World
Development 33 (1), 1865-1879.
Lei, Z., R. Juneja, and B. D. Wright (2009). Patents versus patenting: implications of intellectual
property protection for biological research. Nature Biotechnology 27 (1), 36-40.
Lerner, J. (2002). Patent Protection and Innovation over 150 Years. American Economic Review 92
(2), 221-225.
Mansfield, E. (1986). Patents and Innovation: An Empirical Study. Management Science 32 (2),
173-181.
Mansfield, E. (1994). Intellectual property protection, foreign direct investment, and technology
transfer. Washington, DC: International Finance Corporation Discussion Paper No. 19.

33

Mansfield, E. (2000). Intellectual property protection, direct investment and technology transfer:
Germany, Japan and the USA. International Journal of Technology Management 19 (1/2),
3-21.
Maskus, K. E. and M. Penubarti (1995). How trade-related are intellectual property rights? Journal
of International Economics, 39, 227-48.
Maskus, K. E. (2004). Encouraging International Technology Transfer, Geneva, Switzerland:
ICTSD and UNCTAD Issue Paper No. 7.
McCalman, P. (2001). Reaping what you sow: an empirical analysis of international patent
harmonization. Journal of International Economics 55 (1), 161-186.
Moser, P. (2005). How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from Nineteenth-Century
World’s Fairs. American Economic Review 95 (4), 1214-1236.
Mowery, D. C., R. R. Nelson, and B. Martin (2009). Technology policy and global warming.
London, UK: NESTA Provocation 10.
Murmann, J. P. (2003). Knowledge and Competitive Advantage: The Coevolution of Firms,
Technology, and National Institutions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Newell, R. G., A.B. Jaffe, and R. N. Stavins (2006). The effects of economic and policy incentives
on carbon mitigation technologies. Energy Economics, Vol. 28(5-6), 563-578.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2009). Economic Issues in a Designing a Global Agreement on Global Warming.
Keynote Address at the Climate Change Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark, March 10-12,
available at http://nordhaus.econ.yale.edu/documents/Copenhagen_052909.pdf
Nordhaus, W. D. (1969). Invention, Growth, and Welfare: A Theoretical Treatment of
Technological Change. MIT Press.
Nuvolari, A. (2001). Collective Invention during the British Industrial Revolution: The Case of the
Cornish Pumping Engine. DRUID, Copenhagen Business School Working Paper 01-05.
Park, W. G., and J. C. Ginarte (1997). Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Growth.
Contemporary Economic Policy XV (July), 51-61.
Park, W. G. and D. C. Lippoldt (2008). Technology Transfer and the Economic Implications of the
Strengthening of Intellectual Property Rights in Developing Countries. OECD Trade
Policy Working Papers No. 62.
Penrose, E. (1973). International Patenting and the Less-Developed Countries. Economic Journal,
83 (331), 768-786.
Popp, D. and R.G. Newell (2009). Where Does Energy R&D Come From? Examining Crowding
Out from Environmentally-Friendly R&D. NBER Working Paper No. 15423.
Popp, D., R.G. Newell, and A. Jaffe (2010). Energy, the Environment, and Technological Change.
In Hall, B. H. and N. Rosenberg. (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation.
Amsterdam: Elsevier-NorthHolland, pp. 873-972. Also National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper Series No. 14832.
Popp, D. (2001).The effect of new technology on energy consumption. Resource and Energy
Economics, 23, 215-239.
Popp, D. (2002). Induced innovation and energy prices. American Economic Review, Vol. 92(1),
160-180.

34

Popp, D. (2010). Innovation and Climate Policy. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper Series No. 15673.
Qian, Y. (2007). Do Additional National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation in a Global
Patenting Environment. Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (3), 436-453.
Rehdanz, K. and D. J. Maddison (2005). Climate and Happiness. Ecological Economics, 52(1),
111–25.
Rimmer, M. (2009). The road to Copenhagen: intellectual property and climate change. Journal of
Intellectual Property Law & Practice, Advance Access.
Rose N. L. and P. L. Joskow (1990). The Diffusion of New Technologies: Evidence from the
Electric Utility Industry. RAND Journal of Economics, 21(3), 354-373.
Ryan, M. (2010). Patent Incentives, Technology Markets, and Public-Private Bio-Medical
Innovation Networks in Brazil. World Development, in press.
Sakakibara, M., and L. G. Branstetter (2001). Do Stronger Patents Induce More Innovation?
Evidence from the 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms. Rand Journal of Economics 32 (1),
77-100.
Scotchmer, S. (2004). The Political Economy of Intellectual Property Treaties. Journal of Law,
Economics, and Organization 20 (2), 415-437.
Scotchmer, S. (2009).Cap-and Trade, Emissions Taxes, and Innovation. Mimeo School of Law,
University of California, Berkeley.
Shafik, N. (1994). Economic Development and Environmental Quality: An Econometric Analysis.
Oxford Economic Papers, Special Issue on Environmental Economics, 46, 757-773.
Smith, P. (1999). Are weak patent rights a barrier to U.S. exports? Journal of International
Economics, 48, 151-177.
Smith, P. (2001). How do foreign patent rights affect U.S. exports, affiliate sales, and licenses?
Journal of International Economics, 55, 411-439.
Smithers, J. and A. Blay-Palmer (2001). Technology Innovation as a Strategy for Climate
Adaptation in Agriculture. Applied Geography, 21, 175-197.
Snyder L. D., N. H. Miller and R. N. Stavins (2003). The Effects of Environmental Regulation on
Technology Diffusion: The Case of Chlorine Manufacturing. American Economic Review,
93(2), 431-435.
Stavins, R. N. (2008). Environmental Economics. In Durlauf S.N. and L. E. Blume (eds.) The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Second Edition.
Stern, N. (2006). The Economics of Climate Change. HM Treasury, London.
Taylor, M. (2008). Beyond technology-push and demand-pull: Lessons from California’s solar
policy. Energy Economics, 30, 2829-2854.
Tol, R. S. (2008). Climate, Development, and Malaria: An Application of FUND. Climatic
Change, 88, 21-34.
Tol, R. S. (2009). The Economic Effects of Climate Change. Journal of Economic Perspectives
23(2), 29-51.
Turner, J. L., and P. Heald (2004). Intellectual Property and Foreign Direct Investment: Improving
upon Mansfield's 1991 Survey, Preliminary Report. Atlanta, GA: University of Georgia.
Available at http://media.terry.uga.edu/myila/pdf/RRTurner.pdf

35

UNFCCC (2010). Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under
the Convention on its eighth session, held in Copenhagen from 7 to 15 December 2009.
FCCC/AWGLCA/2009/17.
WHO (2009). Protecting Health from Climate Change: Global Research Priorities. Geneva.
Wing, I.S. (2007). Explaining the declining energy intensity of the U.S. economy. Resource and
Energy Economics, 30, 21-49.
Winters, P., R. Murgai, E. Sadoulet, A. de Janvry, and G. Frisvold (1998). Economic and Welfare
Impacts of Climate Change on Developing Countries. Environmental and Resource
Economics, 12, 1-24.
World Bank (2010). World Development Report 2010: Development and Climate Change.
Washington D.C.
Wright, B., and T. Shih (2010). Agricultural Innovation. NBER Working Paper No. 15793.
Wright, B., and P. G. Pardey (2006). Changing intellectual property regimes: implications for
developing country agriculture. International Journal of Technology and Globalisation,
2(1/2), 93-114.
Yang, L. and K. E. Maskus (2009). Intellectual property rights, technology transfer and exports in
developing countries. Journal of Development Economics, 90, 231-236.
Yohe, G. and M. Schlesinger (2002). The Economic Geography of the Impacts of Climate Change.
Journal of Economic Geography, 2, 311-341.
Youngman, R., J. Schmidt, J. Lee, and H. de Coninck (2007). Evaluating technology transfer in the
Clean Development Mechanism and Joint Implementation. Climate Policy, 7, 488-499.
Zhao, M. (2006). Conducting R&D in Countries with Weak Intellectual Property Rights Protection.
Management Science, 52 (8), 1185-1199.

36

