                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  HOW MUCH DOES SIZE ERODE MUTUAL FUND PERFORMANCE? A REGRESSION
                      DISCONTINUITY APPROACH

                                           Jonathan Reuter
                                            Eric Zitzewitz

                                        Working Paper 16329
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16329


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2010




We thank Vikas Agarwal (discussant), Jonathan Berk, Joe Chen, Wayne Ferson, Edie Hotchkiss, Jeffrey
Pontiff, Laura Starks, Phil Strahan, two anonymous referees, and participants at Babson College, Boston
College, Tilburg, the 2009 Financial Research Association annual meeting, and the 2012 Financial
Intermediation Research Society conference for helpful comments. Any remaining errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jonathan Reuter and Eric Zitzewitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
How Much Does Size Erode Mutual Fund Performance? A Regression Discontinuity Approach
Jonathan Reuter and Eric Zitzewitz
NBER Working Paper No. 16329
September 2010, Revised July 2015
JEL No. G14,G23,G24

                                           ABSTRACT

The level of diseconomies of scale in asset management has important implications for tests of manager
skill and the expected level of performance persistence. To identify the causal impact of fund size
on future returns, we exploit the fact that small differences in returns can cause discrete changes in
Morningstar ratings that, in turn, generate discrete differences in size. Despite robust evidence that
Morningstar ratings increase fund size, our regression discontinuity estimates yield little evidence
that fund size erodes returns. Consequently, any downward bias in standard estimates of performance
persistence due to diseconomies of scale is likely to be small.


Jonathan Reuter
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
224B Fulton Hall
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
reuterj@bc.edu

Eric Zitzewitz
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
eric.zitzewitz@dartmouth.edu
               The literature testing for the skilled mutual fund managers is one of the largest in finance.

Studies of manager skill are easy to motivate. Actively managed mutual funds hold trillions of

dollars in assets and generate billions of dollars in management fees for fund families and their

managers. For example, while the market share of equity index funds continues to rise, 79.2% of

the assets invested in equity funds in the U.S. in 2014 were invested in actively managed funds.1

At the same time, the oldest branch of this literature continues to raise significant questions about

the ability of active fund managers to justify their fees.2 Low levels of performance persistence

among active funds combined with average risk-adjusted, after-fee returns consistently below

those available in index funds has lead some prominent researchers to puzzle over the continued

demand for active management (e.g., Gruber (1996) and French (2008)). The essence of their

argument is that investors would do well to stop chasing active funds with high past returns (e.g.,

Chevalier and Ellison (1997) and Sirri and Tufano (1998)), because high past returns are more

likely to reflect luck than skill. This argument begs the question of why the majority of mutual

fund assets remain actively managed.3

               Berk and Green (2004) provide an intriguing potential answer based on diseconomies of

scale. In their model, rational investors chase performance to the point that expected future re-

turns are equalized across funds. In equilibrium, more-skilled managers manage more assets

but—precisely because of the diseconomies of scale associated with managing more assets—

earn the same expected future return as their less-skilled peers. In other words, diseconomies of

scale can potentially rationalize both the high market share of active funds and low levels of per-

formance persistence. Whether diseconomies of scale play a first-order role in explaining the

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1
  See Figure 2.15 in Investment Company Institute’s 2015 Fact Book.
2
   See, for example, Jensen (1968), Malkiel (1995), Gruber (1996), Carhart (1997), French (2008), and Fama and
French (2010).
3
  A relatively new branch of the literature seeks to answer this question by focusing on measures other than risk-
adjusted, after-fee returns. See, for example, Glode (2011) and Berk and van Binsbergen (2012).
observed levels of performance persistence depends crucially on their magnitude.

               Our goal in this paper is to estimate the causal impact of fund size on fund performance,

and then revisit estimates of performance persistence. To motivate our empirical strategy, it is

helpful to view the existing evidence through the lens of Berk and Green’s (2004) model. In a

study that is both representative and widely cited, Chen, Hong, Huang, and Kubik (2004, hereaf-

ter CHHK) regress mutual fund returns on lagged fund size and other observable fund character-

istics. They find that a fund that is a log order of magnitude larger earns risk-adjusted returns that

are 2 to 3 basis points per month lower.4 If we were to interpret this difference as the causal ef-

fect of fund size on returns, we would conclude that diseconomies could not be masking a mean-

ingful amount of performance persistence. First, we know that a fund that outperforms its peers

by one percentage point this year will be 2-5 percentage points larger next year (one percentage

point from returns mechanically increasing assets, and the other 1-4 percentage points from the

flow-performance relation).5 Second, CHHK's estimate implies that a fund that is one percent-

age point larger will earn returns that are about 0.003 percentage points lower over the next 12

months. Combining these two estimates implies that a fund that outperforms its peers by one

percentage point this year will suffer a 0.6-1.5 basis point penalty next year. In other words, if

we interpret CHHK's estimate as an estimate of the causal effect of fund size on performance, the

effect described in Berk and Green will cause us to underestimate an annual AR(1) coefficient by

0.006-0.015. Given that we estimate the annual AR(1) coefficient to be approximately 0.1, the

estimated diseconomies of scale in CHHK are too small to meaningfully affect our views about

the level of return persistence.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
4
  Chen, Hong, Jiang, and Kubik (2013) and Massa, Reuter, and Zitzewitz (2010) estimate similar partial correlations
between fund size and fund returns, although neither paper is focused on the relation between fund size and returns.
5
  We take our range from the graphs of the inflow-performance relationship for the "young" (<2 years) and "old"
(>10 years) funds in Chevalier and Ellison (1997), but these slopes have been replicated in many other studies.


!                                                               2!
               However, if fund size is endogenously related to expected future returns, in equilibrium,

fund size will be uncorrelated with future returns, thereby frustrating standard approaches to es-

timating diseconomies of scale. Even if we allow for the possibility that fund sizes are out of

equilibrium, the estimates in CHHK (and other studies) will underestimate the actual disecono-

mies of scale if larger funds have more-skilled managers.6,7 In other words, unless the correla-

tion between fund size and manager skill is zero, standard OLS estimates of diseconomies of

scale and performance persistence will be biased downward.8 The interpretation of OLS regres-

sions of future returns on fund characteristics such as portfolio concentration (Kacperczyk, Si-

alm, and Zheng (2005)), return gap (Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008)), active share (Crem-

ers and Petajisto (2009)), and R2 (Amihud and Goyenko (2013)) are also likely to be complicat-

ed, at least when used to learn about the return production process.

               To identify diseconomies of scale in asset management, separately from the effects of

other factors that covary with size, we require a natural experiment—something that causes an

increase in fund size for reasons that are related to future returns only through diseconomies of

scale. We identify such an experiment using a regression discontinuity approach. Our insight is

that small changes in fund returns can have discontinuous impacts on fund flows through their

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
6
   When testing for diseconomies of scale, Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2012) assert that “if Berk and Green (2004) are
right, then we should find no predictability among big funds for which diseconomies of scale are more likely to be
important” (p. 34). This implicitly assumes that the correlation between manager skill and fund size is zero (or only
weakly positive), whereas the correlation is strongly positive within the Berk-Green model.
7
   Controlling for additional fund characteristics, as is common in studies comparing large and small funds, does not
change the fundamental prediction that the partial correlation between fund size and expected returns should be zero,
even in the presence of scale diseconomies. When observable fund characteristics impact expected returns, investors
should allocate dollars across funds such that expected returns are equal conditional on those characteristics.
"
  ! Edelen, Evans, and Kadlec (2007) and Yan (2008) provide evidence that trading costs are higher in larger funds,
likely depressing returns. If larger funds have more skilled managers, and skill mitigates trading costs, the partial
correlation should yield a conservative estimate of the causal effect of size on trading costs. Gutierrez, Maxwell,
and Xu (2009) find no evidence of a size-return correlation for bond funds, and suggest that differences in size-
return correlation between stock funds and bond funds reflects differences in economies of scale in trading costs for
stocks and bonds. Alternatively, size-skill relationship may stronger for bond funds, where skill may be more im-
portant or more readily inferred by investors from fund returns.
!


!                                                               3!
impact on the fund’s Morningstar rating. For example, as a fund’s within-category Morningstar

performance ranking increases from the 89th percentile to the 90th percentile, its Morningstar rat-

ing increases from four stars to five stars. Under the assumption that manager skill varies contin-

uously across each of the Morningstar rating thresholds, we can use high frequency data on

Morningstar performance rankings to identify the casual impact of Morningstar rating thresholds

on fund inflows. Then, because this source of fund inflows is uncorrelated with manager skill

(and other factors affecting future returns), we can use these inflows to identify the causal impact

of fund size on fund performance. In other words, we are using small deviations from the rational

behavior assumed in the Berk-Green model to measure the extent of diseconomies of scale.

               We have four main empirical findings, based on monthly data from Morningstar that co-

vers virtually every mutual fund in operation between December 1996 and August 2009. First, in

our first-stage regressions, we show that mutual funds just above the threshold for a Morningstar

rating receive incremental net flows over the next six months that are equal to approximately 2.5

percent of assets under management. Second, looking out over the next 6-24 months, we find

little evidence of diseconomies of scale. Our reduced-form estimates of the impact of incremen-

tal net flows on returns are largely positive during the first six months and largely negative dur-

ing the subsequent eighteen months, but none of the estimates are statistically different from ze-

ro. In other words, within the full sample of funds, the exogenous variation in fund size that we

exploit has little impact on fund returns.9

               Third, when we shift our focus to subsamples based on investment objectives (e.g., small-

cap equity funds or sector funds), we continue to find little evidence of diseconomies of scale.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
9
  Using an empirical strategy based on fund fixed effects, Pastor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2014) find statistically
significant evidence of decreasing returns to scale at the mutual fund industry level. While their fund-level esti-
mates are negative, they are not statistically significant. Industry-level scale diseconomies may help explain low
average risk-adjusted returns, but they would not affect performance persistence coefficients. This motivates our
interest in fund-level diseconomies.


!                                                               4!
For example, despite the fact that incremental inflows into sector funds reach 14.0 percentage

points by month 24, and despite the fact that sector funds should be an ideal category in which to

test for diseconomies of scale, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the diseconomies implied by

the ratio of our reduced form and first-stage regression coefficients (the Wald estimator) equal

those obtained via standard OLS regressions. The only subsamples for which we can reject the

hypothesis that the Wald estimate equals the OLS estimate are mid-cap equity funds and munici-

pal bond funds.10 Moreover, within both of those subsamples, our Wald estimates imply (small)

positive economies of scale.

               Finally, we adjust standard OLS estimates of performance persistence for potential dise-

conomies of scale. Because we find little evidence of diseconomies of scale, our median correct-

ed AR(1) estimate of 0.088 is virtually identical to our uncorrected estimate of 0.090. Moreover,

the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval for the corrected persistence coefficient is 0.14

in the full sample of funds, and even lower in some subsamples.11 Overall, the diseconomies of

scale that we estimated using our regression discontinuity approach are too small to rationalize

the low levels of performance persistence among actively managed funds.


I. Morningstar Ratings and Fund Characteristics

Our identification strategy relies on the discrete nature of Morningstar ratings. It also relies on

the fact that, because Morningstar ratings are based on past returns, we can identify funds near

rating thresholds. In this section, we describe how Morningstar ratings are determined. We then

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
10
   One might argue that when OLS and IV estimates are equal, there is no scientific contribution from having done
the IV. We disagree, particularly when there is a plausible alternative explanation for the OLS result that the IV
approach rules out. Two famous examples come from the literatures on smoking and lung cancer (e.g., Doll (1998))
and wages and education (e.g., Card (1999)). In both cases, initial correlative evidence was dismissed on the
grounds that there were very plausible confounding factors, and it was left to later work to establish a causal rela-
tionship.
11
   By way of comparison, our estimate of 0.14 is significantly lower than the 0.42 implied by the calibration exercise
in Berk and Green. Farnsworth (2013, footnote 2) critiques their calibration exercise on different grounds.


!                                                               5!
describe our sample.

A. Morningstar Ratings

Morningstar rates mutual fund share classes on a scale that ranges from one star (the lowest pos-

sible rating) to five stars (the highest possible rating). The rating assigned to each mutual fund

share class depends on its relative performance within its Morningstar-determined investment

category over the prior 3 years, 5 years, and 10 years, “after adjusting for risk and accounting for

all sales charges.”12 Morningstar does not rate mutual fund share classes that are less than three

years old.

               For mutual fund share classes between the age of three and five years, the Morningstar

rating depends entirely on its relative performance over the prior 36 months. “Within each Morn-

ingstar Category, the top 10% of funds receive five stars, the next 22.5% four stars, the middle

35% three stars, the next 22.5% two stars, and the bottom 10% receive one star.”13 Therefore,

small differences in past returns, such as going from the 10th percentile to the 11th percentile, or

from the 89th percentile to the 90th percentile, result in discrete changes in Morningstar ratings.

These discrete changes are evident in Figure 1, in which we plot Morningstar ratings for all share

classes that are less than 5 years old against Morningstar’s risk-adjusted, within category return

percentile. Figure 1 also provides graphical evidence that (residual) flows increase sharply




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
12
   Morningstar changed various detailed of its ratings process in June 2002. See Blume (1998) for a description of
the rating system used from 1996-2002 and http://quicktake.morningstar.com/DataDefs/FundRatingsAndRisk.html
(last accessed 6/30/2015) for Morningstar’s description of their current ratings process. The most significant change
was that the number of Morningstar Categories used for ratings increased from four on May 2002 (Domestic Equity,
International Equity, Taxable Bonds, and Municipal Bonds) to 48 on June 2002, eventually growing to 81 in August
2009. The new Morningstar Categories better reflect actual investment styles (e.g., distinguishing domestic equity
funds that focus on large-cap growth from those that focus on small-cap value). Morningstar also changed the meth-
od used to risk-adjusting returns, and made the relative importance of 5 and 10-year returns depend on whether a
fund had experienced style drift.
13
   See http://quicktake.morningstar.com/DataDefs/FundRatingsAndRisk.html (last accessed 6/30/2015).


!                                                               6!
around ratings thresholds.14 (We present more formal evidence in Section III.)

               For share classes between the age of 5 and 10, Morningstar determines separate ratings

based on the prior 36 months and the prior 60 months, and “averages” the underlying ratings to

calculate an overall integer rating. In Figure 2, we show how relative performance over the prior

36 and 60 months maps into a share classes' overall rating. The pattern reveals that Morningstar

calculates a fund's overall rating as a 60-40 average of the 5-year and 3-year integer ratings,

causing it to “round up” when the better performance is over the longer horizon.15 For example,

a share class with a 36-month return that puts it at the 89th percentile (four stars) and a 60-month

return that puts it at the 90th percentile (five stars), receives an overall rating of five stars. In con-

trast, a share class with a 36-month return that puts it at the 90th percentile (five stars) and a 60-

month return that puts it at the 89th percentile (four stars), receives an overall rating of four stars.

To the extent that we are willing to assume that the managers of these two funds are similarly

skilled (conditional on current assets under management) and that the five-star fund receives

higher residual flows, we can study the impact of these incremental flows on future returns.

               While the staircase boundaries between overall ratings may strike readers as an unusual

methodological choice by Morningstar, it is helpful from the perspective of our research, since

this approach increases the number of funds that are very close to a rating boundary. For share

classes that are more than 10 years old, Morningstar’s overall rating depends on the average of

the 3-year, 5-year, and 10-year ratings. For these share classes, thresholds between ratings are

conceptually similar to those in Figure 2. However, because these thresholds relate to three un-


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
14
   The residual flows in Figure 1 come from versions of the baseline flow regression in Section III that omit the
Morningstar within-category percentile ranking and discontinuity dummy variable.
15
   After June 2002, Morningstar began giving older history less weight when funds had experienced style drift. To
make Figure 2 more transparent, we exclude these funds from the picture. Depending on how much style drift was
experienced and when it was experienced, a fund's 3-year history can receive more than 50 percent of the weight,
causing the rounding to occur in the other direction.


!                                                               7!
derlying ratings, they must be plotted in three dimensions.

B. Sample Construction

To study the impact of mutual fund flows on mutual fund returns, we obtain data from Morn-

ingstar Principia CDs. Our sample consists of all open-end mutual funds that have at least one

share class rated by Morningstar. Because Morningstar does not rate share classes that are less

than three years old, mutual funds enter our sample when their oldest share class reaches three

years of age. The fact that we only study funds in the time period in which they appear on a

Morningstar CD limits the influence of incubation bias (Evans (2010)) on our results. While in-

cubation bias might help to explain why funds appearing on a Morningstar CD for the first time

have average Morningstar ratings about a quarter point above older funds, our analysis of future

inflows and performance uses only non-backfilled data. Consequently, our estimates of scale dis-

economies should be unaffected by incubation bias.

               Our data begin in December 1996 and end in August 2009.16 Because mutual fund share

classes can earn different Morningstar ratings and experience different inflows, the unit of obser-

vation in our initial analysis of inflows is the share class. As any scale diseconomies would occur

at the fund (portfolio) level, however, in most of our analysis we aggregate variables to the fund

level, weighting each share class in proportion to its assets under management in the prior

month. In practice, the exact approach we take to weighting share classes has little influence on

the results because the average fund gets 84 percent of its assets from its largest share class.

               Finally, because Morningstar within-category percentile rankings do not distinguish be-

tween actively and passively managed mutual funds, we include the share classes of index funds

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
16
  We have been unable to obtain data for 12 of the 36 months between January 1997 and December 1999. The
missing months are January 1997, February 1997, April 1997, May 1997, July 1997, August 1997, October 1997,
November 1997, January 1998, July 1998, January 1999, and November 1999. The fact that we have data for all
months that end a calendar quarter motivates our focus on time horizons divisible by three months.


!                                                               8!
in our sample when calculating within-category percentile rankings. However, we are careful to

exclude index funds from all inflow and return regressions.

C. Summary Statistics

In Table 1, we report fund-level summary statistics for the full sample of 491,863 fund-month

observations. We also use asset-weighted average Morningstar ratings to assign fund-level rat-

ings, and report summary statistics for each fund-level rating category. Looking across these cat-

egories, we see that funds with higher ratings tend to be larger and come from larger families.

Funds with higher ratings also tend to charge lower average fees (both in month t and month

t+12), tend to offer fewer share classes, and are less likely to charge a sales load. Of course, dif-

ferences in fees and sales loads follow, at least in part, from the fact that Morningstar ratings are

based on returns measured net of fees and loads. Although Guedj and Papastaikoudi (2003) find

that families can increase fund performance by allocating an additional manager to the fund, and

changes in the future allocation of managers to funds in response to crossing a ratings threshold

pose a potential challenge to our identification strategy, we find that the number of named fund

managers is effectively constant across the five ratings and highly persistent.17

               The most interesting differences between funds with higher and lower ratings involve fu-

ture flows and future returns. Consistent with investors responding to Morningstar ratings (or to

the return histories underlying them), we find that funds with higher ratings receive higher net

flows over the next 24 months. Relative to other funds in their Morningstar category, the typical

five-star funds grows by 23 percentage points over this period, while the typical one-star funds

shrinks by 18 percentage points. The results presented later imply that of this 41 percentage point

difference, about 9 percentage point represents a causal effect of the difference in Morningstar

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
17
 In Appendix Table A1, we test for, but do not detect, discontinuities with respect to current and future changes in
management structure.


!                                                               9!
ratings on flows, with the remainder being due to investors responding directly to observable

fund characteristics included in Morningstar’s ratings (e.g., past returns, risk, and loads), other

observable characteristics correlated with the ratings (e.g., low expenses), or unobservable char-

acteristics correlated with the ratings (e.g., marketing efforts).18

               Consistent with prior work on the predictive power of Morningstar ratings (e.g., Blake

and Morey (2009)), we find that one-star funds underperform other funds over the next 24

months, but find little difference in the future performance of other funds. The fact that 5-star

and 2-star funds perform approximately as well in the future despite 5-star funds experiencing

greater inflows does not necessarily imply the absence of scale diseconomies, however. In the

Berk-Green model, the 5-star funds attract more inflows because they have more skilled manag-

ers, and this skill allows the funds to match the 2-star funds’ returns despite managing more as-

sets. For a test for scale diseconomies to be valid, it needs to exploit a source of variation in in-

flows that is not caused by or correlated with manager skill. Fortunately, the discontinuities in

the Morningstar ranking function generate this type of variation.


    II. Overview of RD and our Identification Strategy

In order to measure the causal impact of fund size on fund performance, we must identify varia-

tion in fund size that is uncorrelated with manager skill. In markets with perfectly rational, in-

formed investors, this variation should be impossible to come by. We use a regression disconti-

nuity approach that exploits the fact that mutual funds with past returns immediately above a

Morningstar rating threshold receive a discretely higher rating than mutual funds with past re-


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
18
   Prior work examining the relationship between fund inflows and Morningstar ratings uses observable variables to
control for these factors. For example, when they include fund fixed effects, Del Guercio and Tkac (2008) continue
to find a positive association between stars and flows. A limitation of this approach is that fund fixed effects are
necessarily assumed to be constant, whereas one might expect some unobservable characteristics (e.g., marketing
efforts) to change.


!                                                               10!
turns immediately below the threshold. To the extent that investors place positive weight on

Morningstar ratings, funds with risk-adjusted returns immediately above a ratings threshold are

likely to receive significantly more inflows than funds with risk-adjusted returns immediately

below the threshold.19

               Our analysis proceeds in two stages. In the first-stage regressions, we estimate the impact

of rating thresholds on future flows. Then, we use reduced-form regressions to estimate the im-

pact of rating thresholds on future returns. The identifying assumption is that while inflow will

vary sharply at each threshold, the other fund characteristics that might be related to future re-

turns will vary continuously.20 Under this assumption, our first-stage and reduced-form esti-

mates allow us to measure the extent of diseconomies of scale.

               More formally, our analysis focuses on actively managed mutual funds just above and

below each rating threshold. For example, with respect to the threshold between four stars and

five stars, our first-stage regression predicts log net flows as function of the within-category per-

centile ranking used to determine Morningstar ratings, a dummy variable that indicates whether

the within-category percentile ranking the share class i of fund j in month t is above the five star

rating threshold, and controls, including multiple controls for past performance and past flows.

               Flow i, j,t+1 = δ 1st threshold indicatori, j,t + λ ranking i, j,t + β1st X i, j,t + ηi, j,t   (1)


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
19
   In the Berk-Green model, investors use risk-adjusted past returns to directly infer manager skill. Because perfectly
informed investors will not place any weight on Morningstar ratings, flows will vary continuously across Morn-
ingstar rating thresholds. To motivate our RD approach, consider a version of the Berk-Green model where many
investors observe Morningstar stars rather than risk-adjusted returns, and make inferences about manager skill based
on the average characteristics of funds with that rating. In this version of the model, average performance will be
equalized across the different Morningstar ratings. However, there will be flow discontinuities at rating boundaries
and—because funds just over a boundary will have similar managerial skill to those just under it—the incremental
flows will cause funds just over a boundary to underperform. Of course, given this underperformance, sophisticated
investors who directly observe returns will rationally choose to invest in funds just below ratings boundaries. There-
fore, for the flow discontinuities that we observe in the data to exist, the number of sophisticated investors must be
limited.
20
   Imbens and Lemieux (2008) and Lee and Lemieux (2009) provide excellent overviews of the regression disconti-
nuity approach.


!                                                                     11!
where δ1st measures the discontinuous flow effect associated with the ratings threshold.21

               In many RD settings, the “forcing variable”, which determines whether an observation is

above or below the threshold, is exogenous.22 In our setting, the forcing variable is the within-

category percentile ranking, which is not exogenous. However, our identifying assumption is

that, because all managers are trying to maximize relative performance, manager skill will vary

continuously across the threshold for a higher rating. In other words, while we allow for the pos-

sibility that managers with slightly higher returns are slightly more skilled, our identification

strategy assumes that skill does not jump in a discontinuous way at the threshold between rat-

ings. The fact that thresholds for different Morningstar ratings depend on within-category per-

formance rankings over as many as three investment horizons increases our confidence that the

distribution of manager skill is smoother than the distribution of Morningstar ratings.23

               To estimate fund-level flows, we focus on the discontinuity measure for the fund’s largest

share class. Then, we estimate a reduced-form regression

               Return i, j,t+1 = δ rf threshold indicatori, j,t + λ ranking i, j,t + β rf X i, j,t + ηi, j,t   (2)

where δrf measures the causal effect of ratings thresholds on returns. Under the assumption that

the causal effect of ratings thresholds on flows is unrelated to differences in manager skill, δrf

will capture any diseconomies of scale associated with these flows. Finally, we can estimate the

causal impact of flows (i.e., the treatment) on returns (i.e., the outcome) as the ratio of δrf to δ1st.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
21
   Following the advice in Imbens and Lemieux (2008), we experimented with more flexible approaches to control-
ling for the ranking variable, but found that the results varied little from the local linear approach.
22
   For example, to study the impact of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on firms costs and earnings, Iliev (2010) exploits the
fact that U.S. firms with a public float below $75 million in 2002, 2003, or 2004 were allowed to delay compliance
with Section 404 until well after the November 2004 date on which slightly larger firms were required to comply.
23
   An common concern in regression discontinuity studies is manipulation of the forcing variable. In our setting, the
forcing variables is the within-category percentile ranking, so our identification approach would be threatened if
funds with more skilled managers were also able to manipulate their returns in order to place just above a Morn-
ingstar cutoff. We conduct several tests for and find no evidence of such manipulation. We test for discontinuities in
the density of risk-adjusted returns around Morningstar cutoffs (McCrary (2008)) and for month-to-month persis-
tence in the discontinuity variable (controlling for the forcing variable). We also test for discontinuities in lagged
flows and returns and the control variables. These results are presented in an Appendix.


!                                                                     12!
The more negative the Wald estimator, the larger the implied diseconomies of scale.


III. Impact of Morningstar Ratings on Flows

In this section, we present evidence that Morningstar ratings have a causal impact on investor

flows. Because our identification strategy exploits the discreteness of Morningstar ratings, and

because different share classes of the same mutual fund can receive different Morningstar rat-

ings, we begin by studying the impact of Morningstar ratings on net flows at the share class lev-

el. Consistent with equation (1), our general approach is to regress log net flows of share class i

in month t+1 on its Morningstar percentile ranking in month t, which is our local linear control,

and a dummy variable that indicates whether share class i is above the threshold for a particular

rating in month t. Under the assumption that manager skill varies continuously across the rating

threshold, the dummy variable will capture incremental flows into the higher-rated fund that are

uncorrelated with manager skill.

               To quantify these discontinuous flow effects, in Table 2, we estimate separate regressions

for each rating thresholds (i.e. one star versus two stars, …, four stars versus five stars), and a

pooled regression that combines all four thresholds. In each case, the sample is restricted to those

share classes that are within five percentiles of a rating threshold.24 For example, when we focus

on the threshold between four and five stars, we restrict the sample to share classes with Morn-

ingstar rankings between the 85th and 95th percentiles. We further restrict the sample to actively

managed funds by excluding any fund that Morningstar identifies as an index fund.

               In addition to the variables that we report in Table 2, “Baseline” regressions control for

the lagged log size of the share class, portfolio, and family, portfolio turnover, expense ratio, and



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
24
     In the Appendix, we present robustness checks that vary this five percentile bandwidth.


!                                                               13!
the presence of loads (front, deferred, and trailing).25 Because our sample includes the full range

of Morningstar categories (i.e., large-cap equity, sector funds, corporate bond funds, etc.), we

include a separate fixed effect for each Morningstar category each month. This allows us to

compare funds to their peers.26 In the regressions with “Additional Controls”, we supplement the

Morningstar percentile ranking variable with controls for Morningstar's measure of risk-adjusted

returns, lagged log returns from t-12 to t-1, t-24 to t-13, and t-36 to t-25, and lagged log inflows

from t-12 to t-1 and t-3 to t-1. Because mutual funds with multiple share classes can appear mul-

tiple times in the same month, we cluster standard errors on the fund.27

               The estimated coefficients on the threshold indicator variable are positive and statistically

significant for each of the four ratings thresholds, and for the pooled regression that includes all

four ratings thresholds. In the baseline regressions, the estimates range from 0.337 percentage

points at the boundary between 1 star and 2 stars (significant at the 5-percent level) to 0.946 per-

centage points at the boundary between 4 stars and 5 stars (significant at the 1-percent level).

When we include additional controls for past returns and past flows, the estimated coefficients

decline, but only slightly. For example, within the stacked regression, the estimated coefficient

falls from 0.518 to 0.432 percentage points, but remains statistically significant at the 1-percent

level. In other words, share classes that are just above the Morningstar ratings threshold this

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
25
   Edelen (1999) finds that investor flow volatility is associated with lower fund returns and higher trading activity.
The incremental net flow caused by Morningstar ratings may be accompanied by higher gross flow that stimulates
trading. While we lack Edelen’s hand-collected data on gross flows, we do not find evidence of discontinuities in
future portfolio turnover at Morningstar boundaries, and including portfolio turnover as a control does not materially
affect our results.
26
   Pastor and Stambaugh (2012) hypothesize and Pastor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2014) conclude that there are dise-
conomies of scale at the mutual fund industry level. Including category-by-month fixed effects effectively controls
for changes in the average return each month due to changes in the intensity of competition.
27
   Given the large number of regressions estimated in the study and the large number of category-time fixed effects
included in each model, it is not practical to cluster standard errors on both fund and month (e.g., following Petersen
(2009)). However, when we experimented with two-way clustering on fund and month, we found that the standard
errors were quite similar to those reported in the paper. This is likely because all of our regressions include time
fixed effects and because the distribution of Morningstar ratings is stable across time periods. We also found that our
results were robust to clustering standard errors by family instead of by fund.


!                                                               14!
month receive an additional 0.432 percentage points in net flow next month, compared to share

classes that are just below the threshold.

       Our identifying assumption is that manager skill and other fund characteristics related to

future returns vary continuously across rating thresholds. In the last two columns of Table 2, we

test this assumption by changing the dependent variable from log net flows in month t+1 to log

net flows in month t. If the discontinuity in flows in month t+1 is due to a discontinuity in flow-

producing (and, potentially, return-producing) fund characteristics at the start of month t, rather

than to the higher Morningstar rating, we should also find discontinuity effects in month t. Im-

portantly for our empirical strategy, when we shift our focus to current-month flows, only five of

the ten estimated coefficients on the discontinuity dummy variable are positive, and only one is

statistically significant from zero (at the 10-percent level). These results strongly suggest that the

discontinuity in flows in month t+1 is solely due to the higher Morningstar rating. Overall, the

results in Table 2 provide the “first stage” that we need to study the causal impact of flows on

performance.

       Of course, to test for diseconomies of scale, we need to study the impact of fund-level

flows on fund-level performance. In Table 3, we study the impact of Morningstar ratings on log

net flows at the fund level. Because many funds have more than one share class, we need a

measure of incremental flows that is aggregated across all of fund j’s share classes. Most funds

have a main share class that contains the majority of the assets (traditionally the “A” class for

load funds and the “Investor” class for no-load funds). Because other share classes have the same

return gross of fees and expenses, within-fund differences in returns (and Morningstar percentile

rankings) reflect differences in fees and expenses. The Morningstar rating of the largest share

class is generally the one marketed to potential investors, as other share classes either have lower




!                                                15!
ratings due to higher fees (e.g., B, C, and Service share classes) or impose restrictions on who

can purchase them (e.g., Institutional share classes). Our approach is to focus on the discontinui-

ty and ranking variables for fund j’s largest share class.28

               The estimated coefficients in the first two columns of Table 3 are qualitatively similar to

those in Table 2, with slightly smaller magnitudes because the denominator is fund-level assets

rather than share class-level assets. Seven of the ten coefficients are statistically significantly dif-

ferent from zero at conventional levels, with the lack of a discontinuity at the 1/2 star boundary

being the major exception. Importantly, we continue to find little evidence of a discontinuity in

current month flows.

               Again, the coefficient estimates from the regressions with additional controls are slightly

smaller than the baseline estimates, but the differences are never statistically significant. Because

we find the strongest evidence of flow discontinuities when we stack the 3/4 star and 4/5 star

boundaries, we focus on these boundaries in later tables. Figure 3 provides graphical evidence of

the discontinuity in future inflows at each rating threshold.29 Figure 4 provides graphical evi-

dence of the lack of the discontinuity in current month inflows. In the appendix, we provide evi-

dence of a lack of discontinuities in the control variables, which further supports our identifica-

tion strategy.


IV. Testing for Diseconomies of Scale

We now use the incremental flows earned by funds with returns just above rating thresholds to

test for diseconomies of scale. We begin by estimating first-stage and reduced-form regressions

on the full sample of mutual funds over longer investment horizons. Then, because diseconomies
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
28
   As an alternative, we experimented with taking the highest Morningstar rating and ranking variable across all
share classes, on the assumption that this would be the rating marketed to investors. We found very similar results.
29
   Residual flows in Figures 3 and 4 are estimated from the baseline specification in Table 3 but omit the Morn-
ingstar within-category percentile ranking and discontinuity dummy variables.


!                                                               16!
of scale may differ across asset classes, we estimate first-stage and reduced-form regressions for

different subsamples of mutual funds. Finally, we compare the diseconomies of scale estimates

implied by our first-stage and reduced-form regressions to the diseconomies of scale estimates

implied by standard OLS regressions.

A. Evidence from Broad Samples of Equity and Bond Mutual Funds

In Table 4, we extend the analysis in Table 3 along three dimensions. First, rather than estimat-

ing first-stage regressions focused on log net flows in month t+1, we estimate first-stage regres-

sions focused on cumulative log net flows over different investment horizons. Our goal is to

measure the long-term impact of rating thresholds on fund flows. Second, for each first-stage re-

gression of log net flows on the discontinuity variable (and full set of controls), we estimate an

analogous reduced-form regression of log net returns on the discontinuity variable (and same set

of controls). Given our identification assumption that flows associated with rating thresholds are

uncorrelated with manager skill, these flows should only impact fund returns through disecono-

mies of scale. The reduced-form regressions are intended to measure this impact. Third, in addi-

tion to reporting regression results for the full sample of actively managed funds (“All funds”),

we report results separately for equity funds (“All equity”) and bond funds (“All bonds”). We

focus on specifications where the 3/4 star and 4/5 star boundaries are stacked, and report results

for specifications that use other boundaries in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered on

fund.

        When we restrict attention to net flows in t+1 and net returns in month t+1, we find little

evidence of diseconomies of scale. Estimated incremental flows are between 0.56 and 0.59 per-

centage points, depending on the sample that we study, and statistically significant from zero at

the 5-percent level and below. In contrast, the estimated coefficients on the threshold indicator




!                                               17!
variable in the return regression are economically small, ranging between -0.01 and 0.01 per-

centage points, and are not statistically significantly different from zero at conventional levels.

       When we focus on cumulative log net flows beyond month t+1, we continue to find that

Morningstar rating boundaries are associated with significant incremental flows. For example, in

the “All funds” sample, the incremental flows associated with the threshold indicator variable

(measured in month t) are 0.59 percentage points in month t+1, 1.75 percentage points through

month t+6, 2.34 percentage points through month t+12, and 2.88 percentage points through

months t+24. These estimates imply that while the effect of an extra Morningstar star in the

ranking disseminated during month t+1 is strongest in that month, the effect of the extra star per-

sists beyond the initial month. There are numerous mechanisms that could produce this effect.

Investors may make an initial investment in month t+1 based on the current-month Morningstar

rating, and that initial investment decision may affect the placement of subsequent investments.

Investors may also make investment decisions based on an accumulation of signals received over

several months. Regardless of the mechanism, our findings about the timing of investor reactions

to Morningstar are consistent with prior findings on the timing of investor reactions to media

mentions or advertising (e.g., Reuter and Zitzewitz (2006)).

       When we examine returns after month t+1, we continue to find little evidence that the

variation in fund size associated with rating thresholds affects future returns. Through month

t+6, the coefficients on the threshold indicator variable are almost uniformly small and positive,

possibly reflecting the finding in Lou (2012) that flows can temporarily push up security prices.

The strongest evidence of scale diseconomies appears in month t+18, where equity funds with

returns just above a rating threshold receive flows totally 2.62 percentage points of assets and

underperform their peers by 5 basis points. However, the underperformance is not statistically




!                                                18!
significant at conventional levels. Moreover, none of the return effects for bonds after month

t+2 is negative. In other words, exploiting exogenous variation in fund size due to Morningstar

rating thresholds, we find little evidence of diseconomies of scale. In Figures 5A, 5B, 6A, and

6B, we graph the contemporaneous and cumulative flow and return effects for equity and bond

funds as a function of time.

B. Evidence from Different Investment Categories

Although we find little evidence of diseconomies of scale within broad sample of mutual funds,

we might reasonably expect the degree of diseconomies of scale to vary across asset classes. For

example, CHHK find their strongest evidence of diseconomies of scale among small-cap equity

funds. More generally, we might expect the strongest diseconomies of scale in asset classes with

less liquidity (e.g., municipal bond funds) or where the inflows experienced by a typical fund are

large relative to the investment options available (e.g., sector funds).

       In Table 5, we re-estimate the first-stage and reduced-form regressions for different mu-

tual fund categories over four different investment horizons. We use the Morningstar category

variable to create the following seven non-overlapping subsamples of mutual funds: large-cap

equity; mid-cap equity; small-cap equity; sector funds; international equity; taxable bonds; mu-

nicipal bonds. (We exclude a small set of funds that do not fall into these categories, such as bal-

anced funds, commodities funds, and target-date retirement funds.) The “All equity” sample that

we introduced in Table 4 combines large-cap equity, mid-cap equity, small-cap equity, sector

funds, and international equity. The “All bonds” sample includes “taxable bonds” and “munici-

pal bonds.” We focus on cumulative log flows and log returns through month t+6, t+12, t+18,

and t+24.

       The estimated flow and return effects in the first column of Table 5 are for all funds, all




!                                                 19!
equity, and all bonds and match those reported in Table 4. The other columns focus on different

types of funds. Looking across the seven non-overlapping subsamples, we see that the estimated

flow effects are almost always positive, but also that the standard errors tend to be much larger

than in the full sample. The evidence that Morningstar rating thresholds impact flows is strongest

for sector funds, taxable bond funds, and municipal bond funds. For sector funds, the magnitudes

are quite large, ranging from 5.91 percentage points in month t+6 to 13.71 percentage points in

month t+24. Given our need to focus on exogenous variation in fund size, it is hard to imagine

ever finding exogenous variation in fund size beyond 13.71 percentage points. The only subsam-

ple-horizon first-stage estimates that are negative for small-cap equity funds are for months t+12

through t+24.

               Turning to the reduced-form regressions for the seven non-overlapping subsamples, we

see that 15 of the 28 estimated coefficients are negative. However, the only negative coefficient

that is statistically different from zero at conventional levels is for small-cap equity in month

t+18, when the first-stage estimate is also negative (but statistically insignificant). Despite

strong flow effects, none of the return effects for sector funds is statistically significant. In con-

trast, seven of the eight estimates for mid-cap equity and municipal bonds are positive and statis-

tically significant from zero (at the 5-percent level). Overall, the evidence appears to be as con-

sistent with positive economies of scale as with diseconomies of scale.

D. Evidence from Different Levels of Aggregation

Above, when we ask how flow and return effects vary across asset classes, the unit of observa-

tion is the mutual fund. In this section, we ask how flow and return effects vary across more

highly aggregated portfolios. There are two ways to motivate this exercise.30 The first is uncer-

tainty about the nature of the diseconomies of scale. As Berk and Green (2004) note, a fund may
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
30
     We thank the two anonymous referees for encouraging us to perform the analysis in this section.


!                                                               20!
generate lower returns when it grows “sufficiently large” either because “a manager will spread

his information processing activities too thin” (unit of observation should be the manager or

management team) or because “large trades will be associated with a larger price impact and

higher execution costs” (unit of observation should be the fund or all funds in the family in the

same asset class) (p. 1273). The second motivation is to address concerns that the fund-level

tests for diseconomies of scale are confounded by the reallocation of resources (or cross-

subsidization) within fund families.

               We report versions of Table 5 for four different levels of aggregation in the Appendix.

(See Tables A4 through A7.) Regressions in each version include weighted-average threshold

indicators based on all the underlying share classes, the weighted-average running variable, and

the full set of controls.31 For comparability, we begin with a version where the unit of observa-

tion is the mutual fund (i.e., an alternative version of Table 5). Next, we aggregate across portfo-

lios so that all funds with the same management team in the same broad category become a sin-

gle observation.32 In the third version, all funds with the same primary manager in the same

(broad) category become a single observation. Because Morningstar does not appear to list man-

agers in alphabetical order, we assume that the primary manager is the manager listed first by

Morningstar.33 In the last version, we aggregate across all funds within the family that are in the

narrow Morningstar category, which allows us to test for diseconomies of scale at the family lev-

el for each asset class.

               Looking across the four tables, we see that the flow effects that tend to be both larger and


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
31
   Regressions in Tables A4 and A5 include narrow Morningstar category-by-time fixed effects. Regressions in
Tables A6 and A7, which aggregate portfolios to the level of the broad Morningstar category, switch to broad Morn-
ingstar category-by-time fixed effects.
32
   Broad categories are the categories used in Table 5: Large-cap equity, Mid-cap equity, Small-cap equity, Sector
funds, International equity, Taxable bonds, and Municipal bonds.
33
   For funds with two named managers, manager names are listed in alphabetical order only 52% of the time.


!                                                               21!
more highly significant than in Table 5. However, because the sixteen return effects that we re-

port for each type of fund almost always contain a mixture of signs and magnitudes, few other

patterns emerge. At both the fund-level (Table A4) and the family-category level (Table A7), we

continue to find positive return effects for mid-cap equity. At the management team and prima-

ry-manager-levels, we find negative return effects for municipal bonds in months t+18 and t+24,

but the magnitudes are quite small. Five of the sixteen estimated return effects for large cap-

equity are negative and statistically significant (at the 10-percent level and below), but the im-

plied diseconomies of scale are the same as in Table 5 (because the flow effects and return ef-

fects are both larger). Finally, five of the sixteen estimated return effects for sector funds are

negative and statistically significant, while another is positive and statistically significant. To the

extent that we find evidence of meaningful diseconomies of scale in this section, it is only with

respect to sector funds, and only in the fund-level regressions.

E. A Comparison of Wald and OLS Estimates of Diseconomies of Scale

Our regression discontinuity approach allows us to directly estimate the causal impact of rating

thresholds on flows and the causal impact of rating thresholds on returns. However, we are ulti-

mately interested in measuring the causal impact of flows on returns. To obtain a Wald estimate

of the diseconomy of scales for a particular subsample of mutual funds and investment horizon,

we scale the estimated coefficient from the reduced-form by the estimated coefficient from the

first stage. For example, for the “All equity” sample of funds through month t+24, one percent-

age point in incremental flows is associated with incremental returns that are 0.03 percentage

points lower. (The Wald estimate of -0.03 equals -0.07 divided by 2.29.)

       Table 6 reports Wald estimates for different sets of mutual funds and investment horizons

alongside the first-stage and reduced-form estimates (from Table 5). Eleven of the 28 Wald esti-




!                                                 22!
mates are negative.34 Among the seven mutually exclusive categories of funds, nine of the 19

Wald estimates are negative. However, the standard errors associated with many of the estimates

are quite large, particularly at longer time horizons and in categories with smaller inflow effects.

               In the last several columns of Table 6, we compare our Wald estimates to the partial cor-

relation between fund size and fund returns that we estimate within the same sample using stand-

ard OLS regressions (i.e., using a specification similar to that used in CHHK and numerous other

papers). Specifically, the partial correlation for each asset class and investment horizon is esti-

mated as the coefficient on fund size in a regression of future returns on the variables listed un-

der fund characteristics in Table 1, a control for past-12-month log returns, and a separate fixed

effect for each Morningstar category each month. Consistent with the existence of diseconomies

of scale, each of the negative Wald estimates is significantly more negative than the correspond-

ing OLS estimate. However, the average Wald estimate is 0.028 versus an average OLS estimate

of -0.002. Similarly, the median Wald estimate is 0.007 versus a median OLS estimate of -0.002.

Because of the larger standard errors on the Wald estimates, we can only reject the hypothesis

that the OLS and Wald estimates are equal in the six cases where the Wald estimate is statistical-

ly significant from zero (the p-values of the Hausman tests range from 0.02 to 0.09). Further-

more, in all six of these cases, which apply to mid-cap equity and municipal bond funds, the

Wald estimate is actually more positive than the OLS estimate, suggesting the existence of

(small) economies of scale.

F. Robustness: Estimating Diseconomies of Scale From Changes in Morningstar Ratings

To test for diseconomies of scale, we have been comparing the future flows and future returns of

funds whose current returns are near thresholds for specific Morningstar ratings. This approach is

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
34
  The fact that the estimated flow effects in Table 5 are negative for small-cap equity funds for months t+12, t+18,
and t+24 prompts us to drop these subsample-horizon combinations from Tables 6 and 7.


!                                                               23!
inherently cross-sectional. The rating thresholds that we use in month t are those that Morn-

ingstar uses to determine its rating in month t. In this section, we take a different approach and

use time-series changes in fund ratings to test for diseconomies of scale. When we modify our

baseline flow regression to include both the Morningstar star rating in month t-1 and the change

in Morningstar star ratings between month t and t-1, the (unreported) estimated coefficient on the

change in ratings variable is 4.6% (standard error of 0.2%). This suggests that gaining one star is

associated with a 4.6% increase in fund size over the next 12 months. While 4.6% is two times

the full-sample estimate of 2.3% in Table 4, time-series changes in fund ratings are less plausibly

exogenous than the cross-sectional differences in fund ratings that we exploit above.

               To identify exogenous changes in Morningstar ratings, we exploit a significant change in

how Morningstar ratings are determined. Through May 2002, fund ratings are based on rankings

“across four broad asset classes (U.S. stock, international stock, taxable bond, and municipal

bond).” However, beginning in June 2002, funds are “ranked and rated within nearly 50 Morn-

ingstar Categories.”35 This change in methodology increases the ratings of the top performing

funds in investment categories with lower average returns, and decreases the ratings of the not-

top-performing funds in investment categories with higher average returns. The standard devia-

tion of the variable measuring changes in ratings jumps from 0.3 stars within the full sample to

0.9 stars in June 2002. When we limit the flow regression sample to June 2002, the estimated

coefficient on the change in ratings variable is again 4.6% (standard error of 1.0%).

               The advantage of focusing on June 2002 is that, if we treat the changes in ratings in this

month as being purely exogenous, they provide another strong first stage. The disadvantage is

that we are limited to a single (noisy) cross-section of mutual fund returns. In the reduced-form

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
35
  See the Morningstar Press Release titled "Morningstar, Inc. to Change "Star Rating" for Funds", dated April 22,
2002.


!                                                               24!
regression, the coefficient on the change in ratings variable is 0.19 percentage points (standard

error of 0.16). Combining the first-stage and reduced-form estimates, a one-percentage point in-

crease in fund size is associated with a 0.04 percentage point increase in fund returns (standard

error of 0.03). This effect is statistically and economically indistinguishable from the 0.01 per-

centage point increase that we find for “All funds” in Table 6. Therefore, regardless of whether

we focus on our preferred regression discontinuity estimates or estimates based on changes in the

Morningstar rating system, we find little evidence that fund size erodes performance.

G. How are Incremental Flows Invested?

There are two reasons why incremental flows might not depress fund returns. First, incremental

flows may be closet indexed rather than actively managed. This is what the Berk-Green model

assumes will happen when a fund’s assets under management exceed the optimal level for its

manager. Second, incremental flows may be used to deepen existing positions, but without gen-

erating enough price impact to significantly harm returns. For example, for sector funds in month

t+12, flows rise 8.54 percentage points and after-fee returns fall 0.11 percentage points. The

Wald estimate is that a 1 percentage point increase in size is associated with a 2 basis point de-

crease in returns (standard error is 6 basis points). This decrease is consistent with incremental

flows being invested at prices that are approximately 2% too high, which may be plausible given

that sector funds are constrained to a limited number of stocks.

       In Table 7, we examine how incremental flows are invested. We begin by estimating a

reduced-form regression with the number of equity holdings as the dependent variable. This

specification measures the casual impact of incremental flows associated with the 4/5-star and

3/4-star boundaries on the number of equity holdings. The sample is limited to non-specialty

domestic equity funds for which we observe quarterly holdings. We do not find any evidence




!                                               25!
that the number of holdings increases in response to incremental flows. Instead, our findings

suggest that incremental flows are used to deepen existing positions, which is what Pollet and

Wilson (2008) find when they treat net flows as exogenous.36

              Next, we sort the sample of domestic equity funds into two groups based on the number

of stocks they hold. Our hypothesis is that funds with fewer stocks than the median fund (within

the same investment objective in the same month) may be more likely to actively manage their

incremental flows. If so, funds with more concentrated portfolios may be the most likely to ex-

hibit diseconomies of scale. Although the standard errors are higher than in our main tables, we

find some evidence that incremental flows are higher in funds with more concentrated portfolios.

This finding suggests that investors prefer to invest in more actively managed funds. However,

we find no evidence that funds with more concentrated portfolios earn lower returns than funds

with less concentrated portfolios.

H. Robustness: Variation in Fund and Family Characteristics

               In a final set of robustness tests, we re-estimate flow and return regressions for different

partitions of the “All funds,” “All equity,” and “All bonds” samples. We report these results in

Appendix Tables A8, A8A, and A8B, respectively. We find stronger flow effects into smaller

funds (i.e., those of below median size within their category) and younger funds (i.e., those be-

tween 3 and 5 years old). (The standard errors are too large to conclude anything definitive

about the sample of small and young funds.) We also find stronger flow effects into smaller

families; funds that we classify as being more actively managed (based on their correlation with

the best-fit index as reported by Morningstar); and load funds. While these patterns suggest that

investors place more weight on Morningstar ratings when investing in funds for which recent
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
36
  In unreported regressions, we test for changes in the Cremers-Petajisto (2009) active share measure. The estimat-
ed coefficients are positive, suggesting that incremental flows are driving portfolio weights further from benchmark
weights, but the standard errors are large.


!                                                               26!
returns may be relatively more informative about manager skill—or when they are investing

through a broker—the return effects remain both economically small and statistically indistin-

guishable from zero. Of the 44 estimates from return regressions based on differences in fund

and family characteristics in the “All funds” sample, only 12 are negative. The final comparison

divides the sample into periods before and after November 2000, when Regulation Fair Disclo-

sure (Reg FD) went into effect. We find slightly stronger flow effects, but similar return effects,

in the post-Reg FD period.

I. Summary

While our identification strategy necessarily limits the variation in fund size that can be used to

test for scale diseconomies, it is important to note that we are testing for scale diseconomies at

many different points in the size distribution. We separately examine asset classes where Morn-

ingstar rating effects are large (e.g., sector funds and international equity) or modest but precise-

ly estimated (large-cap equity, municipal bonds). We also separately examine asset classes where

diseconomies of scale are most likely because managers have limited securities to chose from

(sector funds), where there is more room to invest additional assets (large-cap equity), and where

economies of scale may be most likely, due to large trades having lower trading costs (bonds).

The change in rating system in 2002 gives us a completely different, but still plausibly exoge-

nous, source of identification, as well as a few examples of rating changes of more than one star.

None of these estimates support the view that diseconomies of scale meaningfully erode perfor-

mance. Finally, while the Berk-Green model assumes that incremental flows by domestic equity

funds will be indexed, we find that they are used to deepen existing positions. Financial markets

appear liquid enough that even the latter practice does not have a significant impact on returns.




!                                                27!
V. Adjusting Performance Persistence for Diseconomies of Scale

Finally, we turn to the important question of whether our estimated diseconomies of scale have

an economically significant impact on estimates of performance persistence. Berk and Green

(2004) show that the combination of diseconomies of scale with endogenous fund flows will

cause researchers to underestimate the true degree of performance persistence in the mutual fund

industry. In Table 8, we adjust measures of performance persistence for the causal impact of

flows on performance. To begin, we estimate standard OLS regressions that predict future re-

turns from past 12-month returns, as well as the category-by-month fixed effects and the control

variables included in Tables 2-7. We report the estimated coefficient on the past return measure,

and its standard error, in the first set of columns. Within the full sample of funds, assuming a 12-

month horizon, the estimated coefficient is 0.091. However, this estimate will be downwardly

biased if past returns attract incremental flows and there are diseconomies of scale.

               We use a similar set of regressions to predict the impact of past returns on log net flows.

We report the estimated coefficient on the past return measure, and its standard error, in the se-

cond set of columns. For the full sample of funds, an additional percentage points in returns over

the past 12 months is associated with 0.947 percentage points in additional flow. The larger the

diseconomies of scale associated with these additional flows, the greater the downward bias in

the persistence coefficient.

               Finally, we use the diseconomies of scale that we estimated in the prior section to adjust

the persistence coefficient. Specifically, we estimate the “Corrected persistence coefficient” as

the “Persistence coefficient” minus the “Flow coefficient” times the “Causal effect of flows”

from Table 6.37 For the full sample of funds and a 12-month horizon, adjusting for diseconomies

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
37
  The “Persistence coefficient” is the increase in expected next-period percentage point return associated with a one
percentage point increase in 12-month past returns. The “Flow coefficient” times the “Causal effect of flows” is the


!                                                               28!
of scale decreases the persistence correlation from 0.091 to 0.078. If we use the standard errors

from Table 6 to construct a 95% confidence interval for the corrected persistence coefficient, we

find that it ranges from 0.015 to 0.142. We cannot reject the hypothesis that the “Persistence co-

efficient” and “Corrected persistence coefficient” are equal. However, we can reject at the 1-

percent level the hypothesis that the corrected persistence coefficient is equal to 0.42, which is

the value implied by Berk and Green’s calibration.38 On the other hand, we also can reject the

hypothesis that the corrected persistent coefficient is zero.

               Within investment categories, the corrected persistence coefficient is less precisely esti-

mated. As we possess data on virtually every U.S. mutual fund in operation between December

1996 and August 2009, it may prove difficult to significantly increase the statistical power of our

tests. Nevertheless, the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval of the corrected persistence

coefficient is typical no more than twice the OLS estimate, and it tends to be lower in categories

where we expect diseconomies of scale to be largest. For sector funds the corrected persistence

coefficient is slightly higher than the unadjusted persistence coefficient (0.080 versus 0.069), but

the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval is only 0.168. In contrast, we obtain the largest

upper bound (0.433) for “Large-cap Equity”, a category for which we expect diseconomies of

scale to be relatively small. Our inference, based on our empirical strategy for identifying exoge-

nous variation in fund size, is that correcting for scale diseconomies does not significantly affect

our view of performance persistence.



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
expected percentage point decrease in next period’s return based on the expected percentage point increase in flows
times the expected diseconomies of scale associated with the incremental flow. The “Corrected persistence coeffi-
cient” removes the impact of return-induced flows on the expected percentage point increase in next period’s return.
38
   In Berk and Green's calibration exercise, managers’ skill, defined as the annualized alpha they would achieve in
the absence of scale diseconomies, is distributed normally with a mean of 6.5% and a standard deviation of 6.0%.
Given the within-objective standard deviations of returns of 7.4% over the past 12 months, in the absence of scale
diseconomies, this distribution of alpha would imply (within-objective) persistence coefficients of 0.42.


!                                                                                              29!
VI. Conclusion

We use a regression discontinuity approach to test for fund-level diseconomies of scale in the

mutual fund industry. Specifically, we use the discrete changes in flows associated with discrete

changes in Morningstar ratings to identify flows that should only impact fund returns through

diseconomies of scale. On the one hand, the confidence intervals around the estimates of scale

diseconomies implied by these plausibly exogenous flows are wider than those implied by cross-

sectional comparisons of large and small funds. This raises the possibility that diseconomies of

scale are larger than previously estimated, perhaps because more-skilled managers do, in fact,

manage larger funds. On the other hand, when we use our diseconomies of scale estimates to

adjust standard measures of performance persistence, the upper bounds of the confidence inter-

vals are still too low to significantly change our views about the extent of performance persis-

tence in the U.S. mutual fund industry. In practical terms, we conclude that any downward bias

in OLS estimates of diseconomies of scale and performance persistence in prior and future stud-

ies of manager skill is likely to be small.




!                                              30!
                                      REFERENCES

Amihud, Yakov and Ruslan Goyenko. 2013. “Mutual Fund’s R2 as Predictor of Performance.”
    Review of Financial Studies 26, 667–694.
Berk, Jonathan, and Richard Green, 2004, “Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational
    Markets,” Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269–1295.
Berk, Jonathan, 2005, “Five Myths of Active Portfolio Management,” UC-Berkeley mimeo.
    http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/berk/papers/myth.pdf.
Berk, Jonathan, and Jules van Binsbergen, 2012, “Measuring Managerial Skill in the Mutual
    Fund Industry” NBER Working Paper #1814.
Blake, Christopher and Matthew Morey, 2003, “Morningstar Ratings and Mutual Fund Perfor-
    mance,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 451-483.
Blume, Marshall, 1998, “An Anatomy of Morningstar Ratings,” Financial Analysts Journal 54,
    19-27.
Card, David, 1999, “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” Handbook of Labor Econom-
    ics, Vol 3, Part 1, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, North Holland.
Carhart, Mark, 1997, “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance 52, 57–
    82.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, “Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to In-
    centives,” Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167–1200.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2004, “Does Fund Size Erode
    Mutual Fund Performance? The Role of Liquidity and Organization,” American Economic
    Review 94, 1276–1302.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Wenxi Jiang, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2013, “Outsourcing Mutual Fund
    Management: Firm Boundaries, Incentives and Performance,” Journal of Finance 68, 523-
    558.
Cici, Gjergi, Scott Gibson, John Merrick, 2011, "Missing the Marks? Dispersion in Corporate
    Bond Valuations Across Mutual Funds," Journal of Financial Economics 101, 206–226.
Cremers, Martijn and Antti Petajisto, 2009, “How Active is Your Fund Manager: A New Meas-
    ure That Predicts Performance,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329–3365.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula Tkac, 2008, “Star Power: The Effect of Morningstar Ratings on
    Mutual Fund Flow,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 907–936.
Doll, Richard, 1998, “Uncovering the Effects of Smoking: Historical Perspective,” Statistical
    Methods in Medical Research 7, 87-117.
Edelen, Roger, 1999, “Investor Flows and the Assessed Performance of Open-end Fund Manag-
    ers,” Journal of Financial Economics 53, 439-466.
Edelen, Roger, Richard Evans, and Gregory Kadlec, 2007, “Scale Effects in Mutual Fund Per-
    formance: The Role of Trading Costs,” Working Paper.
Elton, Edwin, Martin Gruber, and Christopher Blake, 2012, “Does Mutual Fund Size Matter?
    The Relationship Between Size and Performance,” Review of Asset Pricing Studies 2, 31-55.
Evans, Richard, 2010, “Mutual Fund Incubation,” Journal of Finance 65, 1581-1611.
Farnsworth, Heber, 2013, “Performance Evaluation, Contracts, and Flows in Efficient Markets,”
    Working Paper.
Glode, Vincent, 2011, “Why Mutual Funds ‘Underperform’,” Journal of Financial Economics
    99, 546–559.
Gutierrez, Ro, William Maxwell, and Danielle Xu, 2009, “On Diseconomies of Scale and Persis-



!                                            31!
    tent Performance in Corporate-Bond Mutual Funds,” Working Paper.
Iliev, Peter, 2010, “The Effect of SOX Section 404: Costs, Earnings Quality, and Stock Prices,”
    Journal of Finance 65, 1163–1196.
Imbens, Guido, and Thomas Lemieux, 2008, “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
    Practice,” Journal of Econometrics 142, 615-635.
Jensen, Michael, 1968, “The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945–1964,” Journal of
    Finance 23, 389–416.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, “On the Industry Concentration of
    Actively Managed Equity Mutual Funds,” Journal of Finance 60, 1983-2012.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2008, “Unobserved Actions of Mutual
    Funds,” Review of Financial Studies 21, 2379-2416.
Lee, David, and Thomas Lemieux, 2009, “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,”
    NBER Working Paper #14723.
Lou, Dong, 2012, “A Flow-Based Explanation for Return Predictability,” Review of Financial
        Studies 25, 3457-3489.
Massimo, Massa, Jonathan Reuter, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2010, “When Should Firms Share Credit
    with Employees? Evidence from Anonymously Managed Mutual Funds ,” Journal of Finan-
    cial Economics 95, 400−424.
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert Stambaugh, 2012, “On the Size of the Active Management Industry,”
    Journal of Political Economy 120, 740-781.
Pastor, Lubos, Robert Stambaugh, and Lucian Taylor, 2014, “Scale and Skill in Active Manage-
    ment,” NBER Working Paper #19891.
Peter, Laurence and Raymond Hull, 1969, The Peter Principle: Why Things Always Go Wrong,
    New York: William Morrow and Company.
Pollet, Joshua, and Mungo Wilson, 2008, “How Does Size Affect Mutual Fund Behavior?”
    Journal of Finance 63, 2941-2969.
Petersen, Mitchell, 2009, "Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
    Approaches,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 435-480.
Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2006, “Do Ads Influence Editors? Advertising and Bias in
    the Financial Media,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 197-227.
Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano, 1998, “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows,” Journal of Finance
    53, 1589–1622.
Yan, Xuemin, 2008, "Liquidity, Investment Style, and the Relation between Fund Size and Fund
    Performance," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 741-768.




!                                             32!
                                            Appendix

This appendix has three subsections. First, we present tests for manipulation of the forcing varia-

ble, the within-category percentile ranking. Second, we examine the robustness of our results to

alternative bandwidths around the rating thresholds. Third, we present the additional flow and

return regressions that are referenced in Sections IV.D and IV.H.

A.1. Tests for manipulation

A common concern in regression discontinuity design studies is that agents may be able to ma-

nipulate the forcing variable. In our context, the concern would be that funds with more skilled

managers might be better at managing their returns (e.g., by time varying the riskiness of their

portfolios) in order to maximize their chances of placing just above a Morningstar boundary. If

manager skill is correlated with the probability of such manipulation succeeding, this could cre-

ate a discontinuity in skill at the boundary, confounding our use of the boundary to identify scale

diseconomies.

       Our prior is that this type of manipulation would be very difficult to do successfully for

several reasons. First, the cutoffs for additional stars are not fixed, but depend on the perfor-

mance of the other funds in a Morningstar category. The median fund*month is in a category

with 131 other funds, and so tracking and forecasting the performance of the others funds that

are close to a cutoff would be non-trivial. Second, attempting to manage returns through the var-

iation of risk (e.g., as in Chevalier and Ellison, 1997) would be difficult for most mutual funds,

which often are restricted in their use of leverage or short selling. Manipulating returns through

discretion in the valuation of less-illiquid assets like corporate or municipal bonds might be more

feasible (e.g., Cici, Gibson, and Merrick, 2011), and so we run separate manipulation tests for

these asset categories. Third, the Morningstar ranking methodology is complicated. We are




!                                               33!
therefore more concerned about manipulation before June 2002, when the methodology became

substantially more complicated, and conduct separate tests for the pre-2002 period.

        Given these concerns, we are therefore not that surprised that our tests fail to find evi-

dence of successful manipulation, even in the time periods and asset classes where our concerns

are the greatest. We conduct three types of tests: 1) McCrary (2008) tests for discontinuities in

the density of the forcing variables at rating cutoffs, 2) tests for discontinuities in the control var-

iables at the rating cutoffs, and 3) fund-level tests for persistence in the discontinuity variable

(controlling for the forcing variable). The first two tests are fairly standard in regression discon-

tinuity studies, while the third addresses a form of manipulation that would be particularly prob-

lematic for our methodology.

A.1.1. McCrary tests for discontinuities

McCrary outlines a simple test for manipulation of the forcing variable. If agents successfully

manipulate the forcing variable to just exceed a cutoff, then we should observe a discontinuity in

the density of the variable at the cutoff. As successful manipulators would be more common just

above the cutoff, to the extent that skill in manipulation was correlated with skill in fund man-

agement, this could create a discontinuity in skill at the cutoffs, and thus be a threat to identifica-

tion.

        The McCrary test involves defining a bandwidth, calculating the number of observations

in each bin, and testing whether the number of observations in each bin changes discretely at the

boundary. Morningstar ratings are defined based on within-category percentile rankings on risk-

adjusted returns. Because the density of a percentile variable cannot vary, we test for discontinui-

ties in the density of Morningstar's measure of risk-adjusted returns. For simplicity, we test for

discontinuities at the boundaries of the 3, 5 and 10-year star ratings, without considering whether




!                                                 34!
a boundary is pivotal for a fund's overall rating. As in the main analysis, we restrict attention to a

fund's largest share class, which for the reasons discussed above is the rating funds are most like-

ly to have an interest in manipulating.

       In order to aggregate results over investment categories with different standard deviations

of returns, we first standardize returns into z-scores within each objective*month. If returns were

normally distributed, the 4 cutoffs would be at z-scores of approximately -1.28, -0.45, 0.45, and

1.28. In practice, the average and standard deviation z-score boundaries are -1.13, -0.29, 0.46,

and 1.22, reflecting some excess kurtosis and negative skew. The standard deviations are 0.22,

0.15, 0.15, and 0.24, reflecting some variation around these averages across objective*months.

       After identifying the funds that are just above and below each boundary, we place funds

into bins that are 0.01 wide in z-score space and begin just after the first fund on each side of the

boundary. Figure A1 plots the share of funds in the 10 bins on either side of the four star bounda-

ries for the 3-year ratings (the time horizon which have the largest sample size). The standard

normal density is shown for comparison. There is no evidence of a discontinuity in density, and

this is confirmed by statistically insignificant coefficients on a discontinuity variable in a regres-

sion with a local linear control. Results are similar for the 5-year and 10-year ratings. They are

also similar when we split the sample based on pre/post-2002 and bond/stock funds.

A.1.2. Tests for discontinuities in control and lagged dependent variables

A second commonly used test for manipulation of the forcing variable is to test whether control

and lagged dependent variables exhibit discontinuities. Table A1 replicates the regressions in

Table 3 with alternative dependent variables. While most of the control variables covary with the

forcing variable, there is no evidence of discontinuities at the rating boundaries. The fact that

there are no discontinuities in these pre-determined observable variables increases our confi-




!                                                35!
dence that there is also no discontinuity in manager skill, the key unobservable variable our ap-

proach is attempting to control for.

A.1.3. Tests for persistence in the discontinuity variable

As a final test for successful manipulation of Morningstar ratings, we ask whether certain funds

are able to persistently place just above rating thresholds. Morningstar ratings are based on risk-

adjusted returns over multi-period windows (36, 60, and 120 months), and so the month-to-

month change in a fund's percentile ranking is fairly small (with standard deviations of 6.6, 5.5,

and 4.7 percentile points, respectively). As a result, these tests require controlling for the forcing

variable non-linearly.

       To see this, suppose that if a fund's percentile ranking change is drawn randomly each

month from a p.d.f. f(x), with a peak at x=0. The probability that a fund will exceed a threshold

next month will be given by F(z), where z is the current-month distance above the threshold and

F is the c.d.f. Given the peak in f() at 0, this probability F(z) will be non-linear in z with a slope

that peaks at zero. Especially if the spread in f() is small, controlling for the current-month forc-

ing variable linearly when predicting the future discontinuity could lead one to falsely conclude

that there is persistence in the discontinuity variable.

       As a result, we use a logit model to predict the future discontinuity variable as a function

of the current-month discontinuity and forcing variable, as well as the control variables used in

Table 3. Table A2 reports the coefficients on the current-month discontinuity and forcing varia-

ble for models predicting the discontinuity variable at the 1, 3, and 6 month horizon. In general,

the coefficients on the current-month discontinuity variable are statistically and economically

insignificant. In particular, we can usually rule out that being above the boundary this month

raises the future probability by more than a 2-percentile increment in the forcing variable.




!                                                 36!
A.2. Robustness to bandwidth

It is common in regression discontinuity studies to check the robustness of the results to alterna-

tive choices about the bandwidth analyzed around the discontinuities. The results presented

above use a bandwidth of 5 percentiles in either direction of the cutoff for a Morningstar rating.

Table A3 replicates selected results from Tables 4 using alternative bandwidths.

       The results do not appear sensitive to the choice of bandwidth. Because narrower band-

widths reduce the number of observations included, standard errors rise, particularly if the band-

width is narrowed to 2 percentiles. Likewise, standard errors decline slightly as the bandwidth

widens. The main conclusions are robust to bandwidth: 1) star boundaries are accompanied by

discontinuities in flows, 2) discontinuities in flows are larger for the 4/5-star boundary, and 3)

discontinuities in flows are rarely accompanied by discontinuities in future returns.

A.3. Additional first-stage and reduced form estimates

In Section IV.D., we discuss alternative versions of Table 5. In Table A4, we estimate flow and

return effects at the fund level, in regressions that include weighted-average threshold indicators

based on all the underlying share classes, the weighted-average running variable, and the full set

of controls. In Tables A5, A6, and A7, the unit of observation is no longer the mutual fund. We

aggregate portfolio to the management-team-by-narrow-Morningstar-category level, primary-

manager-by-broad-Morningstar-category level, and family-by-broad-Morningstar-category level,

respectively.

       In Section IV.H., we discuss regressions where we split the sample of funds into two

groups based on different fund and family characteristics, and on the introduction of Regulation

Fair Disclosure. The samples being split in Tables A8, A8A, and A8B are “All funds,” “All eq-

uity,” and “All bonds,” respectively.




!                                               37!
                <%&1#2*=>**!"#$%$&'()#*+)$,%$&'*)$/*+2'%/1):*<:"4'?*@-A*72)#*":/*B1$/'*
'%                                                                                                   "#)'%



                                                                                                     "#)$%

+%
                                                                                                     "#)&%



                                                                                                     "#)%
$%

                                                                                                     "#"(%

                                                                                                              ./012134560%76813%9:;<%4=6:;>%
*%                                                                                                   "#"'%

                                                                                                              7;42?@6:%A/B4%95C)>%
                                                                                                     "#"$%

&%
                                                                                                     "#"&%



                                                                                                     "%
)%

                                                                                                     !"#"&%



"%                                                                                                   !"#"$%
     "%   )"%       &"%       *"%        $"%        +"%       '"%        ,"%       ("%     -"%   )""%
                   !"#$%$&'()#*+%',-./01'(2/*+2(1#$*34%(5%$*6)(2&"#7*82#62$9:2*#)$,%$&;*
                  Figure 2. Overall ratings for 5-10 year-old funds




.4   1
     .8  .6
5 year rank
     .2
     0
              0          .2              .4                 .6             .8        1
                                              3 year rank

                      1 Star   2 Stars          3 Stars          4 Stars   5 Stars
      2340#")56))7"89:;+%9<)#"(3.0-')=+,()>+#)>0%.()-#+0%.)?+#%3%4(9-#)
                              #-&%4)*+0%.-#3"()
                                     "#)%




                                   "#"(%




                                   "#"$%
                                                                              &!*%+,-.%/0123-.4%


                                   "#"&%

                                                                              5!&%+,-.%/0123-.4%

                                   "#"'%


                                                                              '!5%+,-.%/0123-.4%
                                       "%




                                   !"#"'%                                     )!'%+,-.%/0123-.4%


!$%    !&%        !'%                       "%                 '%   &%   $%
                                   !"#"&%




                                   !"#"$%
                        !"#$"%&'"()*"'+,)-%.)-*+/")*+0%.-#1)
      2340#")56))2-'(37$-&+%8))90##"%:;<+%:=)#"(3.0-')>+,()?+#)?0%.()-#+0%.)
                           @+#%3%4(:-#)#-&%4)*+0%.-#3"()
                                     "#)'%



                                       "#)%



                                     "#"(%

                                                                                &!*%+,-.%/0123-.4%
                                     "#"$%



                                     "#"&%                                      5!&%+,-.%/0123-.4%



                                     "#"'%
                                                                                '!5%+,-.%/0123-.4%

                                         "%


                                                                                )!'%+,-.%/0123-.4%
                                     !"#"'%


!$%     !&%         !'%                       "%                 '%   &%   $%
                                     !"#"&%



                                     !"#"$%
                          !"#$"%&'"()*"'+,)-%.)-*+/")*+0%.-#1)
             '()*+,&-./&0*++,#$&1#2&3*4*5167,&8"9&2(:3"#6#*(6,:&;;&
                  :$13<,2&=>-&1#2&?>=&@"*#21+(,:&A,B*($C&D*#2:E&&&
                    ($#




                     '#




                     &#



                                                                            )*+,#

                     %#


                                                                            -./#)*+,#

                     "#




                     $#
!("#   !'#    !%#         $#   %#            '#   ("#   (&#   "$#     "%#




                    !"#
                                    !"#$%&
             '()*+,&-./&0*++,#$&1#2&3*4*5167,&8"9&2(:3"#6#*(6,:&;;&
                  :$13<,2&=>-&1#2&?>=&@"*#21+(,:&A@"#2&B*#2:C&&&
                    *#



                    )#



                    (#



                    '#



                    "#
                                                                            ,-./#

                    $#



                    %#                                                      012#,-./#



                    &#
!%$#   !+#   !'#          &#   '#            +#   %$#   %)#   $&#     $'#

                    !%#



                    !$#



                    !"#
                                    !"#$%&
             '()*+,&-./&0*++,#$&1#2&3*4*5167,&+,$*+#&2(83"#6#*(6,8&99&
                   8$13:,2&;<=&1#2&><;&?"*#21+(,8&@,A*($B&C*#28D&&
                    "#&%


                    "#'%


                    "#(%


                    "#)%


                    "#*%


                       "%                                                   ,-../01%./1-.0%
!*)%   !+%    !'%           "%   '%            +%   *)%   *$%   )"%   )'%

                    !"#*%
                                                                            ,-2%3/1-.0%
                    !"#)%


                    !"#(%


                    !"#'%


                    !"#&%


                    !"#$%
                                      !"#$%&
             '()*+,&-./&0*++,#$&1#2&3*4*5167,&+,$*+#&2(83"#6#*(6,8&99&
                    8$13:,2&;<=&1#2&><;&?"*#21+(,8&@?"#2&A*#28B&&
                    "#$%



                    "#&%



                    "#'%



                    "#(%



                    "#)%
                                                                            ,-../01%./1-.0%

                       "%
!)(%   !*%    !&%           "%   &%            *%   )(%   )+%   ("%   (&%

                    !"#)%                                                   ,-2%3/1-.0%



                    !"#(%



                    !"#'%



                    !"#&%



                    !"#$%
                                      !"#$%&
!"#$%&'(&&)*++",-&./"/0./01.

%122#+G()*#*8)*8B)(#+"(+"64+*"E(54+(64+*54784924$*:(B4238$#*84$)(8$(P:8B:(#*(7"#)*(4$"():#+"(B7#))(+"B"8C")(#(!4+$8$D)*#+(+#*8$D;(P:8B:(+"\18+")(#*(7"#)*(
*:+""(G"#+)(45(:8)*4+GM((O1$E(B:#+#B*"+8)*8B)(#+"(*:"(#C"+#D"(B:#+#B*"+8)*8B)(45(*:"(51$E)]():#+"(B7#))");(P"8D:*"E(3G(6+84+N24$*:(#))"*)M((T(B4267"*"(
2#$#D"2"$*(*"#2(B:#$D"(8)(E"58$"E(#)($4(4C"+7#6(8$(2#$#D"+()1+$#2")(P8*:(*:"(6+84+(6"+84E^(#$G(2#$#D"2"$*(*"#2(B:#$D"(8)(E"58$"E(#)(8$B4267"*"(
4C"+7#6(8$(2#$#D"+()1+$#2")M((!4$"G(2#+Y"*(#$E(8$E"V(51$E)(#+"("VB71E"EM



                                                                         T77(51$E)                   [G(A#))"*NP"8D:*"E(#C"+#D"H(!4+$8$D)*#+(+#*8$D
                                                                    !"#$           %&             '()*#+      ,()*#+)    -()*#+)   .()*#+)(    /()*#+)
0123"+(45(64+*54784924$*:)                                               .</;L--                  -.;<'=      =>;<==    '<';?/<    ',?;<>-     /?;,</
@"*1+$)(AB1217#*8C"(74D(6"+B"$*#D"(648$*);(#EF1)*"E(54+(B#*"D4+G(2"#$H
    I"+B"$*()1+C8C8$D(*4(*J,.(24$*:)K                                 >L           -/                <-         >?          >L         ='          =,
    @"*1+$(A*H                                                       ?M?           'M>              N?ML       N?M,         ?M?        ?M,         ?M-
    @"*1+$(A*J'H                                                     ?M?           'M>              N?M,       ?M?          ?M?        ?M?         ?M'
    @"*1+$(A*J'(*4(*JLH                                              ?M?           /M'              N?M=       N?M,         ?M?        ?M,         ?M.
    @"*1+$(A*J'(*4(*J',H                                             ?M?           <M.              N'M.       N?M,         ?M'        ?M-         ?M-
    @"*1+$(A*J'(*4(*J,.H                                             ?M?         '?M?               N,M'       N?M,         ?M'        ?M.         ?M.
O74P)(AB1217#*8C"(74D(6"+B"$*#D"(648$*);(#EF1)*"E(54+(B#*"D4+G(2"#$H
    O74P(A*H                                                         ?M?         '?M<               N'M/        N?M=       N?M,        ?ML         'M=
    O74P(A*J'H                                                       ?M?         '?M/               N'M.        N?M=       N?M,        ?ML         'M=
    O74P(A*J'(*4(*JLH                                                ?M?         ,/M<               N<M,        N.M<       N'M'        -M-         '?M?
    O74P(A*J('(*4(*J',H                                              ?M?         ->M-              N',M?        N>M'       N'M=        LM?         'LM.
    O74P(A*J'(*4(*J,.H                                               ?M?         //M<              N'<M>       N''M<       N,M>        >M=         ,-M,
Q*:"+(51$E(B:#+#B*"+8)*8B)
    R$AI4+*54784(S0TH                                                /M,           'M>             .M,         .M>         /M,         /ML         /M=
    R$AO#287G(S0TH                                                   >M=           ,M-             >M?         >M>         =M?         =M,         =M,
    UV6"$)"(+#*84                                                    'M,?        ?M<'              'M<.        'M-<        'M'/        'M?-        'M?-
    UV6"$)"(+#*84(A*J',H                                             'M'=        ?M<'              'M<L        'M-<        'M'L        'M?.        'M?-
    I"+B"$*(P8*:(#$G(74#E                                             L=           .L               <<          <>          <,          L'          /.
    I4+*54784(*1+$4C"+(AWH                                           '??          '/>              '/?         '?>          =,          >>         '?.
    0123"+(45():#+"(B7#))")                                          ,M.           'ML             ,M.         ,M/         ,M/         ,M-         ,M'
    I"+B"$*(45(#))"*)(8$(7#+D")*():#+"(B7#))                         >.M-        '=ML              >,ML        >'M<        >.M?        >LM'        ><M-
!#$#D"+(B:#+#B*"+8)*8B)(A51$E)(P8*:($#2"E(2#$#D"+)(4$7GH
    X4267"*"(2#$#D"2"$*(*"#2(B:#$D"(AWH                              'M<         ',M<              ,M,         'M=         'ML         'M.         'M-
    T$G(2#$#D"2"$*(*"#2(B:#$D"(AWH                                   -ML         '>ML              .M'         .M?         -M<         -M,         -M'
    0123"+(45(2#$#D"+)                                               'M<<        'M?/              'M<,        'M>?        'M>?        'M<L        'M<,
    0123"+(45(2#$#D"+)(A*JL(24$*:)H                                  'M<=        'M?L              'M<'        'M>'        'M>'        'M<>        'M</
!4+$8$D)*#+(+#*8$D)
    I"+B"$*(P8*:()#2"(+#*8$D(54+(#77():#+"(B7#))")                    <-           ..               >,          <?          <?          <-          >-
    TC"+#D"(+#*8$D(A*H                                               -M'?        'M?<              'M?-        ,M?'        ,M==        -M=<        .M=<
    TC"+#D"(+#*8$D(A*(J(-L(24$*:)H                                   -M?L        'M?,              ,M'L        ,ML,        ,M=>        -M.?        -ML-
    TC"+#D"(+8)YN#EF1)*"E(+"*1+$(6"+B"$*87"()B4+"
          -(G"#+                                                      /'           ,=                >          ,/          .>          <-          ='
          /(G"#+                                                      /,           ,=                /          ,,          .=          <L          =-
          '?(G"#+                                                     /'           ,>                L          ,-          .>          <.          ='
    I"+B"$*(45(64+*54784)(P8*:Z
          /(G"#+(+#*8$D(A/N=(G"#+N47E(51$E)H                          >-           -<               <>          >.          >/          >.          <<
          '?(G"#+(+#*8$D(A'?J(G"#+N47E(51$E)H                         .L           /?               -=          .<          .>          .L          -=
!"#$%&'(&&)*+,-"+%.&/0+01%&,2/$34&.,*532+,20,+6&"+&7312,28*+"1&1"+,28&#302."1,%*&99&*:"1%&5$"**&$%;%$
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'4+$'#"*5"$&6

<="'8$+&'/1'/,3"*()&+/$'+3'3=)*"'5-)33'+'+$'M/$&='&?''<="'3)M#-"'+3'&="'3=)*"'5-)33"3'&=)&'5/M#/3"'&="'M8&8)-'18$%'#/*&1/-+/3'38MM)*+N"%'+$'<),-"'AO')3'+$'
<),-"'A'M/$"9'M)*;"&')$%'+$%"P'18$%3')*"'"P5-8%"%Q')$%'3=)*"'5-)33"3'M83&',"'&=*""'9")*3'/-%'+$'/*%"*'&/',"'*)&"%',9'R/*$+$03&)*?''<="'3)M#-"'1/*'")5='
*"0*"33+/$'+3'18*&="*'*"3&*+5&"%'&/'3=)*"'5-)33"3'2+&='2+&=+$G5)&"0/*9'#"*1/*M)$5"'*)$;+$03'2+&=+$'@'#"*5"$&+-"3'/$'"+&="*'3+%"'/1')'*)$;+$0',/8$%)*9?''<="'
3&)5;"%'M/%"-3'+$5-8%"')--'D'*)$;+$0',/8$%)*+"3O'&="'/&="*'M/%"-3'+$5-8%"'/$-9'&="'+$%+5)&"%',/8$%)*9?''S--'*"0*"33+/$3'+$5-8%"')'-/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-'1/*'
2+&=+$G5)&"0/*9'#"*5"$&+-"'*)$;+$0')$%')$%')'&=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*'()*+),-"'&=)&'"T8)-3'/$"'2="$'&="'3=)*"'5-)33"3U'2+&=+$G5)&"0/*9'#"*5"$&+-"'*)$;+$0'+3'
),/("'&="',/8$%)*9?''7)3"-+$"'*"0*"33+/$3')-3/'+$5-8%"'5/$&*/-3'1/*'-)00"%'-/0'3+N"'/1'&="'3=)*"'5-)33Q'#/*&1/-+/Q')$%'1)M+-9Q'"P#"$3"'*)&+/Q'#/*&1/-+/'
&8*$/("*Q')$%'-/)%3'41*/$&Q'%"1"**"%Q')$%'&*)+-+$06Q')$%'5)&"0/*9CM/$&='1+P"%'"11"5&3?''VS%%+&+/$)-'5/$&*/-3V'+$5-8%"'5/$&*/-3'1/*'R/*$+$03&)*U3'M")38*"'/1'
*+3;G)%W83&"%'*"&8*$3Q'-)00"%'-/0'*"&8*$3'1*/M'&GAF'&/'&GAQ'&GFD'&/'&GAEQ')$%'&GEH'&/'&GF@Q')$%'-)00"%'-/0'+$1-/23'1*/M'&GAF'&/'&GA')$%'&GE'&/'&GA?'':&)$%)*%'
"**/*3'4+$'#)*"$&="3"36')--/2'1/*'5-83&"*+$0'2+&=+$'18$%3?''':&)&+3&+5)-'3+0$+1+5)$5"')&'&="'A>G#"*5"$&Q'@G#"*5"$&Q')$%'AG#"*5"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/G3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'
%"$/&"%',9'CQ'CCQ')$%'CCC?




                                                                Y"P&GM/$&='1-/23                                        X8**"$&GM/$&='1-/23
7/8$%)*9                                             7)3"-+$"               S%%+&+/$)-'X/$&*/-3                 7)3"-+$"              S%%+&+/$)-'X/$&*/-3
:&)5;"%           <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*              >?@AB        CCC             >?DEF      CCC               G>?>>H                       >?>EE
                                                  4>?>HF6                      4>?>HF6                       4>?>IA6                     4>?>I>6
                  J/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-             >?>>K                        >?>>E                         >?>@D      CCC              >?>EK      CC
                                                  4>?>AA6                      4>?>A>6                       4>?>AH6                     4>?>AH6
DL@'3&)*3         <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*              >?IDH        CCC             >?BB>      CCC                >?FII                       >?EHK
                                                  4>?ADA6                      4>?ADE6                       4>?F@B6                     4>?FHB6
                  J/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-             >?>DH        C               >?>FF                         >?>K>                       >?>F>
                                                  4>?>F@6                      4>?>FH6                       4>?>DH6                     4>?>DB6
ELD'3&)*3         <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*              >?B@D        CCC             >?HKA      CCC               G>?AIH                      G>?A@A
                                                  4>?AE>6                      4>?AEF6                       4>?AH@6                     4>?AHA6
                  J/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-            G>?>D>        C              G>?>EH      C                  >?>KF      CC               >?>@E      C
                                                  4>?>FF6                      4>?>FF6                       4>?>FB6                     4>?>FB6
FLE'3&)*3         <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*              >?HA>        CCC             >?@AD      CCC                >?FEF                       >?FDK      C
                                                  4>?A>B6                      4>?A>H6                       4>?A@I6                     4>?A@D6
                  J/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-            G>?>FK                       G>?>EK      C                  >?>AA                      G>?>>A
                                                  4>?>AI6                      4>?>AI6                       4>?>FB6                     4>?>FK6
ALF'3&)*3         <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*              >?EEK        CC              >?EAF      CC                G>?FF@                      G>?AB>
                                                  4>?AEK6                      4>?AEB6                       4>?AIK6                     4>?ABH6
                  J/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-             >?>>I                        >?>>A                         >?>KH      CC               >?>@K      C
                                                  4>?>FH6                      4>?>FH6                       4>?>EE6                     4>?>EA6
!"#$%&'(&&)*+,-"+%.&/0+01%&,2/$34&.,*532+,20,+6&"+&7312,28*+"1&1"+,28&#302."1,%*&99&:31+/3$,3&$%;%$
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'4+$'#"*5"$&6

<=+3'&),-"'*"#")&3'&="')$)-93+3'+$'<),-"'IN',8&'&="'8$+&'/1'/,3"*()&+/$'+3')5&+("-9'O)$)0"%'18$%'P'+$'O/$&='&?''<="'-/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-'+3'&="'2+&=+$F5)&"0/*9'
#"*5"$&+-"'*)$;+$0'1/*'&="'-)*0"3&'3=)*"'5-)33N')$%'&="'&=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*'+$%+5)&"3'2="&="*'&="'#/*&1/-+/Q3'-)*0"3&'3=)*"'5-)33'+3'/$'&="'#/3+&+("'3+%"'/1'&="'
*)&+$0',/8$%)*9?''R&="*'()*+),-"3')*"')00*"0)&"%'&/'&="'#/*&1/-+/'-"("-N'2"+0=&"%',9'#*+/*FO/$&=')33"&3?''7)3"-+$"')$%'H%%+&+/$)-'5/$&*/-3')*"')3'+$'<),-"'
I?''7)3"-+$"'5/$&*/-3')*"'&="'-)00"%'"S#"$3"'*)&+/N'#/*&1/-+/'&8*$/("*N'-/)%3'41*/$&N'%"1"**"%N')$%'&*)+-+$06N')$%'&="'-/0'3+T"'/1'&="'3=)*"'5-)33N'#/*&1/-+/N')$%'
1)O+-9N')3'2"--')3'5)&"0/*9BO/$&='1+S"%'"11"5&3?''H%%+&+/$)-'5/$&*/-3'+$5-8%"'5/$&*/-3'1/*'U/*$+$03&)*Q3'O")38*"'/1'*+3;F)%P83&"%'*"&8*$3N'-)00"%'-/0'
*"&8*$3'1*/O'&FGI'&/'&FGN'&FI@'&/'&FGCN')$%'&FCL'&/'&FIEN')$%'-)00"%'-/0'+$1-/23'1*/O'&FGI'&/'&FG')$%'&FC'&/'&FG?''<="'3)O#-"'+3'*"3&*+5&"%'&/'#/*&1/-+/3'1/*'
2=+5='&="'-)*0"3&'3=)*"'5-)33"3Q'#"*5"$&+-"'*)$;+$0'+3'2+&=+$'E'#"*5"$&+-"3'/1'&="'*)&+$0',/8$%)*9?'':&)$%)*%'"**/*3'4+$'#)*"$&="3"36')--/2'1/*'5-83&"*+$0'
2+&=+$'18$%3?'':&)&+3&+5)-'3+0$+1+5)$5"')&'&="'G>F#"*5"$&N'EF#"*5"$&N')$%'GF#"*5"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/F3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'%"$/&"%',9'BN'BBN')$%'BBB?




                                                                     V"S&FO/$&='1-/23                                   W)-3+1+5)&+/$.''58**"$&FO/$&='1-/23
7/8$%)*9                                                  7)3"-+$"             H%%+&+/$)-'X/$&*/-3                   7)3"-+$"                H%%+&+/$)-'X/$&*/-3
:&)5;"%                 <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*            >?@>A BBB                     >?CDE BBB                     F>?>DG                           F>?>AG
H--',/8$%)*+"3                                        4>?GCI6                       4>?GC@6                       4>?G>J6                          4>?GG>6
                        K/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-           >?>EG BB                      >?>@> B                       >?>AE BBB                         >?>A@ BBB
                                                      4>?>I@6                       4>?>I@6                       4>?>GJ6                          4>?>I>6
:&)5;"%                 <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*            >?EJL BBB                     >?EAE BBB                     F>?G>I                           F>?>AE
CM@')$%'@ME                                           4>?GAI6                       4>?GAD6                       4>?GCD6                          4>?GCA6
                        K/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-           >?>LD BB                      >?>EC B                       >?GGE BBB                        >?GG@ BBB
                                                      4>?>CG6                       4>?>CI6                       4>?>I@6                          4>?>I@6
@ME'3&)*3               <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*            >?@II                         >?@JI B                       F>?>GC                           >?>IC
                                                      4>?IDD6                       4>?IAL6                       4>?I>C6                          4>?IGI6
                        K/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-           >?GED BBB                     >?G@A BBB                     >?G@I BBB                        >?GEC BBB
                                                      4>?>EI6                       4>?>ED6                       4>?>CA6                          4>?>@G6
CM@'3&)*3               <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*            >?L@L BB                      >?ELA BB                      F>?IEI                           F>?IIA
                                                      4>?IEE6                       4>?IL>6                       4>?GAJ6                          4>?GJG6
                        K/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-           >?>>G                         F>?>>J                        >?>JJ BBB                        >?>J> BBB
                                                      4>?>@I6                       4>?>@I6                       4>?>C>6                          4>?>C>6
IMC'3&)*3               <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*            >?@ED BB                      >?@CA BB                      >?@>I                            >?CCJ
                                                      4>?I>D6                       4>?IGA6                       4>?IEG6                          4>?ILG6
                        K/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-          F>?>>A                         >?>G>                         >?>>>                            >?>>L
                                                      4>?>@C6                          4>?>@@6                    4>?>CE6                         4>?>CD6
GMI'3&)*3               <=*"3=/-%'+$%+5)&/*           F>?>DC                           F>?I@@                     F>?E@I    B                     F>?DCI    BB
                                                      4>?CD@6                          4>?CAE6                    4>?CIA6                         4>?CCL6
                        K/5)-'-+$")*'5/$&*/-          >?>GE                             >?>>E                     >?G>J     B                     >?GCC     BB
                                                      4>?>AI6                          4>?>AE6                    4>?>LI6                         4>?>LE6
!"#$%&'(&&)*+,-./*.0*/*%+&*.&,010$"/*2%&3$-4+&".5&6%/06.+&77&8-6/3-$*-&$%2%$&9"$$&30.5+:
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'/*'-/0'$"&'*"&4*$3'5+$'#"*6"$&)0"'#/+$&37

H9"'&),-"'*"#")&3'&9"'*"0*"33+/$3'+$'H),-"'@'1/*'%+11"*"$&'&+I"'9/*+J/$3K'1/*'&9*""'3)I#-"3'/1'14$%3>''H9"'/("*)--'3)I#-"'+3'&9"'3)I"')3'+$'H),-"'
@>''H9"'%"#"$%"$&'()*+),-"'+3'&9"'64I4-)&+("'14$%:-"("-'-/0'1-/23'/*'14$%:-"("-'-/0'*"&4*$3K'6)-64-)&"%'"+&9"*'1*/I'&9"'*)$L+$0'I/$&9'&/')'14&4*"'
I/$&9K'/*'1*/I')'#)3&'I/$&9'&/'&9"'*)$L+$0'I/$&9>'''G3'+$'H),-"'@K')--'*"0*"33+/$3'+$6-4%"'&9"'&9*"39/-%'+$%+6)&/*'1/*'&9"'CMB')$%'@MC'3&)*'
,/4$%)*+"3')$%'2+&9+$:6)&"0/*N'#"*6"$&+-"'*)$L+$0'()*+),-"3'1/*'&9"'-)*0"3&'39)*"'6-)33>'''O"0*"33+/$3'+$6-4%"'&9"'3)I"'6/$&*/-3')3'+$'&9"'
)%%+&+/$)-'6/$&*/-3'3#"6+1+6)&+/$3'+$'H),-"'@>'PG--'"Q4+&NP'+$6-4%"3'PR)*0":6)#'"Q4+&NPK'P8+%:6)#'"Q4+&NPK'PSI)--:6)#'"Q4+&NPK'PS"6&/*'14$%3PK')$%'
PT$&"*$)&+/$)-'"Q4+&NP>''PG--',/$%3P'+$6-4%"3'PH)U),-"',/$%3P')$%'P84$+6+#)-',/$%3P>''PG--'14$%3P'+$6-4%"3'PG--'"Q4+&NPK'PG--',/$%3PK')$%')'
*"-)&+("-N'3I)--'$4I,"*'/1'14$%3'&9)&'%/'$/&'1+&'+$&/'&9"3"'34,3)I#-"3K'3469')3',)-)$6"%')$%'9N,*+%'14$%3>''S&)$%)*%'"**/*3'5+$'#)*"$&9"3"37'
)--/2'1/*'6-43&"*+$0'2+&9+$'14$%3>''S&)&+3&+6)-'3+0$+1+6)$6"')&'&9"';=:#"*6"$&K'B:#"*6"$&K')$%';:#"*6"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/:3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'%"$/&"%',N'FK'
FFK')$%'FFF>

                                          V-/23                                                               O"&4*$3

8/$&9               G--'14$%3             G--'"Q4+&N           G--',/$%3                 G--'14$%3              G--'"Q4+&N            G--',/$%3
:;<               :=>?@                 :=>?=                :=>A?                    =>=B                   =>=C                    =>=;
                 5=>A=7                5=>?A7               5=>?A7                   5=>=D7                 5=>;A7                 5=>=B7
:D                :=>AD                 :=>BE                :=>E;                    :=>=;                  :=>=;                  :=>=;
                 5=>B;7                5=>EB7               5=>E=7                   5=>=?7                 5=>;@7                 5=>=C7
:A                :=>A;                 :=>;A                :;><B F                  =>=B                   =>=?                   :=>=;
                 5=>C;7                5=>BA7               5=>AA7                   5=>=A7                 5=>;;7                 5=>=@7
:@                :=>CA F               =>=;                 :;>== FF                 =>=@                   =>=A                   :=>=<
                 5=><E7                5=>@B7               5=>CD7                   5=>=C7                 5=>=?7                 5=>=<7
=                 :=>=D                 =>=A                 :=><@                    =>=;                   =>=<                   :=>=< F
                 5=>;C7                5=><=7               5=><<7                   5=>=<7                 5=>=C7                 5=>=;7
;                 =>BD     FFF          =>BA FF              =>BD FF                  =>=;                   =>==                   :=>=;
                 5=>;D7                5=><E7               5=><E7                   5=>=<7                 5=>=B7                 5=>=;7
<                 =>ED     FFF          =>?D FF              =>AA FF                  =>=B                   =>=E                   :=>=;
                 5=><<7                5=>@E7               5=><E7                   5=>=@7                 5=>=A7                 5=>=;7
@                 =>?E     FFF          =>E= FF              ;>=C FFF                 =>=B                   =>=A                   =>==
                 5=><<7                5=>@B7               5=><?7                   5=>=@7                 5=>=A7                 5=>=<7
A                 ;>EB     FFF          ;>D@ FFF             ;>A< FFF                 =>=?                   =>=E                   =>=C
                 5=>@D7                5=>AC7               5=>CE7                   5=>=B7                 5=>=D7                 5=>=@7
D                 <>=C     FFF          <>;D FFF             ;>DE FFF                 =>=B                   :=>=;                  =>=B
                 5=>B;7                5=>?C7               5=>A=7                   5=>=E7                 5=>;<7                 5=>=C7
;<                <>@C     FFF          <>@B FF              <>@< FFF                 =>=@                   :=>=E                  =>=<
                 5=>A@7                5;>=A7               5=>E;7                   5=>=?7                 5=>;B7                 5=>=C7
;B                <>@B     FFF          <><D F               <>@C FFF                 =>=@                   :=>;=                  =>=@
                 5=>E<7                5;><=7               5=>?<7                   5=>=D7                 5=>;E7                 5=>=B7
;?                <>A<     FFF          <>@@ F               <>D< FFF                 =>=<                   :=>;<                  =>=@
                 5=>ED7                5;>@C7               5=>?E7                   5=>;=7                 5=>;D7                 5=>=B7
<;                <>?;     FFF          <>@B F               @><; FFF                 =>=<                   :=>;;                  =>=@
                 5=>?A7                5;>CA7               5=>DC7                   5=>;;7                 5=><=7                 5=>=A7
<C                <>??     FFF          <>@@                 @>CA FFF                 =>=B                   :=>=E                  =>=<
                 5=>D<7                5;>BB7               5;>=@7                   5=>;;7                 5=><;7                 5=>=A7
!"#$%&'(&&)*+*$",-.%&/$01&"23&4%,*42&%//%5,6&#7&"66%,&5$"66&88&9:'&"23&;:9&#0*23"4-%6&<6,"5=%3>
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'/*'-/0'$"&'*"&4*$3'5+$'#"*6"$&)0"'#/+$&37

:>+3'&),-"'*"#")&3'&>"'1+*3&J3&)0"')$%'*"%46"%J1/*='*"0*"33+/$3'+$'&>"'LHMB')$%'EMH'53&)6N"%7L'*"0*"33+/$3'+$':),-"'H'1/*'%+11"*"$&'&+="'>/*+O/$3')$%'34,3)=#-"3'/1')6&+("-P'=)$)0"%'=4&4)-'
14$%3@''K"0*"33+/$3'+$6-4%"'&>"'3)="'6/$&*/-3')3'+$'&>"')%%+&+/$)-'6/$&*/-3'3#"6+1+6)&+/$3'+$':),-"'E.''-)00"%'"Q#"$3"'*)&+/R'#/*&1/-+/'&4*$/("*R'-/)%3'51*/$&R'%"1"**"%R')$%'&*)+-+$07R')$%'&>"'-/0'
3+O"'/1'&>"'3>)*"'6-)33R'#/*&1/-+/R')$%'1)=+-PR'S/*$+$03&)*T3'=")34*"'/1'*+3NJ)%U43&"%'*"&4*$3R'-)00"%'-/0'*"&4*$3'1*/='&J?I'&/'&J?R'&JIH'&/'&J?ER')$%'&JE<'&/'&JIBR')$%'-)00"%'-/0'+$1-/23'1*/='&J?I'
&/'&J?')$%'&JE'&/'&J?@'L8--'"V4+&PL'+$6-4%"3'LW)*0"J6)#'"V4+&PLR'LS+%J6)#'"V4+&PLR'LX=)--J6)#'"V4+&PLR'LX"6&/*'14$%3LR')$%'LY$&"*$)&+/$)-'"V4+&PL@''L8--',/$%3L'+$6-4%"3'L:)Q),-"',/$%3L')$%'
LS4$+6+#)-',/$%3L@''L8--'14$%3L'+$6-4%"3'L8--'"V4+&PLR'L8--',/$%3LR')$%')'*"-)&+("-P'3=)--'$4=,"*'/1'14$%3'&>)&'%/'$/&'1+&'+$&/'&>"3"'34,3)=#-"3R'346>')3',)-)$6"%')$%'>P,*+%'14$%3@''X&)$%)*%'
"**/*3'5+$'#)*"$&>"3"37')--/2'1/*'6-43&"*+$0'2+&>+$'14$%3@''X&)&+3&+6)-'3+0$+1+6)$6"')&'&>"'?FJ#"*6"$&R'BJ#"*6"$&R')$%'?J#"*6"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/J3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'%"$/&"%',P'CR'CCR')$%'CCC@




                                                            W)*0"J6)#'        S+%J6)#'''      X=)--J6)#'                        Y$&"*$)&+/$)-'                                          S4$+6+#)-'
                         8--'14$%3        8--'"V4+&P          "V4+&P          "V4+&P           "V4+&P         X"6&/*'14$%3         "V4+&P         8--',/$%3         :)Q),-"',/$%3        ,/$%3
9-/2'"11"6&3
    :;<'=/$&>3           ?@AB     CCC      ?@DE    CCC      F@GF              ?@BG             ?@??             B@D?     CC       H@GI     CC       ?@<I      CCC      I@EI    CCC      ?@FH     CC
                        5F@ED7            5F@<H7           5F@AF7            5?@?D7           5?@<I7           5I@<I7            5I@HF7            5F@HA7             5F@GG7           5F@H<7
    :;?I'=/$&>3          I@EH     CCC      I@EB    CC       ?@IB              I@<<             J?@GI            G@BH     CC       <@FE              I@EI      CCC      I@<I    C        ?@DG     CCC
                        5F@<E7            5?@F<7           5?@?I7            5?@DI7           5E@FD7           5E@A?7            5E@GG7            5F@A?7             5?@EG7           5F@<<7
    :;?G'=/$&>3          I@<I     CCC      I@EE    C        ?@BI              I@HB             JE@HH           ??@BA     CC       B@<?              I@DI      CCC      E@GE    CC       I@?G     CCC
                        5F@AD7            5?@EH7           5?@<B7            5I@<<7           5E@BH7           5H@AE7            5H@HH7            5F@GA7             5?@A?7           5F@AH7
    :;IH'=/$&>3          I@GG     CCC      I@EE             ?@EF              I@HG             JH@?B           ?E@A?     CC       B@AF              E@H<      CCC      H@EH    CC       I@AD     CCC
                        5F@DI7            5?@BB7           5I@FF7            5E@?F7           5H@?G7           5<@BF7            5H@G?7            5?@FE7             5I@FA7           5F@GD7
K"&4*$'"11"6&3
    :;<'=/$&>3           F@FG              F@FA             JF@FH             F@BB    CC       JF@IG            F@EI               F@II             F@FH               F@FF             F@FA     CC
                        5F@FB7            5F@FD7           5F@??7            5F@IG7           5F@IG7           5F@HE7            5F@IB7            5F@FE7             5F@FB7           5F@FE7
    :;?I'=/$&>3          F@FE              JF@FA            JF@FG             F@A<    C        JF@<E            JF@??             JF@?G             F@FI               JF@FA            F@FD     CC
                        5F@FG7            5F@?B7           5F@?G7            5F@HI7           5F@HE7           5F@BB7            5F@EA7            5F@FH7             5F@FG7           5F@FH7
    :;?G'=/$&>3          F@FI              JF@?I            JF@?A             F@AD             JF@DD    C       F@F?              JF@FI             F@FE               JF@F<            F@?F     CC
                        5F@?F7            5F@?D7           5F@IE7            5F@BF7           5F@<F7           5F@<A7            5F@HB7            5F@FB7             5F@?F7           5F@FB7
    :;IH'=/$&>3          F@FB              JF@FA            JF@II             ?@?G    CC       JF@DI            F@FD              JF@F<             F@FI               JF@FA            F@?F     C
                        5F@??7            5F@I?7           5F@IA7            5F@BB7           5F@AF7           5F@AD7            5F@BF7            5F@F<7             5F@??7           5F@F<7
!"#$%&'(&&)*+%,-%./0.1"23%&"24&/$05,-%./0.1"23%&30..%$"6*027&301-".%4&5*68&%76*1"6%4&3"97"$&%//%367&0/&/$057

O;%.0('N3#0$)/"'4#.0(;#0"'4(%'30$)44#3'(%)*0N#(Q##*0")4(&)3%)0.%5#0'*<0&-(-4#0"#4&)4/'*$#0Q%(;0(;#0#.(%/'(#<0$'-.'30#&&#$(0)&0%*&3)Q.0)*0"#4&)4/'*$#800O;#0"'4(%'30$)44#3'(%)*0%.0#.(%/'(#<0'.0(;#0
$)#&&%$%#*(0)*0")4(&)3%)0.%5#0%*0'04#K4#..%)*0)&0&-(-4#04#(-4*.0)*0(;#02'4%'N3#.03%.(#<0-*<#40&-*<0$;'4'$(#4%.(%$.0%*0O'N3#0=R0'0$)*(4)30&)40"'.(1=G1/)*(;03)K04#(-4*.R0'*<0$'(#K)4IS/)*(;0&%P#<0#&&#$(.800O;#0
#.(%/'(#<0#&&#$(.0)&0'*0#P(4'0L)4*%*K.('40.('40)*0&-(-4#0%*&3)Q.0'*<04#(-4*.0'4#0('T#*0&4)/0O'N3#0?800O;#04'(%)0)&0(;#.#0#.(%/'(#<0#&&#$(.0"4)2%<#.0'*0%*.(4-/#*(02'4%'N3#.0#.(%/'(#0)&0(;#0$'-.'30#&&#$(0
)&0%*&3)Q.0)*0@$)*(#/")4'*#)-.D0"#4&)4/'*$#800,'-./'*0(#.(.0K#*#4'33I0<)0*)(04#U#$(0(;#0*-330;I")(;#.%.0(;'(0(;#0V!('*<'4<0WJ!V0.%5#1"#4&)4/'*$#0$)44#3'(%)*0'*<0VMXV0$'-.'30#&&#$(.0'4#0#H-'3800
!('(%.(%$'30.%K*%&%$'*$#0'(0(;#0=A1"#4$#*(R0?1"#4$#*(R0'*<0=1"#4$#*(03#2#30%*0(Q)1.%<#<0(#.(.0%.0<#*)(#<0NI0SR0SSR0'*<0SSS8



!"#$%&%$'(%)*+                                             V]%4.(0!('K#V                 V\#<-$#<0])4/V                        VMXV                             V!('*<'4<0WJ!V               ,'-./'*0(#.(
                                                      7'-.'30#&&#$(0)&0.('40)*0       7'-.'30#&&#$(0)&0.('40)*0     ['3<0#.(%/'(#0)&0&3)Q0#&&#$(0
                                                               &3)Q.                          4#(-4*.                       )*04#(-4*.                     Y)4(&)3%)0.%5#0$)#&&%$%#*(             "12'3-#
,)4%5)*          6..#(0$3'..                           7)#&8            !898           7)#&8            !898           7)#&8            !898                 7)#&8             !898
:0/)*(;.         6330&-*<.                              =8>?           @A8BCD           A8AE           @A8A?D           A8AF          @A8ABD               1A8AA==          @A8AAA=D               A8=G
                 0006330#H-%(I                          =8CB           @A8:FD           A8A>           @A8ACD           A8AF          @A8A?D               1A8AA=>          @A8AAAGD               A8F=
                 000000J'4K#1$'"0#H-%(I                 A8EA           @A8>AD          1A8AF           @A8==D          1A8A?          @A8=FD               1A8AA=C          @A8AAABD               A8>?
                 000000L%<1$'"0#H-%(I                   =8?E           @=8=CD           A8??           @A8GED           A8B?          @A8=ED               1A8AA=>          @A8AAA?D               A8A?
                 000000!/'331$'"0#H-%(I                 =8==           @=8:GD          1A8GE           @A8GED          1A8G?          @A8G?D               1A8AAG:          @A8AAA>D               A8BB
                 000000!#$()40&-*<.                     ?8C=           @G8:GD           A8BG           @A8FBD           A8A?          @A8A>D               1A8AA=>          @A8AAAED               A8FF
                 000000M*(#4*'(%)*'30#H-%(I             F8EG           @G8FAD           A8GG           @A8G?D           A8A?          @A8A?D               1A8AAA:          @A8AAA?D               A8B>
                 0006330N)*<.                           =8:G           @A8F>D           A8AF           @A8ABD           A8AG          @A8AGD               1A8AAA=          @A8AAA=D               A8GG
                 000000O'P'N3#0N)*<.                    G8BG           @A8EED           A8AA           @A8A?D           A8AA          @A8AGD               1A8AAA=          @A8AAA=D               A8C>
                 000000L-*%.                            =8AF           @A8F:D           A8A>           @A8ABD           A8A>          @A8ABD                A8AAAA          @A8AAA=D               A8AF
=G0/)*(;.        6330&-*<.                              G8BF           @A8:BD           A8AB           @A8AED           A8A=          @A8ABD               1A8AAG=          @A8AAABD               A8:B
                 0006330#H-%(I                          G8B?           @=8A:D          1A8A>           @A8=?D          1A8AB          @A8A:D               1A8AABA          @A8AAAFD               A8:?
                 000000J'4K#1$'"0#H-%(I                 =8G?           @=8=GD          1A8AE           @A8=ED          1A8A>          @A8=FD               1A8AAB?          @A8AAA?D               A8:>
                 000000L%<1$'"0#H-%(I                   G8::           @=8CGD           A8>:           @A8FGD           A8GC          @A8=:D               1A8AABB          @A8AAACD               A8A>
                 000000!/'331$'"0#H-%(I                1=8EG           @B8ACD          1A8:B           @A8FBD             Z)(0/#'*%*K&-3                   1A8AA?G          @A8AA=FD
                 000000!#$()40&-*<.                     E8?F           @B8>=D          1A8==           @A8??D          1A8A=          @A8A:D               1A8AAG>          @A8AA=:D               A8E>
                 000000M*(#4*'(%)*'30#H-%(I             :8AB           @B8EED          1A8=E           @A8B>D          1A8AB          @A8A:D               1A8AAAC          @A8AAACD               A8:?
                 0006330N)*<.                           G8BG           @A8>=D           A8AG           @A8AFD           A8A=          @A8AGD               1A8AAAG          @A8AAAGD               A8:E
                 000000O'P'N3#0N)*<.                    G8:G           @=8BED          1A8A>           @A8AED          1A8AB          @A8ABD               1A8AAAG          @A8AAABD               A8B?
                 000000L-*%.                            =8CE           @A8::D           A8AC           @A8AFD           A8A?          @A8AGD               1A8AAA=          @A8AAAGD               A8AG
GF0/)*(;.        6330&-*<.                              G8EE           @A8CGD           A8A?           @A8==D           A8AG          @A8AFD               1A8AABA          @A8AAA?D               A8:A
                 0006330#H-%(I                          G8BB           @=8??D          1A8A>           @A8G=D          1A8AB          @A8ACD               1A8AAF?          @A8AAA>D               A8>>
                 000000J'4K#1$'"0#H-%(I                 =8BA           @G8AAD          1A8GG           @A8G>D          1A8=>          @A8G=D               1A8AA?B          @A8AAACD               A8FF
                 000000L%<1$'"0#H-%(I                   G8FE           @B8=AD           =8=E           @A8??D           A8FE          @A8GGD               1A8AA?:          @A8AA=:D               A8AB
                 000000!/'331$'"0#H-%(I                1F8=?           @F8=ED          1A8CG           @A8>AD             Z)(0/#'*%*K&-3                   1A8AA>:          @A8AAGBD
                 000000!#$()40&-*<.                    =B8>=           @:8?AD           A8AC           @A8>CD           A8A=          @A8A:D               1A8AAGC          @A8AAGCD               A8E>
                 000000M*(#4*'(%)*'30#H-%(I             ?8>A           @F8E=D          1A8A:           @A8?AD          1A8A=          @A8ACD               1A8AA=A          @A8AA=?D               A8C=
                 0006330N)*<.                           B8F:           @=8ABD           A8AG           @A8A:D           A8A=          @A8AGD               1A8AAAB          @A8AAABD               A8:E
                 000000O'P'N3#0N)*<.                    F8BF           @G8A>D          1A8A>           @A8==D          1A8AG          @A8ABD               1A8AAAB          @A8AAA?D               A8?:
                 000000L-*%.                            G8>C           @A8ECD           A8=A           @A8A:D           A8AF          @A8AGD               1A8AAAG          @A8AAAFD               A8AC
!"#$%&'(&&)*+&",%&-./,%0%.1"$&2$*+3&-.4%31%56

!&"4%/EF,$%($G'(/4%/&$%$4/"#E/$2%H'$II"H"$*/4%'*%/&$%2"4H'*/"*0"/J%#$E40($%I'(%/&($$%2"II$($*/%4G$H"I"HE/"'*48%%!&$%4E#G,$%"4%4#E,,$(%/&E*%
"*%'/&$(%/EF,$4%F$HE04$%"/%"4%($4/("H/$2%/'%*'*:4G$H"E,/J%2'#$4/"H%$K0"/J%I0*24%I'(%-&"H&%-$%'F4$(L$%$K0"/J%&',2"*34D%-&"H&%E($%2"4H,'4$2%
K0E(/$(,J8%%!&$%I,'-%E*2%($/0(*%4G$H"I"HE/"'*4%#E/H&%/&$%M@N=%E*2%6N@%A4/EHO$2CM%I"(4/:4/E3$%E*2%($20H$2:I'(#%($3($44"'*48%%!&$%&',2"*34%
4G$H"I"HE/"'*%"4%E*E,'3'04%/'%/&$%($/0(*%4G$H"I"HE/"'*D%$PH$G/%/&E/%/&$%2$G$*2$*/%LE("EF,$%"4%/&$%*E/0(E,%,'3E("/&#%'I%/&$%*0#F$(%'I%
$K0"/J%&',2"*348%%Q$%($G'(/%$4/"#E/$4%I'(%/&$%I0,,%4E#G,$%'I%*'*:4G$H"E,/J%2'#$4/"H%$K0"/J%I0*24%I'(%-&"H&%-$%'F4$(L$%$K0"/J%&',2"*348%%
Q$%E,4'%($G'(/%$4/"#E/$4%I'(%/-'%40F4E#G,$4D%FE4$2%'*%&'-%I0*2%"R4%*0#F$(%'I%$K0"/J%&',2"*34%H'#GE($4%/'%/&$%#$2"E*%*0#F$(%'I%
$K0"/J%&',2"*34%I'(%I0*24%-"/&%/&$%4E#$%"*L$4/#$*/%'FS$H/"L$D%"*%/&$%4E#$%K0E(/$(8%%T,,%4G$H"I"HE/"'*4%"*H,02$%/&$%4E#$%H'*/(',%LE("EF,$4%
E4%"*%!EF,$4%6:=U%%,E33$2%$PG$*4$%(E/"'D%G'(/I',"'%/0(*'L$(D%,'E24%AI('*/D%2$I$(($2D%E*2%/(E","*3CD%E*2%/&$%,'3%4")$%'I%/&$%4&E($%H,E44D%
G'(/I',"'D%E*2%IE#",JD%V'(*"*34/E(R4%#$E40($%'I%("4O:E2S04/$2%($/0(*4D%,E33$2%,'3%($/0(*4%I('#%/:79%/'%/:7D%/:9@%/'%/:76D%E*2%/:6B%/'%/:9=D%
E*2%,E33$2%,'3%"*I,'-4%I('#%/:79%/'%/:7%E*2%/:6%/'%/:78%W/E*2E(2%$(('(4%A"*%GE($*/&$4$4C%E,,'-%I'(%H,04/$("*3%-"/&"*%I0*248




                             WE#G,$%-"/&%1',2"*34                 X%1',2"*34%E/%'(%EF'L$%#$2"E*              X%1',2"*34%F$,'-%#$2"E*
!"#$%&'(")'*              +,'-     .$/0(*     1',2"*34             +,'-       .$/0(*     1',2"*34          +,'-       .$/0(*   1',2"*34
!56%#'*/&4                7899       :;8;7      :7899              ;8<9        :;8;=       :;8>9           78?<        ;87;      :78@6
                         A;8B<C     A;876C     A78;BC             A;8>>C      A;87>C      A78;7C          A7869C      A;896C    A78@@C
                         BD?=7      BD?=7      BD?=7               6D=>=      6D=>=       6D=>=           6D6>B       6D6>B      6D6>B
!5B%#'*/&4                98?@       ;8;?       :78B>              98;6        ;8;7        :;8@7           @8@7        ;89<      :98>;
                         A78;;C     A;897C     A78;=C             A786=C      A;89?C      A78;9C          A78>>C      A;866C    A78B7C
                         BDB=@      BDB=@      BDB=@               6D@9@      6D@9@       6D@9@           6D96;       6D96;      6D96;
!579%#'*/&4               68;B       ;87;       :78;B              78BB        :;86B       ;87?            =8;=        ;8=>      :989;
                         A78?6C     A;86=C     A786=C             A686>C      A;8@?C      A78=BC          A98=>C      A;8=9C    A78?;C
                         BD;@>      BD;@>      BD;@>               6D77@      6D77@       6D77@           9D?66       9D?66      9D?66
!57<%#'*/&4               687?       ;87B       :;8>@              98;B        :;8@B       989>            @8><        ;8?;      :@8;B
                         A98B9C     A;8@=C     A786=C             A68??C      A;8B9C      A989BC          A@8;6C      A;8>;C    A98@>C
                         =D@=9      =D@=9      =D@=9               9D<@6      9D<@6       9D<@6           9DB;?       9DB;?      9DB;?
!59@%#'*/&4               98=9       ;87=       :78<;              ;8B9        :;89;       ;8=?            @8=@        ;8?9      :@8<=
                         A6899C     A;8=>C     A78<<C             A=8;7C      A;8>BC      A98@@C          A@8?9C      A;8?7C    A98<>C
                         @D<B?      @D<B?      @D<B?               9D==<      9D==<       9D==<           9D677       9D677      9D677
!"#$%&'(&&)*+,-./01&2%34536"07%&2%3-/-.%07%&453&7",-"$&%44%7.&54&4$58-

O<$(+*.N-)+#)8"#*(+,")00$,$)&*(+0#";+#)K#)(($"&(+"0+0=*=#)+#)*=#&(+.&>+$&0-"5(+"&+8.(*+9:L;"&*<+#)*=#&(1++Q)K#)(($"&(+$&,-=>)+,.*)K"#GR;"&*<+0$P)>+)00),*(+.&>+,"&*#"-+0"#+*<)+(.;)+
,"&*#"-+S.#$.N-)(+.(+$&+*<)+0$#(*L(*.K)+.&>+#)>=,)>L0"#;+#)K#)(($"&(+$&+O.N-)(+:LJ1++O<)+*.N-)+*<)&+#)8"#*(+#)*=#&+8)#($(*)&,)+,")00$,$)&*(+*<.*+.#)+,"##),*)>+0"#+*<)+,.=(.-+)00),*+"0+
$&0-"5(+"&+8)#0"#;.&,)1++O<)+,"##),*$"&(+.#)+,.-,=-.*)>+.(+*<)+8#">=,*+"0+*<)+0-"5+,")00$,$)&*+A$1)1T+*<)+)P*#.+$&0-"5(+*<.*+.,,";8.&G+.+9U+<$K<)#+#)*=#&B+.&>+*<)+,.=(.-+)00),*+"0+.&+
.>>$*$"&.-+9U+"0+.(()*+$&0-"5+"&+0=*=#)+8)#0"#;.&,)T+.(+#)8"#*)>+$&+O.N-)+J1++V)+,.-,=-.*)+*<)+=88)#+.&>+-"5)#+N"=&>(+"0+@IU+,"&0$>)&,)+$&*)#S.-(+0"#+*<)+,"##),*)>+8)#($(*)&,)+
,")00$,$)&*+=($&K+*<)+(*.&>.#>+)##"#(+#)8"#*)>+$&+O.N-)+J1++W"#+(;.--L,.8+)F=$*G+0=&>(T+*<)+,"##),*)>+,")00$,$)&*(+.#)+&"*+;).&$&K0=-+N),.=()+*<)+0$#(*+(*.K)+A0-"5B+)(*$;.*)+$(+&)K.*$S)1



                                                         X)#($(*)&,)+,")00$,$)&*                  W-"5+,")00$,$)&*                            /"##),*)>+8)#($(*)&,)+,")00$,$)&*
!"#$%"&         '(()*+,-.((                              /")01             2131                /")01             2131                      /")01              4"5)#+/6          788)#+/6
9:+;"&*<(       '--+0=&>(                                ?1?@9           A?1?9?B               ?1@CD           A?1?C9B                    ?1?DE                ?1?9C             ?19C9
                +++'--+)F=$*G                            ?1?EE           A?1?99B               ?1E@H           A?1?CHB                    ?199I                ?1??C             ?1::J
                ++++++4.#K)L,.8+)F=$*G                   ?1?E9           A?1?:IB               ?1@JD           A?199DB                    ?19CC                L?19HI            ?1C::
                ++++++M$>L,.8+)F=$*G                     ?1?EE           A?1?:?B               ?1@?E           A?1?DCB                    L?19D9               L?1CIE            ?199J
                ++++++2;.--L,.8+)F=$*G                   ?19::           A?1?:IB               ?1@CE           A?1?ECB                                Y"*+;).&$&K0=-
                ++++++2),*"#+0=&>(                       ?1?J@           A?1?:HB               ?1J@H           A?1?DEB                    ?1?DE                L?1?9:            ?19JE
                ++++++6&*)#&.*$"&.-+)F=$*G               ?1?JC           A?1?::B               ?1E@D           A?1?E@B                    ?1?@?                L?1?:9            ?1:?9
                +++'--+N"&>(                             ?19::           A?1?:?B               91D@I           A?19@9B                    ?19?@                ?1?C:             ?19DI
                ++++++O.P.N-)+N"&>(                      ?199J           A?1?:HB               91@::           A?19@EB                    ?19D?                ?1?IC             ?1:ED
                ++++++M=&$(                              ?19HE           A?1?C:B               91C::           A?1C99B                    ?1?D:                ?1?9C             ?19H?
!"#$%&'()*''+,-."/#'.0&'1&/2".3'-4'56.$5,'%&.$%/2'5%-$/1'%5."/#'7-$/15%"&2'88'9'3&5%'%5."/#2


!"#$%&'(&)(*+"#,-'(#)"%-)'$#*'%.#+/$0.)"$#1*%2*'#"&02#.34"0%*5"67.'%28##9,%")#*("'%*,:*';#%2"#,-'($#%2&%#&)"#4-$%#&3.5"#&'(#3"<.1#"&02#3.-'(&):=#1"#
><&0"#,-'($#*'%.#3*'$#%2&%#&)"#?8?@#1*("#*'#+/$0.)"#$>&0"8##!"#><.%#%2"#$2&)"#.,#,-'($#*'#%2"#@?#3*'$#.'#"*%2")#$*("#.,#%2"#@AB=#BAC=#CAD=#&'(#DAE#
3.-'(&)*"$#,.)#%2"#C/:"&)#)&%*';$8##!"#&<$.#><.%#%2"#$2&)"#*7><*"(#3:#%2"#$%&'(&)(#'.)7&<#(*$%)*3-%*.'8


                          )?@82.5%'7-$/15%3'                                                        @?982.5%'7-$/15%3'
                            90%-&<#         F"'027&)G#                                                90%-&<#         F"'027&)G#

                               ?8C?#                                                                     ?8H?#
                               ?8B?#                                                                     ?8D?#
                               ?8@?#                                                                     ?8B?#
                               ?8??#                                                                     ?8??#
  /?8@#          /?8?E#                ?#            ?8?E#       ?8@#      /?8@#           /?8?E#                ?#                ?8?E#     ?8@#
                           :826-%&';<'='7-$/15%3>'                                                   :826-%&';<'='7-$/15%3>'



                          9?A82.5%'7-$/15%3'                                                        A?B82.5%'7-$/15%3'
                            90%-&<#         F"'027&)G#                                                90%-&<#         F"'027&)G#

                               ?8H?#                                                                     ?8C?#
                               ?8D?#                                                                     ?8B?#
                               ?8B?#                                                                     ?8@?#
                               ?8??#                                                                     ?8??#
  /?8@#          /?8?E#                ?#            ?8?E#       ?8@#      /?8@#           /?8?E#                ?#                ?8?E#     ?8@#
                           :826-%&';<'='7-$/15%3>'                                                   :826-%&';<'='7-$/15%3>'
!"#$%&'()&&!%*+*&,-.&/0*1-2+0230+0%*&02&1-2+.-$&4".0"#$%*&"2/&,3+3.%&5"2"6%.0"$&17"26%*

6U$20/"%&'0T).NPT/20/'2/20*)#0N$2T)./$.P$/$'20"/0Q)#.$.42/"#0#".R$.40%)#N'#20$.0/U'0T)./#)&01"#$"%&'20P2'N0$.0/U'0K)#/*)&$)F&'1'&0#'4#'22$).20$.06"%&'20BF?+00,$.T'0
/U'2'0T)./#)&20"#'0K#'FN'/'#D$.'N0"/0/U'0/$D'0)*0#".R$.4W0/U'0Q)#.$.42/"#0#"/$.402U)P&N0.)/0U"1'0"0T"P2"&0'**'T/0).0/U'D+006'2/20"#'0"&2)0T).NPT/'N0*)#0
N$2T)./$.P$/$'20$.0*P/P#'0D"."4'#$"&0TU".4'20"/0/U'0#"/$.40%)P.N"#E+00Q".E0)*0/U'2'0/'2/20#'XP$#'0/U"/0Y'0&$D$/'N0/U'02"DK&'0/)0*P.N20/U"/0U"1'0."D'N0
D"."4'D'./0/'"D20$.0D)./U0/0".N0D)./U0/L:+00,/".N"#N0'##)#20"&&)Y0*)#0T&P2/'#$.40Y$/U$.0*P.N2+00,/"/$2/$T"&02$4.$*$T".T'0"/0/U'0=9FK'#T'./W0>FK'#T'./W0".N0=F
K'#T'./0&'1'&0$.0/Y)F2$N'N0/'2/20$20N'.)/'N0%E0AW0AAW0".N0AAA+


                                                                                                          Z$2T)./$.P$/E                   3)T"&0&$.'"#0T)./#)&
!"#$"%&'                                                                                              ()'*+             ,+-+             ()'*+             ,+-+
()./#)&01"#$"%&'2
      3)405)#/*)&$)0678                                                                               9+:;             <=+>?@            =+=9     AAA     <9+B=@
      3)40C"D$&E0678                                                                                  FB+G9    A       <H+=:@             =+=:    AAA     <9+IH@
      -JK'.2'0#"/$)                                                                                   F9+I=            <9+B?@            9+9H             <9+9?@
      -JK'.2'0#"/$)0</L=H@                                                                            F9+B9            <9+I=@            9+99             <9+9?@
      M"20&)"NO                                                                                       FH+H;            <>+I>@            F9+>>    AAA     <9+=9@
      5)#/*)&$)0/P#.)1'#                                                                              F9+=H            <9+=>@            F9+IH    AAA     <9+9B@
      3)40#'/P#.0</F=H0/)0/@                                                                          F9+=>            <9+=I@            9+?9     AAA     <9+9B@
      Q)#.$.42/"#0BFE'"#0#$2RF"NSP2/'N0#'/P#.                                                         F9+HH            <9+HB@            9+GB     AAA     <9+9I@
CP/P#'0D"."4'#$"&0TU".4'20<V=0$*02K'T$*$'N0TU".4'0D"N'0*#)D0/0/)0/L:@
!"#$%&'()&&*+,-.&/%,/%00-+10&2/%3-4.-1,&56.6/%&/".-1,


!&".%,4E-$%($F'(,.%0'$GG"0"$*,.%G('#%($H($.."'*.%F($I"0,"*H%G1,1($%J'(*"*H.,4(%(4,"*H.%
1."*H%,&$%.4#$%.F$0"G"04,"'*%4.%"*%!4E-$.%>KB9%%L'(%G1*I.%4,%,&$%E'1*I4(2%E$,M$$*%.%
4*I%.56%.,4(.N%,&$%I$F$*I$*,%O4("4E-$%".%I$G"*$I%4.%6%"G%,&$%G1*I%($0$"O$.%.56%'(%#'($%
.,4(.%"*%,&$%G1,1($9%%/4,4%G('#%4--%G'1(%E'1*I4("$.%4($%.,40P$I9%%Q$H($.."'*.%M",&%
0'*,('-.%"*0-1I$%,&$%0'*,('-.%1.$I%"*%!4E-$%>%=E',&%E4.$-"*$%4*I%4II","'*4-%0'*,('-.?9


!"#$%&'(")'*         +'*,('-.          /".0'*,"*1",2            3'04-%-"*$4(%0'*,('-
!56%#'*,&              7'                   89:;                        89;<:
                                           =>9;6?                      =8988@?
                        A$.                 89:B                        89;CC
                                           =:9D@?                      =8986>?
!5>%#'*,&               7'                  89<:                        89<<8
                                           =>9;8?                      =8988B?
                        A$.                 896C                        89<D>
                                           =:9D6?                      =8986<?
!5B%#'*,&               7'                  896>                        8966C
                                           =>9D@?                      =8988@?
                        A$.                 896>                        896:<
                                           =B9D@?                      =8986>?
!"#$%&'()&&*+#,-./%--&+0&1%-,$.-&.+&#"/2342.5

!"#$%&'()*%+*,)#-'&*$%$./*%0*1%+*$2)&$%3.+%')&*+4'&#5*%('467#6&"$8%%9))%+*$2)&$%'+*%3.+%,.+&3.)#.$%'46%3.+%&"*%&:;<%/.4&"%".+#=.48


                                                                                              O'467#6&"%G#4%,*+-*4&#)*%$,'-*P%>8>A%#$%2$*6%#4%/'#4%&'()*$H
                                                                          >8><            >8>?           >8>@             >8>A             >8>B           >8>C      >8>D
Q).7$M%'))%3246$M%'))%(.246'+#*$%G!'()*% E#$-.4&#42#&1                   ;8D>             ;8D;           ;8CC             ;8AB             ;8@D           ;8?F      ;8A@
@M%N.)%;H                                                               G>8C;H          G>8ACH         G>8@DH           G>8@@H           G>8@<H         G>8?FH    G>8?DH
                                         I244#4J%5'+#'()*                K>8;?           K>8>C          K>8>@            >8>D             >8;@            >8;F      >8;B
                                                                        G>8<CH          G>8;AH         G>8;>H           G>8>DH           G>8>BH         G>8>BH    G>8>AH
                                         L($*+5'&#.4$                   ACMFDB          DDM<AA        ;;DM;FC          ;@CM@@;          ;CBM>C;        <>?MFA@   <?;MA@D
Q).7$M%'))%3246$M%@RA%$&'+%(.246'+1%     E#$-.4&#42#&1                   ;8<@             <8CC           ?8;C             <8?F             <8@B           <8A<      <8?F
G!'()*%@M%N.)%?H                                                        G;8@?H          G;8<<H         G;8>>H           G>8F?H           G>8DCH         G>8D@H    G>8D<H
                                         I244#4J%5'+#'()*                 >8CC            >8??           >8;<             >8@;             >8@>           >8@B      >8A;
                                                                        G>8AFH          G>8?BH         G>8<?H           G>8;DH           G>8;AH         G>8;?H    G>8;;H
                                         L($*+5'&#.4$                   ;AM@?A          <?M??@         ?;M>BD           ?DMAB?          @AMF@C          A?M>>?   B>M>B?
Q).7$M%$*-&.+%3246$M%'))%(.246'+#*$%     E#$-.4&#42#&1                   <8DA             @8<B           ?8C;             ?8A>             ?8<;           ?8;;      <8CF
G!'()*%BM%N.)%CH                                                        G?8>DH          G<8ABH         G<8;CH           G;8F;H           G;8CAH         G;8B@H    G;8A@H
                                         I244#4J%5'+#'()*                >8DC            K>8@D          K>8?F            K>8?D            K>8;F          K>8;<     K>8>A
                                                                        G;8>BH          G>8BBH         G>8@>H           G>8?>H           G>8<CH         G>8<@H    G>8;FH
                                         L($*+5'&#.4$                    <MFD>           @MA@C          BM>B>            CMB?D           FM<@B          ;>MDCB   ;<M@B<
I*&2+4$M%'))%3246$M%'))%(.246'+#*$%      E#$-.4&#42#&1                   >8>C            >8>B           K>8>?            K>8>@            K>8>A          K>8>@     K>8>;
G!'()*%@M%N.)%<H                                                        G>8>FH          G>8>CH         G>8>CH           G>8>BH           G>8>BH         G>8>BH    G>8>BH
                                         I244#4J%5'+#'()*                K>8>;           K>8><           >8>;             >8>;             >8><           >8>;      >8>;
                                                                        G>8>@H          G>8><H         G>8><H           G>8>;H           G>8>;H         G>8>;H    G>8>;H
                                         L($*+5'&#.4$                   ACMFFD          DDM<CB        ;;DM<<B          ;@CM@CF          ;CBM;;D        <>@M>>D   <?;MB>C
I*&2+4$M%'))%3246$M%@RA%$&'+%(.246'+1%   E#$-.4&#42#&1                   K>8>B           >8>@           K>8>@            K>8>F            >8>;           >8>C       >8;A
G!'()*%@M%N.)%@H                                                        G>8<;H          G>8;BH         G>8;AH           G>8;@H           G>8;?H         G>8;?H    G>8;?H
                                         I244#4J%5'+#'()*                 >8>@            >8>;           >8><             >8>@             >8><           >8>;      >8>;
                                                                        G>8>FH          G>8>AH         G>8>?H           G>8>?H           G>8><H         G>8><H    G>8><H
                                         L($*+5'&#.4$                   ;AM@?C          <?M??B         ?;M>C?           ?DMABF          @AMFA@          A?M>;;   B>M>C<
I*&2+4$M%$*-&.+%3246$M%'))%(.246'+#*$%   E#$-.4&#42#&1                   K;8<@           K>8B@          K>8F?            K;8>F            K>8F;          K>8F?     K>8D<
G!'()*%BM%N.)%CH                                                        G>8C?H          G>8ADH         G>8A>H           G>8@CH           G>8@BH         G>8@BH    G>8@@H
                                         I244#4J%5'+#'()*                 >8B<            >8;A           >8;<             >8;@             >8>D           >8>F      >8>D
                                                                        G>8?;H          G>8;BH         G>8;>H           G>8>DH           G>8>BH         G>8>AH    G>8>AH
                                         L($*+5'&#.4$                    <MFD?           @MAA>          BM>BA            CMB@?           FM<A;          ;>MDD;   ;<M@BC
!"#$%&'()&&!"#$%&*&+,-.&+%,/.-%0&"1%2"/%&0,3456-,67,-8&,60,4"-52&"60&2766,6/&1"2,"#$%3&2"-.%2&-."6&$"2/%3-&3."2%&4$"33&
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'/*'-/0'$"&'*"&4*$3'5+$'#"*6"$&)0"'#/+$&37

:>+3'&),-"'*"#/*&3'*"0*"33+/$3'&>)&')*"'+%"$&+6)-'&/'&>/3"'+$':),-"'DL'"M6"#&'&>)&'*)&>"*'&>)$'43+$0'&>"'%+36/$&+$4+&N'+$%+6)&/*'()*+),-"')$%'-/6)-'-+$")*'6/$&*/-'6)-64-)&"%'1/*'&>"'-)*0"3&'3>)*"'
6-)33'/1')'14$%L'2"'+$3&")%'43"'&>"')33"&K2"+0>&"%')("*)0"'/1'&>"3"'()*+),-"3@''O&)$%)*%'"**/*3'5+$'#)*"$&>"3"37')--/2'1/*'6-43&"*+$0'2+&>+$'14$%3@''O&)&+3&+6)-'3+0$+1+6)$6"')&'&>"'AGK#"*6"$&L'DK
#"*6"$&L')$%'AK#"*6"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/K3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'%"$/&"%',N'CL'CCL')$%'CCC@




                                                            R)*0"K6)#'        P+%K6)#'''      O=)--K6)#'                       S$&"*$)&+/$)-'                                          P4$+6+#)-'
                         8--'14$%3        8--'"Q4+&N          "Q4+&N          "Q4+&N           "Q4+&N         O"6&/*'14$%3        "Q4+&N         8--',/$%3          :)M),-"',/$%3       ,/$%3
9-/2'"11"6&3
    :;<'=/$&>3           ?@AB     CCC      ?@BD    CCC      ?@B<     CCC      ?@<E    CCC      ?@F?     CC      D@AE     CCC      ?@AB    CCC       A@FG      CCC      E@HG    CCC      A@H<     CCC
                        5G@E?7            5G@HA7           5G@<?7            5G@BE7           5A@DH7           5A@ED7            5G@BH7            5G@EB7             5G@DD7           5G@EB7
    :;AE'=/$&>3          D@EA     CCC      <@G?    CCC      <@?D     CCC      D@BH    CCC      D@HI     C       <@?G     CCC      D@?<    CCC       ?@H?      CCC      H@?H    CCC      E@D<     CCC
                        5G@HA7            5G@I?7           5A@GF7            5A@D<7           5E@BF7           5E@AH7            5A@H?7            5G@DG7             5G@FI7           5G@HF7
    :;AB'=/$&>3          <@?D     CCC      I@?B    CCC      B@AD     CCC      I@G<    CCC      D@?G             B@GG     CCC      <@?E    CCC       H@HG      CCC      <@A?    CCC      E@B?     CCC
                        5G@D<7            5A@GG7           5A@DI7            5E@E?7           5?@<D7           5E@IB7            5A@FG7            5G@IG7             5A@?<7           5G@<F7
    :;EH'=/$&>3          I@AG     CCC      B@HG    CCC      B@IH     CCC      B@H?    CCC      D@?A             F@IF     CCC      I@F?    CCC       D@G<      CCC      I@EG    CCC      ?@GA     CCC
                        5G@<B7            5A@EA7           5A@FG7            5E@<E7           5H@AI7           5?@?<7            5E@<<7            5G@BI7             5A@<D7           5G@BB7
J"&4*$'"11"6&3
    :;<'=/$&>3           G@A?     CCC      G@EA    CC       G@GF              G@IB    CCC       G@GH            KG@HE             G@HH    C         G@GH      C        G@G<              G@GE
                        5G@GH7            5G@AA7           5G@A?7            5G@?G7           5G@EB7           5G@H<7            5G@E<7            5G@GE7             5G@GD7           5G@G?7
    :;AE'=/$&>3          G@GF              G@AG             KG@GA             A@A<    CC       KG@AF            KA@?H    C        G@E?              G@GH               G@GI              G@GE
                        5G@GI7            5G@AI7           5G@EA7            5G@DA7           5G@HD7           5G@IB7            5G@?F7            5G@GH7             5G@GI7           5G@GH7
    :;AB'=/$&>3          KG@GA             KG@AG            KG@EA             A@GF    C        KG@<B            KE@AA    CC       G@?G              G@G?               G@AG             KG@GA
                        5G@GF7            5G@E?7           5G@EI7            5G@<H7           5G@<A7           5A@GI7            5G@DA7            5G@GD7             5G@GF7           5G@GD7
    :;EH'=/$&>3          KG@GB             KG@A<            KG@HA             A@ED    C        KG@DD            KE@?A    C        G@AD              G@GE               G@AE             KG@GH
                        5G@AA7            5G@E<7           5G@?G7            5G@I<7           5G@IG7           5A@??7            5G@DI7            5G@G<7             5G@AA7           5G@G<7
!"#$%&'*)&&!"#$%&'(&+,-.&"6"$83,3&"-&9"6"/%9%6-&-%"9:#25"0&4"-%/528&2"-.%2&-."6&;52-<5$,5&$%1%$
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'/*'-/0'$"&'*"&4*$3'5+$'#"*6"$&)0"'#/+$&37



:>+3'&),-"'+3'+%"$&+6)-'&/':),-"'8HL'"M6"#&'&>)&'+&')00*"0)&"3'#/*&1/-+/3'&/'&>"'=)$)0"="$&'&")=C,*/)%'6)&"0/*N'-"("-'*)&>"*'&>)$'&>"'14$%'#/*&1/-+/'-"("-@'J"0*"33+/$3'+$6-4%"',*/)%'
6)&"0/*NC&+="'1+M"%'"11"6&3'*)&>"*'&>)$'P/*$+$03&)*'6)&"0/*NC&+="'1+M"%'"11"6&3@'S$')--'/&>"*'*"3#"6&3L'346>')3'3)=#-"L'6/$&*/-'()*+),-"3L')$%'&>"',/4$%)*+"3'+$6-4%"%L'&>"')$)-N3+3'+3'+%"$&+6)-'
&/':),-"'8H@''''T*/)%'6)&"0/*+"3')*"'UR)*0"K6)#'"Q4+&NUL'UP+%K6)#'"Q4+&NLU'UO=)--K6)#'"Q4+&NLU'UO"6&/*'14$%3LU'US$&"*$)&+/$)-'"Q4+&NLU'U:)M),-"',/$%3LU')$%'UP4$+6+#)-',/$%3@U''8'=)$)0"="$&'
&")='+3')'4$+Q4"'6/=,+$)&+/$'/1'=)$)0"*'34*$)="3@''94$%3'=)$)0"%',N')$/$N=/43'&")=3'/*'2+&>'=+33+$0'=)$)0"*'$)="3')*"'"M6-4%"%'1*/='&>"')$)-N3+3@''O&)&+3&+6)-'3+0$+1+6)$6"')&'&>"'AGK
#"*6"$&L'DK#"*6"$&L')$%'AK#"*6"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/K3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'%"$/&"%',N'CL'CCL')$%'CCC@



                                                           R)*0"K6)#'       P+%K6)#'''       O=)--K6)#'                      S$&"*$)&+/$)-'                                         P4$+6+#)-'
                         8--'14$%3        8--'"Q4+&N         "Q4+&N         "Q4+&N            "Q4+&N        O"6&/*'14$%3        "Q4+&N         8--',/$%3         :)M),-"',/$%3       ,/$%3
9-/2'"11"6&3
    :;<'=/$&>3           E@?I    CCC      E@F<     CCC     E@?B     CC      G@<B             E@EF             H@BD     CCC     H@H?     CCC       E@EA     CCC      ?@EH    CCC      A@HI    C
                        5G@HI7           5G@I?7           5A@AE7           5A@DE7           5A@DB7           5A@BD7           5A@<H7             5G@<?7            5G@FE7           5G@FA7
    :;AE'=/$&>3          ?@D?    CCC      H@?A     CCC     H@HE     CC      G@ID             ?@D<             <@EG     CC      D@GA     CC        ?@FI     CCC      D@GA    CCC      ?@<A    CCC
                        5G@IF7           5A@AI7           5A@FB7           5E@HB7           5E@EB7           5E@FB7           5E@HE7             5A@GH7            5A@DI7           5A@ED7
    :;AB'=/$&>3          H@A<    CCC      D@GD     CCC     ?@HE             E@BH             H@FF     C       <@D<     C       I@AE     C         D@HI     CCC      I@EG    CCC      H@FI    CCC
                        5A@GB7           5A@<I7           5E@B<7           5?@EB7           5E@FG7           5?@?F7           5H@EA7             5A@??7            5A@FB7           5A@<A7
    :;EH'=/$&>3          H@?B    CCC      D@HG     CCC     ?@AI             ?@DD             <@DB     C      AG@<E     CC      D@HI               D@HE     CCC      <@I<    CCC      D@BH    CCC
                        5A@EA7           5A@BA7           5?@AA7           5?@BD7           5?@DG7           5H@E?7           5H@<F7             5A@D<7            5E@??7           5A@FB7
J"&4*$'"11"6&3
    :;<'=/$&>3           G@G?             G@A?             KG@A?            G@AB             KG@AA            A@GA     C       G@G<               G@G?              G@GD              G@GG
                        5G@GB7           5G@AD7           5G@AF7           5G@??7           5G@H?7           5G@DH7           5G@?I7             5G@GH7            5G@GI7           5G@G?7
    :;AE'=/$&>3          KG@GE            G@AI             KG@?H            G@?A              G@GE            A@GF             G@E<               G@GG              G@GG             KG@GF
                        5G@A?7           5G@E<7           5G@EI7           5G@DI7           5G@IA7           5A@GD7           5G@IG7             5G@GI7            5G@AG7           5G@G<7
    :;AB'=/$&>3          KG@AA            G@AA             KG@HG            G@DA              G@HH            G@I<             KG@A<              KG@GH             KG@G<            KG@AF   CC
                        5G@AI7           5G@??7           5G@??7           5G@IA7           5G@BI7           5A@?I7           5A@GG7             5G@GF7            5G@AH7           5G@GF7
    :;EH'=/$&>3          KG@A<            G@AA             KG@<D    C       G@IE              G@FE            G@IB             KG@EG              KG@G?             KG@G?            KG@EG   C
                        5G@AF7           5G@?B7           5G@?H7           5G@IG7           5A@GB7           5A@<G7           5A@EE7             5G@GF7            5G@AH7           5G@AA7
!"#$%&'=)&&!"#$%&'(&+,-.&"6"$83,3&"-&<,23-&9"6"/%2:#25"0&4"-%/528&2"-.%2&-."6&;52-<5$,5&$%1%$
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'/*'-/0'$"&'*"&4*$3'5+$'#"*6"$&)0"'#/+$&37



:>+3'&),-"'+3'+%"$&+6)-'&/':),-"'8HL'"M6"#&'&>)&'+&')00*"0)&"3'#/*&1/-+/3'&/'&>"'1+*3&K$)="%'=)$)0"*C,*/)%'6)&"0/*N'-"("-'*)&>"*'&>)$'&>"'14$%'#/*&1/-+/'-"("-@'J"0*"33+/$3'+$6-4%"',*/)%'
6)&"0/*NC&+="'1+M"%'"11"6&3'*)&>"*'&>)$'P/*$+$03&)*'6)&"0/*NC&+="'1+M"%'"11"6&3@'S$')--'/&>"*'*"3#"6&3L'346>')3'3)=#-"L'6/$&*/-'()*+),-"3L')$%'&>"',/4$%)*+"3'+$6-4%"%L'&>"')$)-N3+3'+3'+%"$&+6)-'
&/':),-"'8H@''''T*/)%'6)&"0/*+"3')*"'UR)*0"K6)#'"Q4+&NUL'UP+%K6)#'"Q4+&NLU'UO=)--K6)#'"Q4+&NLU'UO"6&/*'14$%3LU'US$&"*$)&+/$)-'"Q4+&NLU'U:)M),-"',/$%3LU')$%'UP4$+6+#)-',/$%3@U''94$%3'2>/3"'
1+*3&K$)="%'=)$)0"*'>)3'&>"'3)="'34*$)="')*"'6/$3+%"*"%'&/'>)("'&>"'3)="'#*+="'=)$)0"*'5&>"')-#>),"&+6)-'/*%"*+$0'$/*=')##")*3'&/'$/&',"'43"%',N'P/*$+$03&)*V'"@0@'=)$)0"*3')*"'+$'
)-#>),"&+6)-'/*%"*'1/*'DEW'/1'&2/'=)$)0"*'14$%37@''94$%3'=)$)0"%',N')$/$N=/43'&")=3'/*'2+&>'=+33+$0'=)$)0"*'$)="3')*"'"M6-4%"%'1*/='&>"')$)-N3+3@''O&)&+3&+6)-'3+0$+1+6)$6"')&'&>"'AGK
#"*6"$&L'DK#"*6"$&L')$%'AK#"*6"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/K3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'%"$/&"%',N'CL'CCL')$%'CCC@



                                                           R)*0"K6)#'        P+%K6)#'''      O=)--K6)#'                      S$&"*$)&+/$)-'                                          P4$+6+#)-'
                         8--'14$%3        8--'"Q4+&N         "Q4+&N          "Q4+&N           "Q4+&N         O"6&/*'14$%3       "Q4+&N         8--',/$%3         :)M),-"',/$%3        ,/$%3
9-/2'"11"6&3
    :;<'=/$&>3           E@<F     CCC     ?@?D     CCC     E@BA     CCC     A@BB             ?@EB     CC       ?@DB    CC       H@BF    CCC       E@AI     CCC      ?@E<     CCC     A@ED
                        5G@HH7           5G@DF7           5G@FE7           5A@?H7           5A@DI7            5A@IA7           5A@?H7            5G@<E7            5G@BD7           5G@FH7
    :;AE'=/$&>3          H@G?     CCC     D@E?     CCC     D@??     CCC     E@BH             H@IE     CC       <@D<    CC       <@GE    CCC       ?@DD     CCC      H@FE     CCC     E@BF     CC
                        5G@I?7           5G@F<7           5A@DF7           5E@AF7           5E@AB7            5E@FF7           5E@AG7            5A@G?7            5A@DE7           5A@E<7
    :;AB'=/$&>3          H@DF     CCC     D@F<     CCC     H@<A     CC      H@HB     C       <@GG     CC       <@B<    C        B@?I    CC        H@HB     CCC      <@?<     CCC     H@?A     CCC
                        5A@GG7           5A@?<7           5E@E<7           5E@II7           5E@<I7            5?@BD7           5?@<G7            5A@??7            5A@FF7           5A@<?7
    :;EH'=/$&>3          H@BF     CCC     <@ED     CCC     H@EG     C       D@A<             I@HD     CC       B@IF    C        I@HD    C         H@EF     CCC      D@FG     CC      D@A<     CC
                        5A@AA7           5A@DA7           5E@HD7           5?@?G7           5?@AD7            5H@B?7           5?@FE7            5A@DD7            5E@?H7           5E@GD7
J"&4*$'"11"6&3
    :;<'=/$&>3           G@G?             G@AH             KG@AI            G@<A             G@AE              G@EH             KG@G<             KG@GE             KG@GH            G@GG
                        5G@GB7           5G@AH7           5G@A<7           5G@HA7           5G@HG7            5G@DA7           5G@EB7            5G@GD7            5G@GI7           5G@G?7
    :;AE'=/$&>3          KG@G<            G@A?             KG@?B    C       G@<?             G@EF              G@G<              G@G<             KG@GB             KG@AH            KG@GI
                        5G@A?7           5G@E?7           5G@E?7           5G@DB7           5G@<F7            5A@GH7           5G@D?7            5G@GI7            5G@AA7           5G@G<7
    :;AB'=/$&>3          KG@AD            G@G<             KG@DE    C       G@FH             G@HI              KG@DH            KG@AA             KG@GF             KG@AD            KG@A<    C
                        5G@A<7           5G@EF7           5G@EB7           5G@IH7           5G@BA7            5A@?D7           5G@IH7            5G@GF7            5G@AD7           5G@GF7
    :;EH'=/$&>3          KG@EE            G@G?             KG@ID    CCC     G@FI             G@BF              KG@DH            KG@AF             KG@GI             KG@AA            KG@AB    C
                        5G@AB7           5G@??7           5G@EB7           5G@I?7           5G@FD7            5A@DD7           5G@BF7            5G@AG7            5G@A<7           5G@AA7
!"#$%&'>)&&!"#$%&'(&+,-.&"6"$83,3&"-&<760&<"9,$8:4"-%/528&2"-.%2&-."6&;52-<5$,5&$%1%$
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'/*'-/0'$"&'*"&4*$3'5+$'#"*6"$&)0"'#/+$&37

:>+3'&),-"'+3'+%"$&+6)-'&/':),-"'8HL'"M6"#&'&>)&'+&')00*"0)&"3'#/*&1/-+/3'&/'&>"'14$%'1)=+-NCP/*$+$03&)*'6)&"0/*N'-"("-'*)&>"*'&>)$'&>"'14$%'#/*&1/-+/'-"("-@''S$')--'/&>"*'*"3#"6&3L'346>')3'3)=#-"L'
6/$&*/-'()*+),-"3L')$%'&>"',/4$%)*+"3'+$6-4%"%L'&>"')$)-N3+3'+3'+%"$&+6)-'&/':),-"'8H@'''O&)$%)*%'"**/*3'5+$'#)*"$&>"3"37')--/2'1/*'6-43&"*+$0'2+&>+$'14$%3@''O&)&+3&+6)-'3+0$+1+6)$6"')&'&>"'AGK
#"*6"$&L'DK#"*6"$&L')$%'AK#"*6"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/K3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'%"$/&"%',N'CL'CCL')$%'CCC@



                                                            R)*0"K6)#'        P+%K6)#'''       O=)--K6)#'                       S$&"*$)&+/$)-'                                          P4$+6+#)-'
                         8--'14$%3        8--'"Q4+&N          "Q4+&N          "Q4+&N            "Q4+&N         O"6&/*'14$%3        "Q4+&N         8--',/$%3         :)M),-"',/$%3        ,/$%3
9-/2'"11"6&3
    :;<'=/$&>3           ?@HI     CCC      H@?F     CCC     ?@IF     CCC      ?@IB    CCC      <@EE     CCC      A@<<             H@ED     CCC      E@AI      CCC      E@FB     CCC     G@II
                        5G@?F7            5G@D<7           5G@BG7            5A@ED7           5A@?A7            5A@BE7           5A@<G7            5G@DD7             5G@IH7           5G@FG7
    :;AE'=/$&>3          D@?F     CCC      <@DF     CCC     <@HI     CCC      <@ID    CCC      B@<B     CCC      E@GF             D@AE     CC       ?@IH      CCC      H@BD     CCC     E@GI     C
                        5G@<<7            5G@FD7           5A@IG7            5A@BB7           5A@FG7            5E@DG7           5E@HA7            5G@BF7             5A@?G7           5A@AH7
    :;AB'=/$&>3          <@HH     CCC      I@?B     CCC     <@BF     CCC      F@GF    CCC     AA@E?     CCC      KG@GA            H@DG              D@GD      CCC      D@FD     CCC     ?@BD     CCC
                        5G@F?7            5A@??7           5E@A?7            5E@DG7           5E@<H7            5?@GF7           5?@AG7            5A@EG7             5A@I<7           5A@HD7
    :;EH'=/$&>3          I@AF     CCC      B@HE     CCC     I@<<     CCC      F@HA    CCC     AD@EH     CCC      KG@B<            H@GH              D@G?      CCC      D@DI     CCC     H@?D     CCC
                        5A@EG7            5A@I?7           5E@?<7            5?@GH7           5?@D?7            5?@<<7           5?@<<7            5A@HA7             5E@GH7           5A@<I7
J"&4*$'"11"6&3
    :;<'=/$&>3           KG@GD             KG@GH            KG@?G    CC       G@IB    CCC      G@EE              KG@EA            KG@EH             G@GG               G@GG              G@GH
                        5G@GI7            5G@AE7           5G@AD7            5G@EI7           5G@?D7            5G@?F7           5G@EB7            5G@GH7             5G@G<7           5G@G?7
    :;AE'=/$&>3          KG@AA             KG@G<            KG@EA             A@GG    CC       G@?H              KG@<<            KG@D?             KG@GI              KG@AG            KG@GA
                        5G@AE7            5G@AF7           5G@EH7            5G@HE7           5G@<E7            5G@<?7           5G@HD7            5G@G<7             5G@AG7           5G@GD7
    :;AB'=/$&>3          KG@EE             KG@EE            KG@E?             A@EH    CC       KG@AG             KA@EB   C        KG@B<             KG@AA              KG@AI            KG@G<
                        5G@AH7            5G@EH7           5G@??7            5G@HB7           5G@<H7            5G@IB7           5G@DI7            5G@GB7             5G@AE7           5G@GI7
    :;EH'=/$&>3          KG@E?             KG@EG            KG@?H             A@EH    CC       G@EF              KA@GB            KG@FD             KG@GF              KG@A<            KG@GH
                        5G@AD7            5G@ED7           5G@?D7            5G@DA7           5G@<I7            5G@B<7           5G@<D7            5G@GB7             5G@A?7           5G@GB7
!"#$%&'()&&*+,+$"-./%&0$12&"34&5%-+53&%00%6-7&.3&7+#7",8$%7&9"$$&0+347:
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'/*'-/0'$"&'*"&4*$3'5+$'#"*6"$&)0"'#/+$&37

9=+3'&),-"'*"#")&3'&="'1+*3&I3&)0"')$%'*"%46"%I1/*<'*"0*"33+/$3'+$'9),-"'A'1/*'%+11"*"$&'34,3)<#-"3'/1')6&+("-K'<)$)0"%'<4&4)-'14$%3?''9="'LM--'84$%3L'6/-4<$'*"#")&3'&="'*"34-&3'+$'&="'1+*3&'6/-4<$'/1'9),-"'A?''9="'#/3&I8!'#"*+/%'+3'N/("<,"*'EHHH'&=*/40='&="'"$%'/1'
&="'3)<#-"?''9="'1)<+-K'3+O"'(3?'6)&"0/*K'<"%+)$'%+(+%"%'14$%'#/*&1/-+/3'+$'")6='6)&"0/*KB&+<"'#"*+/%'+$&/'&2/'"P4)--K'0*/4#3',)3"%'/$'&="'3+O"'/1'&="+*'14$%'1)<+-K?''9="'6/**"-)&+/$'2+&=',"3&I1+&'+$%"Q'()*+),-"'+3'6)-64-)&"%',K'R/*$+$03&)*?''S&)$%)*%'"**/*3'5+$'
#)*"$&="3"37')--/2'1/*'6-43&"*+$0'2+&=+$'14$%3?''S&)&+3&+6)-'3+0$+1+6)$6"')&'&="'>HI#"*6"$&T'AI#"*6"$&T')$%'>I#"*6"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/I3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'%"$/&"%',K'BT'BBT')$%'BBB?



                                                                                                                W/*&1/-+/'3+O"'(3?'6)&"0/*K'       8)<+-K'3+O"'(3?'6)&"0/*K'                                           [/**"-)&+/$'2+&=',"3&I1+&'
                                                       J"0'8!                           U/)%'1)<+-KV                     <"%+)$                            <"%+)$                                M0"                            +$%"Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      X"-/2'<"%?' M,/("'<"%?'           Y/4$0'5GIA'K*37'
                           M--'14$%3             W*"            W/3&              Y"3              N/              X"-/2          M,/("              X"-/2         M,/("             GIA'K")*3         A:'K")*3      5R/*"')6&+("7 5U"33')6&+("7       )$%'3<)--'5Z<"%7
8-/2'"11"6&3
    9:;'</$&=3            >?@A    BBB         >?CD BBB       >?CD      BBB      E?FD     BBB    >?DG BBB          E?@A BBB      >?G@ BB            E?>F BBB       >?D@ BBB           G?DE BB        >?AA BBB           >?D; BBB       >?C; BBB             >?CE
                         5H?GD7              5H?;D7         5H?FD7             5H?AD7          5H?;D7            5H?@E7        5H?AG7             5H?AE7         5H?;G7             5>?AF7         5H?FG7             5H?;C7         5H?F;7               5E?EG7
    9:>E'</$&=3           E?GF    BBB         H?E;           E?D>      BBB      G?FF     BBB    >?ED              G?CA BBB      >?GE               G?EG BBB       >?CA B             E?>E           E?H; BBB           E?CE BB        >?;G BB              H?C@
                         5H?;G7              5>?H;7         5H?C;7             5H?D@7          5>?G>7            5>?EA7        5H?CD7             5H?DE7         5>?H@7             5E?DG7         5H?@A7             5>?E>7         5H?@>7               5G?HC7
    9:>C'</$&=3           E?;E    BBB         H?FC           E?GE      BB       G?HG     BBB    >?E;              G?HG B        H?CH               G?>@ BB        >?E@               G?;E           >?FC B             E?HC           >?C@ BB              E?HE
                         5H?@D7              5>?EA7         5H?DD7             5>?HF7          5>?@;7            5>?@F7        5H?C@7             5>?EC7         5>?H@7             5G?G>7         5H?CA7             5>?F>7         5H?DA7               5G?C@7
    9:EF'</$&=3           E?CC    BBB         IH?EE          E?>E      B        E?@;     BB     H?DA              E?@G          H?@@               E?GF           >?;>               E?@C           H?C;               >?>>           >?@;                 >?>C
                         5H?DE7              5>?FE7         5>?EG7             5>?EH7          5E?EH7            5E?EG7        5>?HG7             5>?;A7         5>?EC7             5G?CF7         5>?HE7             5>?@E7         5>?>>7               5F?;>7
J"&4*$'"11"6&3
    9:;'</$&=3            H?HC                H?>;            H?H>              H?>E BB         H?>G               H?>G         H?H@                H?>H          H?HA               H?FH            H?H>              H?HC            H?H;                H?G>
                         5H?HA7              5H?>A7         5H?HA7             5H?H;7          5H?>>7            5H?HD7        5H?H;7             5H?HC7         5H?H@7             5H?EA7         5H?HA7             5H?HD7         5H?H;7               5H?GE7
    9:>E'</$&=3           H?HG                IH?H;          IH?HE              H?HA            H?EF              H?HE          H?H@               H?HA           H?HE               H?>E           IH?HG              H?>H           IH?HA                H?>G
                         5H?HC7              5H?EG7         5H?H@7             5H?HD7          5H?>@7            5H?>F7        5H?>H7             5H?>E7         5H?>>7             5H?FH7         5H?HC7             5H?>G7         5H?HD7               5H?AF7
    9:>C'</$&=3           H?HE                IH?H;          IH?HC              H?HF            H?EG              IH?H@         H?>>               IH?H;          H?H@               H?GA           IH?H;              H?H;           IH?HC                H?FH
                         5H?>H7              5H?E@7         5H?>H7             5H?>E7          5H?E>7            5H?>@7        5H?>E7             5H?>A7         5H?>F7             5H?A>7         5H?>H7             5H?>@7         5H?>E7               5H?;@7
    9:EF'</$&=3           H?HA                H?HD           IH?>H              H?HC            H?EA              IH?>;         H?EH               IH?>H          H?>@               H?G@           IH?HG              H?>E           IH?HF                H?>G
                         5H?>>7              5H?GH7         5H?>>7             5H?>G7          5H?EF7            5H?>D7        5H?>F7             5H?>C7         5H?>A7             5H?A@7         5H?>>7             5H?>D7         5H?>F7               5H?@E7
!"#$%&'(')&&*+,+$"-./%&0$12&"34&5%-+53&%00%6-7&.3&7+#7",8$%7&9%;+.-<&0+347:
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'/*'-/0'$"&'*"&4*$3'5+$'#"*6"$&)0"'#/+$&37

9=+3'&),-"'*"#")&3'&="'1+*3&I3&)0"')$%'*"%46"%I1/*<'*"0*"33+/$3'+$'9),-"'A'1/*'%+11"*"$&'34,3)<#-"3'/1')6&+("-K'<)$)0"%'"P4+&K'<4&4)-'14$%3?''9="'LM--'\P4+&K'84$%3L'6/-4<$'*"#")&3'&="'*"34-&3'+$'&="'3"6/$%'6/-4<$'/1'9),-"'A?''9="'#/3&I8!'#"*+/%'+3'N/("<,"*'EHHH'
&=*/40='&="'"$%'/1'&="'3)<#-"?''9="'1)<+-K'3+O"'(3?'6)&"0/*K'<"%+)$'%+(+%"%'14$%'#/*&1/-+/3'+$'")6='6)&"0/*KB&+<"'#"*+/%'+$&/'&2/'"P4)--K'0*/4#3',)3"%'/$'&="'3+O"'/1'&="+*'14$%'1)<+-K?''9="'6/**"-)&+/$'2+&=',"3&I1+&'+$%"Q'()*+),-"'+3'6)-64-)&"%',K'R/*$+$03&)*?''
S&)$%)*%'"**/*3'5+$'#)*"$&="3"37')--/2'1/*'6-43&"*+$0'2+&=+$'14$%3?''S&)&+3&+6)-'3+0$+1+6)$6"')&'&="'>HI#"*6"$&T'AI#"*6"$&T')$%'>I#"*6"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/I3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'%"$/&"%',K'BT'BBT')$%'BBB?



                                                                                                                W/*&1/-+/'3+O"'(3?'6)&"0/*K'       8)<+-K'3+O"'(3?'6)&"0/*K'                                          [/**"-)&+/$'2+&=',"3&I1+&'
                                                      J"0'8!                            U/)%'1)<+-KV                     <"%+)$                            <"%+)$                               M0"                            +$%"Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     X"-/2'<"%?' M,/("'<"%?'           Y/4$0'5GIA'K*37'
                       M--'"P4+&K'14$%3         W*"            W/3&               Y"3              N/             X"-/2           M,/("             X"-/2          M,/("            GIA'K")*3         A:'K")*3      5R/*"')6&+("7 5U"33')6&+("7       )$%'3<)--'5Z<"%7
8-/2'"11"6&3
    9:;'</$&=3            >?DG BBB           E?HE B         E?>> BB             G?>>     BBB    E?EH BB          G?>; BB        >?A; B             E?>C BBB       E?HC B            G?AC BB        >?@@ BB            E?GF BB        >?DD BBB             E?FC
                         5H?;F7             5>?>H7         5H?CG7              5>?HG7          5>?HE7           5>?EG7         5H?C@7             5H?@D7         5>?H@7            5>?CE7         5H?@F7             5>?>G7         5H?@E7               5E?DH7
    9:>E'</$&=3           E?GA BB            IH?EF          G?HH BB             F?EG     BB     >?>D             G?@; B         >?;E               G?F@ BB        >?;C              >?;G           E?H>               G?@A B         >?EA                 E?A>
                         5>?H;7             5>?CA7         5>?FG7              5>?;D7          5E?HE7           5>?DF7         5>?AG7             5>?FG7         5>?C@7            5G?@A7         5>?G>7             5>?D@7         5>?HD7               5G?CC7
    9:>C'</$&=3           E?GG B             H?>;           E?E>                G?@G     BB     >?H@             G?A;           H?@E               G?>E           >?EF              E?AD           >?G@               E?D@           >?A;                 A?EA
                         5>?GF7             5E?>H7         5>?;G7              5>?@G7          5E?@A7           5G?>H7         5>?FH7             5E?>@7         5>?@;7            5F?>G7         5>?FC7             5E?EE7         5>?;E7               5F?CH7
    9:EF'</$&=3           E?GG               IH?F>          E?EA                G?GA     B      H?CF             E?CG           >?F;               >?FA           E?FC              >?;A           >?>>               E?>D           >?D@                 F?HA
                         5>?AA7             5E?GC7         5E?H@7              5>?D@7          5G?A>7           5F?>G7         5>?;G7             5E?C;7         5E?HF7            5A?H>7         5>?CH7             5E?@A7         5>?CA7               5A?DH7
J"&4*$'"11"6&3
    9:;'</$&=3            H?H@                H?EG          IH?HF                H?HC           H?E;              H?>@          H?HC                H?>H           H?HF              H?GH           H?HH               H?HE           H?>>                 H?GF
                         5H?HD7             5H?GH7         5H?HD7              5H?>>7          5H?>D7           5H?>C7         5H?>>7             5H?>A7         5H?>E7            5H?GG7         5H?>H7             5H?>A7         5H?>E7               5H?FF7
    9:>E'</$&=3           IH?H@              IH?GG          IH?>F               IH?>F           H?GA             IH?HD          H?H@               IH?H;          IH?HC             IH?E;          IH?>E              IH?H;          IH?>G                H?HG
                         5H?>A7             5H?F;7         5H?>G7              5H?>@7          5H?ED7           5H?E@7         5H?>@7             5H?EG7         5H?>D7            5H?AG7         5H?>A7             5H?EG7         5H?>C7               5H?@;7
    9:>C'</$&=3           IH?>E              IH?GE          IH?E;               IH?EH           H?GC             IH?G>          H?>E               IH?G>          H?HH              IH?H;          IH?E>              IH?>A          IH?EH                H?GA
                         5H?>D7             5H?AA7         5H?>@7              5H?E>7          5H?G;7           5H?GA7         5H?EE7             5H?ED7         5H?EA7            5H?;C7         5H?>D7             5H?ED7         5H?EG7               5H?DA7
    9:EF'</$&=3           IH?H@              IH?HF          IH?ED               IH?>@           H?FC             IH?AC          H?GG               IH?GD          H?>@              H?HH           IH?>;              IH?HA          IH?>F                IH?H;
                         5H?E>7             5H?;>7         5H?EH7              5H?EF7          5H?F>7           5H?GC7         5H?EA7             5H?GG7         5H?EC7            5H?@;7         5H?EE7             5H?GG7         5H?E@7               5>?HG7
!"#$%&'(=)&&*+,+$"-./%&0$12&"34&5%-+53&%00%6-7&.3&7+#7",8$%7&9#134&0+347:
!"#"$%"$&'()*+),-".''-/0'$"&'1-/23'/*'-/0'$"&'*"&4*$3'5+$'#"*6"$&)0"'#/+$&37

9=+3'&),-"'*"#")&3'&="'1+*3&I3&)0"')$%'*"%46"%I1/*<'*"0*"33+/$3'+$'9),-"'A'1/*'%+11"*"$&'34,3)<#-"3'/1')6&+("-K'<)$)0"%'"P4+&K'<4&4)-'14$%3?''9="'LM--'X/$%'84$%3L'6/-4<$'*"#")&3'&="'*"34-&3'+$'&="'LM--'X/$%L'6/-4<$'/1'9),-"'A?''9="'#/3&I8!'#"*+/%'+3'N/("<,"*'EHHH'
&=*/40='&="'"$%'/1'&="'3)<#-"?''9="'1)<+-K'3+O"'(3?'6)&"0/*K'<"%+)$'%+(+%"%'14$%'#/*&1/-+/3'+$'")6='6)&"0/*KB&+<"'#"*+/%'+$&/'&2/'"P4)--K'0*/4#3',)3"%'/$'&="'3+O"'/1'&="+*'14$%'1)<+-K?''9="'6/**"-)&+/$'2+&=',"3&I1+&'+$%"Q'()*+),-"'+3'6)-64-)&"%',K'R/*$+$03&)*?''
S&)$%)*%'"**/*3'5+$'#)*"$&="3"37')--/2'1/*'6-43&"*+$0'2+&=+$'14$%3?''S&)&+3&+6)-'3+0$+1+6)$6"')&'&="'>HI#"*6"$&T'AI#"*6"$&T')$%'>I#"*6"$&'-"("-'+$'&2/I3+%"%'&"3&3'+3'%"$/&"%',K'BT'BBT')$%'BBB?



                                                                                                                W/*&1/-+/'3+O"'(3?'6)&"0/*K'       8)<+-K'3+O"'(3?'6)&"0/*K'                                          [/**"-)&+/$'2+&=',"3&I1+&'
                                                      J"0'8!                        U/)%'1)<+-KV                         <"%+)$                            <"%+)$                               M0"                            +$%"Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     X"-/2'<"%?' M,/("'<"%?'           Y/4$0'5GIA'K*37'
                       M--',/$%'14$%3           W*"            W/3&               Y"3           N/                X"-/2           M,/("             X"-/2          M,/("            GIA'K")*3         A:'K")*3      5R/*"')6&+("7 5U"33')6&+("7       )$%'3<)--'5Z<"%7
8-/2'"11"6&3
    9:;'</$&=3            >?;E    BBB        E?EH BB        >?@F BBB            >?;; BBB     E?E; BB             E?A> BBB       H?DC B             E?>D    BBB    >?DE BBB          A?DC           >?FH BBB           >?@G BB        >?@A BBB             I>?EE
                         5H?F@7             5H?DF7         5H?A@7              5H?;>7       5H?DC7              5H?CF7         5H?A@7             5H?@E7         5H?;F7            5F?HF7         5H?FC7             5H?@A7         5H?;A7               5F?HF7
    9:>E'</$&=3           E?GE    BBB        >?HE           E?D@ BBB            E?EF BB      E?AC B              F?FG BBB       H?A>               G?GF    BBB    >?@; B            G?AH           E?>D BBB           E?>D           >?CE B               I;?@;
                         5H?@>7             5>?EF7         5H?DD7              5>?HE7       5>?AF7              5>?AD7         5H?CF7             5>?EG7         5>?HE7            5A?>>7         5H?CE7             5>?FH7         5>?HE7               5;?>H7
    9:>C'</$&=3           E?DE    BBB        >?F@           E?;E BB             >?CG         G?>>                G?;G B         H?E@               G?;C    BB     >?HC              @?>;           >?C> B             >?CC           >?D> B               I@?DH
                         5H?C@7             5>?AG7         5>?EH7              5>?EH7       5>?D;7              5>?DH7         5>?HA7             5>?FA7         5>?EF7            5;?AE7         5H?D@7             5>?C>7         5>?>A7               5@?;@7
    9:EF'</$&=3           G?F;    BBB        H?F>           E?EE                >?AA         E?;D                G?HD           IH?EC              G?;>    BB     H?;>              A?EF           H?C@               H?FA           >?AF                 ID?G;
                         5>?HG7             5>?@>7         5>?FA7              5>?FG7       5E?FH7              5E?G;7         5>?E@7             5>?C>7         5>?A@7            5A?DF7         5>?>D7             5E?>F7         5>?F>7               5@?C;7
J"&4*$'"11"6&3
    9:;'</$&=3            H?HF               H?>E           H?HG                H?HC B       H?HC                H?HD           H?H>               H?H@           H?HE              H?;> B         H?H>               H?>E            H?HH                 H?>;
                         5H?HG7             5H?>E7         5H?HG7              5H?HF7       5H?HA7              5H?H;7         5H?HF7             5H?H;7         5H?HG7            5H?G@7         5H?HG7             5H?HC7         5H?HE7               5H?>D7
    9:>E'</$&=3           H?HE               H?HG           H?HG                H?H@         H?HD                H?HF           IH?H>              H?HF           IH?H>             H?AA           IH?H>              H?>A           IH?HG                H?H>
                         5H?HF7             5H?>E7         5H?HF7              5H?H;7       5H?H;7              5H?H@7         5H?HA7             5H?HC7         5H?HA7            5H?GC7         5H?HF7             5H?>H7         5H?HG7               5H?EF7
    9:>C'</$&=3           H?HG               H?HA           H?HF                H?>H         H?HD                H?HA           H?HE               H?H;           IH?H>             H?;>           H?HH               H?>@           IH?HE                H?HE
                         5H?HA7             5H?>G7         5H?HA7              5H?H@7       5H?HC7              5H?HD7         5H?H;7             5H?HD7         5H?H;7            5H?FH7         5H?HA7             5H?>>7         5H?HF7               5H?ED7
    9:EF'</$&=3           H?HE               H?HA           H?HG                H?>H         H?H@                H?H@           H?HH               H?H;           IH?HG             H?FG           H?HH               H?>D B         IH?HA                IH?>F
                         5H?H;7             5H?>A7         5H?H;7              5H?HC7       5H?HD7              5H?>H7         5H?H@7             5H?>H7         5H?H@7            5H?FE7         5H?HA7             5H?>E7         5H?H;7               5H?G>7
