NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE, POVERTY AND THE LAGGING REGIONS OF SOUTH ASIA
Pravin Krishna
Devashish Mitra
Asha Sundaram
Working Paper 16322
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16322

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

Research support for this project from the World Bank is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Pravin Krishna, Devashish Mitra, and Asha Sundaram. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade, Poverty and the Lagging Regions of South Asia
Pravin Krishna, Devashish Mitra, and Asha Sundaram
NBER Working Paper No. 16322
September 2010
JEL No. F1,R11
ABSTRACT
This chapter studies the differential effects that trade openness may have on leading and lagging regions
within a country. Examining data from India, we find that while trade liberalization is associated with
reduced poverty, this effect is smaller in lagging states. The expected transmission of international
prices to domestic prices with openness to trade is seen to be less perfect in lagging states than in leading
ones, especially in the rural sector. This suggests that poverty reduction in lagging regions is impeded
by the lack of exposure to international markets as opposed to another commonly argued factor – the
competition to domestic production from international trade. Cross-country analysis with a sample
of countries in South Asia (Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka) also suggests that countries
with a smaller proportion of their populations in lagging regions experience greater reduction in poverty
rates following trade liberalization. Our study confirms that though trade liberalization can bring gains,
there is scope for policy to ensure that these gains are distributed more equally across sub-national
regions. Our results highlight the importance of developing infrastructure including equipped ports,
better and more extensive roads and communication links in exploiting gains from international trade.

Pravin Krishna
Johns Hopkins University
1740 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
Pravin_Krishna@jhu.edu
Devashish Mitra
Department of Economics
The Maxwell School of Citizenship and
Public Affairs
133, Eggers Hall, Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
dmitra@maxwell.syr.edu

Asha Sundaram
Maxwell School, 200 Eggers Hall
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
assundar@maxwell.syr.edu

1.

Introduction

After decades of post-imperial stagnation, South Asia has experienced impressive growth in
recent years. From 1990 to 2005, the region grew its GDP at about 6 percent annually -- nearly
twice the rate of the world economy. This acceleration in output growth took place in the context
of a parallel increase in international trade – itself driven by a combination of declining trade
barriers and transportation costs as well as technological changes. Between 1990 and 2005,
South Asia’s largest economy, India (accounting for nearly 75 percent of regional GDP), more
than doubled its trade/GDP ratio (from about 15 percent to 35 percent). Other countries in the
region, including Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, also experienced impressive increases in their
international trade.
Greater international trade in the region, however, has raised some basic questions regarding the
gains from trade: Who benefits from trade? Will greater international trade result in an increase
in income inequality and poverty? Should we expect the benefits from trade to be uniformly
distributed across lagging and leading regions within a country?
Basic international trade theory predicts that trade will increase the returns to the abundant
factors in an economy: For the unskilled-labor abundant countries of South Asia, this is good
news -- the implication is that trade will raise the incomes of low-skilled workers, thus
generating a reduction in poverty. It has, however, been argued that the benefits of trade may not
spread uniformly across different regions within a country for a number of practical reasons.
First, different regions may have different levels of access to international trade -- lagging
regions may not benefit from trade because transportation and other trade costs may be too high
for these regions to interact with international markets. As the World Development Report 2009
notes, “for trade in goods and services, distance from markets implies time and monetary costs.
The placement and quality of transport infrastructure and the availability of transport can
dramatically affect the economic distance between any two areas…two villages may have the
same straight-line distance to a city, but one could be near a national highway, the other on an
unpaved rural road.” Thus, the type and quality of roads and other transport infrastructure may
affect the ability of lagging regions to benefit from trade.
2

Second, an important source of the gains from trade is the improvement in the allocation of
productive resources in the economy. To achieve this improvement in production efficiency,
however, it is important that factors of production, such as labor, are mobile and that labor
markets are flexible to enable mobility. However, markets, in practice, are often characterized
by a variety of rigidities. Importantly, the extent of labor market inflexibility also varies across
countries. As Ramaswamy (2003) notes, “In India, firms employing more than 100 workers need
to take prior permission from the government before retrenching a worker. In Sri Lanka, all firms
employing more than 15 workers need consent of the Commissioner of Labor before dismissing
a worker with more than one year of service. In Pakistan, permission from the labor courts is
required for all firms with more than ten workers to close or to retrench more than 50 percent of
the workers. In Bangladesh, a worker can be retrenched after giving one month’s notice to the
concerned worker.” Furthermore, regions within a country may also vary in their labor market
flexibility. Aghion et. al. (2006) note in their study on the differential effects of trade
liberalization across Indian states that, in India, “labor market institutions started from a common
nationwide framework, the Industrial Disputes Act, approved in 1947, which regulated industrial
relations in the registered or organized manufacturing sector.” However, under the Indian
constitution “states were entitled to amend the Act, and amendments were in fact extensively
introduced. As a result, labor market institutions gradually evolved, and there was a large extent
of heterogeneity across Indian states at the time of the industrial policy reforms of the 1980s and
1990s.”
Third, recent insights from the literature on the “new economic geography” suggest that
increases in regional disparities may be a natural feature of the economic development process
(Fujita, Krugman and Venables (1999)). Specifically, if production is subject to economies of
scale (so that unit costs fall with larger scale in production), market forces may induce
production to agglomerate in a few areas. In this case, the economic development process can be
a lumpy one – with some regions growing faster than others do. Trade itself may affect
agglomeration patterns and the location of economic activity. Trade liberalization may lead to an
increase in the geographic concentration of economic activity – thus, possibly increasing (or
decreasing) the extent of regional differences within a country. As WDR 2009 notes, in China,
3

the coastal provinces -- three areas known as the Bohai Basin, the Pearl River Delta, and the
Yangtze River Delta—accounted for more than half of the country’s GDP in 2005, but
constitutes less than a fifth of China’s geographical area. This is a pattern of concentration of
economic activity that has accelerated with the expansion of Chinese trade in recent decades.
The preceding discussion highlights contexts in which the effect of trade on poverty alleviation
in developing countries may not be uniform – with the specific possibility that lagging regions
may not see benefits from trade. It is these issues concerning the differential effects of trade
openness on leading and lagging regions within countries in South Asia that this chapter is
interested in studying. Using data from South Asia (primarily from India), we study empirically
the extent to which trade liberalization affects differently lagging and leading regions within a
country. In addition, we attempt to study the factors that inhibit market integration and prevent
trade from positively affecting development in lagging regions. Our focus is on poverty – but we
do also examine other variables of interest such as industry productivity.
To preview our findings: We find evidence that though trade liberalization is associated with
reduced poverty, the effect is smaller in lagging states -- A percentage point reduction in the
tariff rate decreases poverty by 0.22 percent in the leading states, while the effect is insignificant
in the lagging states. Within leading states, the effects of trade liberalization are also larger in
the urban rather than rural areas -- A percentage point decrease in the tariff rate decreases
poverty by 0.19 percent in the rural sector and by 0.26 percent in the urban sector in the leading
states.
Lagging states are further away from ports (on average about 25 percent further from the nearest
port than an average leading state). For example, the north-eastern states in India that fall in the
“lagging category” are somewhat geographically isolated. This isolation from the rest of India is
accentuated by the intermediate presence of Bangladesh, which makes distance by road to the
nearest port quite large (more than 1000 km in some instances). Also, the quality of roads and
highway connections in this sector lag behind most states. In contrast, Maharashtra is a leading
state and itself has the country’s largest port, the city of Mumbai. In Pakistan, the North West
Frontier Province (NWFP) faces a similar problem of remoteness, while the leading region of
4

Sindh has the country’s largest port, Karachi. How much does remoteness matter? We find that
price transmission (from international prices to domestic prices) is less perfect in lagging states
than in leading ones, especially in the rural sector. Our estimates for India suggest that, in the
urban sector, a one percent reduction in international prices implies a 0.61 percent reduction in
the unit price in the leading states but a 0.53 percent reduction in the unit price in the lagging
states. In contrast, in the rural sector, a one percent reduction in international prices implies a
0.60 percent reduction in the unit price in leading states but a 0.34 percent reduction in the unit
price in the lagging states. This, taken along with the findings concerning the links between trade
liberalization and poverty reduction described above, suggests that it is the lack of exposure to
international markets (and not the opposite cause – i.e., competition from international trade) that
is lowering the rate of poverty reduction in lagging regions relative to leading ones.
Finally, we see that trade liberalization has increased the productivity of Indian industry, while
also finding that the increase in productivity due to trade liberalization is (weakly) smaller in
lagging states.

Specifically, a one percentage point reduction in the tariff rate increases

productivity by 0.41 percent across all leading states but only by 0.38 percent in the lagging
states. These results for India suggest that lagging regions and the extent of regional inequality
limit the benefits of trade reform in a number of ways.
We study the links between trade and poverty alleviation further using data from other countries
in South Asia – Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal and Sri Lanka. We find that the effects of trade
liberalization on poverty differ by the proportion on national population living in lagging
regions. Countries with a smaller proportion of population in lagging regions benefit more from
trade liberalization. Specifically, our results indicate that a point increase in the proportion of
population in lagging regions depresses the annual growth in per capita GDP after trade
liberalization further by 0.01 percentage points.

We also find statistically weaker but yet

suggestive evidence that a point increase in the proportion of population in lagging regions
decreases the annual rate of decline in poverty following trade liberalization by an additional
0.01 percentage point. Even though small, since these effects are on the annual rate of growth or
decline, these benefits can accumulate to something quite substantial over time.

5

The rest of this chapter proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we briefly survey the existing
empirical literature on the effects of trade liberalization. This literature has largely focused on the
effects of trade on growth, inequality and poverty reduction at the national level paying relatively
little to sub-national variation in outcomes. Nevertheless, as we will point out, a few
contributions in this literature have indeed discussed how a variety of economic, political and
institutional factors that vary at the sub national level may lead to differences in regional
outcomes. Section 3 discusses our data, section 4 our estimation strategy and section 5 presents
and discusses our empirical results. Section 6 discusses the policy implications of the literature
and our empirical analysis for South Asia. Finally, section 7 concludes.

2.

Trade, Growth, Inequality and Poverty – Literature Review

Early empirical demonstrations of the linkages between trade and growth include the well-known
studies of Bhagwati (1978) and Krueger (1978). Analyzing in detail a sample of developing
countries including India and Turkey, these studies concluded that trade openness was indeed an
important driver of economic growth. These conclusions are also consistent with the recent
economic experience – as countries such as China and India have grown extremely fast after
their economies became open to trade and foreign direct investment in recent decades. While
these countries were also engaged in numerous domestic policy reforms at the same time, it
would be hard to argue that international integration did not play an important role in supporting
the growth outcomes there.
Other methodological approaches have also been used in the literature to explore the link
between trade and growth. Hasan, Mitra and Ural (2007) list Dollar (1992), Sachs and Warner
(1995), Edwards (1998) and Wacziarg and Welch (2004), each of whom, using cross-country
growth regressions, found positive effects of trade on growth. However, Rodriguez and Rodrik
(2001), have argued that results linking trade and growth are not particularly robust to the choice
of openness measures. These inconclusive findings have inspired a vigorous debate regarding the
limitations of both case-study and cross-country regression approaches in analyzing the
relationship between trade and growth. While the trade-growth nexus has not been decisively
demonstrated in quantitative exercises – a combination of intuition and experience leads the
6

majority of economists to believe that trade is good for growth (and at a minimum that trade does
not harm growth).
An extensive literature has examined the impact of trade liberalization on inequality in
developing countries (See Winters et. al. (2004) and Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004) for
comprehensive surveys). Since developing countries are mainly unskilled labor abundant, trade
liberalization should result in specialization in unskilled labor-intensive sectors, pushing the
unskilled wage up relative to the skilled wage. However, as Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004) point
out, a casual examination of the data suggests that, if anything, there were large increases in
inequality between skilled and unskilled workers in the years following trade reform in Latin
America (with inequality increasing by 60 percent between 1987 and 1993 for Mexico and by 20
percent between 1990 and 1998 for Colombia). Rising skill-premia suggest that factors other
than (or which dominate) international trade (which, theoretically, should be shrinking skill
premia in developing countries) may be at work in determining labor market outcomes. Several
explanations have been offered in the literature. First, returns to particular occupations that
require a higher level of education may have increased -- as has been observed in Mexico. At the
same time, it appears that the fraction of skilled workers has risen across all sectors. Taken
together, these facts point to skill biased technological change rather than international trade as
the dominant driver of rising skill premia. On the other hand, the literature has also suggested
that it may be trade liberalization that causes skill biased technological change. For instance, in
Colombia, demand for skilled workers was largest in those sectors that experienced largest tariff
cuts suggesting that competition induces firms to pursue R&D and invest in technologies and
innovation. Finally, it has been argued that international trade has indeed contributed to rising
inequality in developing countries due to the nature of production sharing in the global economy.
Feenstra and Hanson (1996) have argued that developed countries typically outsource production
of less skill intensive intermediate goods to developing countries. However, these intermediate
goods are relatively more skill intensive in developing countries. Outsourcing hence increases
the relative demand for skilled labor in both developed and developing countries thereby
increasing the skill premium. Overall, it appears that skill biased technological change and
international trade may both be relevant in understanding increased wage inequality in developed
and developing countries. Feenstra and Hanson (2002), study US trade data to conclude that both
7

factors are quantitatively significant as well (with international trade explaining roughly fifteen
percent of the increased wage inequality and skilled biased technological change explaining
another forty percent.)
The literature has also examined the question of the relationship between trade and poverty. On
the one hand, it has been argued that if trade is good for growth, it should also lower poverty. For
instance, trade liberalization increases productivity through cheaper intermediate inputs and
import competition – and productivity improvements are clearly important for poverty
alleviation in the long run. On the other hand, if productivity grows faster than output in the short
run, there may adverse consequences for employment. Equally, import competition may kill
weaker domestic firms, pushing their employees into less well paying alternatives or
unemployment – thereby raising poverty. In one of the relatively few studies to have examined
the effects of trade on poverty using disaggregate household level data, Hasan, Mitra and Ural
(2007), provides evidence for the poverty reducing impact of trade reforms in India. Their study
also shows that trade reform is associated with larger reductions in poverty in states with flexible
labor laws, especially in the urban sector. Finally, their study also finds weak evidence that in
addition to the effect of trade liberalization, deregulation reduces poverty in states with flexible
labor markets.
Finally, the literature stresses on the role played by domestic policy in ensuring that the poor
benefit from trade reforms. Rodrik, Subramanian and Trebbi (2002) find that the quality of
domestic institutions interacts with trade liberalization. They use an instrumental variables
approach to control for the endogeneity of trade and institutions to find that good institutions are
important for growth. Hasan, Quibria and Kim (2003) contend that institutions that “support
economic freedom” like freedom to trade with foreigners, property rights and rule of law are key
to poverty reduction. Harrison (2006) stresses the need for investment in human capital, credit
provision and infrastructure for globalization to aid poverty reduction.
In closing this brief literature review, we should note that the most, if not all, of the papers in the
literature are fraught with methodological issues – notably measurement error of various forms
in data and difficult questions concerning identification and inference in the statistical analysis.
8

Improved data and econometric methodologies are nevertheless constantly being brought to bear
and future research will likely provide more decisive answers to these questions than has been
possible until now.

3. Data
3.1

Poverty

For India, the poverty and trade protection data used in this paper are from Hasan, Mitra and
Ural (2007)1. To measure poverty, we employ urban, rural and overall poverty rates (head count
indices) by state based on NSS household expenditure surveys and urban and rural poverty lines
for the years 1987-88, 1993-94 and 1999-2000. Different estimates of poverty are available for
India due to differences in data and methods used.2

To ensure that our results are robust to

varied approaches to estimating poverty, we employ three different estimates for poverty rates.
The first set of estimates is from Deaton and Dreze (2002). The Deaton and Dreze (DD) poverty
estimates improve upon official estimates by using better commodity weights for the CPI,
adjusting for the change in the NSS survey questionnaire in 1999-2000 and accounting for the
differentials between urban and rural poverty lines implicit in the official poverty lines. Our
second set of estimates is the official Government of India (GOI) poverty estimates adjusted for
the change in the NSS expenditure survey questionnaire as proposed by Deaton (2003b). The
DD and GOI estimates are obtained from thick rounds of the NSS survey. The third set of
poverty estimates used in this paper developed by Ozler-Datt-Ravallion (ODR) was downloaded
from LSE’s EOPP Indian States Database website. These estimates are based on both thick and
thin rounds of the NSS expenditure survey, although they do not correct for the new NSS survey
questionnaire in 1999-2000.
For the other South Asian countries in our cross-country regressions, we use poverty data from
the World Bank’s POVCALNET database. This database incorporates the findings of the 2005
International Comparison Program (ICP). The poverty estimates combine the 2005 Purchasing
1

Hasan, Mitra and Ural (2007) provide a more comprehensive discussion of the poverty and trade protection
estimates used in this paper.
2
See Hasan, Mitra and Ural (2007) for more details.

9

Power Parity (PPP) exchange rates for household consumption from the 2005 ICP with data from
675 household surveys across 116 developing countries spanning the period 1981-2005. The
World Bank's official poverty estimates (as reported in the World Development Indicators) use
unit record household data whenever possible while POVCALNET uses grouped distributions.
Our poverty variable is the percentage of population living in households with consumption or
income per person below the poverty line. The poverty line is $38.00 per month at 2005 PPP.
This is the World Bank $1.25 per day poverty line ($38=$1.25*365/12).
We use two other measures of well being. The first is the per capital GDP in 2005 PPP US
dollars obtained from the World Development Indicators 2009. The second is the Human
Development Index (HDI) from the UNDP as an alternative measure of human well being. The
HDI is a composite index measuring the average achievements in a country in three dimensions
of human development, a long and healthy life, access to knowledge and a decent standard of
living. The dimensions are measured by life expectancy at birth, adult literacy and combined
gross enrolment in primary, secondary and tertiary level education and GDP per capital in PPP
US dollars3. HDI are available for the years 1975 through 2005 with gaps of five years in
between4. Hence, we assume that the HDI is constant over five year intervals in this period.

3.2

Measures of Regional Inequality

In our cross- country regressions for South Asia, we use the proportion of population in lagging
regions within each country as a measure of regional inequality.

We classify

regions/states/provinces within each country as leading and lagging based on data provided to us
by the South Asia PREM team of the World Bank. Table 1 lists these regions/states/provinces
and their classifications. Next, we use region/state/province level and national level populations
for each country to construct the proportion of national population in lagging regions. For India,
Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, we use population data provided by the World Bank. For Nepal, we
3

For details on the construction of the HDI see Technical Notes 1 in Human Development Report 2007/2008,
UNDP.
4

HDI are not comparable across time due to differences in methods used in calculation. Hence, we use Table 2 in
the Human Development Report 2007/2008 that provides trends in HDI from 1975 to 2005 with five year gaps using
the same methodology used for the construction of the 2005 HDI

10

use population data from the Statistical Yearbook 2005 (Table 1.3), Central Bureau of Statistics,
Government of Nepal. For Pakistan, we obtain population data from the Statistics Division,
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Statistics, Population Census Organization, Government of
Pakistan. (Website: http://www.statpak.gov.pk/depts/pco/statistics/statistics.html).

Data on

populations is available only for census years. Hence, we use the populations in the beginning of
the decade to calculate the proportion of population in lagging regions for the whole decade.5 In
the absence of such data, we use the population data for the next available year in the decade and
so on.
We use two other controls in our cross country regressions of poverty on trade liberalization and
its interaction with proportion of population in lagging regions. The first is the coastline in
kilometers divided by the coastline plus the land boundary in kilometers. The other is the
national average distance to the national capital in kilometers.

Data on coastlines, land

boundaries and average national distance to the capital are drawn from the World Development
Indicators (2009) by the World Bank. Table 2 provides summary statistics on the poverty, HDI,
regional inequality and geographical measures by country.

3.3

Trade Barriers for Poverty Regressions

Following Hasan, Mitra and Ural (2007), we look at both tariffs and non-tariff barriers (NTBs),
and alternatively at a principal components aggregation of the two policy instruments as
measures of trade protection. Protection measures by state by broad sector (urban, rural and
overall) are arrived at by weighting 2-digit industry level tariff rates and non tariff barrier (NTB)
coverage rates (constructed from Pandey (1999)) for manufacturing, mining and agricultural
industries by state and sector employment shares. The NTB measure is the proportion of the
value of imports covered by non-tariff barriers. The weight for each industry in a state and
sector is its employment share from the 1993-94 round of the NSS household data. We exclude
nontradables from our calculation of employment weights6. Thus, our state-level protection
5

We do not expect the proportion of population in lagging regions to vary greatly over a decade.
The size of the non-tradable part of economy is endogenous to protection given to tradable sectors and to factor
endowments (controlled for by our state-specific fixed effects).
6

11

measures are inverse measures of the trade exposure of the labor force. Such measures make
sense in the light of the fact that there is substantial interstate and inter-industry labor immobility
in India. Tariffs and non-tariff barriers are strongly correlated and this prevents our estimates
from being precisely estimated.

We use principal components analysis, which combines

correlated variables into a smaller set containing most of the variation in the data. Since the first
principal component contains about 90 percent of the variation for all industry groups in our
case, we use it as a third measure of trade protection.
Table 3 presents summary statistics for the poverty and protection measures used in our trade
and poverty regressions. Time plots of the three poverty and protection estimates (the tariff,
NTB coverage rates and the first principal component of the two) for the rural, urban and overall
sectors are available at: http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/dmitra/hmu_appendix.pdf.
For our cross country regressions, we use a dummy variable that is one after liberalization and
zero before to study the impact of trade liberalization on trends in poverty. Years of trade
liberalization for each of the South Asian countries are obtained from Sachs et al (1995) and
from Wacziarg and Welch (2003). Sachs et. al. classify a country as closed to trade if it satisfies
at least one of the following conditions: 1) NTBs covering more than 40 percent or more of trade
2) Average tariff rate of 40 percent or more 3) A black market exchange rate that is depreciated
by 20 percent or more relative to the official exchange rate, on average, during the 1970s or the
1980s. 4) A socialist economic system 5) A state monopoly on major exports. A country is
classified as open if none of the above apply to it. They determine the trade liberalization date as
the date after which a country remains open continually until the end of the sample period, which
is 1994. Wacziarg and Welch (2003) update the Sachs et al study and include trade liberalization
dates for countries that liberalized after 1994 and before 2001 which is the end of their sample
period. They disagree with Sachs et al on trade liberalization dates for several countries, one of
which is India. Sachs et al note 1994 as the year in which India can be classified as open,
however, Wacziarg and Welch (2003) find that even though 1994 was the year that saw major
tariff reductions in India, the country still had high NTBs which were not below 40 percent by
the end of 2001. For the purpose of this study, we use 1994 as the year in which India liberalized
trade. Table 4 provides liberalization dates for each of the South Asian countries in our sample.
12

3.4

Data for Price Transmission Regressions for India

Price data for price transmission regressions, also obtained from Hasan, Mitra and Ural (2007),
are unit values for primary commodities computed using information on expenditures and
quantities from the NSS consumer expenditure surveys for 1987-88, 1993-94 and 1999-2000.
World prices for the same years are derived from the index of export prices in the WTO
International Trade Statistics handbook. Distance is measured as the weighted sum of the
distances between a state capital and all ports with the weights being the share of each port in
overall cargo traffic7. Exchange rate data are from the IMF IFS database. Our tariff and NTB
measures are at the commodity level.

3.5

Export Data for India

Export data are from the NBER-UN World Import and Export database of the NBER
(http://www.nber.org/data/) provided by Feenstra and Lipsey. The data are at the 4 digit level of
SITC Rev 2. The data were matched with production data for manufacturing industries at the 2
digit level from the Annual Survey of Industries, CSO, New Delhi8. Export and production data
are for the years 1980 through 1997. To examine if lagging states primarily produce goods in
export-oriented industries, we use, as a regressor, the value of exports of each 2-digit industry as
a proportion of overall exports as a measure of export-orientation. Net value added in each
industry in a state as a proportion of overall net value added of all industries in that state has
been used to measure specialization in each industry within a state.

7

For sources of distance data, see Hasan, Mitra and Ural (2007).
The ASI data are at the 2 digit level of NIC, India. To match the NBER-UN world trade data with Indian
production data, the world trade data were first converted to US NAICS 1997 using the concordance provided by
Feenstra and Lipsey at http://www.nber.org/data/ . During this process, some export data which Feenstra and
Lipsey could not attribute to the 4 digit SITC level and hence attributed to a 3 digit SITC code were lost. We then
aggregated the data to the 3 digit NAICS level. A concordance was then written between 3 digit US NAICS 1997
and 2 digit Indian NIC 1987. Data have been aggregated at the 2 digit level to reduce measurement error caused by
the concordance. The world trade data are in nominal US dollars and the Indian ASI data in nominal Indian rupees.
8

13

3.6

Data for Productivity Regressions for India

For our productivity regressions, we use data on net value added, capital stock and number of
workers for each of 18 2-digit manufacturing industries in 16 Indian states from the Annual
Survey of Industries. Tariff and NTB rates, constructed from Pandey (1999), are at the 2-digit
industry level and are from Hasan, Mitra and Ramaswamy (2007). We again classify Indian
states as leading and lagging states based on data provided to us by the South Asia PREM team
of the World Bank. Table 2 lists Indian states and their classification. The states of Assam,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal are classified as
lagging states.

4. Estimation Strategy

4.1

Trade and Poverty

For the period during which India experienced trade liberalization, we want to know whether the
differences in the level of development between lagging and leading regions were becoming
smaller or getting magnified over time. In other words, we are interested in finding out where
development is taking place faster. As a starting point, we ask if poverty trends differ across
leading and lagging Indian states, and if they are different, where it is higher. The specification
we adopt for this purpose is:
yjit = γjt + ηjt*Lagi + δji + εjit

(1)

where yjit is the logarithm of poverty in state i and sector j (where j = overall, urban or rural) at
time t, t is the time trend, Lagi is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the state is a lagging state and
is constant over the three years, δji are state fixed effects and εjit is the error term. We expect a
positive coefficient on the interaction between the time trend and the Lag dummy if poverty has
been rising faster or falling more slowly in lagging states.

14

Our main question in this paper focuses on the impact of trade on poverty and the difference in
this effect between the leading and the lagging states. We also want to control for trends or time
effects common across all states to control for the decline in poverty that would take place in any
case through poverty alleviation programs and other policies. It is actually quite possible that
government programs to reduce poverty are more concentrated in the lagging states. Not
controlling for the differential in trend, that is driven by such policies, in fact makes finding a
smaller poverty-reducing effect of trade in lagging more difficult. We work here with the
following basic specification:
yjit = α + βj1protectionjit-1 + βj2Lagi*protectionjit-1 + δji + μjt + εjit

(2)

where protectionjit-1 is the trade protection measure (the tariff, NTB coverage rate or Principal
Component 1) lagged by one year and μt represents time fixed effects. Note that the level of
protection here is at the state-level and is arrived at from industry-level protection for various
sectors and weighting them with their employment shares with the overall, urban or rural sector.
In deriving this measure, we restrict ourselves to tradable sectors. The state fixed effects control
for time invariant unobservable state-specific factors like factor endowments or local
government policy that might affect poverty and might be correlated with protection. While βj1
identifies the impact of trade liberalization on poverty (in sector j =overall, urban or rural) in
leading states, βj2 captures the differential effect on lagging states.

4.2

Price Transmission

After investigating whether trade affects poverty differently in leading and lagging regions, in
the event we find a difference, we would like to find the causes for it. An important possible
cause could be differences in the transmission of international prices and trade protection. We
check for differences in the transmission of trade protection to domestic prices between lagging
and leading states by running the following regression:
pjcit = α + β1protectionct + β2protectionct*Lagi + β3world pricect + β4world pricect*Lagi +
β5exchange ratet + β6inverse distancei*protectionct + β7inverse distancei*world pricect +
δi + εcit

(3)
15

where pjcit is the unit price of commodity c in sector j (rural or urban) in state i at time t.
Protectionct is now a vector of protection measures including either tariff rates or NTB coverage
rates or both at the industry level. Lagi is the lagging state dummy that equals one if a state is
classified as a lagging state, δi are state fixed effects and εcit is the error term. The coefficient β2
will be negative if price transmission in lagging states is more imperfect than in leading states.

4.3

Exports

If protection and world prices are transmitted to the leading and lagging states to different
degrees, and that causes the differential effects of trade on poverty in leading relative to lagging
states, then this could happen through differences in the product mixes of the two types of states.
The easiest thing that comes to mind here is to look for the importance of export goods in the
overall product mix. We explore whether lagging or leading states produce export-oriented
goods as a larger proportion of their output by running the following regression:
qkit = α + β1expkt + β2expkt*Lagi + μt + εkit

(4)

where qkit is output (measured by net value added) in industry k in state i at time t as a proportion
of total output in state i at time t and expkt is the value of exports from India in industry k at time
t as a proportion of overall national exports at time t. If leading states specialize in net export
goods and lagging states in other goods we would expect to see a negative β2.

4.4

Productivity

Trade can affect poverty and incomes by making countries more specialized in certain goods. By
increasing competition, trade can also force firms to be more efficient and can make them invest
more in R&D. Thus productivity is expected to increase through trade, unless the loss in market
size for domestic import-competing firms offsets this effect. However, due to the differential
transmission across states, the effect of trade liberalization on productivity might differ across
leading and lagging states. Also, factor markets can be more rigid in the lagging states, coming
16

in the way of resource reallocation in response to trade liberalization. To estimate the trend in
productivity and to see whether the trends are the same or different across leading and lagging
states, we estimate the following regression:
logqkit = α + β1logKkit + β2logLkit+ β3t + β4t*Lagi + δi + ζk + εkit

(5)

where qkit, Kkit and Lkit refer to net value added, capital stock and employment in industry k in
state i at time t and ζk are industry fixed effects. We expect a negative β4 if productivity has been
rising more slowly in lagging states. If the trends are actually different, this difference may be
caused by the fact, trade affects the two types of states differently. To find this out we focus on
the impact of trade policy on industry productivity in India by estimating:
logqkit = α + β1logKkit + β2logLkit + β3Lagi + β4protectionkt + β5protectionkt*Lagi
+ ζk + μt + εkit

(6)

where protectionkt refers to either the tariff rate or the NTB coverage rate. μt are time fixed
effects.

4.5

Trade and Poverty in South Asia

After running the above regressions for India, we need to generalize our findings to the extent
possible with the limited data available for the other South Asian countries. To estimate the
effects of trade liberalization on poverty and well-being in South Asia as a whole, we run crosscountry regressions of the form:
hct = α + β1t + β2*t*Tct + εct

(7)

where hct refers to human development poverty in country c at time t and is measured by per
capita GDP or percentage of population in households in poverty or the human development
index (HDI).

‘t’ is a trend, Tct is the trade liberalization dummy that equals zero pre

liberalization and that equals one post liberalization. To further study if these trade liberalization
17

effects on poverty trends depend on the proportion of national population in lagging regions, we
estimate the equation:
hct = α + β1t + β2*t*Tct + β3*t*Tct*P_Laggingct + β4*t*Tct*CBct + β5*t*Tct*distancect + εct
(8)
where P_Laggingct, CBct and distancect are the proportion of the national population in lagging
regions, the ratio of coastline to the total boundary and the national average distance to the
capital city respectively for country c at time t.

5. Results

5.1

Trade and Poverty for India

We start with the study of poverty trends in India and how they differ across leading and lagging
states. This is followed by an investigation of the effects of changes in protection on poverty,
after controlling for common trends or time effects across states. As explained earlier, we allow
the effect of protection on poverty to be different for leading and lagging states, mainly because
price and protection transmission might be more imperfect in the latter kind of states. In addition,
there are further imperfections in such states, some of which take the form of factor-market
rigidities and can be partly responsible for the differential effects.. We present these results in
Tables 5, 6 and 7, where we use specifications (1) and (2), for overall, rural and urban sectors
respectively.

Column (1) of each table presents results for specification (1) where the DD

poverty measure is regressed on a time trend, the time trend interacted with the lagging state
dummy, and on state fixed effects. In other words, we allow for the trend to differ between
leading and lagging states and poverty to vary across states due to time-invariant, state-specific
factors. Columns (2), (3) and (4) present results for specification (2) where the DD poverty
measure is regressed on lagged protection, lagged protection interacted with the lagging state
dummy and state and time fixed effects. In other words, even controlling, through time effects,
for the fact that poverty over time would change all over the country, say due to poverty
alleviation programs, we try to see whether protection and the reductions in them over time
additionally affect how poverty changes in the various states. We also see how this variation in
18

protection across states explains the variation in poverty across states. The variation in protection
across states comes from the variation in the industrial composition of employment across these
different states. However, since protection interacts with labor market institutions, distance from
ports and the quality of roads and road transportation, the effect of protection on poverty will be
different for lagging and leading states. In columns (2), (3) and (4) of each table, the trade
protection measures are lagged tariff rates, NTB rates and the first principal component
respectively.
Results from column (1) of Tables 5, 6 and 7 indicate that poverty has been falling in all three
sectors (urban, rural and overall). Poverty seems to be falling faster in the urban than in the rural
sector. This is not surprising since most of the trade liberalization took place in manufacturing
and transmission of world prices and trade policy is expected to be stronger in urban compared to
rural areas. In addition, it is the urban sector that experiences industrialization and
modernization. Though poverty is falling in all states, the positive and significant coefficient on
the interaction between the time trend and the lagging state dummy suggests that it has been
falling much more slowly in the lagging states.
Next we look at the differential effect of trade reforms as a possible cause for the differential
trend. Here we control for time effects or trends that are common across all states, and see
whether after controlling for these common effects, we find an effect of protection on poverty
that is different for lagging and leading regions. From columns (2), (3) and (4) there is some
evidence that trade protection is positively related to poverty in the leading states. From column
(2) in Table 5, disregarding the insignificance of the pure tariff term, a one percentage point
decrease in the employment-weighted average tariff rate for a state decreases poverty there by
0.22 percent overall in the leading states. From column 3, a one percentage point decrease in the
NTB coverage rate decreases poverty by 3 percent overall in the leading states, which seems
rather large. Stronger results are obtained using the principal component combined measure of
tariffs and NTBs. The coefficient of lagged protection is both positive and significant.
Next we look at whether the differential effect on leading versus lagging regions is more
pronounced in urban or rural areas. From column 2 of Tables 6 and 7, a one percentage point
19

decrease in the tariff rate reduces poverty by more in the urban than in the rural sector of leading
states. It decreases poverty by 0.19 percent in the rural sector and by 0.26 percent in the urban
sector in the leading states. While the lagged protection measure always has the correct sign, it
is significant in the case of NTB for the rural case and for the combined measure for the overall
case.
However, not surprisingly and possibly due to differences in the transmission of world prices and
protection, the impact of trade liberalization on reducing poverty is smaller in the lagging states
(and sometimes goes in the opposite direction) as seen by the negative coefficient on the
interaction between protection and the lagging state dummy. The negative coefficient on the
interaction term is always significant when the tariff or the first principal component is used for
measuring protection. From column (2) of Table 5, a percentage point decrease in the tariff
increases poverty by roughly 0.8 percent in lagging states in the overall sector. From column (2)
of Table 6, we see that in the rural sector, a percentage point decrease in the tariff also increases
poverty by approximately 0.8 percent which is much higher than the increase of 0.15 percent in
the urban sector (column 2, Table 7). Since the pure tariff term is insignificant (i.e., its effect is
not precisely measured), it is difficult to say in all the above cases whether trade liberalization
actually increased poverty in the lagging states or just whether the reduction in poverty in such
states was smaller than in others. When NTB rates are used as a protection measure, the
interaction term is no longer significant in the overall and rural sectors, but it is still negative.
Thus, from our results, we conclude that while poverty has been decreasing across all states, it
has been falling more slowly in lagging states. Besides, while trade liberalization may have
reduced poverty overall, but could have actually increased poverty in the lagging states of the
country. At the very least, the poverty-reducing effects of trade liberalization were not as large
in the case of the lagging states. Our results also suggest that urban areas have benefitted more
from trade liberalization than rural ones.
To ascertain whether our results are robust to alternative measures of poverty, we use the GOI
and ODR measures of poverty to estimate specifications (1) and (2) for the overall sector. A
discussion of the pros and cons of these alternative measure can be found in Hasan, Mitra and
Ural (2007). The results with our alternative poverty measures are presented in Tables 8 and 9,
20

both of which are structured exactly like Tables 5, 6 and 7. The results are qualitatively similar.
We find strong evidence that trade liberalization has reduced poverty across all states in India.
The coefficient on the lagged protection measure is positive and significant except in one case
where the ODR poverty measure is used to measure poverty and the NTB measure to capture
protection. The coefficient on lagged protection interacted with the lagging state dummy is
always negative and significant except in the case of the ODR measure of poverty where the
tariff or the first principal component are used to measure protection. Tables 8 and 9 support the
idea that the poverty reducing impact of trade liberalization is weaker in lagging states than in
leading ones.
Thus, looking overall across all three poverty measures, there seems to be a fair amount of
evidence in support of a poverty-reducing effect of trade liberalization across all states but the
effects turn out to be smaller for the lagging states. As explained earlier, this could be due to
poorer transmission of world prices and protection in the lagging states as well as greater
distance to ports and poorer quality roads in such states. In addition, factor markets probably
work better and more smoothly in the leading states. Similar reasons also lead to decreases in the
tariff rate leading to bigger reductions in poverty in the urban than in the rural sector of leading
states, i.e., there is probably better transmission of world prices and protection to urban areas
where factor markets are also more efficient.

5.2

Price Transmission in India

After finding the differential impacts of trade on poverty and measures of well being across
lagging and leading states, we need to identify the sources of these differential effects. A likely
source is poor transmission of world prices and protection, with the extent of the lack of
transmission being different in lagging and leading states. Lagging states are not as well
connected to ports as are leading states. Also, the quality of roads and their connections to main
highways may be much poorer in lagging states. To confirm the correlation between distance
from ports and the likelihood of being classified as lagging as opposed to leading, we ran a
regression of the logarithm of inverse distance from ports on the Lag dummy and found that

21

moving from a leading to a lagging state reduces mean inverse distance by about 25 percent
(increase distance by 25 percent). The coefficient on Lag is significant at the 10 percent level.
We next investigate directly the degree of incompleteness of transmission of world prices and
protection and the degree to which this differs across lagging and leading states by running
specification (3). Columns (1) and (2) of Table 10 present results for the rural sector and
Columns (3) and (4) present results for the urban sector.

Our objective is to find out if the

impact of a tariff on unit prices differs between lagging and leading states. In columns (1) and
(3) we present results for specification (3) for the rural and urban sector respectively with (1 +
tariff) and (1 + NTB rate) as our protection measures. If transmission of trade policy to domestic
prices is less perfect in lagging states, we would expect the interaction between the trade
protection measures and the lagging state dummy to be negative. From columns (1) and (3), we
see that this is indeed the case for the tariff measure. While in all cases, protection and its
interaction have the right signs, we only have statistical significance for half of these relevant
terms in these two columns of Table 10. Subject to the caveat that not all coefficients are
precisely estimated, we can say from columns (1) and (3) that for the rural sector, a one percent
increase in (1 + tariff) implies a 0.60 percent increase in the unit price in leading states but a 0.34
percent increase in the unit price in the lagging states. For the urban sector, a one percent
increase in (1 + tariff) implies a 0.61 percent increase in the unit price in the leading states but a
0.53 percent increase in the unit price in the lagging states. For the NTB protection measure
however, the coefficients are not estimated precisely. Hasan, Mitra and Ural (2007) point out, the
statistical insignificance of the NTB term might be due to the fact that the NTB measure is a
coverage ratio and it is not clear what exact functional form captures its transmission into
domestic prices.
In columns (2) and (4) we drop the NTB measure and the interaction between the NTB measure
and the lagging state dummy. The results support our hypothesis that transmission is less perfect
for lagging states than for leading ones. The coefficient on (1 + tariff) is positive and it is
significant for the rural sector. The coefficient on the interaction between (1 + tariff) and the
lagging state dummy is now negative and significant at the 5 percent level for both rural and
urban sectors. Results indicate that for the rural sector, though a one percent increase in (1 +
22

tariff)9 implies an increase in domestic unit price of 0.77 percent for leading states, it is only 0.41
percent for lagging states. For the urban sector, a one percent increase in (1 + tariff) implies an
increase in the domestic unit price of 0.81 percent for leading states but of 0.36 percent for
lagging states. In all our regressions, the exchange rate enters with a negative coefficient that is
significant for the rural sector but not for the urban sector. The coefficients on the inverse
distance interacted with (1 + tariff) and coefficient on the inverse distance interacted with the
world price are always negative but never significant.
We conclude that there is evidence of less than perfect price transmission in lagging versus
leading states, with some estimates suggesting that this is an even greater issue in rural areas.
This result makes sense if connectedness is a larger problem for rural areas than urban ones,
which is not unreasonable in most developing countries.

5.3

Exports in India

Having found evidence for the imperfect transmission of prices and protection and for this effect
to be stronger in lagging states, we next focus on one of the channels through which this
imperfect transmission affects development. One of the ways this happens is through the
differences in the product mix. At the very basic level, the degree of specialization in exportoriented goods might be different in the lagging and leading states. In Figure 1, we plot output
measured by net value added in export industries as a percentage of total output in leading and
lagging states over time. Export industries are Food/Beverages, Textile/Apparel, Leather, Basic
Chemicals and Machinery/Other manufacturing.10 The share of export goods in total output is
larger for leading states for all years. Further, we employ specification (4) to study if, after
controlling for time-specific shocks, leading states produce more export goods than lagging
states. We regress output measured by net value added in an industry in a state in a given year as
a proportion of total output of that state in that year on national exports of an industry as a
percentage of total national exports in a given year, on this export ratio measure interacted with
9

For our price transmission regressions, we express tariff rates and NTB rates as fractions. In other words, a 50
percent tariff implies that our tariff measure is 0.5. At a 50 percent tariff, a one percent increase in (1 + tariff) is a 3
percent increase in our tariff measure.
10
There are the industries with the largest export shares in the Feenstra and Lipsey NBER-UN World Export Import
data, NBER (Years 1980-97).

23

the lagging state dummy and on year fixed effects. Results shown in Table 11 provide evidence
that leading states specialize more in export goods in comparison with lagging states. The
interaction between exports and the lagged state dummy is negative and strongly significant
showing that leading states specialize in the production of export goods. This is not surprising
since the lowering of protection through trade liberalization is transmitted more to leading states
and therefore, we have greater specialization there.

5.4

Productivity in Indian Manufacturing

The second proximate cause for difference in the impact of trade on development across the
lagging and leading states is possibly the difference in productivity effects of trade liberalization.
We use the production function approach with the TFP depending on the various trade policy
variables and their interactions with the lagging state dummy showing the differential effect
mentioned above. As explained earlier, by increasing competition, trade can also force firms to
be more efficient and can make them invest more in R&D. Thus productivity is expected to
increase through trade, unless the loss in market size for domestic import-competing firms
offsets this effect. However, due to the differential transmission across states, the effect of trade
liberalization on productivity might differ across leading and lagging states. Also, factor markets
can be more rigid in the lagging states, coming in the way of resource reallocation in response to
trade liberalization. Column (1) of Table 12 presents results for specification (5). We find
evidence that productivity in Indian manufacturing has been rising as shown by the positive and
significant coefficient of the trend variable. However, the coefficient on the time trend interacted
with the Lagging state dummy is negative and significant suggesting that the increase in
productivity has been much smaller for the lagging states. Column (2) presents results for
specification (6) with the tariff rate as the protection measure. The coefficient on the tariff is
negative and strongly significant. A one percent decrease in the tariff rate increases productivity
by 0.41 percent across all leading states but only by 0.38 percent in the lagging states (if we
disregard the insignificance of the interaction term). However, the coefficient on the interaction
term between the tariff and the lagging state dummy is not estimated precisely.

24

To check for robustness of our results, we use NTB rates as another measure of protection in our
productivity regression. We present results in column (3). The results are not qualitatively
different. The NTB rate enters with a negative coefficient that is significant at the 5 percent
level. The coefficient on the NTB rate interacted with the lagging state dummy is positive but
not significant. To conclude, while there is strong evidence that trade liberalization has had a
productivity-enhancing effect across all states and industries, we find weak evidence that the
increase in productivity due to trade liberalization is smaller in lagging states.

5.5

Trade and Poverty in South Asia

We now want to see if our results hold more generally for South Asia as a whole. Here we are
constrained by data availability. But we try to do the best we can given the data available. We try
to investigate whether the trend rate of growth in GDP per capita and the human development
index (HDI) and rate of reduction in poverty change as a result of trade liberalization. Also, we
want to see whether the change is in the desired direction or not and whether the actual
magnitude of the change depends on the population size of the lagging regions relative to leading
regions, on the average distance of the various regions to the capital and on the coastline relative
to the overall national boundary. Thus indirectly we might be able to infer whether lagging
regions grow faster or slower and whether the rate of reduction in poverty is slower or faster in
them upon trade liberalization. Thus, we use specifications (7) and (8) to address these issues,
and the results obtained from running these specifications are presented in Table 13. In columns
(1) and (2), the dependent variable that measures well being is the log of per capita GDP. In
columns (3) and (4) it is a measure of poverty. More specifically, it is the log of the percentage
of individuals living in households below the poverty line. In columns (5) and (6), the measure of
well being is the log of the Human Development index (HDI). From columns (1), (3) and (5),
where we regress measures of poverty or of well being on a trend and the trend interacted with
the trade liberalization dummy that equals one post liberalization, one strong result emerges.
Poverty as measured by the percentage of people below the poverty line is decreasing over time
and well being as measured by per capita GDP or the HDI is increasing over time. The
coefficient of the trend in the HDI and per capita GDP regressions are positive and strongly
significant and the coefficient of the trend in the poverty regression is negative and significant.
25

However, the impact of trade liberalization on trends in poverty and well being are less obvious.
From column (1), though per capita GDP is increasing over time, it grows more slowly post
liberalization.

The coefficient on the interaction term between the trend and the trade

liberalization dummy is negative and significant. Specifically, the percentage increase in per
capita GDP is less by 1.14 percentage points in the post-liberalization period. However, in the
case of HDI, the result is the opposite. The coefficient on the interaction term between the trend
and the trade liberalization dummy in the HDI regression is positive and significant and suggests
that HDI is increasing over time and the increase is larger post liberalization. The annual growth
rate of HDI is larger by 0.25 percentage points in the period post liberalization. In column (2),
we see from the negative coefficient of the trend and the positive coefficient of the interaction
between the trend and the trade liberalization dummy that though the percentage of individuals
living in poverty is falling over time, this decrease is smaller post liberalization. However, the
interaction effect is statistically insignificant. We conclude that the impact of trade liberalization
on poverty is ambiguous. While evidence suggests that trade liberalization was somewhat
negatively correlated with per capita income growth (possibly due to macroeconomic factors that
accompany or even trigger liberalization episodes), it seems to help growth in human
development.
We now examine if the impact of trade liberalization differs by the percentage of the population
living in lagging regions. Given the lack of data on the various regions within each country, this
would be our indirect way of finding out whether lagging regions gain less from trade than
leading regions all over South Asia. Columns (2), (4) and (6) decompose the effect of trade on
the trends in poverty and well being. Here our results are clearer. From column (1), we find that
the negative effect of trade liberalization on the growth rate of per capita GDP is exacerbated in
countries with a larger population in lagging regions. The coefficient on the triple interaction
between the trend, the trade liberalization dummy and the percentage of population in lagging
regions is negative. Results indicate that a one point increase in the proportion of population in
lagging regions depresses the growth in per capita GDP after trade liberalization further by 0.01

26

percentage points.11 Since this is the effect on the annual rate of growth, over time this benefit
will accumulate and become fairly significant. Similarly, a one point increase in the proportion
of population in lagging regions decreases the annual rate of decline in poverty by an additional
0.01 percentage point, but this is statistically insignificant. Thus a country that has 90 percent of
its population in lagging regions can raise its rate of decline in poverty by about 0.4 percentage
points if it reduces this population in lagging areas to 50 percent. For a country with 300 million
poor, this means an additional annual reduction of about 1.2 million poor per year. We find
stronger results for HDI in terms of statistical significance but weaker in terms of the magnitude
of coefficients. For countries with a larger proportion of population in lagging regions, trade
liberalization negatively affected the growth in HDI.
With regard to our control variables, having a higher ratio of coastline to the boundary seems to
either reinforce the beneficial effect of trade liberalization or mitigate the negative trade
liberalization effects. In two out of the three regressions, having a higher national average
distance to the capital city also seems to either dampen the negative effects of trade liberalization
on poverty and well being and boost the positive effects. This is surprising. However, it is
possible that what we need is a measure of ‘effective’ distance to the capital city, one that takes
into account transport costs and infrastructure, for instance the time taken to travel to the capital
city. In the absence of such measures, the distance variable may just be proxying for the size
(geographical area) of a country, which captures external or agglomeration economies.

6. Implications for South Asia
Many South Asian countries began active trade liberalization in the 1990s: Sri Lanka was an
exception and introduced trade reform as early as the late 1970s. India started its liberalization
process in 1991 after it had to seek IMF help for a debt crisis. India’s tariff and NTB reductions
have been gradual. Bangladesh, on the other hand, started in the late 1980s and early 1990s with
significant reductions in tariffs and quantitative restrictions, generating concerns domestically of

11

Note that the proportion of population in lagging regions is measure not in percentage terms but as fraction in our
data, i.e., the scale is 0-1 and not 0-100.

27

foreign competition hurting import competing industries. However, Bangladesh has seen fast
growth in exports since the 1990s in the textiles, garments, footwear and leather sectors.
The literature on trade, poverty and inequality and our current study have several implications
for South Asia’s trade liberalization experience. One implication is that initial conditions affect
the impact trade liberalization will have on poverty. High income inequality or spatial inequality
will imply fewer benefits from trade liberalization for the poor. Tables 14 (a) and (b) show the
income share held by the bottom 20 percent and the percentage of individuals in households
below the $1.25 a day poverty line in these countries respectively over time, averaged over 5
year intervals. Trade liberalization dates are provided in column (2). The figures show that Sri
Lanka and Bangladesh experienced a slight increase in the percentage of individuals below the
poverty line just after liberalization (though poverty fell later). For Sri Lanka, percentage poor
went up from 15.01 percent in the 1986-1990 period to 16.32 in the 1991-95 period. For
Bangladesh, percentage of individuals in households below the poverty line went up from 51.13
in the 1991-1995 period to 56.11 in the 1996-2000 period. Focusing on inequality as measured
by the income share of the bottom 20 percent, both these countries either had falling (or
relatively stable) income shares of the bottom 20 percent prior to liberalization, indicating
increasing inequality.
Pakistan’s experience on the other hand is different. Income shares of the bottom 20 percent rose
prior to liberalization. The income share rose from 8.82 in the 1991-1995 period to 9.33 in the
1993-2000 period. Also, percentage poor in Pakistan dropped significantly from 38.60 percent
to 29.23 immediately after reform. Though we cannot make concrete conclusions based on these
trends, it appears like increasing inequality prior to liberalization went along with a spike in
poverty post reform before poverty started falling again. Table 15 shows some inequality and
infrastructure measures for each country for 2006/2007. Bangladesh, India and Nepal show
higher regional inequality as measured by above average poor in the most lagging region as a
percentage of the total poor in the economy. For these countries, a priority would be to ensure
integration of backward regions and government redistribution programs to lessen inequality so
that the poor may also benefit from trade reforms.

28

Another implication that emerges from the literature is the importance of infrastructure, credit
provision, investment in human capital, flexible labor markets and better institutions like rule of
law and contract enforcement mechanisms in ensuring that the benefits of trade liberalization
reach the poor. From Table 15, column (7), Bangladesh, India and Pakistan perform better than
Nepal and Sri Lanka in terms of overall infrastructure.

In terms of road and rail density

however, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka fare better than Bangladesh and Nepal. Bangladesh,
Pakistan and Sri Lanka seem to have above average airport (with paved runway) coverage while
Bangladesh has better port coverage than the rest. While more and better ports facilitate trade,
higher rail and road density help reducing transportation costs to lagging regions, thereby
ensuring transmission of world prices to these regions.
While Bangladesh has better overall infrastructure and better airport and port coverage,
developing road and rail density might help target the benefits of trade liberalization towards the
poor in Bangladesh’s lagging regions. Pakistan appears to have better infrastructure overall and
Sri Lanka lags behind in port coverage. India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka also have smaller indices
of shipping difficulties, which can be a crude measure of institutions. Nepal and Bangladesh
have large indices. Shipping difficulties might arise due to the quality of infrastructure at the
ports or due to corruption and other institutional failure at the border (customs). Given that
Bangladesh performs fairly well with respect to its infrastructure indicators, shipping difficulties
might be an indication of corrupt officials or red tape at the border. Further research in this area
might help uncover precise policy implications. Table 16 gives average literacy rates across five
year periods from 1991 to 2005. Sri Lanka has the highest literacy rates with 90 percent literacy
in the 2000-2005 period and the other South Asian countries seem to have made significant
progress in spreading literacy (Nepal went from 33 percent literacy in the 1991-1995 period to
49 percent literacy in the 2000-2005 period). However, literacy rates in India, Nepal, Sri Lanka
and Pakistan are still low.

Continued efforts in increasing literacy rates and focusing on

investment in higher and technical education will promote better distribution of trade gains to the
poor by allowing domestic industry to avail of cheap capital imports to improve production
technologies.

29

7.

Conclusions

We find evidence that for India, poverty has been decreasing over time in Indian states but more
slowly in lagging states. While there is strong evidence that trade liberalization led to a decline
in poverty across all leading states, there is evidence that either this decline arising from trade
liberalization was smaller or that there may not have been a decline in poverty due to trade
liberalization in the lagging states. We see that though productivity has been increasing in Indian
manufacturing across all states, it has been increasing more slowly in lagging states. Our results
indicate strong evidence that trade liberalization has increased productivity in Indian
manufacturing. However, there is weak evidence that the increase in productivity due to trade
liberalization has been smaller in lagging states.
Transmission of tariffs to domestic prices in India seems to be less perfect in lagging states,
especially in rural areas. We propose that this might be due to poor infrastructure in these states
as measured by distance of the state capital from all ports. Results show that leading states in
India specialize primarily in export goods.
We use our results for India to examine the importance of regional inequality in availing the
benefits of trade reform for the South Asia region as a whole. Measuring regional inequality by
the percentage of population in South Asian countries that lives in lagging regions, we find
strong support for the hypothesis that more regionally integrated economies are better able to
exploit gains from liberalization. We also draw policy implications of the literature and our
empirical analysis for South Asia.
Our study confirms that though trade liberalization brings gains, but there is scope for policy to
ensure that these gains are distributed more equally. Our results highlight the importance of
developing infrastructure including equipped ports, better and more extensive roads and
communication links in exploiting possible gains from international trade.

30

References
Aghion Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen Redding and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2006), “The Unequal
Effects of Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India”, NBER Working
paper 12031
Baldwin, Robert (2003), “Openness and Growth: What is the Empirical Relationship?,” NBER
Working Paper No. 9578
Bhagwati, J. (1978), Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:Anatomy of Exchange
Control Regimes, Cambridge: Ballinger
Deaton, Angus (2003), “Adjusted Indian Poverty Estimates for 1999/2000”, Economic and
Political Weekly, 25, 322-326
Deaton, Angus and Jean Dreze (2002), “Poverty and Inequality in India – A re-examination”,
Economic and Political Weekly, 7, 3729-48
Dollar, David (1992), “Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More
Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985,” Economic Development and Cultural Change
40(3), 523-44
Edwards, Sebastian (1998), “Openness, Productivity and Growth: What Do We Really Know,”
The Economic Journal 108(447), 383-98
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H Hanson (1996), “Globalization, Outsourcing and Wage
Inequality”, American Economic Review, 86, 240-245
Feenstra, Robert, Robert Lipsey et al (2005), “World Trade Flows”, NBER Working Paper
11040
Frankel, Jeffrey and David Romer (1999), “Does Trade Cause Growth?,” American Economic
Review89(3), 379-399
Fujita, M., Krugman, P., and Venables, A.J. (1999), The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions, and
International Trade, MIT Press.
Ramaswamy, K.V. (2003), Globalization and Industrial Labor Markets in South Asia: Some
Aspectsof Adjustment in a Less Integrated Region, Indian Journal of Labor Economics, 46(2),
pp 253-274.
Goetz, Stephen J (1992), “A Selectivity Model of Household Food Marketing behavior in Sub
Saharan Africa”, American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 74, 444-52

31

Haddad Eduardo A and Fernando S Perobelli (2004), “Trade Liberalization and Regional
Inequality: Do Transportation Costs Impose A Spatial Poverty Trap?”, Paper 131, Proceedings
of the 32nd Brazilian Economics Meeting, Brazilian Association of Graduate Programs in
Economics
Harrison, Ann (2006), “Globalization and Poverty,” mimeo, University of California – Berkeley
Hasan, Rana, Devashish Mitra, and Beyza Ural (2007), “Trade Liberalization, Labor-Market
Institutions and Poverty Reduction: Evidence from Indian States,” India Policy Forum 3, 71-122
Hasan, Rana., M.G. Quibria, and Yangseon Kim (2003), “Poverty and Economic Freedom:
Evidence from Cross-Country Data,” East-West Center Working Paper
Human Development Report 2007/2008, United Nations Development Program, Table 2
Irwin, Douglas and Marko J. Tervio (2002), “Does Trade Raise Income? Evidence from the
Twentieth Century,”Journal of International Economics 58, 1-18
Krueger, A ( 1978), Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Liberalization
Attempts and Consequences, Cambridge: Ballinger
Minot, Nicholoas (1998), “Distributional and Nutritional Impact of Devaluation in Rwanda”,
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 46(2), 379-402
Ozler, Berk, Gaurav Datt and Martin Ravallion (1996), “A Database on Poverty and Growth in
India”, The World Bank, Washington DC
Panagariya, Arvind (2008), India: The Emerging Giant, Oxford University Press, New York
Pandey, Mihir (1999), “NCAER Report on Trade Protection in India”, National Council of
Applied Economic Research, New Delhi, India
Pavcnik Nina and Pinelopi K Goldberg (2004), “Trade, Inequality and Poverty: What do we
know? Evidence from Recent Trade Liberalization Episodes in Developing Countries”, NBER
Working Paper 10593
Porto Guido G (2006), “Using Survey Data to Assess the Distributional Effects of Trade Policy”,
Journal of International Economics, 70(1), 140-160
Ravallion, Martin (2001), “Growth, Inequality and Poverty: Looking Beyond Averages,” World
Development 29(11), 1803-1815
Rodrik, Dani and Francisco Rodriguez (2001), “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic's
Guide to the Cross-National Evidence,” Macroeconomics Annual 2000, eds. Ben Bernanke and
Kenneth S. Rogoff, MIT Press for NBER, Cambridge, MA

32

Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi (2002), “Institutions Rule: The
Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Department
of Economics Working Paper, Harvard University
Sachs Jeffrey D, Andrew Warner, Anders Aslund and Stanley Fischer (1995), “Economic
Reform and the Process of Global Integration”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1118
Topalova Petia (2004), “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case of India”, IMF
Working Papers WP/04/28
Wacziarg Romain and Karen H Welch (2003), “Trade Liberalization and Growth: New
Evidence”, NBER Working Paper 10152
Winters Alan L., Neil McCulloch and Andrew McKay (2004), “Trade Liberalization and
Poverty: The Evidence So Far”, Journal of Economic Literature, XLII, 72-115
World Development Indicators (2009), World Bank, Washington DC

33

Table 1: Leading and Lagging States
Country
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Pakistan
Pakistan
Pakistan
Pakistan
Nepal
Nepal
Nepal
Nepal
Nepal
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India
India

State
Western
Southern
Sabaragamuwa
Central
Uva
Eastern
North
Western
North
Central
Nothern
Punjab
Sindh
NWFP
Balochistan
Central Region
Eastern Region
Far-Western Region
Mid-Western Region
Western Region
Andaman & Nicobar Islands
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pr.
Assam
Bihar
Chandigarh
Chattisgarh
Delhi
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Orissa
Pondicherry
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu

34

Lagging

Leading
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

India
India
India
India
Bangladesh
Bangladesh
Bangladesh
Bangladesh
Bangladesh

Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal
Barisal
Chittagong
Dhaka
Khulna
Rajshahi

X
X
X
X
X
X

Bangladesh
Afghanistan

Sylhet
Afghanistan

X
X

X
X
X

Source: World Bank

35

Table 2: Poverty, regional inequality and geographical measures by country
Variable

Country

Observations

Mean

Standard
deviation

Maximum

Minimum

0.72

0.02

0.69

0.73

Proportion of population in Afghanistan 0
lagging regions

Coastline/(Coastline + Land
boundary)

National average distance to
capital city

Percentage individuals in
households below poverty line

Per capita GDP in PPP US$

Bangladesh
Bhutan
India Rural
India Urban
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Afghanistan

27
0
17
17
0
27
40
17
48

0.61
0.42

0.01
0.00

0.60
0.42

0.62
0.42

0.46
0.17
0.73
0

0.00
0.01
0.01
0

0.46
0.17
0.71
0

0.46
0.18
0.74
0

Bangladesh
Bhutan
India Rural
India Urban
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Afghanistan

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

0.12
0
0.33
0.33
1
0
0.13
1
418

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.12
0
0.33
0.33
1
0
0.13
1
418

0.12
0
0.33
0.33
1
0
0.13
1
418

Bangladesh
Bhutan
India Rural
India Urban
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Afghanistan

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
0

165
99
992
992
276
236
661
157

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

165
99
992
992
276
236
661
157

165
99
992
992
276
236
661
157

Bangladesh
Bhutan
India Rural
India Urban
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India Rural
India Urban

7
1
5
5
0
2
7
4
0
28
28
28
28

50.25
26.23
55.74
45.49

4.21
.
9.13
7.20

43.03
26.23
43.83
36.16

56.11
26.23
69.02
54.79

61.78
41.53
16.31

9.42
18.53
2.62

55.12
22.59
13.95

68.44
66.46
19.96

797.10
2239.86
1445.62
1445.62

164.41
990.00
479.43
479.43

614.12
922.54
868.89
868.89

1172.65
4567.53
2598.59
2598.59

36

HDI

Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India Rural
India Urban
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan

13
28
28
28
0
33
3
33
33
3
33
33

3628.52
777.37
1753.43
2465.94

770.41
134.76
307.54
701.87

2520.01
564.22
1190.90
1553.16

5035.92
975.51
2383.32
4020.22

0.43
.58
0.51
0.51
0.74
0.41
0.45

0.07
0
0.06
0.06
0
0.08
0.06

0.35
0.58
0.42
0.42
0.74
0.30
0.37

0.55
0.58
0.62
0.62
0.74
0.53
0.55

Sri Lanka

33

0.69

0.04

0.62

0.74

37

Table 3: Summary Statistics for Protection and Poverty measures
Average*
Variables
1987
1993 1999
Poverty Measures
Deaton-Dreze Overall Poverty Rate 32.63 27.48 20.87
Deaton-Dreze Urban Poverty Rate 21.15 16.93 11.62
Deaton-Dreze Rural Poverty Rate
36.25 30.97 24.19
GOI Overall Poverty Rate
36.58 33.63 26.52
GOI Urban Poverty Rate
36.30 30.27 23.35
GOI Rural Poverty Rate
36.07 33.82 26.91
ODR Overall Headcount Index
40.28 36.66 31.28
ODR Urban Headcount Index
36.46 28.12 22.53
ODR Rural Headcount Index
41.34 39.12 33.70
Trade Protection Measures
(Lagged by one year)
Overall Tariff
Urban Tariff
Rural Tariff
Overall Non-Tariff Barriers
Urban Non-Tariff Barriers
Rural Non-Tariff Barriers

94.69
131.49
90.22
100
100
100

70.63
93.84
67.86
80.80
74.25
81.54

Note (*): The average is taken over the 15 major states

38

24.38
36.72
22.86
70.48
53.33
72.47

Table 4: Trade liberalization dates
Country

Trade liberalization year

Afghanistan
Bangladesh

1996

Bhutan
India

1994

Maldives
Nepal

1991

Pakistan

2001

Sri Lanka

1977-83, 1991

Source: Sachs et al (1995) and Wacziarg and Welch (2003)

39

Table 5: Trade and poverty - Overall Sector.
measure)
(1)
Time trend

Dependent variable: Log(DD poverty

(2)
Protection=Tariff

(3)
Protection=NTB

0.002
(0.002)
-0.01***
(0.002)

0.03**
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.004)

(4)
Protection=Principal
Component 1
0.19*
(0.10)
-0.08*
(0.05)

State Fixed effects

-0.06***
(0.01)
0.02**
(0.01)
5.76***
(0.32)
Yes

2.81***
(0.28)
Yes

0.37
(0.89)
Yes

3.46***
(0.27)
Yes

Year Fixed effects

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Lagged protection
Lagged
protection*Lag
Time trend
Time trend*Lag
Constant

Observations
60
45
45
45
R-squared
0.93
0.96
0.96
0.96
Notes: (1) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3) Data are for years 1987,
1993 and 1999 for each of 15 Indian states (4) Lag is equal to one if state is a lagging state, 0 otherwise. (4) Tariffs
and NTBs are expressed in percentage points. A 50 percent tariff implies that the tariff variable equals 50.

40

Table 6: Trade and poverty - Rural Sector. Dependent variable: Log(DD poverty measure)
(1)
Time trend

(2)
Protection=Tariff

(3)
Protection=NTB

0.002
(0.002)
-0.01**
(0.002)

0.02*
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.005)

(4)
Protection=Principal
Component 1
0.13
(0.11)
-0.08*
(0.05)

State Fixed effects

-0.05***
(0.01)
0.02*
(0.01)
5.62***
(0.34)
Yes

4.01***
(0.37)
Yes

1.72
(1.25)
Yes

3.64***
(0.30)
Yes

Year Fixed effects

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Lagged protection
Lagged
protection*Lag
Time trend
Time trend*Lag
Constant

Observations
60
45
45
45
R-squared
0.93
0.96
0.95
0.96
Notes: (1) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3) Data are for years 1987,
1993 and 1999 for each of 15 Indian states (4) Lag is equal to 1 if state is a lagging state, 0 otherwise. (4) Tariffs
and NTBs are expressed in percentage points. A 50 percent tariff implies that the tariff variable equals 50.

41

Table 7: Trade and poverty - Urban Sector.
measure)
(1)
Time trend

Dependent variable: Log(DD poverty

(2)
Protection=Tariff

(3)
Protection=NTB

0.003
(0.005)
-0.004***
(0.001)

0.01
(0.01)
-0.01***
(0.002)

(4)
Protection=Principal
Component 1
0.16
(0.17)
-0.10***
(0.03)

State Fixed effects

-0.07***
(0.01)
0.03***
(0.01)
6.03***
(0.29)
Yes

2.45***
(0.65)
Yes

2.04*
(0.99)
Yes

3.47***
(0.28)
Yes

Year Fixed effects

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Lagged protection
Lagged
protection*Lag
Time trend
Time trend*Lag
Constant

Observations
60
45
45
45
R-squared
0.91
0.96
0.95
0.95
Notes: (1) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3) Data are for years 1987,
1993 and 1999 for each of 15 Indian states (4) Lag is equal to 1 if state is a lagging state, 0 otherwise. (4) Tariffs
and NTBs are expressed in percentage points. A 50 percent tariff implies that the tariff variable equals 50.

42

Table 8: Trade and poverty - Overall Sector. Dependent variable: Log(GOI measure)
(1)
Time trend

(2)
Protection=Tariff

(3)
Protection=NTB

0.004*
(0.002)
-0.01***
(0.002)

0.03**
(0.01)
-0.01**
(0.003)

(4)
Protection=Principal
Component 1
0.24***
(0.08)
-0.09**
(0.04)

State Fixed effects

-0.04***
(0.005)
0.02***
(0.01)
4.87***
(0.21)
Yes

2.87***
(0.30)
Yes

0.86
(0.85)
Yes

3.47***
(0.21)
Yes

Year Fixed effects

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Lagged protection
Lagged
protection*Lag
Time trend
Time trend*Lag
Constant

Observations
60
45
45
45
R-squared
0.94
0.96
0.95
0.96
Notes: (1) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3) Data are for years 1987,
1993 and 1999 for each of 15 Indian states (4) Lag is equal to 1 if state is a lagging state, 0 otherwise. (4) Tariffs
and NTBs are expressed in percentage points. A 50 percent tariff implies that the tariff variable equals 50.

43

Table 9: Trade and poverty - Overall Sector. Dependent variable: Log(ODR measure)
(1)
Time trend

(2)
Protection=Tariff

(3)
Protection=NTB

0.01***
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.001)

0.01
(0.01)
-0.004**
(0.002)

(4)
Protection=Principal
Component 1
0.52***
(0.08)
-0.01
(0.02)

State Fixed effects

-0.02***
(0.001)
0.01***
(0.001)
3.98***
(0.04)
Yes

2.87***
(0.28)
Yes

2.75**
(1.33)
Yes

2.18***
(0.19)
Yes

Year Fixed effects

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Lagged protection
Lagged
protection*Lag
Time trend
Time trend*Lag
Constant

Observations
591
150
150
150
R-squared
0.79
0.91
0.90
0.92
Notes: (1) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3) Data are for years 1987,
1993 and 1999 for each of 15 Indian states (4) Lag is equal to 1 if state is a lagging state, 0 otherwise. (4) Tariffs
and NTBs are expressed in percentage points. A 50 percent tariff implies that the tariff variable equals 50.

44

Table 10: Price transmission regressions. Dependent variable: Log(unit price for sector)
Log(1+tariff)
Log (1+tariff)*Lag
Log (1+NTB)
Log (1+NTB)* Lag
Log (world price)
Log (world price)* Lag
Log (exchange rate)
Log (inverse distance)* Log (1+tariff)
Log (inverse distance)*Log(world price)
Constant

Rural sector
(1)
0.60*
(0.32)
-0.26
(0.43)
-0.17
(0.20)
0.11
(0.34)
0.28
(0.31)
-0.22
(0.15)
-0.38***
(0.15)
-0.006
(0.07)
-0.06
(0.07)
4.39***
(0.67)

(2)
0.77***
(0.27)
-0.36*
(0.20)

0.28
(0.32)
-0.21
(0.14)
-0.35**
(0.15)
-0.006
(0.07)
-0.06
(0.07)
4.17***
(0.60)

Urban sector
(3)
0.61
(0.47)
-0.08
(0.53)
-0.21
(0.24)
0.39
(0.36)
0.54**
(0.21)
0.0003
(0.11)
-0.06
(0.10)
-0.10
(0.11)
-0.006
(0.05)
2.55***
(0.46)

(4)
0.81
(0.50)
-0.45*
(0.25)

0.53**
(0.21)
0.01
(0.11)
-0.05
(0.10)
-0.10
(0.12)
-0.006
(0.05)
2.51***
(0.46)

State fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
265
265
266
266
Number of states
15
15
15
15
R-squared
0.13
0.13
0.19
0.19
Notes: (1) Bootstrap standard errors in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3) Data are for years 1988,
1994 and 2000 for 16 goods in each of 15 Indian states (4) Lag is equal to 1 if state is a lagging state, 0 otherwise.
(5) ‘Tariff’ and ‘NTB’ are expressed in fractions. For instance, a 50 percent tariff implies that ‘tariff’ = 0.5

45

Table 11: Production of export goods in lagging versus leading states
Dependent variable: output in industry-state/total state output
Exports in industry/total exports
(Exports
in
exports)*Lag

industry/total

(1)
0.44***
(0.02)
-0.14***

(0.03)
0.05***
(0.01)
State/Industry fixed effects
No
Year fixed effects
Yes
Observations
3348
R-squared
0.12
Notes: (1) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3) Data are for years 1980 to
1997 for 16 Indian states in 12 broad industry groups (4) Lag is equal to 1 if state is a lagging state, 0 otherwise.
Constant

46

.4

.5

.6

.7

Figure 1: Production of export goods in leading and lagging states

1980

1985

1990
year

1995

2000

% production top export industries - lagging
% production top export industries - leading
Top export industries: Food/Beverage,Textile/Apparel

Leather,Chemicals,Machinery/Other manuf
Source: ASI production data and NBER-UN World Export Import Data, NBER provided by Feenstra and Lipsey

47

Table 12: Trade liberalization and productivity. Dependent variable: Log(net value added)
Log(capital stock)
Log(employment)
Time Trend
Time Trend*Lag
Lag
Log(tariff)
Log(tariff)*Lag

(1)
0.39***
(0.01)
0.69***
(0.02)
0.03***
(0.002)
-0.01**
(0.003)

(2)
0.42***
(0.02)
0.63***
(0.02)

(3)
0.42***
(0.02)
0.63***
(0.02)

-0.25
(0.18)
-0.41***
(0.10)
0.03
(0.04)

-0.12
(0.23)

Log(NTB)

-0.16**
(0.08)
Log(NTB)*Lag
0.003
(0.06)
Constant
4.82***
6.18***
5.28***
(0.18)
(0.43)
(0.35)
State fixed effects
Yes
No
No
Industry fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Time fixed effects
No
Yes
Yes
Observations
4672
2592
2592
R-squared
0.92
0.91
0.91
Notes: (1) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3) Data are for 16 Indian
states in 18 broad industry groups (4) Data for column (1) are for years 1980-97. Data for columns (2) and (3) are
for 1988-97. (5) Lag is equal to 1 if state is a lagging state, 0 otherwise. (4) Tariffs and NTBs are expressed in
percentage points. A 50 percent tariff implies that the tariff variable equals 50.

48

Table 13: Trade, Poverty and Lagging Regions in South Asia
VARIABLES

t
t*Tct

(1)
Ln(GDP
per
capita)

(2)
Ln(GDP
per
capita)

(3)
(4)
(5)
Ln(percentage Ln(percentage Ln(HDI)
in poverty)
in poverty)

(6)
Ln(HDI)

0.05***
(0.005)
-0.01***
(0.002)

0.03***
(0.006)
-0.01***
(0.002)
-0.01***

-0.02**
(0.01)
0.002
(0.006)

0.01***
(0.002)
-0.0001
(0.001)
-0.003*

t*Tct *(proportion
population
in
lagging regions)
t*Tct*(coastline/total
land boundary)
t*Tct
*(national
average distance to
capital)
Constant
Observations
R-squared

5.55***
(0.16)
181
0.40

-0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.01)
0.01

0.01***
(0.003)
0.002**
(0.001)

(0.002
0.03***

(0.01)
-0.04***

(0.002)
0.01***

(0.001)
9.27e06***

(0.001)
3.03e-06

(0.0009)
9.16e07**

(6.33e07)
6.06***
(0.18)
119
0.60

(2.83e-06)

(3.73e-07)

4.40***
(0.29)
31
0.10

3.88***
(0.74)
21
0.38

-1.09***
(0.08)
171
0.35

-1.12***
(0.07)
124
0.55

Notes: (1) Robust standard errors in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
(3) Data are for years 1961 through
2007 for eight South Asian countries. (4) ‘t’ is a time trend and Tct is a time dummy that equals one post liberalization.

49

Table 14:
(a) Inequality
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Liberalization
Country
Bangladesh

1996

India

1994

Nepal

1991

Pakistan

2001

Sri Lanka

1977-83, 1991

(5)

(6)

(7)

19811985

Income share of the bottom 20 percent
19861991199620011990
1995
2000
2005

9.72

9.73

9.35

8.70

(8)
20062007

8.76
8.08

8.29
8.19

8.82

8.95

7.47

6.02

9.33

9.26

8.14

6.99

Source: WDI 2009, World Bank

(b) Poverty
(1)

(2)
Liberalization

Country

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

% individuals in households below poverty line
19861991199620011990
1995
2000
2005

Bangladesh
India (Rural)

1996
1994

52.50

51.13

56.11

55.60

52.46

43.83

India (Urban)

1994

47.50

40.77

36.16

Nepal

1991

Pakistan

2001

65.59

23.87

Sri Lanka

1977-83, 1991

15.01

16.32

68.44

Source: POVCALNET, World Bank

50

50.47

55.12
38.60

29.23
13.95

(7)
20062007

Table 15: Infrastructure and inequality indicators for 2007
(1)

Bangladesh
India
Nepal
Pakistan

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Surface Area
(km
square)/airports

Rail
density
(kms
per 100
km
square)

Road
density
(kms per
100 km
square)

Index of
shipping
difficulties

Infrastructure
index (1 =
worst
performer,
5=best
performer)

Ports
(number)

Coastline
(kms)/ports

(2007)

(2006)
2.10

(2006)
112.00

(2007)
2.29

(2007)
2.00

(2007)

9600.00

(2006)
183.80

Poor in
most
lagging
region as
%
of
country’s
poor
(2006)
28.20

2.10

113.80

12.20

79.00

2.90

8.00

875.00

0.00

12.20

12.4

151.00

1.77

0.00

0.00

1.10

33.50

1.00

94.00

2.37

2.00

523.00

4.00

60.00

2.13

2.00

670.00

11.56

99.20

2.29

2.80

471.60

13527.82
14718.00
8748.35

Sri Lanka

4686.43

2.20

150.50

Mean

10256.12

1.50

98.76

Source: WDI 2009, World Bank

51

290.00

Table 16: Adult literacy in South Asia
Country

1991-1995

Bangladesh

35.32

47.49

India

48.22

61.01

Nepal

32.98

48.59

Pakistan
Sri Lanka

1996-2000

42.85

2001-2005

46.44
90.68

Source: WDI, World Bank

52

