                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND THE QUALITY OF SUICIDE TERRORISM

                                           Efraim Benmelech
                                            Claude Berrebi
                                            Esteban F. Klor

                                         Working Paper 16320
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16320


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2010




We are grateful to Eric Gould, Michael Intriligator and Todd Sandler for very helpful suggestions.
We have also benefited from comments from participants in the Workshop on Political Economy of
Counter-Insurgency at Princeton University, the Conference on Conflict and Cooperation at Northwestern
University, the 2009 meetings of the American Economic Association, the NBER meeting on the Economics
of National Security and the meeting of the Network for the Economic Analysis of Terrorism and
Anti-Terrorism Policies. We thank the Israeli Security Agency for providing us with their data on
suicide terrorists, and the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics for the data from the Labor Force
Survey. Berrebi thanks the RAND Initiated Research Fund for its financial support and the RAND
National Security Research Division who made this project possible. Benmelech thanks the Warburg
Fund at Harvard University for financial support. Berrebi and Klor are grateful for the support from
the “New Agenda for European Security Economics (EUSECON)” project funded by the European
Commission under the 7th Framework Programme. Klor thanks the warm hospitality of Boston University
and the National Bureau of Economic Research while he was working on this project. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Efraim Benmelech, Claude Berrebi, and Esteban F. Klor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Conditions and the Quality of Suicide Terrorism
Efraim Benmelech, Claude Berrebi, and Esteban F. Klor
NBER Working Paper No. 16320
August 2010
JEL No. H41,H56,J24,O15

                                             ABSTRACT

We analyze the link between economic conditions and the quality of suicide terrorism. While the existing
empirical literature shows that poverty and economic conditions are not correlated with the quantity
of terror, theory predicts that poverty and poor economic conditions may affect the quality of terror.
Poor economic conditions may lead more able, better-educated individuals to participate in terror attacks,
allowing terror organizations to send better-qualified terrorists to more complex, higher-impact, terror
missions. Using the universe of Palestinian suicide terrorists against Israeli targets between the years
2000 and 2006 we provide evidence on the correlation between economic conditions, the characteristics
of suicide terrorists and the targets they attack. High levels of unemployment enable terror organizations
to recruit more educated, mature and experienced suicide terrorists who in turn attack more important
Israeli targets.


Efraim Benmelech                                    Esteban F. Klor
Harvard University                                  Dept. of Economics
Department of Economics                             Hebrew University
Littauer 233                                        Mount Scopus
Cambridge, MA 02138                                 Jerusalem ISRAEL 91905
and NBER                                            eklor@mscc.huji.ac.il
effi_benmelech@harvard.edu

Claude Berrebi
The Federmann School of
 Public Policy and Government
Hebrew University
Mount Scopus
Jerusalem ISRAEL 91905
and RAND Corporation
Claude_Berrebi@rand.org
1. Introduction

       Do poor economic conditions affect terrorism? A growing body of empirical literature shows

that poverty and economic conditions are not directly correlated with the occurrence of terrorism

(Abadie, 2006; Drakos and Gofas, 2006a; Krueger and Malechova 2003; Krueger and Laitin, 2008;

Piazza, 2006). The lack of correlation between the frequency of terror attacks and economic

conditions, combined with the privileged background of suicide terrorist found in earlier studies,

suggests that economic conditions do not have a direct and straightforward effect on terrorism.

However, economic conditions may affect terrorism through other, indirect, channels. While

economic conditions are probably not root causes of terrorism, and do not affect the level of

terrorism, they could still impact the nature and type of terror attacks.

       This paper adds to the debate on the relation between economic conditions and terrorism by

studying the intensive rather than the extensive margin of terrorism. Whereas the related empirical

literature has focused on the quantity or the amount of terror, we study the quality of terrorism and

its relation to underlying economic conditions. The notion that economic conditions are potentially

correlated with the quality of terrorism has been suggested by Bueno de Mesquita (2005a).

According to his theoretical analysis, individuals have to choose whether to work in a market

economy or volunteer to carry terror attacks. Rational individuals become terrorists only if their

utility of carrying a terror attack is higher than their utility of working in the market economy. When

economic conditions are good, and unemployment is low, there are desirable opportunities for able

individuals that choose to join the market economy. Therefore, only individuals with low ability,

those unable to find a job even under good market conditions, are the ones who join terror

organizations. When market conditions deteriorate, the economic opportunities of able individuals

deteriorate as well. Worsening economic conditions should ease the recruiting of more able and

                                                    2
better-educated individuals by terror organizations, even if the launching of a terror campaign and

the quantity of terrorism are driven by strategic decisions taken by terror organizations irrespective

of economic conditions. In other words, economic conditions should affect the supply of individuals

willing to join terror organizations.1 By screening volunteers and selecting only the most competent

to commit attacks, terror organizations may be able to send more capable terrorists under

recessionary economic conditions. That is, we should observe that economic conditions affect the

quality (rather than the quantity) of terrorism.2

          This paper provides a systematic analysis of the link between economic conditions, the

quality of suicide terrorists, the characteristics of their targets, and the outcomes of their attacks. We

combine a detailed data set on the universe of Palestinian suicide terrorists during the second

Intifada with data on earnings and labor force participation in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and

with data on Israeli counterterrorism measures. Our results suggest that there is strong correlation

between economic conditions and the characteristics of suicide terrorists and targets they attack.

Higher unemployment enables terror organizations to recruit more educated, mature and

experienced suicide terrorists, who in turn attack more important targets, located closer to their

district of residence. Furthermore, we show that bad economic conditions do not drive the quality of
1
    This does not necessarily imply that individuals choose to become suicide terrorists the same way they
choose, for example, between enrolling on higher education or joining the labor market. Simply put,
unemployed individuals spend more time socializing with their peers in places, like mosques, where
“enlistment officers” are more likely to recruit them. See Pape (2005) and Pedahzur (2005) for
descriptions of recruiting for suicide missions by Palestinian factions.
2
    Becker and Posner (2005) apply similar intuition in a rational model of suicide. In their application to
suicide bombers, they also highlight the impact of market opportunities on the individuals’ decision to
go on a suicide mission. Unlike Bueno de Mesquita (2005a), Becker and Posner (2005) study
exclusively individuals’ decision making and do not incorporate into the analysis the strategic
considerations of terror organizations.


                                                      3
terror equally for different organizations. In the spirit of the club model proposed by Berman and

Laitin (2008), groups that provide excludable public goods increase their ability to commit terror

attacks during difficult economic times.

        These results have important implications for the design of efficient policies of counter-

terrorism. The most common policies of counterterrorism are aimed to incapacitate terror

organizations by cracking down on their members and by enacting security measures that affect the

probability of success of a planned attack. The connection between economic conditions and the

quality of terrorism suggests that policies intended to improve economic development and stimulate

economic growth might reduce the quality, and thus the threat, of suicide terrorism. The suggested

policy implications have, however, one important caveat. Institutions that provide economic aid

geared to stimulate economic sustainability need to pay particular attention to the ideology and

political objectives of the local organizations administering their aid. Even if these local

organizations use the donors’ aid to provide important public goods (like education and health), our

analysis shows that this aid may allow terror organizations to coerce the local population into

increasing violence and terrorism.


2. Data

A. Data on Palestinian Suicide Terrorists

        The data on Palestinian suicide terrorists is an updated version of the data set constructed by

Benmelech and Berrebi (2007) from reports of the Israeli Security Agency (ISA). The data details

the biographies of all Palestinian suicide terrorists that attacked (or attempted to attack) targets in

Israel, the West Bank and Gaza Strip between September 2000 and December 2006. The data

contains detailed information on terrorists’ characteristics, targets’ characteristics and outcome of

the attacks.

                                                   4
       Our data set includes 157 suicide terrorists for whom we know their names, membership in

terror organization, age, city of residence, whether they had an academic degree or attended an

institution of higher education, and whether they were previously on ISA’s most wanted terrorists

list, were incarcerated, or were detained by the Israeli security forces.

       Figure 1 displays the number of suicide terrorists coming from each of the ten districts in the

West Bank, from the five districts in the Gaza Strip, and from Jerusalem. The figure exhibits a high

geographic variation with respect to district of origin of suicide terrorists, especially among districts

in the West Bank. For example, whereas 45 percent of suicide terrorists resided in Nablus and Jenin,

only two suicide terrorists resided in the neighboring districts Salfit, Tubas and Jericho.

       Table 1 reports detailed summary statistics on suicide terrorists and targets’ characteristics.

The top panel of Table 1 focuses on the characteristics of suicide terrorists. Panel A shows that 31

terrorists were enrolled at the time of the attack in an institution of higher education or completed

academic studies by that time. This rate is higher than the equivalent rate for the entire Palestinian

population of 8 percent (Berrebi, 2007), and confirms findings regarding the relative privileged

background of terrorists elsewhere (Krueger, 2007 and 2008; Krueger and Maleckova, 2003;

Sageman, 2004). The youngest suicide terrorist is 12 years old, the oldest is 64 years old and their

average age is slightly over 21 years old. Out of the 157 suicide terrorists during this time period, 19

(12.1%) had prior known terrorist activity experience: they were either previously detained in Israeli

prisons or accused of being involved in terror activity by the ISA before their attacks.

       Panel B of the table focuses on two variables that measure target importance. The first

measure is a dummy variable that equals one for localities with a population of over 50,000




                                                    5
residents and zero otherwise.3 The second measure of target importance is a dummy variable for

localities that host an official bureau of the Ministry of Interior, thus effectively acting as regional

capitals.4 Arguably, the two variables are sensible proxies for the importance of the targeted

localities. Table 1 shows that suicide terrorists tend to attack these types of localities. Big cities were

targeted in almost 75 percent of the attacks, even though less than 10 percent of Israeli cities have

over 50,000 inhabitants. Similarly, over 50 percent of the attacks (i.e., 84 attacks) occurred in

regional capitals even though less than 15 percent of the localities act in that capacity. These

findings are consistent with previous results showing that city population and regional capitals are

strongly and positively correlated with the frequency of terror attacks in Israel (Berrebi and

Lakdawalla, 2007).

         The third panel of Table 1 presents two variables that proxy for the logistics behind suicide

attacks. To construct these variables we use Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to measure i)

the distance between the suicide terrorist’s locality of residence and his or her target, and ii) the

distance between the headquarter of the faction dispatching the terrorist and the attack’s target.

There is a high degree of variability in both variables. On average, terrorists travel 26.6 km to their

targets, where the maximum distance traveled is 142.4 km. Likewise, the mean distance between the

head quarters of the terror cell that dispatches the suicide terrorist and the target is 25.9 km. The

large distances traveled by suicide terrorists, considering Israel’s modest size, suggest that terror


3
    The localities’ size refers to their population within the metro area of the city according to the
population figures for the year 2003 of the Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics. Our analysis is robust to
alternative cutoffs such as 100,000 or 150,000 residents.
4
    An official bureau of the Ministry of Interior includes the following: National Election Inspection
Bureau, Regional Appeal Committee, Regional Licensing and Supervising Bureau, and Regional or Sub-
Regional Population Administration Bureau.


                                                    6
organizations select their targets carefully, with geographic proximity being only one of many

relevant factors affecting their decision.

         Finally, the bottom panel of Table 1 presents summary statistics on the outcome of the

attacks. The first row of Panel D provides information on caught suicide terrorists. We classify

suicide terrorists as “caught” if they failed to detonate their explosive devices, were apprehended or

killed before they managed to detonate their explosives, blew themselves up before they reached

their desired target, or left without completing the attack (i.e. “chickened out”). Our sample contains

39 suicide terrorists that are classified as caught, 27 of which were killed or died during capture. We

also report summary statistics on casualties caused by the attacks (that is, counts of individuals

killed or wounded in the aftermath of the suicide attacks). On average, a suicide attack caused

almost 30 casualties, but there are several failed attacks that did not cause any casualty and there are

others that caused over 150 casualties. Most of the attacks caused at least 10 casualties.

         Our analysis below differentiates between suicide terrorists of high and low quality. We

define a suicide terrorist as of high quality based on information on his or her education, past

involvement in terror activity, and age. Our data include 31 terrorists with academic education, 19

terrorists that were previously involved in terror activities, and 81 terrorists who were older than 20

at the time of the attack (63 are below that age).5 The three characteristics of suicide terrorists show

similar correlations with other variables in Table 1. Suicide terrorists of high quality are associated

with more complex terror attacks, more important targets, and better outcomes for the terror

organizations (Benmelech and Berrebi, 2007). The only notable difference among our three proxies

for the terrorists’ quality is that, unlike more educated and mature terrorists, suicide terrorists
5
    The results below are robust to any other sensible age cutoff. We choose the cutoff “older than 20
years old” because the median and average terrorists are 21 years old, and there are 13 terrorists that are
exactly at this age.


                                                    7
previously detained in Israeli prisons or accused of being involved in terror activity by the ISA

travel shorter distances to commit an attack. These terrorists attack targets closer to the West Bank

and Gaza Strip because they face a higher risk of being apprehended by the Israeli security forces if

they travel deeper into Israeli territory. Nevertheless, experienced terrorists are still more likely to

attack regional capitals and populated localities.


B. Data on Economic and Demographic Indicators of West Bank and Gaza Strip

       The data on economic and demographic variables come from the Palestinian Labor Force

Survey (PLFS) of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Administered by the Palestinian Central Bureau of

Statistics (PCBS), the survey covers a representative sample of the Palestinian population. The

survey has been conducted every quarter since 1995 and provides information every quarter on

about 22,000 individuals aged 15 and above residing in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza

Strip. Since our empirical analysis focuses on the second Intifada, we use data from all quarterly

surveys between the years 2000 and 2006, with a total of over 620 thousands observations. We use

these micro-level data to calculate economic and demographic variables at the district level.

       We start by collecting information on every individual in the PLFS micro-dataset. We collect

information on the individuals’ district of residence, age, marital status, gender, years of education,

workplace location (Israel or Palestinian territories), and type of locality of residence (city, village

or refugee camp). The PLFS also provides information on the individuals’ labor force status

(employer, self-employed, salaried worker, unemployed, or out of the labor force). While the PLFS

does not report the actual individuals’ income, it groups those individuals that earned strictly

positive incomes into four bins of roughly the same size according to their earnings, and reports the

income group to which they were assigned.




                                                     8
          We next move to use the micro-level data to calculate district-level economic conditions. We

collapse the micro-level data by year, quarter, and district. Using the weights provided by the PLFS,

we compute, for each of these cells, weighted averages of our economic and demographic variables.

Several observations are in order regarding the construction of these variables. First, the definition

of the local unemployment rate, the main treatment of interest, includes not only individuals actively

looking for work but also individuals out of the labor force, a more appropriate measure of

underlying economic conditions.6 Second, we use, as an alternative treatment, the same definition of

unemployment but restricted to the male population between the ages of 15 and 35 years old. Given

that 139 out of a sample of 157 suicide terrorists belong to this demographic group, this is arguably

a more relevant variable than the overall level of unemployment.7

          Finally, we also examine the impact of income inequality on the quality of suicide terrorists.

This variable is used to test the hypothesis that suicide terrorists are mainly motivated by altruistic

concerns (Azam, 2005). Pape (2005, p. 172), for example, argues that “high levels of social

integration and respect for community values cause otherwise normal individuals to commit suicide

out of a sense of duty.” Accordingly, given that social integration and in-group identification are

inversely related to income inequality (Shayo, 2009), the theory of “altruistic suicide terrorism”

predicts a negative correlation between income inequality and the quality of suicide terrorism.8

6
    Our results are qualitatively the same when we use the standard definition of unemployment.
7
    We thus apply to our study of terrorism the recommendations of Gould et al. (2002) with respect to
crime. Gould et al. (2002) show that the labor market conditions for young unskilled men (rather than
the general unemployment rate) is correlated with the crime rate, because crime is perpetrated mainly by
this subpopulation of individuals.
8
    As already stated, the PLFS does not provide information on individuals’ actual earnings. Therefore,
we compute a relative measure of income inequality by adding to the four groups of individuals with
strictly positive income the individuals with incomes equal to zero, and then calculating the standard


                                                     9
        Table 2 displays summary statistics of the economic and demographic variables of interest

for all districts during the entire period at issue.

        As a first cut, the table provides a general overview of Palestinian economic and

demographic conditions during the period of the second Intifada. While we observe a high

unemployment rate, both for the general and the group-specific populations, we must keep in mind

that we use a broad definition of unemployment that includes individuals not actively looking for

work. Therefore, while representing the prevailing economic conditions more accurately, these rates

are significantly higher than the official unemployment rates published by the PCBS. The table also

shows relatively low average years of schooling for the entire period. The table masks, however, a

significant increase of average schooling from 8.8 years in 2000 to 9.6 years in 2006.


C. Data on Curfews and Palestinian Fatalities

        Our analysis includes data on Israeli security measures and districts’ level of violence. The

available measures are the number of Israeli-induced Palestinian fatalities, and the number of

curfews days per district-quarter cell. The data on Palestinian fatalities during the second Palestinian

uprising come from B’tselem, an Israeli human rights organization. B’tselem’s data (considered

accurate, reliable and comprehensive) are widely used in studies focusing on the Israeli-Palestinian

conflict (see, for example, Jaeger et al., 2008 and Gould and Klor, 2010). The data on curfews was

obtained from the United Nation’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).

This organization coordinates humanitarian action on behalf of the United Nations in different

countries of the world. Among some of its responsibilities, the OCHA office that operates in the

West Bank and Gaza Strip monitors closures and curfews imposed on the Palestinian population.

deviation of this variable. While not the ideal measure of income inequality, it is the best we can
compute given the data and it still captures the level of uniformity existent in the society.


                                                       10
OCHA provided us with their data on total hours under curfew by district by month between May

2002 and December 2006. Table 3 reports the available data on Israeli security measures and

districts levels of violence.

        Table 3 illustrates the widespread level of violence during the second Intifada. On average,

every district suffers almost 9 Israeli-induced Palestinian fatalities and 4 days of curfews every

quarter. An average district originates a suicide terrorist every three quarters, and over 10 Israeli

casualties every quarter (an average of 1.33 Israeli fatalities in suicide attacks per district-quarter

cell). At the same time, the table depicts the high level of variation on the level of violence.

Although the median number of Palestinian fatalities is 4, for 27 percent of the observations the

number of Palestinian fatalities is ten or higher. Similarly, for almost 10 percent of the observations

the quarterly number of days with curfew exceeds 21. The variation in the level of violence

highlights the importance of including these variables in the empirical analysis to control for

potential reverse causality. For example, Israeli responses to particularly violent suicide attacks may

affect local economic conditions. Without properly controlling for security measures one would

adduce to economic distress the occurrence of a high quality terror attack, when in actuality high

quality attacks could be the ones causing economic distress (Benmelech et al., 2010).


3. The Impact of Economic Conditions on the Quality of Suicide Attacks

        There is a growing body of literature on the macroeconomic determinants of terrorism. The

majority of these studies find that economic fluctuations in countries from which terrorism

originates do not seem to affect their level of terrorism (Abadie, 2006; Drakos and Gofas, 2006a;




                                                  11
Krueger and Laitin, 2008; Piazza, 2006).9 This does not imply that economic conditions do not

affect terrorism at all. Whereas most of the literature focused on the direct relation between

economic conditions and the quantity of terror, Bueno de Mesquita (2005a) proposes an indirect,

subtler, relationship between economic conditions and terrorism. Bueno de Mesquita (2005a) argues

that bad economic conditions dampen individuals’ opportunities in the labor force and, as a

consequence, lower their opportunity cost of participation in terror activities. Therefore, if terror

organizations select suicide terrorists from a large supply of volunteers, they are able to choose

better-qualified suicide terrorists under bad economic conditions.

          This section assesses the empirical validity of Bueno de Mesquita’s (2005) theoretical

conclusions. The main necessary condition for Bueno de Mesquita’s (2005a) theory to hold is that

the supply of suicide terrorists is greater than its demand. This condition holds for Palestinians terror

organizations, as documented in the field study of Hassan (2001). Hassan (2001) reports that one of

Hamas’ biggest problems during the time period at issue was selecting a few among the large

quantity of volunteers willing to be sent in suicide missions.10 Therefore, if bad economic conditions

lead to an increase in the supply of suicide terrorists (but do not affect the frequency of attacks), then

terror organizations will be able to choose suicide terrorists with better qualifications. Given that

better qualified terrorists lead to more desirable outcomes for terror factions (Benmelech and

9
    These studies focus on transnational terrorism using data from a cross-section of countries. We show
below that fluctuations on the level of unemployment at the district level are not correlated with the
frequency of suicide attacks that the district originates.        Hence, our results are in line with the
conclusions of these studies.
10
     This suggests that terror organizations are not constrained by a lack of volunteers to carry out attacks.
To explain fluctuations on suicide attacks we therefore need to focus mostly on terror organizations’
strategic considerations and capabilities to overcome security obstacles enacted by Israel. See Berrebi
(2009) for further discussion of demand versus supply constraints in terrorism.


                                                      12
Berrebi, 2007), it logically follows that, conditional on originating a suicide attack, bad economic

conditions indirectly lead to terror attacks of higher quality.


A. Empirical Framework

       To test the relationship between economic conditions and the quality of terrorism we focus

exclusively on district-quarter cells that originated at least one suicide attack. We assign to every

suicide terrorist the prevailing economic, demographic and security conditions in his or her district

in the quarter preceding the attack to further address the possibility of reverse causality. These data

allow us to test the effect of poor economic conditions on the quality of suicide terrorists, their

targets, and the outcomes of the attacks.

       Formally, our general specification is:

   (Quality of Suicide Terrorism)i,t = α(Economic Variables)i,t-1 + β(Demographic Variables)i,t-1
                                     + γ(Security Measures)i,t-1 + εi,t                         (1)

where the (Quality of Suicide Terrorism) are the proxies, presented in Table 1, associated with the

characteristics of the suicide terrorists, their targets, the logistics of their attack and the attacks’

outcomes of each suicide terrorist i that committed an attack in quarter t. We focus, alternatively, on

local unemployment rate, group-specific unemployment rate, and income inequality at the district of

origin of the terrorist in the quarter before the attack as our main explanatory economic variable of

interest. All the specifications control for demographic characteristics and Israeli security measures

that vary across districts and time. These include average years of education, percentage of

population living in a refugee camp, average age, proportion of male in the local population,

proportion of married population, population size, as well as local Palestinian fatalities and local

curfews. In addition, we include a West-Bank dummy to control for regional unobservable




                                                   13
characteristics that are constant over time.11 Finally, εi,t is an error term (clustered at the regional

level) that captures non-systematic determinants of the quality of a suicide attack.

         Our detailed data set allows us to overcome some of the difficulties associated with the task

of estimating the causal effects of economic conditions on the quality of suicide terrorism. First, we

control for counter-terror measures enacted by the Israeli government in the aftermath of an attack

that may also affect economic conditions. Second, the longitudinal dimension of the data provides a

sequential order of the events of interest, allowing us to look at the effects of past economic and

demographic conditions on subsequent characteristics of suicide terrorists and their attacks. Finally,

the time variation in the data allows us to include year fixed effects to control for events that are

common to all the districts, occurred at a particular point in time, and may simultaneously affect the

quality of suicide attacks and economic conditions.


B. Results

         Table 4 presents the estimated impact of economic conditions on the characteristics of

suicide terrorists. Panel A of the table focuses on the education of suicide terrorists, Panel B on their

age, and the last panel on the level of their previous involvement in terror activities. All panels

present the same specifications: for each panel, the left column reports the estimated marginal

effects from a probit model of the respective covariate on the dependent variable at issue. The

general unemployment rate is the main variable of interest in the first three rows, the group-specific

unemployment rate is the variable of interest in rows 4 to 6, and income inequality is the focus of




11
     Ideally, we would have liked to include district fixed effects instead of regional fixed effects.
Unfortunately, the available data do not have sufficient variation to allow the inclusion of district fixed
effects and still estimate the coefficients of interest with a satisfying level of precision.


                                                       14
rows 7 to 9;12 the middle column adds years fixed effects to the previous specification; and the

specification in the right adds the number of days with curfew to the regression in the middle

column. Our preferred specification is the one in the middle column because including days with

curfews to the specification significantly reduces the number of observations.13

          The results of the table support the hypothesis that bad economic conditions affect the

quality of suicide terrorists. Higher unemployment rates (whether general or group-specific) are

associated with more educated, more mature and more experienced suicide terrorists. In particular,

based on our preferred specification, a one percentage point increase of the unemployment rate

significantly raises the probability that next quarter’s suicide terrorist i) has some academic

education by 1.38 percentage points; ii) that the terrorist is older than 20 years old by 0.62

percentage points; iii) and that the terrorist was previously involved in terror activities by 0.81

percentage points. These effects are of an important magnitude. They imply that a standard

deviation increase in the level of unemployment causes an increase of 34.3 percent on the

probability that the suicide terrorist has some academic education relative to their mean education

level. Similarly, for a one standard deviation increase in the level of unemployment, they represent

an increase of 5.57 percent on the probability that the terrorist is older than 20 years old, and an




12
     In addition to the reported economic variable and security measures, the regression controls for each
district proportion of males, married, average years of schooling, population size and proportion of the
population living in a refugee camp.
13
     Recall that the data on curfews are only available from May 2002. Therefore, the specification
including curfews as a covariate ignores all the suicide attacks that occurred before the second quarter of
2002.


                                                     15
increase of 33.5 percent on the probability that the terrorist was previously involved in terror

activities, relative to their unconditional means.14

          The impact of the other variables of interest on the quality of suicide terrorists is not

consistently significant across the different measures. The analysis suggests that higher income

inequality raises the quality of suicide terrorists. Therefore, our results do not support the hypothesis

that a heightened identification with the grievances of the in-group (as measured by income

inequality) leads mature, educated and experienced individuals to commit terror attacks. Security

measures imposed by Israel do not have a consistent effect in terms of their sign or significance

level.

          Table 5 repeats the analysis of Table 4 focusing on the characteristics of targeted localities.

The results confirm that economic conditions have a significant effect on the importance of the

localities targeted in suicide attacks. Higher unemployment rates and greater inequality significantly

increase the likelihood that the targeted city has a large population. The estimated coefficients in

Column (2) imply that a standard deviation increase in unemployment results in a 17.6 percent

increase on the probability that the targeted city has a large population relative to the mean number

of large cities. Similarly, a standard deviation increase in inequality causes a 25.7 percent increase

on the probability of a large city being targeted. The probability that the city acts as a regional

capital also increases in recessionary economies, though the effect of either measure of

unemployment is not statistically significant for all the specifications. In line with the results


14
     At this point, it is important to remark that the changes in the magnitudes and significance levels of the
estimates from the second to the third column of each panel are due to the shorter sample and not to the
inclusion of curfews as a dependent variable. Basically, when we restrict the sample to May 2002 and
onwards the results are the same regardless of whether or not the curfews variable is included as a
covariate in the model.


                                                       16
obtained regarding the characteristics of suicide terrorists, the impact of the other covariates is not

consistently significant across specifications and proxies for the importance of the targeted

localities.

          Table 6 focuses on the logistics of terror attacks. The table shows that bad economic

conditions lead terror organizations to commit attacks closer to the suicide terrorists’ localities of

residence and to their headquarters. These results are partially explained by terror organizations

sending experienced suicide terrorists when unemployment is particularly high, and by experienced

terrorist choosing closer targets to avoid the risk of being caught by the Israeli security forces.15 In

addition, the table indicates that suicide terrorists travel longer distances to commit attacks as the

number of Palestinian fatalities in their district increases (though the effect is not always statistically

significant). This effect may be driven by the difficulty of committing an attack against Israeli

civilians nearby due to increased Israeli military presence. Another possibility is that Palestinian

fatalities heighten the desire to retaliate against Israeli civilians in Israel’s most important cities.

          Finally, Table 7 presents the effects of economic conditions on the outcome of suicide

attacks. These results are not as conclusive as our previous findings. While the results in some of the

columns suggest that higher unemployment rates significantly increase the probability that the

suicide terrorist is caught, this is not consistent across the three different specifications, casting

doubts on the validity of the result. Similarly, neither of the measures for the unemployment rate

consistently affects the number of casualties.

          If anything, the table suggests that higher income inequality leads to terror attacks of higher

quality. That is, higher income inequality reduces the chances that the terrorist is caught, and causes
15
     Suicide terrorists previously involved in terror activities travel, on average, 17.9 km to commit an
attack, whereas inexperienced terrorists travel an average of 27.8 km to commit an attack. The difference
between the two means is statistically significant at the 1% level.


                                                     17
an increase in the number of casualties. Finally, the table consistently implies that the outcomes of

terror attacks are significantly affected by Israeli security measures. A stronger Israeli military

presence (measured by the number of days with curfew and the number of Palestinian fatalities) is

effective in terms of stopping suicide terrorists.

         Summarizing, this section shows that there is a strong correlation between economic

conditions, characteristics of suicide terrorists and the targets they attack. High unemployment

enables terror organizations to recruit more educated, mature and experienced suicide terrorists, who

in turn attack more important targets, located closer to their district of residence. We find that the

outcomes of these attacks are not consistently correlated with economic conditions. Perhaps, the

reason behind this is that attacks’ outcomes are more random in nature than the other characteristics

associated with suicide terrorism that are mostly controlled by the terrorists or the terror

organizations. Having said that, it is important to remark that there is an indirect relation between

economic conditions and the outcome of attacks. While we establish that higher unemployment rates

lead to terrorist of higher quality attacking more important targets, previous work showed that

terrorists of higher quality cause more fatalities and are less likely to be caught when assigned to

important targets (Benmelech and Berrebi, 2007).


4. Economic Conditions and Suicide Attacks across Factions

         This section investigates the effect of economic conditions on the willingness of different

Palestinian factions to carry suicide attacks. Several theoretical studies analyze why different types

of factions react differently to the same political environment.16 The related literature focuses mostly

on the peace process (Kydd and Walter, 2002; Bueno de Mesquita, 2005b), the timing of elections

16
     See, for example, the theoretical analyses of Kydd and Walter (2002, 2006), Bueno de Mesquita
(2005b), and Berrebi and Klor (2006), and their applications to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.


                                                     18
(Berrebi and Klor, 2006 and 2008), and Israeli policies of counter-terrorism (Jaeger and Paserman,

2008) as triggers of terrorism. In what follows, we investigate whether economic conditions may

lead different factions to different strategies regarding the number of suicide attacks they commit.

         Several Palestinian factions were involved in suicide terrorism during the second Intifada.

The factions were closely associated to one of the three main political Palestinian organizations:

Fatah, Hamas, and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ).17 These groups differ in terms of their level of

religiosity, ideology, organizational structure, political objectives, and even their strategic responses

to Israeli-induced Palestinian fatalities (Jaeger and Paserman, 2006).

         In conjunction with ideology, economic conditions play an important role in the level of

terrorism chosen by terror organizations. As argued by Bueno de Mesquita (2008), the factions’

level of radicalization, although chosen to maximize political support, is affected by economic

conditions. We expect a similar effect to play a role on the organizations at issue. For example, the

theory of economic voting implies that the level of unemployment should affect the support for

Fatah, the political organization at the helm of the Palestinian National Authority during most of the

analyzed period.

         Though in a different direction, economic conditions should also affect support for Hamas,

an organization that provides excludable local public goods like education, welfare and medical care

(Mishal and Sela, 2000). Naturally, the value of the goods provided by Hamas increases on

recessionary economies. This should increase the demand for membership in Hamas, and the

sacrifice that individuals are willing to make so that they, and their families, are accepted as group

members (Berman, 2000). Therefore, a combination of the club model with Bueno de Mesquita’s


17
     In our data set, 49 terrorists belonged to factions affiliated with Fatah, 61 belonged to factions
affiliated with Hamas, and 46 belonged to the PIJ.


                                                     19
(2005a) theory of the quality of terrorism implies not only that religious clubs are more likely to

commit suicide attacks (Berman and Laitin, 2008), but that religious clubs can conduct more attacks

when economic conditions are bad.

       We analyze the heterogeneous effect of economic conditions on suicide attacks across

factions and report the results in Table 8. The first column of Table 8 presents the results of Probit

regressions where the dependent variable is an indicator for Islamic suicide terrorists (those

affiliated with Hamas and the PIJ), with the same set of covariates used in the models in Tables 4 to

7. The results show that unemployment has a positive and highly significant effect on the likelihood

of Islamic organizations committing a suicide attack, equal to a 8.16 percent increase (relative to its

mean) on the probability that the suicide terrorist belongs to an Islamic organization for a standard

deviation increase in the level of unemployment of the whole population. Income inequality and

Israeli-induced Palestinian fatalities have a negative effect on suicide attacks by Islamic

organizations.

       The results in the first column of Table 8 seem to imply that religiosity plays an important

role on the organizations’ differing response to economic conditions. Aggregating suicide terrorists

affiliated with Hamas and the PIJ, however, masks important differences across these two religious

groups. Most notably, while Hamas provided excludable social services during the time period at

issue, the PIJ did not provide social services at all. To address this issue, the remaining columns of

the table present the results from estimating a multinomial logit model for faction committing a

suicide attack. The dependent variable takes on one of three values: Fatah, Hamas and PIJ. To

facilitate comparison with previous tables we present the marginal effects of the relevant economic

variable for each faction, rather than the multinomial logit coefficients. The results confirm our

hypothesis regarding the effect of economic conditions on religious factions that provide local

public goods. We find that Hamas shows the highest sensitivity to the unemployment rate, with an
                                                  20
increase of over 4 percentage points on the number of suicide terrorists dispatched to Israel for every

one percent increase in unemployment. The marginal effect of unemployment for Fatah is negative

and statistically significant, though of lesser magnitude than the decrease observed by the PIJ.

          The estimated coefficients in Table 8 provide an intuitive ordering of the different groups

based on the type of public goods that they provide (if at all). This ordering suggests that groups that

provide excludable public goods (i.e. Hamas) are able to increase their ability to commit terror

attacks during difficult economic times. The magnitude of the effect of economic conditions on the

number of attacks of groups that provide non-excludable public goods (i.e. Fatah) is not as

important, whereas the ability to commit suicide attacks of groups that are not associated with the

provision of any public goods (i.e. PIJ) significantly decrease when unemployment increases.

Interestingly, only for the PIJ (a religious group that does not provide any type of public good)

altruistic motives appear to drive suicide terrorists. In particular, a more homogenous society (as

measured by a decrease in income inequality) is associated with an increase of suicide terrorists

affiliated with this organization.


5. The Impact of Economic Conditions on the Frequency of Suicide Attacks

          In this section we examine the correlation between economic conditions and the frequency of

suicide attacks during the second Palestinian uprising. We adopt a similar approach to related

studies on the macroeconomic determinants of transnational terrorism but focusing on one particular

case study.18




18
     See Sandler and Enders (2008) for a comprehensive discussion of the related literature. Note also the
recent contribution of Berman et al. (2009), who find a negative correlation between unemployment and
attacks by insurgents in Iraq.


                                                     21
       We believe it is important to compare our analysis to the related literature because of several

important differences. By focusing on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we alleviate concerns driven

by unobserved political, cultural and institutional cross-country differences. Using our longitudinal

data set we are able to control for unobserved characteristics of each district that are constant over

time and may affect the district’s level of terrorism. Moreover, by assembling a detailed data set that

includes information not only on economic and demographic variables, but also on counter-

terrorism policies, we can control for socio-economic characteristics as well as counter-terrorism

measures. Finally, our data set contains information on all suicide terrorists during the time period at

issue. Therefore, it does not suffer from any type of reporting bias or under-reporting that is

suspected to affect data on transnational terrorism (Drakos and Gofas, 2006b).

       Our general specification to analyze the relationship between economic and demographic

conditions and the occurrence of suicide attacks focuses on three different proxies of terrorism: i)

the number of suicide attacks that originated from each quarter-district cell; ii) the number of

casualties caused in suicide attacks that originated in each cell; and iii) an indicator that equals one if

at least one suicide attack originated in district i at quarter t, and zero otherwise. The main

specifications control for the same economic, demographic, and security variables specified in

model (1).

       Table 9 displays the results from estimating the effects of economic conditions on the

number of suicide terror attacks using a Poisson regression model because the dependent variable is

a countable variable that admits only non-negative integers and is best described as a Poisson

distribution. Each cell in the table presents the estimated coefficient of a separate regression between

the variable of interest and the number of suicide attacks. The left panel of the table alternatively

examines the correlations between the number of suicide attacks and the contemporaneous general

unemployment rate, group-specific unemployment rate or income inequality, whereas the right panel
                                                    22
of the table examines the correlation between the number of suicide attacks with the reigning

economic and demographic conditions in the preceding quarter.

          The first column in the table presents coefficients estimated using simple univariate

regression models, each of which explains the correlation between the number of suicide attacks and

a different explanatory variable contemporary to the occurrence of attacks. The results suggest that

current economic conditions are significantly correlated with the timing and district of origin of

suicide attacks. Accordingly, unemployment is positively correlated with suicide attacks and income

inequality is negatively correlated with attacks. These results are not as precisely estimated after we

add to each specification the demographic control variables detailed above (column 2). The

significant correlations completely disappear, however, once we include in the analysis year fixed

effects (column 3). This implies that the statistically significant correlations observed in columns 1

and 2 are mainly driven by the similar fluctuations of these variables over time. The second panel of

the table shows the correlations between the number of suicide attacks and the same control

variables, with all the controls lagged one quarter. The results in this panel lead us to the same

conclusions. Namely, economic conditions do not appear to cause suicide attacks.

          Table 10 performs a similar analysis using as the dependent variables the number of

casualties from suicide attacks that originated in each quarter-district cell and an indicator for the

occurrence of a suicide attack that originated in each cell. These analyses rely on a Poisson and

linear probability regression model, respectively.19 The results in Table 10 show a similar pattern to

those in the previous table. Accordingly, some columns suggest a link between suicide terrorism and



19
     To avoid unnecessary clutter, this table focuses exclusively on the correlations between the dependent
variables of interest and preceding economic conditions. The correlations between the dependent
variables and current economic conditions are qualitatively similar to those observed in Table 9.


                                                     23
economic conditions. This link completely disappears, or even changes sign, once year fixed effects

are included in the analysis.

       Summarizing, the findings of this section unambiguously establish that there is not a

consistent statistically significant impact of economic conditions on the frequency of suicide

terrorism. In addition, the analysis demonstrates that inappropriate specifications (resulting mainly

from limited data sets) may deliver spurious correlations.


6. Conclusions

       This paper provided a systematic analysis of the link between economic conditions, the

quality of suicide terrorists, the characteristics of their targets, and the outcomes of their attacks. We

uncovered a strong correlation between economic conditions and the characteristics of suicide

terrorists and targets they attack. In particular, we document that high unemployment and poor

economic conditions enable terror organizations to recruit more educated, mature and experienced

suicide terrorists, who in turn attack more important targets, located closer to their district of

residence. Furthermore, we show that bad economic conditions do not drive the quality of terror

equally for different organizations, but rather affect groups that provide excludable public goods by

increasing their ability to commit terror attacks during difficult economic times.

       Our paper focuses on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for a variety of reasons. Notably, by

focusing on a particular case study, we are able to build an exceptionally rich longitudinal data set

that allows us to identify the causal connection between economic conditions and the quality of

terrorism. We control for Israeli counterterrorism measures, regional fix effects, and observed the

effect of past economic, demographic and security conditions on the current quality of suicide

terrorism. All these features are crucial to overcome concerns about reverse causality, whereby

successful terror attacks prompt Israeli retaliation and the ensuing worsening of economic

                                                   24
conditions. The particularities of this conflict notwithstanding, we believe that the connection

between economic conditions and the quality of suicide terrorism applies more generally.20 Hence,

the policy implications mentioned in the introduction should be taken into consideration in other

conflicts as well.


7. References

Abadie, Alberto (2006). “Poverty, Political Freedom and the Roots of Terrorism.” The American
         Economic Review, 96 (2): 50-56.
Azam, Jean-Paul (2005). “Suicide-Bombing as Inter-Generational Investment.” Public Choice, 122
         (1-2): 177-198.
Becker, Gary S. and Richard A. Posner (2005). “Suicide and Risk-Taking: An Economic
         Approach,” Unpublished Manuscript, The University of Chicago.
Benmelech, Efraim and Claude Berrebi (2007). “Human Capital and the Productivity of Suicide
         Bombers,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21 (3): 223-238.
Benmelech, Efraim, Claude Berrebi and Esteban F. Klor (2010). “The Economic Cost of Harboring
         Terrorism,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, forthcoming.
Berman, Eli (2000). “Sect, Subsidy and Sacrifice: An Economist’s View of Ultra-Orthodox Jews,”
         Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3): 905-953.
Berman, Eli, Joseph H. Felter and Jacob N. Shapiro (2009). “Do Working Men Revel? Insurgency
         and Unemployment in Iraq,” Unpublished Manuscript, Princeton University.
Berman, Eli and David D. Laitin (2008). “Religion, Terrorism and Public Goods: Testing the Club
         Model,” Journal of Public Economics, 92(10-11): 1942-1967.
Berrebi, Claude (2007). “Evidence About the Link Between Education, Poverty and Terrorism
         Among Palestinians,” Peace Economics, Peace Science and Public Policy, 13 (1): Article 2.




20
     Our results on the lack of a robust correlation between economic conditions and the quantity of
terrorism, for instance, are in line with those obtained by most of the related studies using a cross section
of countries.


                                                     25
Berrebi, Claude (2009). “The Economics of Terrorism and Counterterrorism: What Matters, and is
       Rational-Choice Theory Helpful?” in Paul K. Davis and Kim R. Cragin (eds.) Social Science
       for Counterterrorism, California, RAND Press.
Berrebi, Claude, and Darius Lakdawalla (2007). “How Does Terrorism Risk Vary Across Space and
       Time? An Analysis Based on the Israeli Experience.” Defense and Peace Economics 18 (2):
       113-131.
Berrebi, Claude and Esteban F. Klor (2008). “Are Voters Sensitive to Terrorism? Direct Evidence
       from the Israeli Electorate,” American Political Science Review, 102 (3): 279-301.
Berrebi, Claude and Esteban F. Klor (2006). “On Terrorism and Electoral Outcomes: Theory and
       Evidence from the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 50 (6): 899-
       925.
Blomberg, S. Brock, Gregory D. Hess and Akila Weerapana (2004). “Economic Conditions and
       Terrorism,” European Journal of Political Economy, 20 (2): 463-478.
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan (2008). “Terrorist Factions,” Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 3
       (4): 399-418.
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan (2005a). “The Quality of Terror,” American Journal of Political Science,
       49 (3): 515-530.
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan (2005b). “Conciliation, Counterterrorism, and Patterns of Terrorist
       Violence,” International Organization, 59(1): 145-176.
Drakos Konstantinos and Andreas Gofas (2006a). “In Search of the Average Transnational Terrorist
       Attack Venue,” Defence and Peace Economics, 17 (2): 73-93.
Drakos, Konstantinos and Andreas Gofas (2006b). “The Devil you Know but are Afraid to Face:
       Underrporting Bias and its Distorting Effects on the Study of Terrorism,” Journal of Conflict
       Resolution, 50 (5): 714-735.
Gould, Eric D. and Esteban F. Klor (2009). “Does Terrorism Work?” The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, forthcoming.
Gould, Eric D., Bruce A. Weinberg and David B. Mustard (2002). “Crime Rates and Local Market
       Opportunities in the United States: 1979 – 1997,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(1):
       45-61.
Hassan, Nasra (2001). “An Arsenal of Believers,” The New Yorker, November 19: 36-41.



                                                26
Jaeger, David A., Esteban F. Klor, Sami H. Miaari and M. Daniele Paserman (2008). “The Struggle
       for Palestinians Hearts and Minds: Violence and Public Opinion in the Second Intifada,”
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13956.
Jaeger, David A. and M. Daniele Paserman (2008). “The Cycle of Violence? An Empirical Analysis
       of Fatalities in the Palestinian-Israeli Conflict,” American Economic Review, 98(4): 1591-
       1604.
Jaeger, David A. and M. Daniele Paserman (2006). “Israel, the Palestinian Factions, and the Cycle
       of Violence,” American Economic Review, 96(2): 45-49.
Krueger, Alan B. (2008). “What Makes a Homegrown Terrorist? Human Capital and Participation
       in Domestic Islamic Terrorists Groups in the U.S.A.” Economics Letters, 101(3): 293-296.
Krueger, Alan B. (2007). What Makes a Terrorist: Economics and the Roots of Terrorism,
       Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Krueger, Alan B. and David D. Laitin (2008). “Kto Kogo?: A Cross-Country Study of the Origins
       and Targets of Terrorism,” in Philip Keefer and Norman Loayza (eds.) Terrorism, Economic
       Development, and Political Openness, New York: Cambridge University Press, 148-173.
Krueger, Alan B. and Jitka Maleckova (2003). “Education, Poverty and Terrorism: Is there a Casual
       Connection?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17 (4): 119-144.
Kydd, Andrew H. and Barbara F. Walter (2006) “The Strategies of Terrorism,” International
    Security, 31(1): 49-80.
Kydd, Andrew and Barbara F. Walter (2002). “Sabotaging the Peace: the Politics of Extremist
    Violence,” International Organization, 56 (2): 263-296.
Mishal, Shaul and Avraham Sela (2000). The Palestinian Hamas: Vision, Violence and Coexistence,
       New York: Columbia University Press.
Pape, Robert A. (2005). Dying to Win: The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism, New York:
       Random House Trade Paperback.
Pedahzur, Ami (2005). Suicide Terrorism, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Piazza, James A. (2008). “A Supply-Side View of Suicide Terrorism: A Cross-National Study,”
       Journal of Politics, 70 (1): 28-39.
Piazza, James A. (2006). “Rooted in Poverty? Terrorism, Poor Economic Development, and Social
       Cleavages,” Terrorism and Political Violence, 18 (1): 159-177.



                                               27
Sageman, Marc (2004). Understanding Terror Networks, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
      Press.
Sandler, Todd and Walter Enders (2008). “Economics Consequences of Terrorism in Developed and
      Developing Countries: An Overview,” in Philip Keefer and Norman Loyaza (eds.)
      Terrorism, Economic Development, and Political Openness, Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press.
Shayo, Moses (2009). “A Model of Social Identity with an Application to Political Economy:
      Nation, Class, and Redistribution,” American Political Science Review, 103 (2): 147-174.




                                               28
                     Figure 1: Districts of Origin of Suicide Terrorists




Notes: Numbers indicate the numbers of suicide terrorists originating from each district between the
years 2000 and 2006.


                                                 29
                                                                                       Table 1

                                            Summary Statistics on the Characteristics of Suicide Terrorists and their Attacks


                                                                   Number of                                      Standard
                                                                  Observations                 Mean               Deviation            Median           Minimum            Maximum
A. Characteristics of Suicide Terrorists
   Suicide Terrorist has Academic Education                             157                    0.197                0.399                  0                  0                 1

   Age of Suicide Terrorist                                             156                   21.397                5.727                 21                 12                64

   Suicide Terrorist Previously Involved in Terror                      157                    0.121                0.327                  0                  0                 1
   Activity
B. Characteristics of Targeted Locality
   Targeted Locality's Population above 50,000                          157                    0.745                0.437                  1                  0                 1

   Regional Capital                                                     157                    0.535                0.500                  1                  0                 1

C. Logistics of Suicide Attack
   Distance Suicide Terrorist's Locality to Target (km)                 156                   26.607                22.768              23.230                0               142.4

   Distance Terror Head Quarters to Target (km)                         133                   25.903                23.633              19.782                0               142.4

D. Outcome of Suicide Attack
   Caught Suicide Terrorist                                             157                    0.248                0.433                  0                  0                 1

   Casualties from Suicide Attack                                       157                   29.535                39.397                10                  0                181

Notes: The summary statistics reflect authors' calculations based on Israeli Security Agency reports of suicide terrorists. The targeted cities population refers to their population
within the metro area of the city according to the population figures for the year 2003 of the Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics.
                                                                        Table 2
                              Economic and Demographic Characteristics of Districts (Quarterly Averages)


                                                                                  Standard
                                                               Mean               Deviation            Median           Minimum           Maximum

Unemployment Rate                                              0.591                 0.049               0.589             0.419             0.728

Group Specific Unemployment Rate                               0.370                 0.078               0.368             0.157             0.654

Income Inequality                                              1.099                 0.208               1.080             0.596             1.679

Percentage Employed in Israel                                  0.051                 0.043               0.044                0              0.207

Years of Schooling                                             9.203                 0.513               9.234             7.431             10.346

Refugee Camp                                                   0.170                 0.178               0.112                0              0.696

West Bank                                                      0.688                 0.464                 1                  0                 1

Age                                                            33.633                0.968              33.660             31.133            35.804

Male                                                           0.502                 0.013               0.502             0.460             0.539

Married                                                        0.572                 0.031               0.573             0.496             0.659

Population Size (over 15 years old, hundreds)                   1388                  606                1446               200               3081

Notes: Entries in the table represent districts-quarters statistics of the respective variable. The number of observations equals 448 for all variables.
Data source: Palestinian Labor Force Survey of the West Bank and Gaza Strip between the years 2000 to 2006.
                                                                       Table 3
                                           Israeli Security Measures and Districts' Level of Violence


                                                                                    Standard
                                                                  Mean              Deviation            Median          Minimum           Maximum

Palestinian Fatalities                                            8.732               14.210                 4                0                121

Days with Curfew                                                  3.889               12.413                 0                0                89

Suicide Terrorists                                                0.348                0.914                 0                0                 8

Israeli Casualties from Suicide Terror Attacks                    10.248              37.214                 0                0                362

Notes: Entries in the table represent districts-quarters statistics of the respective variable. There are 304 observations for days with curfew and 448
observations for all the other variables. The data on the number of Palestinian fatalities was obtained from B'tselem. The data cover the years 2000 to
2006. The data on days with curfew was obtained from the U.N. office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs. The information for this variables is
available only from May 2002 to December 2006. The data on the number of suicide terrorists and Israeli casualties from suicide terror attacks was
obtained from reports of the Israeli Security Agency. These data cover the years 2000 to 2006.
                                                                                                                          Table 4

                                                                                The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Characteristics of Suicide Terrorists


Dependent Variable                            A. Education of Suicide Terrorist                                              B. Age of Suicide Terrorist                                   C. Suicide Terrorist Previously Involved in Terror

                                       (1)                     (2)                     (3)                         (4)                     (5)                    (6)                          (7)                    (8)                     (9)
Unemployment Rate                    1.056                   1.372 ***               0.613 ***                   0.660 ***               0.616 **               0.316                        1.530 ***              0.806 **                0.496 ***
                                    [0.827]                 [0.146]                 [0.137]                     [0.047]                 [0.308]                [0.661]                      [0.062]                [0.407]                 [0.248]
Palestinian Fatalities              -0.002 ***              -0.003                  -0.005                      -0.003 ***              -0.003                 -0.004                      -0.0002                -0.0002                  0.0005
                                    [0.001]                 [0.002]                 [0.004]                     [0.001]                 [0.003]                [0.004]                      [0.002]                [0.002]                 [0.001]
Days with Curfews                                                                    0.002                                                                      0.004 *                                                                   -0.0003
                                                                                    [0.002]                                                                    [0.002]                                                                    [0.0005]

Group Specific                       1.419 ***               1.760 ***               1.593 ***                   0.239                   0.632 ***              0.169                        0.217                  0.452 ***              -0.085
Unemployment Rate                   [0.260]                 [0.017]                 [0.478]                     [0.565]                 [0.208]                [0.268]                      [0.352]                [0.125]                 [0.157]
Palestinian Fatalities              -0.002 *                -0.003 *                -0.002                      -0.003 ***              -0.003                 -0.002                       0.0000                 0.0001                  0.0007
                                    [0.001]                 [0.001]                 [0.005]                     [0.001]                 [0.003]                [0.002]                      [0.002]                [0.002]                 [0.001]
Days with Curfews                                                                    0.000                                                                      0.002 ***                                                                  -0.000
                                                                                    [0.003]                                                                    [0.000]                                                                     [0.001]

Income Inequality                   -0.174 ***              -0.159                   0.262                       0.756 ***               0.474 ***              0.706 **                     0.502 ***              0.566 **                0.219 ***
                                    [0.046]                 [0.375]                 [0.293]                     [0.038]                 [0.014]                [0.346]                      [0.182]                [0.251]                 [0.043]
Palestinian Fatalities              -0.002 ***              -0.003                  -0.004 *                    -0.002 **               -0.002                 -0.003 *                      0.001                  0.001 ***               0.001
                                    [0.000]                 [0.002]                 [0.002]                     [0.001]                 [0.003]                [0.002]                      [0.001]                [0.000]                 [0.001]
Days with Curfews                                                                    0.002                                                                      0.003 **                                                                   0.0002
                                                                                    [0.002]                                                                    [0.001]                                                                     [0.001]

Region Fixed Effects                   Yes                    Yes                     Yes                         Yes                     Yes                     Yes                         Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Year Fixed Effects                     No                     Yes                     Yes                          No                     Yes                     Yes                          No                     Yes                     Yes
Observations                           156                    141                      64                         143                     143                      74                         156                     143                      79
Notes: Each column reports the estimated marginal effects of a separate Probit regression model in which the dependent variable is an indicator of the education of suicide terrorists, an indicator of their age, and an indicator of their experience. In
addition to the explanatory variables listed on the left, regressions in Columns 1, 4, and 7 add each district average years of education, population size over the age of 15, proportion of males, married, proportion living in a refugee camp and whether
the district is in the West Bank as explanatory variables. We subsequently add to these regressions years fixed effects (regressions in Columns 2, 5 and 8) and days with curfews (regressions in Columns 3, 6 and 9). Robust standard errors (adjusted
for clustering at the regional level) are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote statistically significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.
                                                                                      Table 5

                                              The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Characteristics of Targeted Cities


                                                       Targeted City Population                                                         Regional Capital


                                            (1)                     (2)                     (3)                         (4)                     (5)                     (6)
Unemployment Rate                          1.116                  2.259 ***               2.728                       1.914                   0.010                   1.316 ***
                                         [1.517]                 [0.202]                 [3.569]                     [2.003]                 [1.076]                 [0.279]
Palestinian Fatalities                    -0.003 ***              -0.002 ***              -0.002                      0.000                   0.001                   -0.002
                                         [0.000]                 [0.000]                 [0.002]                     [0.001]                 [0.001]                 [0.001]
Days with Curfews                                                                         -0.001                                                                      0.005 **
                                                                                         [0.002]                                                                     [0.002]

Group Specific                            0.470                   0.773 ***               0.092                       0.463                   -0.022                  3.716 *
Unemployment Rate                        [0.562]                 [0.047]                 [0.334]                     [0.943]                 [0.811]                 [2.109]
Palestinian Fatalities                    -0.003 ***              -0.002 ***              -0.003 ***                  0.001                   0.001                   0.001
                                         [0.000]                 [0.000]                 [0.001]                     [0.001]                 [0.001]                 [0.003]
Days with Curfews                                                                        0.0004                                                                       0.005 **
                                                                                         [0.000]                                                                     [0.001]

Income Inequality                         0.789 ***               0.829 ***               1.866 ***                   1.494 ***               1.529 ***               2.387 ***
                                         [0.276]                 [0.230]                 [0.504]                     [0.177]                 [0.360]                 [0.345]
Palestinian Fatalities                    -0.001 ***              0.000                   0.001 *                     0.004 ***               0.005 ***               0.005
                                         [0.000]                 [0.000]                 [0.001]                     [0.001]                 [0.001]                 [0.005]
Days with Curfews                                                                         -0.004 ***                                                                  0.003 **
                                                                                         [0.000]                                                                     [0.004]

Region Fixed Effects                       Yes                     Yes                     Yes                          Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Year Fixed Effects                         No                      Yes                     Yes                          No                      Yes                     Yes
Observations                               156                     143                      66                          156                     156                     79
Notes: Each column reports the estimated marginal effects of a separate Probit regression model in which the dependent variable is an indicator of the targeted city population
(equals one for cities with over 50,000 inhabitants) and whether the city is a regional capital. In addition to the explanatory variables listed on the left, regressions in Columns 1
and 4 add each district years of education, population size over the age of 15, proportion of males, married, proportion living in a refugee camp and whether the district is in the
West Bank as explanatory variables. We subsequently add to these regressions years fixed effects (regressions in Columns 2 and 5) and days with curfews (regressions in
Columns 3 and 6). Robust standard errors (adjusted for clustering at the regional level) are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote statistically significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
level respectively.
                                                                                      Table 6

                                                   The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Logistics of Suicide Attacks


                                          Distance Suicide Terrorist's Locality to Target                                 Distance Terror Head Quarters to Target

                                            (1)                     (2)                     (3)                         (4)                     (5)                     (6)
Unemployment Rate                     -162.189 ***            -158.336 ***            -172.355 ***                 -115.356 ***            -128.742 ***            -180.165 ***
                                        [6.250]                 [7.401]                [30.189]                     [27.083]                 [6.395]                [21.560]
Palestinian Fatalities                    0.153                   0.147                   -0.046                      0.201 ***               0.185 ***               -0.009
                                         [0.114]                 [0.223]                 [0.390]                     [0.007]                 [0.041]                 [0.007]
Days with Curfews                                                                         0.326                                                                       0.309 ***
                                                                                         [0.313]                                                                     [0.007]

Group Specific                          -78.240 ***             -75.472 ***           -129.245 **                   -34.636 ***             -42.001 ***             -93.647 ***
Unemployment Rate                       [11.104]                [11.400]               [60.644]                      [5.137]                [12.871]                [21.768]
Palestinian Fatalities                    0.127                   0.128                   -0.128                      0.185 ***               0.174 ***               -0.058
                                         [0.102]                 [0.237]                 [0.414]                     [0.006]                 [0.053]                 [0.037]
Days with Curfews                                                                         0.424                                                                       0.359 ***
                                                                                         [0.338]                                                                     [0.041]

Income Inequality                       -21.124                 -25.180 ***               -2.664                    -26.879 ***             -30.238 ***               -4.525 ***
                                        [17.039]                 [9.414]                 [8.748]                     [4.132]                 [2.601]                 [0.880]
Palestinian Fatalities                    0.074                   0.059                   -0.038                       0.118 ***              0.098 ***               0.038
                                         [0.065]                 [0.183]                 [0.416]                     [0.014]                 [0.031]                 [0.060]
Days with Curfews                                                                         0.261                                                                       0.229 ***
                                                                                         [0.309]                                                                     [0.027]

Region Fixed Effects                       Yes                     Yes                     Yes                          Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Year Fixed Effects                         No                      Yes                     Yes                          No                      Yes                     Yes
Observations                               155                     155                      78                          132                     132                     64
Notes: Each column reports the estimated effects of a separate OLS regression model in which the dependent variable is the distance between the suicide terrorists' locality of
residence and the targeted city, and the distance between the terror head quarters and the targeted city. In addition to the explanatory variables listed on the left, regressions in
Columns 1 and 4 add each district average years of education, population size over the age of 15, proportion of males, married, proportion living in a refugee camp and whether
the district is in the West Bank as explanatory variables. We subsequently add to these regressions years fixed effects (regressions in Columns 2 and 5) and days with curfews
(regressions in Columns 3 and 6). Robust standard errors (adjusted for clustering at the regional level) are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote statistically significance at the 10, 5
and 1 percent level respectively.
                                                                                      Table 7

                                                 The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Outcomes of Suicide Attacks


                                                       Caught Suicide Bomber                                                    Casualties from Suicide Attack

                                           (1)                     (2)                     (3)                         (4)                     (5)                     (6)
Unemployment Rate                        -0.710 ***              0.606 **                1.516 ***                   2.551 ***               0.259                   -8.716 ***
                                        [0.279]                 [0.296]                 [0.183]                     [0.349]                 [0.316]                 [0.233]
Palestinian Fatalities                   0.006 ***               0.005 ***               0.010 ***                   -0.007 ***              -0.003 ***              -0.006 **
                                        [0.001]                 [0.000]                 [0.002]                     [0.002]                 [0.001]                 [0.003]
Days with Curfews                                                                        -0.002 *                                                                    0.004
                                                                                        [0.001]                                                                     [0.004]

Group Specific                           -0.385                  -0.156 *                0.421                       1.766 ***               0.747 *                 -2.211 **
Unemployment Rate                       [0.292]                 [0.092]                 [0.629]                     [0.198]                 [0.448]                 [1.042]
Palestinian Fatalities                   0.006 ***               0.005 ***               0.010 ***                   -0.007 ***              -0.003 ***              -0.003 **
                                        [0.001]                 [0.000]                 [0.001]                     [0.002]                 [0.001]                 [0.002]
Days with Curfews                                                                        -0.002 ***                                                                  0.002
                                                                                        [0.001]                                                                     [0.006]

Income Inequality                        -0.516 ***              -0.620 ***              -1.206 ***                  0.638 ***               0.579 **                0.942 ***
                                        [0.059]                 [0.195]                 [0.121]                     [0.154]                 [0.296]                 [0.032]
Palestinian Fatalities                   0.005 ***               0.004 ***               0.007 ***                   -0.005 *                -0.001                  0.004
                                        [0.001]                 [0.000]                 [0.000]                     [0.003]                 [0.002]                 [0.003]
Days with Curfews                                                                        -0.001 *                                                                    -0.002
                                                                                        [0.001]                                                                     [0.005]

Region Fixed Effects                       Yes                     Yes                     Yes                         Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Year Fixed Effects                         No                      Yes                     Yes                         No                      Yes                     Yes
Observations                               156                     156                     79                          155                     155                     79
Notes: Each column reports the estimated effects of a separate regression in which the dependent variable is whether the suicide terrorist was caught (estimated using a Probit
model), and the number of casualties from suicide attacks (estimated using a Poisson model). In addition to the explanatory variables listed on the left, regressions in Columns 1
and 4 add each district average years of education, population size over the age of 15, proportion of males, married, proportion living in a refugee camp and whether the district is
in the West Bank as explanatory variables. We subsequently add to these regressions years fixed effects (regressions in Columns 2 and 5) and days with curfews (regressions in
Columns 3 and 6). Robust standard errors (adjusted for clustering at the regional level) are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote statistically significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
level respectively.
                                                                Table 8

                The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Organizational Affiliation of Suicide Bombers

                                                                  Multinomial Logit: Marginal Effects that Suicide Terrorist
                                     Islamic Suicide                                    belongs to
                                         Bomber                                                           Palestinian Islamic
                                                                        Fatah             Hamas                  Jihad
Unemployment Rate                         1.103 ***                      -1.085 ***              4.019 **                 -2.934 *
                                         [0.105]                        [0.189]                 [1.963]                  [1.774]

Group Specific                            0.874 ***                      -0.897 ***              2.352 ***                -1.456
Unemployment Rate                        [0.070]                        [0.048]                 [0.012]                  [1.983]

Income Inequality                         -0.474 ***                     0.517 ***               0.743 ***                -1.261 ***
                                         [0.106]                        [0.066]                 [0.076]                  [0.142]


Year Fixed Effects                          Yes                                                    Yes
Observations                                156                                                    156
Notes: Each cell reports the estimated coefficients of a separate regression. The first column reports the estimated marginal effects
of Probit regressions model in which the dependent variable equals one for suicide terrorists affiliated with Islamic groups (Hamas
and PIJ) and zero othewise. Columns 2 to 4 report the estimated marginal effects of multinomial Logit regressions in which the
dependent variable is the group affiliation of suicide terrorists.
 In addition to the explanatory variable listed on the left column, both estimations control for each district average years of education,
population size over the age of 15, proportion of males, married, proportion living in a refugee camp, whether the district is in the
West Bank and years fixed effects. Robust standard errors (adjusted for clustering at the regional level) are in parentheses. *, **, ***
denote statistically significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.
                                                                                     Table 9

                                                  The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Number of Suicide Attacks

                                     Correlation of Number of Suicide Attacks with Current                     Correlation of Number of Suicide Attacks with Conditions
                                                         Conditions                                                              in Previous Quarter

                                                          Including Additional Including Year Fixed                                   Including Additional      Including Year
                                   Simple Correlation                                                          Simple Correlation
                                                               Covariates             Effects                                              Covariates            Fixed Effects

                                           (1)                      (2)                     (3)                         (4)                    (5)                     (6)
Unemployment Rate                       13.222 ***                7.230 ***               2.808                       6.691 ***              2.104                   -1.843
                                        [2.393]                  [2.930]                 [3.076]                     [2.589]                [3.032]                 [3.351]

Group Specific                           4.727 ***                2.549                   1.118                       -0.610                 -2.689                  -3.033
Unemployment Rate                       [1.495]                  [1.814]                 [1.909]                     [1.596]                [1.933]                 [2.126]

Income Inequality                       -3.622 ***               -1.646 *                 0.037                       -2.024 ***             -0.169                   1.243
                                        [0.607]                  [0.891]                 [1.057]                     [0.595]                [0.884]                 [1.083]


Observations                               448                      392                     392                         432                     378                    378
Notes: Each cell reports the estimated coefficients of a separate Poisson panel regression model in which the dependent variable is the number of suicide attacks in each district
for every quarter. The regressions in Columns 1 and 4 have as their only explanatory variable the variable listed in the left.
 Regressions in Columns 2 and 5 add each district average years of education, population size over the age of 15, proportion of males, married, population working in Israel,
proportion living in a refugee camp, number of Palestinian fatalities, whether the district is in the West Bank and district fixed effects as explanatory variables.
Regressions in Columns 3 and 6 add year fixed effects to the regressions in Columns 2 and 5. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote statistically significance at the
10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.
                                                                                     Table 10

                               The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Occurrence and Number of Casualties from Suicide Attacks

                                 Correlation of Occurrence of Suicide Attacks with Conditions                  Correlation of Number of Casualties from Suicide Attacks
                                                     in Previous Quarter                                                 with Conditions in Previous Quarter

                                                          Including Additional Including Year Fixed                                   Including Additional      Including Year
                                   Simple Correlation                                                          Simple Correlation
                                                               Covariates             Effects                                              Covariates            Fixed Effects

                                           (1)                      (2)                     (3)                         (4)                    (5)                     (6)
Unemployment Rate                        1.521 ***                1.276 *                 0.517                       5.515 ***              -3.817 ***              -3.817 ***
                                        [0.140]                  [0.665]                 [0.670]                     [0.478]                [0.601]                 [0.601]

Group Specific                           0.436 *                  0.294                   -0.069                      -0.842 ***             -4.370 ***              -4.370 ***
Unemployment Rate                       [0.262]                  [0.447]                 [0.422]                     [0.287]                [0.361]                 [0.361]

Income Inequality                       -0.377 ***               -0.226                   -0.140                      -2.294 ***             0.088                    0.088
                                        [0.026]                  [0.196]                 [0.171]                     [0.118]                [0.171]                 [0.171]


Observations                               432                      378                     378                         432                     378                    378
Notes: Each cell reports the estimated coefficients of a separate panel regression model in which the dependent variable is the ocurrence of suicide attacks (panel A, estimated
using a linear probability model) and number of casualties from suicide attacks (panel B, estimated using a Poisson model) in each district for every quarter.
The regressions in Columns 1 and 4 have as their only explanatory variable the variable listed in the left. Regressions in Columns 2 and 5 add each district average years of
education, population size over the age of 15, proportion of males, married, population working in Israel, proportion living in a refugee camp, number of Palestinian fatalities,
whether the district is in the West Bank and district fixed effects as explanatory variables.
Regressions in Columns 3 and 6 add year fixed effects to the regressions in Columns 2 and 5. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote statistically significance at the
10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.
