                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    FIRM DYNAMICS, JOB TURNOVER, AND WAGE DISTRIBUTIONS IN AN OPEN
                              ECONOMY

                                           A. Kerem Coşar
                                             Nezih Guner
                                            James Tybout

                                        Working Paper 16326
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16326


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2010




We wish to thank Matteo Cacciatore, Carl Davidson, Donald Davis, Steven Davis, Jonathan Eaton,
Gabriel Felbermayr, Penny Goldberg, John Haltiwanger, Oleg Itskhoki, John McClaren, Philipp Kircher,
Steve Matusz, Marc Muendler, Nina Pavcnik, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Ina Simonovska, Etienne Wasmer,
and participants in many conferences and seminars for helpful discussions. This research was supported
by the National Science Foundation (Grant No. SES-0617888), the Excellence Project of the Bank
of Spain and the European Research Council (Grant No. 263600). Coşar thanks Chicago Booth for
summer financial support. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science
Foundation, the Bank of Spain, the European Research Council, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by A. Kerem Coşar, Nezih Guner, and James Tybout. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Firm Dynamics, Job Turnover, and Wage Distributions in an Open Economy
A. Kerem Coşar, Nezih Guner, and James Tybout
NBER Working Paper No. 16326
September 2010, Revised November 2013
JEL No. F12,F16,J63,J64

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper explores the combined effects of reductions in trade frictions, tariffs, and firing costs on
firm dynamics, job turnover, and wage distributions. It uses establishment-level data from Colombia
to estimate an open economy dynamic model that links trade to job flows in a new way. The fitted
model captures key features of Colombian firm dynamics and labor market outcomes, as well changes
in these features during the past 25 years. Counterfactual experiments imply that integration with global
product markets has increased both average income and job turnover in Colombia. In contrast, the
experiments find little role for this country's labor market reforms in driving these variables. The results
speak more generally to the effects of globalization on labor markets in Latin America and elsewhere.


A. Kerem Coşar                                       James Tybout
University of Chicago                                Department of Economics
Booth School of Business                             Penn State University
kerem.cosar@chicagobooth.edu                         517 Kern Graduate Building
                                                     University Park, PA 16802
Nezih Guner                                          and NBER
MOVE                                                 jtybout@psu.edu
Facultat d’Economia
Edifici B – Campus de Bellaterra
08193 Bellaterra
Cerdanyola del Vallès
Spain
and Barcelona GSE
nezih.guner@movebarcelona.eu
1       Introduction
In Latin America, between 1990 and 2003, merchandise trade tripled while job turnover,
unemployment, informal self-employment, and wage inequality all rose signi…cantly. Also,
around the beginning of this period, many countries in the region dismantled their trade
barriers and implemented labor market reforms.1 These developments motivate the two
basic questions we address in this paper. First, through what mechanisms and to what
extent might the global integration of product markets have increased job insecurity and wage
inequality in Latin America? Second, how might commercial policy reforms and changes in
worker …ring costs have conditioned the relationship between globalization and these labor
market outcomes?
    To answer these questions, we develop a dynamic general equilibrium model that links
globalization and labor regulations to job ‡ows, unemployment, and wage distributions.
Then we …t our model to plant-level panel data from Colombia— a country that cut tari¤s,
reduced …ring costs, and exhibited rapid growth in merchandise trade. Finally, we perform
counterfactual experiments that quantify the labor market consequences of global reductions
in trade frictions (hereafter, "globalization") and Colombia’s policy reforms. Decomposing
the net e¤ects, we …nd that the policy reforms modestly increased job turnover and un-
employment, while modestly improving average income. But globalization was much more
important, accounting by itself for a substantial fraction of the increase in job turnover,
unemployment, and income that Colombia experienced. Hence, while increasing incomes
through the well-known channels, the rapid expansion of global trade may also be contribut-
ing to reduced job security in Latin America and elsewhere.2
    Our model is related to several literatures. First, it shares some basic features with large
…rm models in the labor-search literature. In particular, it can be viewed as an extension of
Bertola and Cabellero (1994), Bertola and Garibaldi (2001), and Koeniger and Prat (2007) to
include fully articulated product markets, international trade, serially correlated productivity
shocks, intermediate inputs, and endogenous …rm entry and exit.3
    It also shares some characteristics with recent trade models that describe the e¤ects
of openness on labor markets and …rms, including Melitz (2003), Davidson et al. (1999,

    1
      Trade ‡ow data are taken from World Trade Organization (2013). The Inter-American Development
Bank (2004) summarizes the deterioration in Latin American labor market conditions. Heckman and Pages
(2004) survey labor market regulations and reforms in Latin America and note that openness to international
trade increased the demand for labor market ‡exibility. Haltiwanger et al. (2004) document the association
between job turnover and openness in Latin America. Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) survey the evidence
linking openness to wage inequality and informality in Latin America and other developing countries.
    2
      Rodrik (1996) makes a related argument, though he points to di¤erent mechanisms.
    3
      Other recent papers that study …rm dynamics and labor market frictions in a closed economy context
include Cooper et al. (2007), Lentz and Mortensen (2010), and Hobijn and Sahin (2013). Utar (2008) studies
…rm dynamics and labor market frictions in an import-competing industry that takes the wage rate as given.

                                                    2
2008), Kambourov (2009), Egger and Kreickemeier (2009), Artuc et al. (2010), Helpman
and Itskhoki (2010), Helpman et al. (2010), Davis and Harrigan (2011), Felbermayr et
al. (2011), Amiti and Davis (2012), Helpman et al. (2012), Coşar (2013), Dix-Carneiro
(2013), and Fajgelbaum (2013). Among these studies, our model most closely resembles
Helpman and Itskhoki (2010), which also has two sectors— one perfectly competitive, and
one characterized by monopolistic competition with search frictions and wage bargaining.
However, we di¤er from this literature in our focus on …rm dynamics and job turnover. Also,
excepting Artuc et al. (2010), Helpman et al. (2012), and Dix-Carneiro (2013), we depart
from these studies by econometrically estimating our model’s structural parameters.
    Finally, our formulation draws on Hopenhayn’s (1992) characterization of …rm dynamics,
and in that sense it is related to many previous models that generate size-dependent volatility,
including Jovanovic (1982), Ericson and Pakes (1995), Klette and Kortum (2004), Luttmer
(2007), and Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007).
    While many of the building blocks in our model are familiar, it delivers a new perspective
on the relationship between openness and labor market outcomes. Several key mechanisms
are at work. First, by increasing the sensitivity of …rms’ revenues to their productivity
and employment levels, openness makes …rms more willing to incur the hiring and …ring
costs associated with adjusting their workforce. By itself, this sensitivity e¤ect makes job
turnover and unemployment higher when trade frictions are low. It also tends to create larger
rents for the more successful …rms and to thereby spread the cross-…rm wage distribution.
Second, however, openness concentrates workers at larger …rms, which are more stable than
small …rms and less likely to exit.4 This distribution e¤ect works against the sensitivity
e¤ect, tending to reduce turnover and wage inequality as trade frictions fall. Finally, both
the sensitivity e¤ect and the distribution e¤ect are compounded by general equilibrium
adjustments in intermediate input prices, exchange rates, and labor market tightness.
    Our estimated model closely replicates basic features of Colombian micro data in the
decade preceding reforms, including the size distribution of …rms, the rates of employment
growth among …rms of di¤erent sizes, producer entry and exit rates, exporting patterns, and
the degree of persistence in …rm-level employment levels. Also, although it is …t to pre-
reform data, it nicely replicates many post-2000 features of the Colombian economy when it
is evaluated at post-2000 tari¤ rates, …ring costs, and global trade frictions. In particular,
the quanti…ed model successfully predicts the post-1990s plant size distribution.
    While we do not pretend to capture all of the channels through which openness and …ring
costs can a¤ect labor market outcomes, our focus on …rm-level entry, exit and idiosyncratic
productivity shocks is supported by existing empirical evidence on the sources of job turnover

   4
     This feature of our model captures a well-known empirical regularity. Haltiwanger et al. (2013) provide
recent evidence from the U.S.

                                                     3
and wage heterogeneity. Studies of job creation and job destruction invariably …nd that most
reallocation is due to idiosyncratic (rather than industry-wide) adjustments (Davis et al.
1998; Roberts 1996), even in Latin America’s highly volatile macro environment (Chapter 2
of Inter-American Development Bank 2004). Further, as Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) note,
there is little evidence in support of trade-induced labor reallocation across sectors, so if
openness has had a signi…cant e¤ect on job ‡ows, it should have been through intra-sectoral
e¤ects. Finally, while observable worker characteristics do matter for wage di¤erentials,
much is attributable to labor market frictions and …rm heterogeneity (Abowd et al. 1999;
Mortensen 2003; Helpman et al. 2012).


2     The Model
2.1    Preferences
We consider a small open economy populated by a unit measure of homogeneous, in…nitely-
lived worker-consumers. Each period t; agents derive utility from the consumption of homo-
geneous, non-tradable services, st ; and a composite industrial good, ct , where
                                      0                1
                                       ZNt                  1
                                                  1
                                 ct = @ ct (n)        dnA       ;                         (1)
                                          0

aggregates consumption of the di¤erentiated goods varieties, ct (n); n 2 [0; Nt ]; with a con-
stant elasticity of substitution > 1. Worker-consumers maximize the expected present
value of their utility stream
                                         X1
                                              s1t ct
                                    U=               t;
                                         t=1
                                             (1  + r)
where r is the discount rate and 2 (0; 1) is the expenditure share of the industrial good.
Being risk neutral, they do not save. In what follows, we suppress time subscripts t for ease
of notation.


2.2    Production technologies
Services are supplied by service sector …rms and, less e¢ ciently, by unemployed workers
engaged in home production. Regardless of their source, services are produced with labor
alone, homogeneous across suppliers, and sold in competitive product markets. Firms that
supply services generate one unit of output per worker and face no hiring or …ring costs.
Unemployed workers who home-produce service goods each generate b < 1 units of output.



                                              4
The economy-wide supply of services is thus

                                         S = Ls + bLu ;                                       (2)

where Ls is labor employed in the service sector and Lu is unemployed labor.
   Di¤erentiated goods are supplied by industrial sector …rms, each of which produces a
unique product. These …rms are created through sunk capital investments; thereafter their
output levels are determined by their productivity levels, z; employment levels, l, and inter-
mediate input usage, m, according to:

                                         q = zl m1     :                                      (3)

                               RN         1      1
Here 0 <     < 1 and m =        0
                                   m(n) dn         aggregates di¤erentiated goods used as
intermediates in the same way the subutility function (1) aggregates di¤erentiated goods
used for …nal consumption. Note that, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002), the inclusion of
intermediate goods in our production function links the domestic prices of imports directly
to the performance of all industrial …rms, including non-exporters. As in Melitz (2003),
productivity variation can equally well be thought of as variation in product quality.


2.3    Price indices
Di¤erentiated goods can be traded internationally. Measure NF of the measure N di¤er-
entiated goods are imported, and an endogenous set of domestically produced goods are
exported. Both exports and imports are subject to iceberg trade costs: for each c > 1
units shipped, a single unit arrives at its destination. Moreover, imports are subject to an
ad valorem tari¤ rate of m 1 > 0:
    Let asterisks indicate that a variable is expressed in foreign currency, and de…ne p (n) to
be the FOB price of imported variety n 2 [0; NF ]. The exact home-currency price index for
                                       hR               i1=(1 )
                                          NF      1
imported goods is then PF = m c k 0 p (n) dn                     ; where k is the exchange rate.
Similarly, letting p(n) be the price of domestic variety n 2 (NF ; N ] in the home market, the
                                                       RN                1=(1 )
exact home price index for domestic goods is PH = NF p(n)1 dn                   : Finally, de…ning
pX (n) to be the price of domestic variety n in the foreign market, and letting I x (n) 2 f0; 1g
                                                     RN x              1
                                                                              1=(1 )
take a value of 1 if good n is exported, PX =         NF
                                                         I  (n)p X (n)    dn          is the exact
foreign market price index for exported goods.
    Several normalizations simplify notation. First, since the measure of available foreign
varieties and their FOB foreign-currency prices are exogenous to our model, we normalize
hR                i1=(1 )
   NF       1
  0
      p (n)    dn         to unity by choice of foreign currency units. This allows us to write


                                                5
the exact domestic price index for the composite industrial good as
                                                                                 1
                                      P = PH1             +(    m c k)
                                                                         1   1
                                                                                     :                        (4)

Second, without loss of generality, we choose the price of services to be our numeraire. The
real exchange rate k endogenously adjusts so that in equilibrium, the two normalizations in
domestic and foreign currency units are consistent.


2.4     Di¤erentiated goods markets
Di¤erentiated goods are sold in monopolistically competitive markets, where they are pur-
chased by consumers as …nal goods and by producers as intermediate inputs. Utility max-
imization implies that worker i with income Yi demands PYi p(n) P
                                                                       units of domestic
                Yi   m c kp   (n0 )
variety n and   P       P
                                          units of imported variety n0 . Similarly, …rm j with gross
                                                           1 Gj    p(n)
revenue Gj optimally purchases (1                     )      P      P
                                                                                 units of domestic variety n; and
           G            0
(1   ) 1 Pj m c kpP
                    (n )
                            units of imported variety n0 .
   Aggregating across domestic consumers and domestic producers yields total domestic
demand for any domestic variety n:

                              QH (n) = DH p(n)                    for n 2 (NF ; N ];                          (5)

where                                      Z                                         Z
                                                 1                                       N
                                      1                                          1
                     DH = P                          Yi di + (1       )                       Gj dj :
                                             0                                           NF

Note that the population of domestic worker-consumers is normalized to one, and domestic
producers are indexed by n 2 (NF ; N ]. Likewise, total domestic demand for any imported
variety n is
                     QH (n) = DH m c kp (n)         for n 2 [0; NF ]:                (6)

Finally, assuming markets are internationally segmented, foreign demand for domestically
produced good n is given by

                               QF (n) = DF [pX (n)]                ; n 2 (NF ; N ];                           (7)

where DF measures aggregate expenditures abroad denominated in foreign currency, and is
net of any e¤ects of foreign commercial policy. Given our small country assumption, we take
DF to be una¤ected by the actions of domestic agents.
   These expressions imply that, expressed in domestic currency, total domestic expendi-


                                                            6
tures on domestic varieties amount to DH PH1 , total domestic expenditures on imported
varieties amount to DH ( m c k)1 ; and domestic …rms’ total export revenues amount to
kDF PX1 = c .
    In what follows, we refer to the sector producing tradable di¤erentiated goods as the
industrial sector and to the producers in there as industrial …rms.


2.5     Producer dynamics
Industrial …rms are subject to idiosyncratic productivity shocks. These are serially correlated
and are generated by the AR(1) process

                                      ln z 0 = ln z +   z   ;                                (8)

where 2 (0; 1) and z > 0 are parameters, primes indicate one-period leads, and
N (0; 1) is a standard normal random variable independently and identically distributed
across time and …rms. Together with …rms’employment policies and entry and exit decisions,
(8) determines the steady state distribution of …rms over the state space (z; l): Note that
  < 1 implies large …rms are less likely to grow, and thus will create jobs at a slower rate.
    Producer dynamics in the industrial sector resemble those in Hopenhayn (1992) and
Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) in that …rms react to their productivity shocks by optimally
hiring, …ring, or exiting. Also, new …rms enter whenever their expected future pro…t stream
exceeds the entry costs they face. However, unlike these papers, we assume that hiring in
the industrial sector is subject to search frictions captured by a standard matching function.
We now describe the functioning of labor markets.


2.6     Labor markets and the matching technology
The service sector labor market is frictionless, so workers can obtain jobs there with certainty
if they choose to do so. Since each service sector worker produces one unit of output, and
the price of services is our numeraire, these jobs pay a wage of ws = 1.
    The industrial sector labor market, in contrast, is subject to search frictions. These expose
industrial job seekers to unemployment risk and create match-speci…c rents that workers and
…rms bargain over. The number of new matches between job seekers and vacancy posting
…rms each period is given by

                                                    VU
                                   M (V; U ) =              ;
                                                 (V + U )1=

where    > 0: Here, U is the measure of workers searching for industrial sector jobs, and


                                                 7
V is the measure of industrial sector vacancies. The parameter governs the severity of
matching frictions, since a higher value for results in a larger number of matches for given
values of U and V:5 This matching function implies that industrial …rms …ll each vacancy
with probability
                                        M (V; U )        U
                              (V; U ) =           =              ;
                                           V        (V + U )1=
while workers searching for industrial jobs …nd matches with probability

                                 e(V; U ) = M (V; U ) =     V
                                                                   :
                                               U        (V + U )1=

    At the beginning of each period, workers who are not already employed in the industrial
sector decide whether to accept a service sector job that pays wage ws = 1 with certainty, or
to search for an industrial sector job. If they fail to match with an industrial sector producer,
they subsist until the next period by home-producing services at the wage of b < 1:6 At the
start of the matching process, among the unit measure of the worker population, U are
searching for an industrial job. At the end of the matching process, Lu = (1 e)U workers
fail to …nd a job and stay unemployed while Lq work in the industrial sector. As a result, a
fraction Lu =(Lu + Lq ) of workers associated with the frictional labor market are unemployed.
    Workers who begin a period employed in the industrial sector can continue with their
current job unless their employer lays them o¤ or shuts down entirely. In equilibrium,
industrial sector workers are paid at least their reservation wage, so those who do not lose
their jobs will never leave them voluntarily. Workers’job-seeking decisions and the bargaining
game that determines industrial …rms’wages will be described below in Sections 2.9 and 2.10,
respectively. But before discussing either, we must characterize the …rm’s problem.


2.7     The …rm’s problem
At the beginning of each period, incumbent …rms decide whether to continue operating and
potential entrants decide whether to create new …rms. Thereafter, active …rms go on to
choose their employment levels, intermediate input usage, and exporting policies. Entry,
exit, and employment decisions involve adjustment costs, so they are solutions to forward-
looking problems. In contrast, intermediate input purchases and exporting decisions involve
frictionless optimization after employment levels have been determined. We now characterize

   5
      The functional form of the matching function follows den Haan et al. (2000). It is subject to constant
returns to scale, and increasing in both arguments. In contrast to the standard Cobb-Douglas form, it has
no scale parameter and the implied matching rates are bounded between zero and one. Note that for V = U;
as approaches in…nity, job …nding and …lling probabilities approach to 1.
    6
      The notion that workers trade job security in a low wage sector for the opportunity to search in a higher
wage sector traces back at least to the Harris and Todaro (1970) model.

                                                      8
all …rm decisions, ending with a discussion of their implications for our model’s mechanics.

2.7.1   Export policy

Given the domestic demand function (5), any …rm that sells some fraction 1               of its
                                                                    1              1
output domestically will generate gross home sales amounting to DH [(1       )q] (   ) : Simi-
larly, given the foreign demand function (7), such a …rm will generate gross foreign sales of
        1
          h i 1
k (DF )     c
              q    : Total gross revenue can thus be written as

                                                                                1
                                    G(q; ) = exp [dH + dF ( )] q                    ;                                    (9)
                                                                            1
                  1                                      1         DF                                1
where dH = ln(DH ); and dF ( ) = ln (1           )           + k   DH
                                                                                ( = c)                   : While the term dH
measures domestic demand, and is common to all …rms, the term dF ( ) captures the extra
revenue generated by exporting, conditional on output.
   Given output levels, …rms choose their exporting levels each period to maximize their
current sales revenues net of …xed exporting costs, cx : Not all …rms …nd it pro…table to
participate in foreign markets, but those that do share the same optimal level of :

                                                                        1                1
                           o                                      DH
                                                                   c
                               = arg max dF ( ) =            1+                              :                          (10)
                                       0    1                   k DF

The associated export market participation policy is thus
                          (                                                                      1
                  x            1     if exp [dH + dF ( o )]        exp(dH ) q                        > cx ;
                I (q) =                                                                                                 (11)
                               0;    otherwise,

and there is a threshold output level that separates exporters from others. Given dH and
dF ( o ); this allows us to write revenues net of exporting costs as a function of output alone:

                                                                       1
                       G(q) = exp [dH + I x (q)dF ( o )] q                          cx I x (q):                         (12)

2.7.2   Intermediates and the value-added function

Firms determine their output levels by choosing their intermediate input usage, m, given their
current period z and l values. Optimizing over m and suppressing market-wide variables,
we can thus use (3) and (12) to write value added net of exporting costs as a function of z
and l alone:
                           R(z; l) = max G(zl m1 ) P m :                                  (13)
                                            m




                                                     9
The solution to this optimization problem is:

                                    R(z; l) =       (z; l) (zl )                  cx I x (z; l);                                (14)

where we have used the optimized m value and (3) to restate I x (q) as I x (z; l): Also,

                                                                                                             1
                                          (1    )
                         (z; l) =     P              exp [dH + I x (z; l)dF ( o )]                               ;              (15)

                                                       h                       i     1
                    1                           1          (1        )(   1)
where = (1          )(1)
                         and = (1 )                        are positive constants.
    The term (z; l) is a …rm-level market size index. It responds to anything that a¤ects
aggregate domestic demand (DH ), trade costs ( c ), or the exchange rate (k). But given
these market-wide variables, the only source of cross-…rm variation in (z; l) is exporting
status (I x ). Accordingly, below we suppress the arguments of     except where we wish to
emphasize its dependence on these variables. Appendix 1 provides derivations of (14) and
(15), and shows that the net revenue function exhibits diminishing marginal returns to labor
(    < 1).

2.7.3    Employment policy

We now turn to decisions that involve forward-looking behavior. When choosing employment
levels, …rms weigh the revenue stream implied by (14) against wage costs, the e¤ects of l on
their continuation value, and current …ring or hiring costs. To characterize the latter, let the
cost of posting v vacancies for a …rm of size l be

                                                                ch            v       1
                                          Ch (l; v) =                                     ;
                                                                 1        l    2




where ch and 1 > 1 are positive parameters.7 The parameter 2 2 [0; 1] determines the
strength of scale economies in hiring. If 2 = 0; there are no economies of scale and the cost
of posting v vacancies is the same for all …rms. On the other hand, if 2 = 1; the cost of a
given employment growth rate is the same for all …rms. For any 0 < 2 < 1; a given level
of employment growth is more costly for larger …rms, and other things equal their growth
rates are relatively small.
    Firms in our model are large in the sense that cross-…rm variation in realized worker
arrival rates is ignorable. That is, all …rms …ll the same fraction of their posted vacancies.
                                                                            0
It follows that expansion from l to l0 simply requires the posting of v = l l vacancies, and

   7
    This speci…cation generalizes Nilsen et al. (2007), who set                       2   =1       1=   1:   See also Merz and Yashiv
(2007), and Yashiv (2006).

                                                            10
we can write the cost of expanding from l to l0 workers as

                                                    ch            l0 l    1

                                  Ch (l; l0 ) =               1
                                                                              :                          (16)
                                                     1              l 2

Clearly, when labor markets are slack, hiring is less costly because each vacancy is more
likely to be …lled.
    Downward employment adjustments are also costly. When a …rm reduces its workforce
from l0 to l; it incurs …ring costs proportional to the number of workers shed:8

                                           Cf (l; l0 ) = cf (l    l0 ):                                  (17)

   For convenience we assume hiring and …ring costs are incurred in terms of service goods,
and we describe both with the adjustment cost function:
                                                (
                                                    Ch (l; l0 ) if l0 > l;
                                  C(l; l0 ) =
                                                    Cf (l; l0 ) otherwise.

    Several observations concerning adjustment costs are in order. First, while convex hiring
costs induce …rms to expand gradually, there is no incentive to downsize gradually. Second,
when the …rm exits, it is not liable for cf : Finally, as will be discussed below, it is possible
that a …rm will …nd itself in a position where the marginal worker reduces operating pro…ts,
but it is more costly to …re her than retain her.
    Regardless of whether a …rm expands, contracts, or remains at the same employment
level, we assume it bargains with each of its workers individually and continuously. This
implies that bargaining is over the marginal product of labor, and all workers at a …rm in a
particular state (z; l) are paid the same wage (Stole and Zwiebel 1996; Cahuc and Wasmer
2001; Cahuc, Marque, and Wasmer 2008). Moreover, the marginal worker at an expanding
…rm generates rents, while the marginal worker at a contracting …rm does not (Bertola and
Caballero 1994; Bertola and Garibaldi 2001; Koeniger and Prat 2007).9 Hence expanding
…rms face di¤erent wage schedules than others. These schedules depend upon …rms’states,
so we denote the wage schedule paid by a hiring …rm as wh (z; l) and the wage schedule paid
by a non-hiring …rm as wf (z; l). Details are deferred to Section 2.10 below.
    We now elaborate …rms’optimal employment policies within a period (see Figure 1). An
incumbent …rm enters the current period with the productivity level and work force (z; l)
determined in the previous period. Thereupon it may exit immediately, either because the
   8
      As is standard in the literature (see Ljungqvist 2002 for a review), we assume that …ring costs take the
form of a resource cost and are not pure transfers from …rms to workers.
    9
      This result obtains because hiring …rms face convex adjustment costs, while …ring costs are linear in
the number of …red workers.

                                                         11
               Figure 1: Within-period Sequencing of Events for Firms




expected present value of its pro…t stream is negative, or because it is hit with an exogenous
exit shock.
    If a …rm opts to stay active and is not hit with an exogenous exit shock, it proceeds to an
interim stage in which it observes its current-period productivity realization z 0 . Then, taking
stock of its updated state, (z 0 ; l); the relevant wage schedules, and adjustment costs C(l; l0 ),
it chooses its current period work force, l0 . Both hiring and …ring decisions take immediate
e¤ect and …rms enter the end of the period with (z 0 ; l0 ); making optimal intermediate usage
and exporting decisions based on their new state. Pro…ts are realized and wages are paid at
this point. Depending on whether the …rm is hiring or not, pro…ts are

                    0    0        R(z 0 ; l0 )   wh (z 0 ; l0 )l0   C(l; l0 )   cp   if l0 > l
                  (z ; l; l ) =                                                                   (18)
                                  R(z 0 ; l0 )   wf (z 0 ; l0 )l0   C(l; l0 )   cp otherwise,

where cp ; the per-period …xed cost of operation, is common to all …rms.
   Firms discount the future at the same rate (1 + r) as consumers. So the beginning-of-
period value of a …rm in state (z; l) is

                                             1
                 V(z; l) = max 0;                Ez0 jz max  [ (z 0 ; l; l0 ) + V(z 0 ; l0 )] ;   (19)
                                             1+r         l 0




where is the probability of an exogenous death shock, and the maximum of the term
in square brackets is the value of the …rm in the interim state, after it has realized its
productivity shock.
   The solution to (19) implies an employment policy function,

                                                 l0 = L(z 0 ; l);                                 (20)

an indicator function I h (z 0 ; l) that distinguishes hiring and …ring …rms, and an indicator

                                                         12
function I c (z; l) that characterizes …rms’continuation and exit policy. I h (z 0 ; l) and I c (z; l)
take the value one if a …rm is hiring or continuing, respectively, and zero otherwise.

2.7.4     Entry

In the steady state, a constant fraction of …rms exits the industry either endogenously or
exogenously. These …rms are replaced by an equal number of entrants, who …nd it optimal
to pay a sunk entry cost of ce and create new …rms. Upon entry, these entrants are endowed
with an initial employment of le > 0, and draw their initial productivity level from the
ergodic productivity distribution implied by (8); hereafter denoted as e (z). Firms need at
least le workers to operate, and the search costs for the initial le workers are included in ce ;
along with …xed capital costs. Thereafter entrants behave exactly like incumbent …rms, with
their interim state given by (z; le ) (see Figure 1). So by the time they begin producing, new
entrants have adjusted their workforce to l0 le in accordance with their initial productivity.
Free entry implies that                  Z
                                       Ve =             V(z; le )   e (z)dz   ce ;                           (21)
                                                    z

which holds with equality if there is a positive mass of entrants. We assume that each worker-
consumer owns equal shares in a diversi…ed fund that collects pro…ts from …rms, …nances
entry, and redistributes the residual as dividends to its owners.


2.8      Discussion
Our value-added and hiring cost functions (equations 14 and 16) combine to deliver several
key model features. Most importantly, they introduce a link between job turnover and the
…rm-level market size index, (expression 15). Other things equal; an increase in makes
the value-added function (14) steeper, increasing the cost of deviating from static pro…t-
maximizing employment levels. Thus, holding the distribution of …rms over (z; l) …xed,
policies that increase will make …rms’employment levels more responsive to z shocks.10
    This e¤ect of     on turnover links job security to openness through Melitz-type (2003)

   10
     To better understand this feature of our model, suppose the marginal value of an additional worker
                                                             1
is simply her marginal revenue product,      z (l0 )           ; and assume the entire cost of hiring l0 workers is
                                                       0
                                                 1 (         ) 1
                                                     l     l
captured by the vacancy posting cost, ch1                l 2
                                                                 . Then the …rst order condition for employment
implies a positive relationship between l0 and among all …rms in states where hiring occurs: l0 = f ( jz; l);
f > 0: Further, the elasticity of l0 with respect to z increases with :

                                            (   1  1) f ( jz; l)
                                 d ln z =                        +1                  d ln l0
                                                f ( jz; l) l

Of course, other properties of our model complicate this relationship, including wage schedules, …ring costs,
and the distinction between the value of a worker and her marginal revenue product.

                                                              13
e¤ects. Speci…cally, a reduction in c or m reduces         for unproductive non-exporters be-
cause these …rms experience increased import competition without any o¤setting increase in
foreign sales. Exporters, on the other hand, see an increase in as trade costs fall because
they gain more in foreign demand than they lose in domestic demand. And small, produc-
tive non-exporters are similarly e¤ected, since a large      value for exporters creates strong
incentives for them to hire and expand into foreign markets. (Fajgelbaum 2013 features
an analogous e¤ect in a setting without productivity dynamics.) These …rms therefore grow
faster when exporters’ increases, especially when they become exporters and their value
jumps discretely.
    This tendency for openness to make productive …rms more responsive to z shocks is what
we dubbed the sensitivity e¤ect in the introduction.11 When the heightened volatility among
productive …rms dominates reductions in volatility at unproductive …rms, it increases job
turnover. Further, to the extent that turnover rises, it is ampli…ed by a feedback e¤ect.
Greater job turnover increases the pool of unemployed workers, and increases the vacancy
…lling rate, (V; U ): This ‡attens the marginal cost of hiring, making …rms even more re-
sponsive to z shocks.
    Thus far we have discussed the e¤ects of openness on …rms’hiring policies, given their
initial states, (z; l). But as Melitz (2003) stresses, the distribution of …rms over the state
space also reacts to changes in c or m : And since reductions in trade frictions tend to
concentrate workers at large, stable …rms, this distribution e¤ect by itself creates a direct
relationship between openness and job stability. The net e¤ect of reductions in c and m
on turnover and unemployment thus depends upon the relative strengths of the sensitivity
e¤ect and the distribution e¤ect.
    In addition to linking turnover with trade costs, our value-added function and hiring cost
function combine to link openness with wage inequality. This feature of the model resembles
earlier treatments in the trade literature.12 Firms with high levels of output, which tend
to be exporters, generate larger revenues when trade costs are low. Since convex hiring
costs discourage productive yet small …rms from moving immediately to their static pro…t-
maximizing employment levels, those …rms also tend to have more surplus to bargain over.
In contrast, small and unproductive non-exporters face more import competition and thus
have less surplus to bargain over when trade costs are low, which reduces their wages. This
pattern is consistent with the empirical …nding that, controlling for employment, exporters
pay their workers more (Bernard and Jensen 1999).
  11
       Holmes and Stevens (2013) document that large …rms in the U.S. are more sensitive to import compe-
tition than small …rms. Their interpretation, however, di¤ers from ours.
    12
       Other open economy labor-search models that translate exporter rents into high wages include Help-
man and Itskhoki (2010), Helpman et al. (2010), Fajgelbaum (2013), Egger and Kreickemeier (2009), and
Felbermayr et al. (2011).


                                                   14
   Finally, it is worth mentioning that our formulation provides new explanations for several
well-documented features of exporters. First, equations (14) and (16) imply that exporters
generate relatively high revenues per unit input bundle, controlling for productivity. Our
formulation thus provides an explanation for the fact that revenue-based productivity mea-
sures are higher among exporters: they have higher mark-ups.13 Second, re-interpreting z
shocks to be product appeal indices rather than e¢ ciency indices, the model explains why
exporters manage to be larger than non-exporters, even though they charge higher prices
and pay higher wages.


2.9     The worker’s problem
Figure 2 presents the intra-period timing of events for workers. Consider …rst a worker who
is employed by an industrial …rm in state (z; l) at the beginning of the current period. This
worker learns immediately whether her …rm will continue operating. If it shuts down, she
joins the pool of industrial job seekers (enters state u) in the interim stage. Otherwise,
she enters the interim stage as an employee of the same …rm she worked for in the previous
period. Her …rm then realizes its new productivity level z 0 and enters the interim state (z 0 ; l):
At this point her …rm decides whether to hire workers. If it expands its workforce to l0 > l,
she earns wh (z 0 ; l0 ); and she is positioned to start the next period at a …rm in state (z 0 ; l0 ):
If the …rm contracts or remains at the same employment level, she either loses her job and
reverts to state u or she retains her job, earns wf (z 0 ; l0 ), and starts the next period at a …rm
in state (z 0 ; l0 ): All workers at contracting …rms are equally likely to be laid o¤, so each loses
her job with probability pf = (l l0 )=l.
    Workers in state u are searching for industrial jobs. They are hired by entering and
expanding …rms that post vacancies. If they are matched with a …rm, they receive the
same wage as those who were already employed by the …rm. If they are not matched, they
support themselves by home-producing b < 1 units of the service good. At the start of the
next period, they can choose to work in the service sector (enter state s) or search for a job
in the industrial sector (remain in state u): Likewise, workers who start the current period in
the service sector choose between continuing to work at the service wage ws = 1 and entering
the pool of industrial job seekers. These workers are said to be in state o:
    We now specify the value functions for the workers in the interim stage. Going into the
service sector generates an end-of-period income of 1 and returns a worker to the o state at


  13
     In support of this interpretation, De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) report evidence that mark-ups are
higher among exporting …rms. Trade models that lack factor market frictions cannot explain this result
because …rms in these models freely expand or contract until their mark-ups are the same (assuming CES
preferences).

                                                   15
              Figure 2: Within-period Sequencing of Events for Workers




the beginning of the next period. Accordingly, the interim value of this choice is

                                                     1
                                          Js =          (1 + J o ):                              (22)
                                                    1+r

Searching in the industrial sector exposes workers to the risk of spending the period unem-
ployed, and supporting themselves by home-producing b units of the service good. But it
also opens the possibility of landing in a high-value job. Since the probability of …nding a
match is e; the interim value of searching for an industrial job is
                                        "                     #
                                              (1 e)
                                J u = eEJhe +       (b + J o ) ;                                 (23)
                                               1+r

where EJhe is the expected value of matching with a hiring …rm to be de…ned below.
    The value of the sectorial choice is J o = maxfJ s ; J u g. In an equilibrium with both sectors
in operation, workers must be indi¤erent between them, so J o = J s = J u : Combined with
(22), this condition implies that J o ; J s ; and J u are all equal to 1=r:
    The expected value of matching with an industrial job, EJhe ; depends on the distribution
of hiring …rms and the value of the jobs they o¤er. For workers who match with a hiring
…rm in the interim state (z 0 ; l), the interim period value is given by

                                                1
                             Jhe (z 0 ; l) =       wh (z 0 ; l0 ) + J e (z 0 ; l0 ) ;            (24)
                                               1+r

where l0 = L(z 0 ; l) and J e (z 0 ; l0 ) is the value of being employed at an industrial …rm in state

                                                        16
(z 0 ; l0 ) at the start of the next period. Accordingly, the expected value of a match for a
worker as perceived at the interim stage is
                                                     Z Z
                                         EJhe    =                 Jhe (z 0 ; l)g(z 0 ; l)dldz 0 ;                                  (25)
                                                     z0        l


where g(z 0 ; l) is the density of vacancies across hiring …rms

                                                                       v(z 0 ; l) e (z 0 ; l)
                                        g(z 0 ; l) = R R                                            :                               (26)
                                                          z0       l
                                                                       v(z 0 ; l) e (z 0 ; l)dldz 0

Here v(z 0 ; l) = I h (z 0 ; l) [L(z 0 ; l) l] = gives the number of vacancies posted by a …rm in
interim state (z 0 ; l); and e (z 0 ; l) is the interim stage unconditional density of …rms over
(z 0 ; l). Note that the latter density is distinct from the end-of-period stationary distribution
of …rms, (z; l).
      It remains to specify the value of starting the period matched with an industrial …rm,
J e (z; l), which appears in (24) above. The value of being at a …rm that exits immediately
(exogenously or endogenously) is simply the value of being unemployed, J u : This is also the
value of being at a non-hiring …rm, since workers at these …rms are indi¤erent between being
…red and retained. Hence J e (z; l) can be written as

  J e (z; l) =    + (1          ) 1     I c (z; l) J u
                     + (1        )I c (z; l) max J u ; Ez0 jz I h (z 0 ; l)Jhe (z 0 ; l) + (1               I h (z 0 ; l))J u     : (27)


2.10      Wage schedules
We now characterize the wage schedules. Consider …rst a hiring …rm. After vacancies have
been posted and matching has taken place, the labor market closes. Firms then bargain
with their workers simultaneously and on a one-to-one basis, treating each worker as the
marginal one. At this point, vacancy posting costs are already sunk and workers who walk
away from the bargaining table cannot be replaced in the current period. Similarly, if an
agreement between the …rm and the worker is not reached, the worker remains unemployed
in the current period. These timing assumptions create rents to be split between the …rm
and the worker.
    As detailed in Appendix 2, it follows that the wage schedule for hiring …rms with an
end-of-period state (z 0 ; l0 ) is given by

                                                                                                        1
          wh (z 0 ; l0 ) = (1         )b +                                 (z 0 ; l0 )   (z 0 ) (l0 )        Pf (z 0 ; l0 )cf ;     (28)
                                             1       +                 |                 {z             }
                                                                                   =@R(z 0 ;l0 )=@l0



                                                                        17
where 2 [0; 1] measures the bargaining power of the worker, and Pf (z 0 ; l0 ) is the probability
of being …red next period.14 Workers in expanding …rms get their share of the marginal
product of labor plus (1    ) share of their outside option, while part of the …ring cost is
passed on to them as lower wages.15
   The marginal worker at a non-hiring …rm generates no rents, so the …ring wage just
matches her reservation value (see Appendix 2):

                                 wf (z 0 ; l0 ) = rJ u        [J e (z 0 ; l0 )   J u ]:             (29)

Three assumptions lie behind this formulation. First, workers who quit do not trigger …ring
costs for their employers. Second, …rms cannot use mixed strategies when bargaining with
workers. Finally, …red workers are randomly chosen. The …rst assumption ensures that
workers at contracting …rms are paid no more than the reservation wage, and the remaining
assumptions prevent …rms from avoiding …ring costs by paying less than reservation wages
to those workers they wish to shed. Importantly, wf (z; l) does vary across …rms, since those
workers who continue with a …ring …rm may enjoy higher wages in the next period. This
option to continue has a positive value— captured by the bracketed term in (29), so …ring
…rms may pay their workers less than the ‡ow value of being unemployed.


2.11      Equilibrium
Six basic conditions characterize our equilibrium. First, the distribution of …rms over (z; l)
states in the interim and end of each period, denoted by e (z; l) and (z; l); respectively,
reproduce themselves each period through the stochastic process on z, the policy functions,
and the productivity draws that …rms receive upon entry. Second, all markets clear: supply
matches demand for services and for each di¤erentiated good, where supplies are determined
by employment and productivity levels in each …rm. Third, the ‡ow of workers into unem-
ployment matches the ‡ow of workers out of unemployment— that is, the Beveridge condition
holds. Fourth, a positive mass of entrants replaces exiting …rms every period so that free
entry condition (21) holds with equality. Fifth, aggregate income matches aggregate expen-
diture, so trade is balanced. Finally, workers optimally choose the sector in which they are
working or seeking work. Appendix 3 provides further details.



  14
     This expression is analogous to equation (9) in Koeniger and Prat (2007).
  15
     As in Bertola and Cabellero (1994), wages decline in …rms’employment (l0 ), holding productivity (z)
…xed. This re‡ects the diminishing marginal revenue product of labor, and induces …rms to hoard labor
and thereby keep workers’wages low. Cahuc, Marque, and Wasmer (2008) discuss conditions under which
overemployment might result at the macroeconomic level.

                                                         18
                                             Figure 3: Colombian Aggregates

         0.4                                                0.4                                             0.4

        0.35      % of plants exporting
                                                           0.35                                            0.35
                  Revenue share of exports
         0.3                                                0.3                                             0.3

        0.25                                               0.25                                            0.25

         0.2                                                0.2                                             0.2

        0.15                                               0.15                                            0.15

         0.1                                                0.1                                             0.1

        0.05                                               0.05                                            0.05

          0                                                  0                                               0
          1980   1985    1990      1995      2000   2005     1980     1985      1990       1995     2000     1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005


                                                                                                            0.7
         0.4


                                                            0.25
         0.3                                                                                               0.65
                                                             0.2


         0.2                                                0.15                                            0.6


                                                             0.1
         0.1                                                                                               0.55
                                                            0.05

           0                                                  0                                             0.5
          1980   1985    1990      1995      2000   2005      1980   1985    1990   1995    2000   2005      1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005




Notes: In all panels, 1991 is marked as the reform year. See text for details about variables. Missing
data points were unavailable. Data sources for each panel in clockwise order: 1) DANE Annual Survey of
Manufacturers. Pre-1991 series are based on own calculations from the micro-data, post-1991 series has
been obtained from DANE. 2) Inter-American Development Bank (2004). See footnote 22 for the de…nition
of job turnover. 3) International Monetary Fund (2011). 4) Approximate …gures based on Figure 3.1. in
Mondragón-Vélez and Pena (2010), 5) Manufacturing share of urban employment, ILO (2013) 6) World
Bank (2013).


3     Quantitative Analysis
3.1     Pre- and post-reform conditions in Colombia
To explore the quantitative implications of our model, we …t it to Colombian data. This
country suits our purposes for several reasons. First, Colombia underwent a signi…cant
trade liberalization during the late 1980s and early 1990s, reducing its average nominal tari¤
rate from 21 percent to 11 percent (Goldberg and Pavcnik 2004). Second, Colombia also
implemented labor market reforms in 1991 that substantially reduced …ring costs. According
to Heckman and Pages (2000), the average cost of dismissing a worker fell from an equivalent
of 6 months’wages in 1990 to 3 months’wages in 1999. Finally, major changes in Colombian
trade volumes and labor markets followed these reforms, suggesting that they and/or external
reductions in trade frictions may well have been important.
    Key features of the Colombian economy during the pre- and post-reform period are sum-


                                                                       19
marized in Figure 3. The …rst panel shows the fraction of manufacturing establishments
that were exporters, as well as the aggregate revenue share of exports. Before 1991, about
12 percent of all plants were exporters on average (we use "plant" and "…rm" interchange-
ably in the remainder of the paper) and total exports accounted for 9 percent of aggregate
manufacturing revenues. Re‡ecting the globalization of the Colombian economy, both ratios
increased by about 250 percent from the 1980s to the 2000s. The second panel shows job
turnover rates in manufacturing, due both to expansion and contraction, and the entry or
exit of plants. This series went from an average of 18.1 percent during the pre-reform period
1981-1990 to 23 percent during the post-reform period 1993-1998.
    The third panel of Figure 3 shows the evolution of the unemployment rate. During the
post-reform years 1991-1998, this series hovered around its 1981-90 average of 10.8 percent.
During 2000-2006, its average was a somewhat higher 13 percent, but this increase mainly
re‡ected a …nancial crisis at the end of the 1990s. In developing countries, o¢ cial unemploy-
ment rates do not provide a complete picture of labor market conditions. Lacking formal
bene…ts, many unemployed workers end up being self-employed in service-related jobs in
order to subsist. The fourth panel shows the employment share of self-employed workers.
After the reforms, this ratio began a sustained increase. This can be taken as a sign of
more precarious labor market conditions. A similar trend in self-employment has been doc-
umented in the context of Brazilian trade reforms by Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011).
The …fth panel documents a drop in the manufacturing share of urban employment from
22.6 percent in 1985-1990 to 19.3 percent in 2000-2006. Finally, the sixth panel shows that
over the same time period, the Gini coe¢ cient for Colombia rose from roughly 53 percent to
roughly 58 percent.
    These aggregate trends were accompanied by a dramatic shift in …rm size distribution.
Figure 4 shows the size distribution of manufacturing …rms in the 1980s (black bars) and
2000s (white bars). Average …rm size increased from 45 to 60 workers, and the proportion
of …rms with more than 100 workers increased from 15 percent to 22 percent.
    In sum, Colombia experienced a signi…cant shift in its manufacturing …rm size distribu-
tion and an overall decline in manufacturing employment. Manufacturing jobs also became
more unstable as job turnover rate increased. Unemployment, self-employment and wage
inequality increased. We now investigate how, in the context of our model, these changes
might be linked to the changes in tari¤s, …ring costs and foreign market conditions that
Colombian …rms experienced during the late 1980s and early 1990s.




                                             20
3.2     Fitting the model to the data
Assuming that Colombia was in a steady state prior to reforms, we use data from 1981-1990
and the existing literature to estimate the parameters of our model. First, we …x some
standard parameters at values reported by previous studies or at their data counterparts di-
rectly. Then we estimate the remaining parameters, basing identi…cation on a set of moments
related to the aggregate economy and establishment-level behavior.

Parameters not estimated Several parameters are not identi…ed by the model; these
we take from external sources. The real borrowing rate in Colombia ‡uctuated around 15
percent between the late 1980s and early 2000s, so we set r = 0:15 (Bond et al. 2008). The
average share of services in Colombian GDP during the sample period was 0:48, so this is
our estimate for .16 Heckman and Pages (2000) estimate that dismissal costs amounted to
6 months’wages in 1990 (their Figure 1), so we …x …rings costs at cf = 0:6 in the benchmark
economy.17 Eaton and Kortum (2002) estimate that the tari¤ equivalent of iceberg costs
falls between 123 percent and 174 percent, so we choose our pre-reform value of c 1 to
be 1:50. Finally, we take our estimate of the pre-reform nominal tari¤ rate, m 1 = 0:21;
from Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004).

The estimator This leaves us with 16 parameters to estimate, collected in the vector

                           =( ; ; ;      z;   ; ; ;   1;    2 ; b; le ; ch ; cp ; cx ; ce ; DF ):


These we estimate using the method of simulated moments (Gouriéroux and Monfort 1996):
Speci…cally, let m be a vector of sample statistics that our model is designed to explain
and de…ne m( ) as the vector of model-based counterparts to these sample statistics. Our
estimator is then given by

                              b = arg min (m                 ^ (m
                                                      m( ))0 W                m( )) ;

      ^ is a bootstrapped estimate of [var (m)]
where W                                                        1
                                                                   with o¤-diagonal elements set to zero.18



  16
       Source: ICP Table 7 downloaded from http://www.eclac.cl/deype/PCI_resultados/eng/index.htm).
  17
       In the benchmark economy average wages are about 1.2. Since the model period is a year, 6 months’
wages is cf = 0:6: Note that cf is not a parameter that we can select without running the model as its value
depends on average wage in the benchmark economy. Since we match it exactly, however, we do not report
its standard errors.
    18
       Setting o¤-diagonal terms to zero improves the stability of our estimator while maintaining consistency
and keeping it independent of units of measurement. Examples of other studies employing the same strategy
include Lee and Wolpin (2006) and Dix-Carneiro (2013).

                                                       21
The sample statistics The vector m and the associated weighting matrix are based on
plant-level panel data from Colombia. These data are annual observations on all manufac-
turing …rms with at least 10 workers, covering the 1981-1990 period.19
    The …rst set of moments in m consists of means, variances, and covariances for the
                                                   x
vector (ln lt ; ln Gt ; Itx ; ln lt+1 ; ln Gt+1 ; It+1 ):20 Gross revenues G are gross sales, expressed
in thousands of 1977 pesos. The indicator I x takes a value of unity for those plant-year
observations with positive exports. Finally, the labor input l is measured in “e¤ective worker”
units. Speci…cally, for a given plant-year, l is the sum of all workers in the plant, each
weighted by the average wage (including fringes) for workers in its category. Five categories
of workers are distinguished: managerial, technical, skilled, unskilled, and apprentice.21
    The second and third groups of moments in m include quintiles of the plant size distrib-
ution and the average rate of employment growth among expanding plants within each size
category, respectively. Quintiles are based on e¤ective employment levels, l, and constructed
using the pooled panel of plants.22 Employment growth rates for quintile j are constructed
as cross-plant averages of (lt+1 lt )= 21 (lt+1 + lt ) ; including only expanding plants that were
in quintile j at the beginning of the period. New plants are included in these growth rates,
and are treated as having an initial employment of zero.
    The fourth group in m contains aggregate statistics for the pooled sample of plants. These
include the job turnover rate, the plant exit rate, and the standard deviation in e¤ective
wages. Job turnover is a cross-year average of the annual turnover rate, net of aggregate
employment growth or contraction.23 The plant exit rate is the fraction of plants that exit the
panel in year t, averaged over the 10-year sample period. Finally, the standard deviation in
e¤ective wages is constructed as the cross-plant standard deviation of the log of real payments
to labor (wages and bene…ts) per e¤ective worker. Given that our measure of e¤ective
   19
      The data were collected by Colombia’s National Statistics Department (DANE) and cleaned as described
in Roberts (1996). They cover 88,815 plant-observations during the sample period. Estimates of vb                 ar (m) are
generated by bootstrapping the sample.
   20                                                      x
      In a stationary equilibrium, (ln lt+1 ; ln Gt+1 ; It+1   ) = (ln lt ; ln Gt ; Itx ) and cov(ln lt+1 ; ln Gt+1 ; It+1
                                                                                                                       x
                                                                                                                           ) =
                     x                                                x                                     x
cov(ln lt ; ln Gt ; It ): We therefore exclude E(ln lt+1 ; ln Gt+1 ; It+1 ) and cov(ln lt+1 ; ln Gt+1 ; It+1 ): This leaves
3 means, 3 variances, and 12 covariances.
   21
      For each category of worker, the average wage is based on the mean real wage in the entire 10-year
panel and expressed as a ratio to the average real wage for unskilled workers during the same period. Thus
wage weights are constant across plants and time, and the only source of variation in l is variation in the
employment level of at least one category of worker.
   22
      While our estimation allows le (the size of entering plants) to be arbitrarily small, our database does not
cover plants with less than 10 workers. This means that plants appearing in the database for the …rst time
can either be plants crossing the 10-worker threshold from below, or plants in their …rst year of operation.
We apply the same truncation to our simulated moments. This means, for example, that statistics describing
the smallest quintile characterize the smallest quintile among observed producers.
   23
      Let c; e; and d be the set of continuing, entering, and exiting plants, respectively. Also, let i index
plants. Our year t job turnover measure is then:

                     Xt = (    i2c jlit   lit   1j   +   i2e lt   +   i2d lt 1   j   i lit   i lit 1 j) =   i lit 1 ;



                                                                      22
workers has been adjusted for workforce composition as discussed above, this measure of wage
dispersion controls for observable worker characteristics to the extent possible. Unavoidably,
it partly re‡ects variation in unobservable worker characteristics. But this latter source of
noise is averaged across individual workers within a …rm, and thus is hopefully relatively
modest.24
    The last two elements of m are not simple descriptive statistics. Rather, they are sample-
                        1
based estimates of        (1     ) and dF obtained by applying the logic of Olley and Pakes
(1996) to the gross revenue function. By including these statistics in the moment vector
rather than treating them as …xed parameters when estimating , we recognize the e¤ects
of their sampling error on ^ :25
    Our approach to estimating these two statistics merits further explanation. By (3) and
(12), gross revenues before …xed exporting costs can be written as

                                                        1
              ln Git = dH + Iitx dF ( 0 ) +                  [ln zit +   ln lit + (1    ) ln mit ] :          (30)

Also, among …rms that adjust their employment levels, the policy function l0 = L(z 0 ; l) can
be inverted to express z 0 as a monotonic function of l0 : ln z 0 = g(ln l; ln l0 ): This "control
function" allows us to eliminate z from (30):

                                               1
          ln Git = deH + Iitx dF ( 0 ) +           (1        ) ln(P mit ) + '(ln lit 1 ; ln lit ) +    it :   (31)

Here '(ln lit 1 ; ln lit ) = 1 [ ln lit + g(ln lit 1 ; ln lit )] is treated as a ‡exible function of its
arguments, and the intercept d~H = dH (1 ) 1 ln P re‡ects the fact that we have replaced
the unobservable mit with observable input expenditures, P mit . The error term it captures
measurement error in ln Git and any productivity shocks that are unobserved at the time
variable inputs and exporting decisions are made. Because it is orthogonal to P mit and
Iitx ; we obtain our estimates of 1 (1        ) and dF ( 0 ) by applying least squares to equation
(31). Just as Olley and Pakes (1996) excluded observations with zero investment to keep
their policy function invertible, we exclude observations for which lit = lit 1 :


                               1
                                 P1990
and our turnover statistic is 10    t=1981 Xt : The job turnover numbers in Table 2 are slightly higher than
those depicted in Figure 3 for two reasons. First, Figure 3 is based on worker head counts, while our
moment is based on e¤ective workers. Second, the turnover rates in Figure 3 are taken from a study limited
to establishments with at least 15 workers, while our moment is based on establishments with at least 10
workers. It was not possible to construct Figure 3 using e¤ective workers and a 10 worker cuto¤ because we
did not have access to establishment level data more recent than 1991.
   24
      The cross-plant distribution of average wages provides a very natural measure of wage dispersion in a
model with homogenous workers. See also Lentz and Mortensen (2008).
   25
      The alternative approach, commonly used, is to pre-estimate technology and taste parameters that can
be identi…ed without solving the dynamic problem, then treat them as parameters at the computationally
intensive stage when parameters identi…ed by the dynamic problem are estimated.

                                                        23
Identi…cation While it is not possible to associate individual parameters in with indi-
vidual statistics in m, particular statistics play relatively key roles in identifying particular
parameters. We devote the rest of this subsection to a discussion of these relationships.
    To begin, the sample-based estimates of 1 (1               ) and dF ( 0 ) provide a basis for infer-
                                                                                1
ence regarding and . This is because, for any given value of                        (1    ), the elasticity
of revenue with respect to labor,            ; increases monotonically in : Thus, loosely speak-
ing, the regression of revenue on employment— which is implied by the sample moments
cov(ln lt ; ln Gt ); var(ln Gt ); and var(ln lt )— pins down :26 And once and 1 (1                    ) are
determined, and are also implied. These moments also discipline : As we mentioned
above, greater job turnover increases the pool of unemployed workers, and increases the
vacancy …ll rate, (V; U ): Hence also helps determine how responsive …rms’employment
levels are to z:
    Next note that by inverting the revenue function, we can express ln zt as a function of
the data (ln lt ; ln Gt ; Itx ) and several parameters discussed above: (dF ( 0 ); , ). Thus, given
                                                                              x
these parameters, the data vector (ln lt ; ln Gt ; Itx ; ln lt+1 ; ln Gt+1 ; It+1 ) determines ln zt+1 and
ln zt ; and the second moments of this vector imply the parameters of the autoregressive
process that generates ln zt , i.e., and z .
    The average level of gross revenues — proxied by E(ln Gt )— helps to identify the …xed
cost of operating a …rm, cp ; while the mean exporting rate E(I x ) is informative about the
…xed costs of exporting, cx . Also, since the cost of creating a …rm, ce ; must match the
equilibrium value of entry, the estimated intercept deH from (31) helps us to pin down the
price level P in the estimation. In turn, this pins down the value of entry Ve from (21).
Further details are described in Appendix 4.
    The job turnover rate among continuing …rms is informative about the general magnitude
of hiring costs, which scale with ch : Similarly, the …rm-size-speci…c job add rates are informa-
tive about frictions faced by …rms in di¤erent states. More precisely, in the absence of labor
market frictions, the job turnover rate, the …rm size distribution, and the quantile-speci…c
add rates would simply be determined by the productivity process. Deviations from these
patterns require adjustment frictions, and quintile-speci…c patterns require di¤erent frictions
for …rms of di¤erent sizes. Thus di¤erential …rm growth rates by …rm size allows us to pin
down 1 (which determines convexity of hiring costs) and 2 (which determines the relative
stability of large versus small …rms).
    Finally, in combination with information on job turnover and hiring rates, the share of

   26
      In this regression, the error term is a function of z and thus is correlated with labor. But the dependence
of l on z is built into our model, so under the maintained hypothesis that the model is correctly speci…ed,
there is no simultaneity bias. Put di¤erently, by exploiting our model’s structure and assuming constant
returns to scale, we avoid the need for a second stage Olley-Pakes step.


                                                       24
        Table 1: Parameters Estimated with Simulated Method of Moments
            Parameter       Description                                  Estimate      Std. Err.
                            Elasticity of substitution                     6.831         0.0404
                            Elasticity of output with respect to labor     0.195         0.0006
                            Persistence of the z process                   0.961         0.0002
                   z        Standard deviation of the z process            0.135         0.0003
                            Bargaining power of workers                    0.457         0.0007
                            Elasticity of the matching function            1.875         0.0023
                            Exogenous exit hazard                          0.046         0.0001
                  ch        Scalar, vacancy cost function                  0.696         0.0006
                   1        Convexity, vacancy cost function               2.085         0.0042
                   2        Scale e¤ect, vacancy cost function             0.302         0.0007
                  b         Value of home production                       0.403         0.0010
                 le         Initial size of entering …rms                  6.581         0.0120
                 cp         Fixed cost of operating                       10.006         0.0189
                 cx         Fixed exporting cost                          100.23         0.5528
                 ce         Entry cost for new …rms                       25.646          0.209
                 DF         Foreign market size                          1361.239        154.58


employment in the non-traded services sector and the cross-…rm dispersion in log wages help
to identify the matching function parameter ( ), workers’ bargaining power ( ), and the
value of being unemployed (b). These parameters determine how rents are shared between
the workers and the employers in hiring …rms, and, as a result, the wage dispersion across
…rms.

Estimates and model …t Table 1 reports our estimates of , along with their standard
errors, while Table 2 reports the data-based and model-based vectors of statistics, m and
m( b ); respectively. Standard errors in Table 1 are constructed using the standard asymptotic
variance expression, with v^ar(m) bootstrapped from the sample data.27 Since our data-based
moments are calculated from a large survey of plants, sample variation in the moments
is small; this is re‡ected in small standard errors in Table 2. Our solution algorithm is
summarized in Appendix 4.
    Overall, the model …ts the data quite well.28 In particular, it captures the size distribution
of …rms (Figure 4, …rst two bars in each bin), the exit rate, the persistence in employment
levels, and the variation in growth rates across the plant size distribution. The model
underestimates wage dispersion a bit, but this is to be expected, since our data-based measure
of wage dispersion controls for only …ve types of workers, and thus re‡ects some unobserved
worker heterogeneity. In contrast, our model-based dispersion measure is based on the

  27                                                                     ^
      Speci…cally, the variance covariance matrix is (J 0 W J) 1 (J 0 W )Q(W J)(J 0 W J) 1 ; where J = @ 0 =@m;
W is the weighting matrix, and Q  ^ = cov(
                                       c m m( )):
   28
      At …tted values, the average percentage deviation between data- and model-based moments is 12.6
percent.

                                                      25
                        Table 2: Data-based versus Simulated Statistics
        Moment                   Data    Model    Size Distribution             Data     Model
        E( ln Gt )               5.442    5.253   20th   percentile   cuto¤    14.617    15.585
        E( ln lt )               3.622    3.636   40th   percentile   cuto¤    24.010    25.773
        E(Itx )                  0.117    0.108   60th   percentile   cuto¤    41.502    41.432
        var( ln Gt )             2.807    3.329   80th   percentile   cuto¤    90.108    79.109
        cov( ln Gt ; ln lt )     1.573    1.788   Plant Growth
        var( ln lt )             1.271    1.219   Rates by Quintile
        cov( ln Gt ; Itx )       0.230    0.251   <20th percentile              1.421      1.234
        cov( ln lt ; Itx )       0.152    0.160   20th-40th percentile          0.255      0.271
        var(Itx )                0.112    0.067   40th-60th percentile          0.209      0.183
        cov( ln Gt ; ln Gt+1 )   2.702    2.196   60th-80th percentile          0.184      0.151
        cov( ln Gt ; ln lt+1 )   1.538    1.556   Aggregate Turnover/
                         x
        cov( ln Gt ; It+1    )   0.225    0.278   Wage Dispersion
        cov( ln lt ; ln Gt+1 )   1.543    1.394   Firm exit rate                0.108      0.120
        cov( ln lt ; ln lt+1 )   1.214    1.161   Job turnover                  0.198      0.240
                       x
        cov( ln lt ; It+1  )     0.152    0.185   Std. dev. of log wages        0.461      0.426
              x
        cov(It ; ln Gt+1 )       0.220    0.279   Olley-Pakes Statistics
                                                           1
        cov(Itx ; ln lt+1 )      0.149    0.201   (1   )                        0.685      0.687
                     x
        cov(Itx ; It+1   )       0.089    0.073   dF                            0.090      0.094

Notes: All data-based statistics are calculated using Colombian plant-level panel data for the pre-liberalization
period, 1981-90. These data were collected by the Colombian National Administrative Department of Sta-
tistics (DANE) in its Annual Manufacturer Survey (EAM), which covers all establishments with at least 10
workers.


assumption of homogenous e¤ective labor units.
    Estimates of b; cp ; cx ; and ce are measured in terms of our numeraire— the price of the
service good, or equivalently, the average annual service sector wage. We estimate this to
be ws = $3; 461 in 2012 US dollars during the sample period so, expressed in dollars, the
sunk cost of creating a new …rm is 25:65 $3; 461 = $88; 771; the annual …xed cost of
operating a business amounts to 10 $3; 461 = $34; 610; and the …xed cost of exporting is
100:23 $3; 461 = $346; 880.29 (The magnitude of the latter …gure re‡ects the large gap
in our sample between the average revenues of exporters and non-exporters.) To put these
numbers in context, the mean and median annual sales of a Colombian manufacturing …rm
during the sample period were $4; 418; 360 and $508; 970; respectively.
    Several other features of our results on preferences and technology merit comment. First,
our estimate of the elasticity of substitution among di¤erentiated industrial goods, = 6:83;




   29
    The data are expressed in thousands of 1977 pesos. In 1977, there were 46.11 pesos per dollar, and
based on the US producer price index, a dollar in 1977 was worth 3.116 in 2012 US dollars. We therefore
convert the average industrial wage per e¤ective worker in 2012 US dollars as: w 3:116=46:11 = $41; 153:
Then using the ratio of service sector wages to average industrial wages, we compute the service sector wage
ws = w=1:2 = 3; 461:56:

                                                       26
is very much in line with the literature.30 Second, given our estimates of and , the elastic-
ity of value added with respect to labor is     = 0:53 (refer to equation 14): This …gure falls
a bit below the range typically estimated for value-added production functions.31 Third, we
…nd substantial persistence in the z process ( = 0:96). This relatively high estimate re‡ects
the fact that, unlike most estimates of productivity processes, we treat capital stocks as …xed
upon entry and common across …rms. This e¤ectively bundles persistence in employment
due to capital stocks into the z process. Fourth, we estimate that about half of the exit that
occurs is due to adverse productivity shocks, and half is due to factors outside our model
( = 0:046). Finally, our model allows us to infer the typical size at which …rms enter,
recognizing that they do not actually appear in the database until they have acquired 10
workers. This entry size amounts to le = 6:58 workers.
    The remaining parameters in Table 1 concern labor markets. Note that the returns to
home production by unemployed workers is 60 percent lower than the secure wage they
could have earned if they had committed to work in the service sector. The parameters of
the vacancy cost function imply both short-run convexities ( 1 = 2:09) and modest scale
economies ( 2 = 0:30).32 Since 2 < 1; it is relatively costly for large producers to sustain
a given rate of growth in their labor force. Given that is almost unity, this is the main
mechanism through which our model matches patterns of size-dependent growth in the data.
The matching function parameter, = 1:88; is close to the value of 2:16 that Coşar (2013)
calibrates using aggregate labor market statistics from Brazil, and not far from the value
of 1:27 that den Haan et al. (2000) obtain in calibrating their model to the US economy.
Finally, our model assigns roughly equal bargaining power to workers and …rms ( = 0:46):

  30
      Estimates of the elasticity of substitution vary widely; our …gure falls somewhere in the middle. For
example, using establishment data from Slovenia, De Loecker and Warzynski (2012, Tables 2 and 3) estimate
mark-ups ranging from 0.13 to 0.28, implying demand elasticities that range from 2.27 to 8.3. Similarly,
using …rm-level Indian data, De Loecker et al. (2012) estimate a median mark-up of 1.10, implying a demand
elasticity of 11, although they …nd the distribution of mark-ups is spread over a wide range of values. Using
trade data, Baier and Bergstrand (2001) estimate a demand elasticity of 6.43, while Broda and Weinstein
(2006) get estimates around 12 for their most disaggregated (10 digit HTS) data.
   31
      Direct comparisons with other recent studies are di¢ cult because most control for capital stocks, and
most estimate gross production functions rather than value added functions. One well-known study that
does estimate a value-added function is Olley and Pakes (1996). Their preferred estimate of the elasticity of
value-added with respect to labor is 0:61–a bit higher than our 0:54: Another well-known study, Ackerberg et
al. (2006), reports estimates between 0:75 and 1:0. When comparing to studies that estimate gross physical
production functions (correcting for price variation), it is perhaps best to focus on the ratio of the labor
elasticity ( ) to the materials elasticity. In our model this …gure is =(1        ) = 0:195=(1 0:195) = 0:24:
In other studies it is either labor = materials or labor =( materials + capital ); depending upon whether one
treats capital as a material input. Several recent studies of selected industries …nd the …rst measure falls
around 0:33 while they …nd the latter falls around 0:25 (e.g., De Loecker 2011; De Loecker et al. 2012).
   32
      Our estimate of 1 is consistent with the available evidence on hiring cost convexities (e.g., Merz and
Yashiv 2007, and Yashiv 2006). We also come close to satisfying the relationship 2 = 1 1= 1 implied by
Nilsen et al.’s (2007) speci…cation.


                                                     27
                    Table 3: Model Implications for Statistics not in m
                                                                       Data     Model
                    Aggregates
                    Revenue share of exports                           0.090     0.120
                    Relative market size                               0057      0053
                    Manufacturing share of employment                  0.226     0.248
                    Unemployment rate                                  0.108     0.124
                    Exporters versus Non-exporters
                    ln lI x =1 ln lI x =0 (size premium)               1.402     1.855
                    ln wI x =1 ln wI x =0 (wage premium)               0.420     0.528
                    Aggregate employment share of exporters            0.360     0.409
                    Aggregate revenue share of exporters               0.518     0.629
                    Wage-Size Relationship
                    corr(w; l)                                         0.394     0.102

                    ln w = + l ln l + x I x +"
                         ln l coe¢ cient ( l )                         0.201     -0.094
                                                                      (0.001)   (0.002)
                         I x coe¢ cient (   x)                         0.137      0.702
                                                                      (0.004)   (0.005)
                         R2                                            0.295      0.158

Notes: Data-based statistics are constructed using the same panel of establishment used for Table 2. Numbers
in parentheses are OLS standard errors.


Non-targeted statistics and out-of-sample …t Before discussing policy implications
of these estimates, we ask how well the model replicates features of the data that we did
not use as a basis for identi…cation. To address this question we construct several additional
statistics in Table 3.
    We start with the aggregates in the …rst panel. The pre-reform revenue share of exports,
plotted in Figure 3, is 9 percent. In our estimation, we targeted the fraction of …rms that
export, and the revenue increment due to exporting dF ; but did not explicitly target the
revenue share of exports. Yet, the model generates a 12 percent share that is quite close to
its empirical level. In the model, DH =(k DF ) measures the size of domestic expenditures
on tradable goods relative to total foreign demand for tradables. We estimate this ratio as
0:0053. While it is hard to …nd an exact empirical counterpart to this statistic, we calculate
Colombia’s average GDP relative to the sum of its trade partners’GDP over 1981-1990 and
…nd a value of 0:0057. Another relevant statistic is the employment share of manufacturing,
which averaged 0:226 in the pre-reform period. Using the empirical expenditure share of
tradables ( = 0:48) and …tting the average …rm size and productivity in manufacturing, our
model predicts an employment share of Lq = 0:248 for the di¤erentiated goods sector, which
is again close to the data. Finally, the model-generated unemployment rate among those
who search for industrial jobs, Lu =(Lu + Lq ); is 0:124, which is quite close to the average


                                                    28
Colombian unemployment rate of 10:8 percent in the pre-reform period. Note that our model
abstracts from labor market frictions in the service sector in order to focus on intra-sectoral
e¤ects in the tradable industry. Unemployment in the data is, however, generated by both
sectors. Without detailed data on sectorial job …nding and separation rates, it is not possible
to gauge the level of search frictions within each sector. Nonetheless, transition rates from
each sector into unemployment are very similar in the data (see Appendix 5.1 for further
details). Also, urban employment shares of manufacturing and services were stable in the
pre-reform period and in the 2000s (Panel 5 of Figure 3). These facts imply similar steady
state sectoral unemployment rates, and thus suggest that industrial unemployment …gures
are representative of the economy overall.33
    As the second panel of Table 3 shows, Colombian exporters are larger (size premium)
and pay higher wages (wage premium) than non-exporters. Also, as a group they account for
more than a third of industrial employment and slightly more than half of total revenues. The
model generates all of these patterns, although it overstates the gap between exporters and
non-exporters. This tendency to overstate exporter premia while matching other moments
re‡ects the fact that in our model, all …rms above a threshold output level are exporters
(see equation 11). The contrast between exporters and others could be weakened without
sacri…cing model …t by adding another source of …rm heterogeneity— for example random
…xed exporting costs. But the workings of the model that we wish to focus upon would be
una¤ected, so we opt for simplicity here.
    This same deterministic relationship between output and exporting status makes it dif-
…cult for our model to generate the observed positive association between size and wages,
conditional on exporting status. The third panel of Table 3 reports the wage-size relation-
ship. While our model generates a positive unconditional correlation, adding an exporter
dummy to the model-based regression of log wages on log employment turns the coe¢ cient
on log employment slightly negative. With the exporter dummy absorbing much of the
cross-…rm rent variation, two remaining forces are at work in our model. On the one hand,
holding productivity and exporting status constant, the marginal revenue product of labor
falls with employment, putting downward pressure on wages at large …rms. On the other
hand, holding exporting status constant, productivity shocks tend to induce a positive cor-
relation between …rm size and rents, thus wages tend to be higher at large …rms.34 In the
model, the marginal revenue product e¤ect dominates. But in the data, the relation between

  33
      This is consistent with evidence on sectoral unemployment rates in U.S. According to the BLS,
unemployment rate in manufacturing was 9 and 7.3 percents in 2011 and 2012, respectively. Av-
erage unemployment rate in service sectors was 8.2 and 7.3 percent for the same years.                 See
http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat26.pdf, accessed on September 26, 2013.
   34
      Bertola and Garibaldi (2001), from whom we take our characterization of labor markets, emphasize the
interplay between these two mechanisms. The net e¤ect can go in either direction.

                                                   29
employment and exports is noisier and additional forces are at work, including unobserved
worker heterogeneity and perhaps greater monopoly power among larger …rms.
    Finally, we ask how well our model does in capturing cross-worker (as opposed to cross-
…rm) residual wage inequality. Since all workers within a …rm receive the same wage, and
there is distribution of workers across …rms, cross-worker wage dispersion di¤ers from the
targeted cross-…rm dispersion that we reported in Table 2. We lack the appropriate survey
data to construct our own data-based version of this concept. However, we note that the
pre-reform average Gini coe¢ cient was around 0.53 (World Bank, 2013, and …gure 3), while
our model generates a Gini of 0.26. As an alternative statistic, Attanasio et al. (2004) report
the 1984-1990 average of unconditional standard deviation of log worker wages as 0.80 using
the Colombian Household Survey (their Table 2a). The model counterpart is 0.452. Since
both data-based measures incorporate observable and unobservable characteristics of workers
and …rms, and observable worker characteristics typically explain around a third of the wage
variation in Mincer regressions, it seems reasonable that our model generates around half of
total dispersion by these measures.


4        Simulated E¤ects of Globalization and Reforms
We are now prepared to examine the e¤ects of reforms and falling trade frictions in our
estimated model. Our aim is to determine the extent to which these simulated e¤ects can
capture the long-term changes in labor market outcomes documented in Figure 3.35 Our
…rst experiment reduces tari¤s m and …ring costs cf to their actual post-reform levels.
Speci…cally, we cut m from 1:21 to 1:11; and cf from 0:6 to 0:3: Our second experiment goes
beyond the …rst one by also reducing trade costs, c ; from its baseline level of 2:5 to 2:1:
This 27 percent drop in c 1, in combination with the reductions in m and cf ; is chosen
to match the observed increase in aggregate revenue share of exports.
    The reduction c captures additional forces of globalization during the period under
study. These include the increased income and openness of Colombia’s trading partners,
improvements in global communications, and general reductions in shipping costs (Hummels,
2007). It also captures the integration of rapidly growing emerging markets into the global
economy. We view these shocks as originating beyond Colombia’s borders, inasmuch as Latin
America in general experienced a surge in trade that roughly matched Colombia’s (World




    35
     Whenever possible, we focus on the post-2000 period because the early 1990s were too close to the reform
years to plausibly approximate a new steady state and the late 1990s were characterized by a …nancial crisis
and recession. However, some series such as job turnover and wage inequality are only available up to 2000.

                                                     30
                        Table 4: E¤ects of Reforms and Globalization

                                                                                  Reforms &
                                                              Baseline   Reforms Globalization
                   m                                           1.21       1.11       1.11
                 cf                                             0.6        0.3       0.3
                   c                                            2.5        2.5       2.1
               Size Distribution
                 20th percentile                                16         17              17
                 40th percentile                                25         25              29
                 60th percentile                                39         40              50
                 80th percentile                                78         81             114
                 Average …rm size                               46         49              62
               Firm Growth Rates
                 <20th percentile                               1.15      1.14        1.20
                 20th-40th percentile                           0.26      0.26        0.34
                 40th-60th percentile                           0.18      0.19        0.22
                 60th-80th percentile                           0.15      0.16        0.20
               Aggregates
                  % of …rms exporting                            1        1.298       2.710
                 Revenue share of exports                        1        1.353       2.497
                 Exit rate                                       1        0.866       0.957
                 Job turnover                                    1        1.027       1.121
                 Mass of …rms                                    1        0.929       0.705
                 Unemployment rate in the industrial sector      1        1.055       1.285
                 Industrial share of employment                  1        0.990       0.939
                 Standard deviation of log wages (…rms)          1        0.999       1.074
                 Standard deviation of log wages (workers)       1        0.982       0.977
                 Log 90-10 wage ratio (…rms)                     1        0.998       1.080
                 Log 90-10 wage ratio (workers)                  1        0.988       1.000
                 Exchange rate (k)                               1        0.987       0.685
                 Real income                                     1        1.035       1.280

Note: Aggregate statistics in the bottom panel are normalized by their baseline levels.


Trade Organization, 2013).36
    The results of the …rst experiment (replicating the reforms) are reported in the second
column of Table 4. The top and middle panels report the absolute values of the moments
while the bottom panel normalizes the baseline outcomes to one. Note that some of the base-
line results slightly di¤er from their estimated values reported in Table 2: This discrepancy is
due to computational issues. As we explain in Appendix 4, our quantitative strategy allows
us to use an estimation algorithm that is simpler and thus faster than the one we use in
simulating the e¤ects of parameter changes. While these two algorithms generate essentially
the same results for most moments, some di¤er due to numerical approximations (such as
the …rst quintile growth rate). The results in Table 4 are generated consistently using the
  36
     We could alternatively have lowered cx su¢ ciently to induce a 250 percent expansion would have resulted
in implausibly small export shipments per …rm. In contrast, the required 27 percent decline in trade frictions
over the course of a decade seems plausible.


                                                     31
same simulation algorithm.
    Note that the reforms increase aggregate real income (I=P ) by 3.5 percent (see Appendix
3 for the de…nition of aggregate income I). But they also lead to small increases in job
turnover and industrial unemployment, while reducing the size of the industrial sector work
force and shifting the …rm size distribution rightward. So these policy changes improve
average incomes at the expense of job security, but both e¤ects are modest.
    To conserve space we relegate details on the separate e¤ects of m and cf to Appendix 5.
However, we note here that reducing …ring costs alone triggers two opposing e¤ects. On the
one hand, it induces a 17 percent decline in the exit rate, since these costs create an incentive
for …rms to shut down. (Recall that, unlike contracting …rms, exiting …rms are not required
to to pay cf to each displaced worker.) On the other hand, the well-known direct impact
of …ring cost reductions on job security (e.g., Ljungqvist 2002; Mortensen and Pissarides
1999) leads to an increase in the job turnover rate among continuing producers. These two
forces almost cancel each other, so that …ring cost reductions alone have very little e¤ect on
job turnover, unemployment, or other variables in Table 4. Accordingly, other than the exit
rate, the results in the second column are essentially attributable to the reduction in m :
    We now turn to our second experiment, which characterizes the combined e¤ects of
reforms and globalization. Results are reported in the third column of Table 4. Starting
with average …rm size, note that our simulation predicts a fairly large increase from 46 to 62
workers as a result of the reductions in m and c . Figure 4 reports plant size distribution
in the data and in the model for pre and post-reform periods. Since the data for post-
reform period is in terms of the number of workers, we report the number of workers (not
e¤ective workers as we did in Table2), both for the model and the data.37 As Figure 4
shows, our post-reform simulation matches the actual movement in the Colombian plant size
distribution quite closely, not only in terms of average size, but also in terms of shape (third
and fourth bars in each bin). We match this post-reform rightward shift through the worker
reallocation e¤ect emphasized by Melitz (2003).
    Turning to job turnover, our simulation predicts an increase of 12 percent, capturing
close to half of the 27 percent increase that we observe in Colombia during the post-reform
period (Panel 2 of Figure 3, and Section 3.1). This re‡ects the dominance of the sensitivity
e¤ect over the distribution e¤ect, as discussed above in section 2.8. That is, without any
change in the employment policy function, the rightward shift in size distribution would have
caused a reduction in job turnover, as …rms move to a region of the state space with high
z values, where the probability of large percentagewise adjustments in l is small. However,

  37
     While we do not have access to the Colombian plant-level data in the post-reform period, the Colombian
Statistical Agency DANE publishes summary statistics on the size distribution of plants for the 2000-2006
period, available at http://www.dane.gov.co/index.php/industria/encuesta-anual-manufacturera-eam

                                                    32
                  Figure 4: Firm Size Distribution: Model vs. Data




…rms’employment levels become more sensitive to productivity shocks as reductions in trade
costs increase the payo¤ to hiring among successful …rms. This e¤ect is compounded by the
reduction in …ring costs, which makes contractions less costly. As documented in the third
panel ("Firm Growth Rates") in Table 4, …rms grow faster in each quintile of the …rm size
distribution and the increase is particularly pronounced in higher quintiles.
    The dominance of the sensitivity e¤ect is graphically depicted in the left panel of Figure
5, which plots the change in state-speci…c employment growth rates ( l=l) relative to the
pre-reform baseline. With lower tari¤s, …ring costs, and iceberg trading costs, low z …rms
shrink much more than they do in the benchmark economy while high z …rms experience
much larger growth rates (on the order of 20 to 40 percentage points more), especially if
they are relatively small.
    With more job turnover, contracting …rms release more workers to the unemployment
pool, driving up the number of industrial job seekers. This makes it cheaper for hiring …rms
to …ll vacancies, as the job …lling rate rises from 56 to 68 percent. In turn, the lower
marginal cost of hiring makes …rms’ employment policy functions still more responsive to
productivity shocks, completing a feedback loop.
    Because of these forces, our model predicts a 28.5 percent increase in the rate of un-
employment among workers who participate in the industrial job market. In the data, the
unemployment rate rose from an average of 10.8 percent during 1981-1990 to an average of
13 percent during 2000-2006, implying a 20 percent increase. While this is broadly consistent
with the increase predicted by our model, we remind the reader that Colombia endured a
…nancial crisis and recession at the end of the 1990s. The e¤ects of this on unemployment
probably lingered into the early part of the next decade.

                                             33
                      Figure 5: Employment Policy and Wage E¤ects




    As we argued in Section 3, unemployment alone is an insu¢ cient measure of labor market
conditions in developing countries. The declining employment share of manufacturing and
the corresponding rise in self-employment, mostly associated with personal services, point
to a further deterioration of stable employment opportunities for workers (Panels 3 and 4
of Figure 3). Our model is consistent with these outcomes in that it predicts a 6 percent
contraction in the manufacturing employment share.38 This contraction is due to a large
decrease in the number of operating …rms, as discussed above. Compared to the data, the
simulations explain around half of the decline in manufacturing share of employment from
a pre-reform average of 22.6 percent in 1985-1990 to 19.3 percent between 2000-2006.
    A …nal outcome of interest is wage inequality, both across …rms and across workers. While
the average real wage (w=P ) increases for workers who retain their jobs, di¤erences between
the post-reform (second experiment) and pre-reform (baseline) wage schedules depend very
much upon employer states (z; l). The right panel of Figure 5 shows changes in …rm-level
wages from their benchmark values for each (z; l) combination. Wages become more polarized
as relatively productive …rms bene…t from additional export sales and pay higher wages while
smaller, less productive …rms su¤er from increased import competition and lower their wages.
This rent polarization is re‡ected in cross-…rm wage dispersion measures (Table 4), and is
consistent with the increase in overall inequality observed in Colombia (Panel 6 of Figure
3). The e¤ects on inequality are modest, however, as both the standard deviation and the

  38
     Note that our model does not explicitly feature self-employment in the service sector: …rm size is not
well de…ned there because of the linear production function. In the data, however, self-employment is mostly
associated with the service sector: around 90 percent of self-employed workers (who are not employers) are
in the service sector (Figure 3.4 in Mondragón-Vélez and Peña 2010). Therefore, we interpret an expansion
of the service sector as a potential source of increased self-employment.

                                                    34
90th-10th interpercentile di¤erential of …rm-level wages (in logs) increase by only 8 percent.
    Counteracting this cross-…rm e¤ect on wage dispersion, however, the rightward shift in
the …rm size distribution puts more workers into larger …rms. And since wages are equal
within …rms in our model, this tends to reduce inequality across workers. This compositional
channel dominates the polarization of wage schedules across …rms, reducing the standard
deviation of log wages across industrial workers by 2.3 percent and undoing the rise in the
interpercentile wage di¤erential. Our model thus predicts little if any e¤ect of increased
openness on within-industry residual wage inequality through the rent-sharing mechanism.
    To put this result in context, we note that related quantitative studies …nd similarly lim-
ited roles for other mechanisms. Attanasio et al. (2004) investigate the e¤ects of Colombian
trade reforms on wage inequality through the skill premium, industry wage premiums and
increased informalization in the manufacturing sector. While their results suggest a role for
trade policy in each of these cases, the overall contribution to changes in wage inequality
seems to be small. Likewise, Helpman et al. (2012) …nd a limited role for within-industry
mechanisms using Brazilian data.39 Exploring alternative mechanisms through which glob-
alization may have contributed to increased wage inequality thus remains an important
direction for future research.
    Finally, our second experiment (reforms and globalization) predicts sizeable aggregate
income gains from globalization through increased selection, market share reallocations, and
cheaper intermediates. These e¤ects dominate the upward pressure on our exact price index
(P ) that results from a fall in the measure of varieties (N ), generating a 28 percent increase
in real income with respect to the baseline. The net welfare implications of these income
gains would ideally be calculated by weighing them against the welfare losses due to greater
worker-speci…c volatility in jobs and wages. But to do so would require introducing risk
aversion into the model, which would substantially complicate the analysis.


5        Summary
In Latin America and elsewhere, globalization and labor market reforms have been associ-
ated with more job turnover, higher unemployment rates, and greater wage inequality. We
formulate and estimate a dynamic structural model that links these developments. Our
formulation combines ongoing …rm-level productivity shocks and Melitz-type (2003) trade
e¤ects with labor market search frictions and worker-…rm wage bargaining.
   Fit to micro data from Colombia, the model delivers several basic messages. First, this

    39
     According to their Figure 2, reducing variable trade costs such that exporter employment share increases
from its initial level of 40 percent to 70 percent increases the standard deviation of log worker wages from
0.464 to 0.473.

                                                     35
country’s tari¤ reductions and labor market reforms in the early 1990s are unlikely to have
been the main reason its labor market conditions deteriorated during subsequent decades.
Second, reductions in global trade frictions do explain a substantial share of the height-
ened job turnover and unemployment this country experienced. Finally, neither Colombia’s
reforms nor the general forces of globalization go very far toward explaining rising wage
inequality.
    Many other countries registered growth rates in merchandise trade similar to Colombia’s
over the past two decades, even without major commercial policy reforms. To the extent
that these surges were mainly caused by the international integration of product markets,
globalization may have contributed to similar labor market outcomes in these countries as
well.
    In principle, our analysis could be extended in several directions. First, allowing for
directed search would introduce intra-…rm wage heterogeneity into the model and allow us
to make more nuanced statements relating openness to wage distributions. Second, and
similarly, incorporating worker heterogeneity in terms of job tenure would permit us to link
openness with wage e¤ects among workers at di¤erent stages in their careers. Third, a more
fully-articulated representation of the service sector would allow us to better characterize
economywide patterns of unemployment and perhaps also explicitly deal with informal jobs.
Finally, introducing risk aversion would permit us to formally link job turnover rates to wel-
fare, and to examine the trade-o¤ between static gains from trade and losses from heightened
risks of job loss. We see these extensions as interesting directions for future work.




References
 [1] Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz and David Margolis (1999). "High Wage Workers and High
    Wage Firms," Econometrica, 67(2), 251-333.
 [2] Ackerberg, Daniel, Kevin Caves and Garth Frazer (2006). Structural Identi…cation of Produc-
    tion Functions, Department of Economics, University of Michigan.
 [3] Amiti, Mary and Donald R. Davis (2012). "Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence,"
    Review of Economic Studies, vol. 79(1), 1-36.
 [4] Artuc, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri and McLaren, John (2010). “Trade Shocks and Labor
    Adjustment: A Structural Empirical Approach,” American Economic Review, 100(3), 1008-
    1045.
 [5] Attanasio, Orazio, Pinelopi K. Golberg and Nina Pavcnik (2004). “Trade Reforms and Wage
    Inequality in Colombia”, Journal of Development Economics, 74(2), 331-366
 [6] Baier, Scott L. and Je¤rey H. Bergstrand (2001). “The Growth of World Trade: Tari¤s,
    Transport Costs, and Income Similarity," Journal of International Economics, 53, 1-27.

                                              36
 [7] Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, (1999). "Exceptional exporter performance:
    Cause, E¤ect, or Both?" Journal of International Economics, 47(1), 1-25.
 [8] Bertola, Giuseppe and Ricardo Caballero (1994). "Cross-sectional E¢ ciency and Labour
    Hoarding in a Matching Model of Unemployment," Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 435-
    47.
 [9] Bertola, Giuseppe and Pietro Garibaldi (2001). "Wages and the Size of Firms in Dynamic
    Matching Models," Review of Economic Dynamics 4(2), 335-368.
[10] Bond, Eric, James Tybout and Hale Utar (2008).“Credit Rationing, Macro Volatility, and
    Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries,” Working Paper, Department of Economics,
    Pennsylvania State University.
[11] Broda, Christian and David Weinstein (2006) "Globalization and the Gains from Variety,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2): 541-585
[12] Cahuc, Pierre and Etienne Wasmer (2001). “Does Intra…rm Bargaining Matter in Large Firm
    Matching Model?” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 5(5), 742-747.
[13] Cahuc, Pierre, Francois Marque and Etienne Wasmer (2008). “Intra…rm Wage Bargaining in
    Matching Models: Macroeconomic Implications and Resolution Methods with Multiple Labor
    Inputs,” International Economic Review, 49(3), 943-972.
[14] Cooper, Russell, John Haltiwanger and Jonathan Willis (2007). "Search Frictions: Matching
    Aggregate and Establishment Observations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1), 56-78.
[15] Coşar, Kerem (2013) "Adjusting to Trade Liberalization: Reallocation and Labor Market
    Policies," Working Paper, U. Chicago, Booth School of Business.
[16] Davidson, Carl, Steven Matusz and Andrei Shevchenko (2008). "Globalization and Firm-Level
    Adjustment with Imperfect Labor Markets," Journal of International Economics, 75(2), 295-
    309.
[17] Davidson, Carl, Lawrence Martin and Steven Matusz (1999). "Trade and Search Generated
    Unemployment," Journal of International Economics. 48(2), 271-299.
[18] Davis, Donald R. and James Harrigan (2011). "Good Jobs, Bad Jobs, and Trade Liberaliza-
    tion," Journal of International Economics. 84(1), 26-36.
[19] Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger and Scott Schuh (1998). Job Creation and Destruction (MIT
    Press).
[20] den Haan, Wouter J., Garey Ramey and Joel Watson (2000). “Job Destruction and the Prop-
    agation of Shocks,” American Economic Review, 90(3), 482-98.
[21] De Loecker, Jan (2011) "Product Di¤erentiation, Multiproduct Firms, and Estimating the
    Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity," Econometrica 79(5): 1407-1451.
[22] De Loecker, Jan, Pinelopi Goldberg, Amit Khandelwal and Nina Pavcnik (2012), "Prices,
    Mark-ups and Trade Reforms," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 17925.
[23] De Loecker, Jan and Frederick Warzynski (2012). "Markups and Firm-Level Export Status,"
    American Economic Review. 102(6): 2437-2471.



                                              37
[24] Dix-Carneiro, Rafael (2013). "Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics," Working
    Paper, Department of Economics, Duke University.
[25] Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002). "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econo-
    metrica, 70(5), 1741-1779.
[26] Egger, Hartmut and Udo Kreickemeier (2009). "Firm Heterogeneity and the Labour Market
    E¤ects of Trade Liberalisation," International Economic Review 50(1), 187-216.
[27] Ericson, Richard and Ariel Pakes (1995) "Markov Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework
    for Empirical Work," Review of Economic Studies 62(1): 53-82.
[28] Fajgelbaum, Pablo (2013). "Labor Market Frictions, Firm Growth, and International Trade,"
    Working Paper, Department of Economics, UCLA.
[29] Felbermayr, Gabriel, Julien Prat and Hans-Jörg Schmerer (2011). “Globalization and Labor
    Market Outcomes: Wage Bargaining, Search Frictions, and Firm Heterogeneity," Journal of
    Economic Theory 146 (1), 39-73.
[30] Goldberg, Pinelopi K and Nina Pavcnik (2004) "Trade Reforms and Wage Inequality in Colom-
    bia," Journal of Development Economics, 74(2), 331-366.
[31] Goldberg, Pinelopi K and Nina Pavcnik (2007). “Distributional E¤ects of Globalization in
    Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic Literature, 45(1), 39-82.
[32] Gouriéroux and Monfort (1996). Simulation-Based Econometric Methods (Oxford University
    Press).
[33] Haltiwanger, John, Adriana Kugler, Maurice Kugler, Alejandro Micco, and Carmen Pages
    (2004). "E¤ects of Tari¤s and Real Exchange Rates on Job Reallocation: Evidence from Latin
    America," Journal of Policy Reform, 7(4), 191-208.
[34] Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda (2013) "Who Creates Jobs? Small
    versus Large versus Young," Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 347-361.
[35] Harris, John R. and Michael P. Todaro (1970). "Migration, Unemployment, and Development:
    A Two-Sector Analysis," American Economic Review, 60(1), 126-142.
[36] Heckman, James and Carmen Pages (2000). "The Cost of Job Security Regulation: Evidence
    from Latin American Labor Markets," NBER Working Paper 7773.
[37] Heckman, James and Carmen Pages (2004). "Law and Enforcement: Lessons from Latin
    America and the Caribbean: An Introduction," in Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin
    America and the Caribbean, edited by James Heckman and Carmen Pages, University of
    Chicago Press, Chicago.
[38] Helpman, Elhanan and Oleg Itskhoki (2010). "Labor Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemploy-
    ment," Review of Economic Studies, 77(3),1100–1137.
[39] Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki and Stephen Redding (2010). "Inequality and Unemploy-
    ment in a Global economy," Econometrica, 78 (4): 1239–1283.
[40] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Muendler, Oleg Itskhoki and Stephen Redding (2012). "Trade and
    Inequality: From Theory to Estimation," NBER Working Paper No. 17991.



                                             38
[41] Hobijn, Bart and Aysegul Sahin (2013). “Firms and Flexibility,” Economic Inquiry, 51(1),
    922-940.
[42] Hopenhayn, Hugo (1992). "Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium," Econo-
    metrica, 60(5): 1127-1150.
[43] Hopenhayn, Hugo and Richard Rogerson (1993). "Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A
    General Equilibrium Analysis," Journal of Political Economy, 101(5), 915-938.
[44] Holmes, Thomas J. and John J. Stevens (2013) "An Alternative Theory of the Plant Size Dis-
    tribution, with Geography and Intra- and International Trade," Working Paper, Department
    of Economics, University of Minnesota.
[45] Hummels, David (2007) "Transportation costs and international trade in the second era of
    globalization." The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 131-154.
[46] Inter-American Development Bank (2004). Good Job Wanted: Labor Markets in Latin Amer-
    ica. Economic and Social Progress Report, Published by the Inter-American Development
    Bank, Distributed by The Johns Hopkins University Press, Washington, D.C.
[47] International Labour O¢ ce (ILO). 2013. ILOSTAT Database (Geneva).
[48] International Monetary Fund (2011). International Financial Statistics, International Mone-
    tary Fund, Washington D.C.
[49] Jovanovic, Boyan (1982). "Selection and the Evolution of Industry," Econometrica, 50(3) ,
    649-70.
[50] Kambourov, Gueorgui (2009). "Labor Market Restrictions and the Sectoral Reallocation of
    Workers: The Case of Trade Liberalizations," Review of Economic Studies, 76(4), 1321-1358.
[51] Klette, Tor Jakob and Samuel Kortum (2004) "Innovating Firms and Aggregte Innovation,"
    Journal of Political Economy 112(5), 986-1018.
[52] Koeniger, Winfried and Julien Prat (2007). “Employment Protection, Product Market Regu-
    lation and Firm Selection,” The Economic Journal, 117(521), F302-F332.
[53] Kugler, Adriana (1999). “The Impact of Firing Costs on Turnover and Unemployment: Ev-
    idence from the Colombian Labour Market Reform," International Tax and Public Finance,
    6(3), 389-410.
[54] Lee, Donghoon and Kenneth Wolpin (20006). “Intersectoral Labor Mobility and the Growth
    of the Service Sector” Econometrica, 74(1), 1-46.
[55] Ljungqvist, Lars (2002). “How Do Lay-O¤ Costs A¤ect Employment,” Economic Journal,
    112(482), 829-853.
[56] Lentz, Rasmus and Mortensen, Dale T. (2010). “Labor Market Frictions, Firm Heterogeneity,
    and Aggregate Employment and Productivity,” Working Paper, Department of Economics,
    Northwestern University.
[57] Luttmer, Erzo (2007) “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, vol. 122, no. 3, 1103-1144.
[58] Melitz, Marc (2003). “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate


                                              39
     Industry Productivity,” Econometrica 71(6), 1695-1725.
[59] Menezes-Filho, Naércio Aquino and Marc Muendler (2011). "Labor Reallocation in Response
     to Trade Reform," Working Paper, Department of Economics, UCSD.
[60] Merz, Monika and Eran Yashiv (2007). “Labor and the Market Value of the Firm,”American
     Economic Review, 97(4), 1419-1431.
[61] Mondragón-Vélez, Camilo, Ximena Peña, and Daniel Wills (2010) "Labor Market Rigidities
     and Informality in Colombia," Economia , 11(1), 65-95.
[62] Mortensen, Dale and Christopher A. Pissarides (1999). “New developments in models of search
     in the labour market,”in (O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds.) Handbook of Labour Economics,
     vol. 3B, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.
[63] Nilsen, Øivind A., Kjell G. Salvanesa, and Fabio Schiantarelli (2007). "Employment Changes,
     the Structure of Adjustment Costs, and Plant Size," European Economic Review 51(3), 577-
     98.
[64] Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes (1996). "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommu-
     nications Equipment Industry," Econometrica 64(6), 1263-98.
[65] Roberts, Mark (1996). "Employment Flows and Producer Turnover" in M. Roberts and J.
     Tybout, eds., Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries (Oxford University Press).
[66] Rodrik, Dani (1997). Has Globalization Gone too Far ?, Washington, D.C.: Institute for Inter-
     national Economics.
[67] Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban and Mark L. J. Wright (2007) "Establishment Dynamics in the
     Aggregate Economy," American Economic Review 97(5), 1639-1665.
[68] Stole, Lars A. and Je¤rey Zwiebel (1996) "Intra-Firm Bargaining under Non-Binding Con-
     tracts," The Review of Economic Studies, 63(3), 375-410.
[69] Utar, Hale (2008). "Import Competition and Employment Dynamics," Working Paper, De-
     partment of Economics, University of Colorado.
[70] World Bank (2013). World Development Indicators, World Bank, Washington D.C.
[71] Yashiv, Eran (2006). “Evaluating the Performance of the Search and Matching Model,” Eu-
     ropean Economic Review, 50(4), 909-936.




                                               40
                                                     Appendices
Appendix 1: The Revenue Function
   From (13), the …rst order condition for …rms’optimal m choice is given by

                                             (           1)                                                               1
                    P m = (1             )                    exp dH + I x dF ( 0 )                  zl m(1       )
                                                                                                                              ;

which gives the optimal choice for m as

                                (1               )        1                                              1
                      m=                                          exp dH + I x dF ( 0 )                      (zl ) ;                           (32)
                                     P
                     1
where    =    (1     )(   1)
                               > 0: Using this expression to eliminate m from (13), and noting that

                                                                      = 1 + (1              ) ;
                                                              1
and
                           1         (1              )(             1)         (       1)
                               +                                          =                 [1 + (1          ) ]= ;

yields gross revenue at state (z; l):
                                                                  (                                                                            ) (1        )(    1)
                                                              1        (1          )        1                                     1
G(z; l) = exp dH + I x dF ( 0 ) (zl )                                                           exp dH + I x dF ( 0 )                  (zl )                          ;
                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                  (1    )
                                                              1       1                         1                                                     (1        )(    1)
        = exp dH + I x dF ( 0 ) (zl )                                                               exp dH + I x dF ( 0 )                   (zl )                          ;
                                                                          P
                                                              (1      )
               (1     )                              1
        = P               (1         )                                        exp dH + I x dF ( 0 )           1
                                                                                                                      (zl ) :

   We can now derive a parameterized version of the net revenue function (14). From (32),
optimal expenditures on intermediate inputs are:

                          (1     )                                    1                                               1
             Pm = P                          (1           )                   exp dH + I x dF ( 0 )                       (zl ) :




                                                                          41
Subtracting this expression and …xed exporting costs from gross revenues yields:

R(z; l) = G(z; l)              Pm             cx I x
                                                                                                                     (1        )
                                                  1         (1         )                                        1
        =    1        (1            )                  P                           (1               )                                  exp dH + I x dF ( 0 )        1
                                                                                                                                                                         (zl )       cx I x
                                                                                                                          (1       )
                      (1            )(                1)          (1           )                                    1
        =                                                   P                           (1              )                                exp dH + I x dF ( 0 )           1
                                                                                                                                                                             (zl )      cx I x
                                                                                               (1       )
                 (1        )                  1                                        1
        = P                                                (1          )                                        exp dH + I x dF ( 0 )                   1
                                                                                                                                                            (zl )       cx I x

                      (1       )
        =     P                     exp dH + I x dF ( 0 )                                  1
                                                                                                    (zl )             cx I x ;
                                         h                       i         1
                           1                 (1       )(    1)
   where     =        (1       )
                                                                                   :


Appendix 2: The Wage Functions
Hiring Wages In order to characterize wages in hiring …rms, we …rst determine the total
surplus for a …rm and a worker that are matched in the end-of-period state (z 0 ; l0 ): At the
time of bargaining, the surplus that the marginal worker generates for the …rm is given by

                                        f irm                               1  @ (z 0 ; l; l0 ) @V(z 0 ; l0 )
                                                  (z 0 ; l; l0 ) =                             +              :
                                                                           1+r    @l0             @l0

Note that at the time of bargaining, the vacancy posting and matching process are over and
the costs of vacancy postings are sunk. As a result, if bargaining fails, the …rm is simply left
with fewer workers. Thus we only use the relevant part of the pro…t function for hiring …rms,
i.e., when l0 > l in (18), denoted by (z 0 ; l; l0 ): The surplus that a marginal worker generates
consists of two parts: the current increase in the …rm’s pro…ts, i.e., marginal revenue product
net of wages, and the increment to the value of being in state (z 0 ; l0 ) at the start of the next
period. If the …rm does not exit next period, i.e., if V(z 0 ; l0 ) > 0; the marginal worker will
have a positive value only if the …rm expands. Otherwise, the …rm will incur the dismissal
cost, cf . If the …rm exits, its expected marginal value from the current marginal hire will be
zero.
     Similarly, the surplus for the marginal worker who is matched by a hiring …rm in the
end-of-period state (z 0 ; l0 ) is

                                   work                          1
                                          (z 0 ; l0 ) =             [wh (z 0 ; l0 ) + J e (z 0 ; l0 )                                   (b + J o )] ;
                                                                1+r
where the worker enjoys wh (z 0 ; l0 ) in the current period, and starts the next period in a …rm
with the beginning-of-period state (z 0 ; l0 ): If bargaining fails, the worker remains unemployed
this period, engages in home production of b; and starts the next period in state o:
    The worker and …rm split the total surplus by Nash bargaining where the bargaining
power of the …rm is given by :
                                                       f irm
                                                                (z 0 ; l; l0 ) = (1                         )       wor ker
                                                                                                                               (z 0 ; l0 ):

                                                                                               42
Wages are thus determined as a solution to the following equation:

               @ (z 0 ; l; l0 ) @V(z 0 ; l0 )
                               +              = (1            ) [wh (z 0 ; l0 ) + J e (z 0 ; l0 )        (b + J o )] :   (33)
                  @l0             @l0

Note that we cannot rule out the case in which a …rm hires in the current period and exits at
the beginning of the next period. The bargaining outcome depends on the decision to exit
or continue which is made by the time of bargaining. We analyze these two cases separately.

  1. Exiting …rms: If the …rm is going to exit next period, i.e., I c (z 0 ; l0 ) = 0; we have
     @V(z 0 ; l0 )=@l0 = 0 and J e (z 0 ; l0 ) = J u from the de…nition of J e : In this case, @V(z 0 ; l0 )=@l0
     cancels with J e J o in (33) since J o = J u in equilibrium. We are left with

                                       @ (z 0 ; l; l0 )
                                                        = (1           )[wh (z 0 ; l0 )        b]:                       (34)
                                          @l0
     Using the de…nition of (z 0 ; l0 ) from (18), and rearranging terms, equation (34) becomes

                         @wh (z 0 ; l0 ) 0                         @R(z 0 ; l0 )
                                         l + wh (z 0 ; l0 )                               (1         )b = 0;
                            @l0                                      @l0
     which is the same as equation (10) in Bertola and Garibaldi (2001). From (14) we
     have:
                                 @R(z 0 ; l0 )                       1
                                       0
                                               =     (z 0 ) (l0 )      :
                                    @l
     Here, we suppressed the dependence of ( ) on l0 since @ =@l0 = 0 if the …rm’s export-
     ing decision does not depend on the marginal worker. Since workers bargain individu-
     ally and simultaneously with the …rm, no single worker will be taken as the marginal
     worker for the export decision. Accordingly, retracing Bertola and Garibaldi’s (2001)
     derivation we obtain:
                                                   Z l
                                                 1        1
                        0 0                                                      1
                   wh (z ; l ) = (1       )b + l       u            (z 0 ) (l0 )   du
                                                    0
                                                                    Z l0
                                                                  1        1
                               = (1       )b +         0
                                                    (z ) (l )0
                                                                          u + 2 du
                                                                                           0
                                                                   1                                        1
                                    = (1          )b +    1                               (z 0 ) (l0 )
                                                              +             1
                                                                                                                1
                                    = (1          )b +                                      (z 0 ) (l0 )            :
                                                         1          +           |                {z             }
                                                                                      =@R(z 0 ;l0 )=@l0


     In this case, the worker is paid a fraction of her marginal revenue plus her share of the
     outside option b:

  2. Continuing Firms: In this case, we have V(z 0 ; l0 ) > 0: There is an expected gain from
     keeping the marginal worker because of the possibility of further hiring next period.
     The worker’s expected gain in the beginning of the next period (when she still has a
     chance to leave the …rm and search) is J e (z 0 ; l0 ) J u : The pair shares the expected

                                                         43
      gains, i.e., J e (z 0 ; l0 ) J u cancels with the expected gain of the …rm in (33). In the
      event of a contraction, however, the …rm cannot enforce contracts that require laid-o¤
      workers to pay their share of …ring costs. As a result, expected …ring costs, Pf (z 0 ; l0 )cf ;
      are subtracted from …rm surplus in the current period:

                                @ (z 0 ; l; l0 )
                                                       Pf (z 0 ; l0 )cf = (1               )[wh (z 0 ; l0 )     b];
                                   @l0

      Conditional on the …rm not hiring, the possibility of losing one’s job, pf (z 0 ; l), is

                                                                      l     L(z 0 ; l)
                                                   pf (z 0 ; l) =                      ;
                                                                             l
      and the probability of being …red next period is then given by

                                  Pf (z 0 ; l0 ) = Ez00 =z0     1         I h (z 00 ; l0 ) pf (z 00 ; l0 ) :

      The wage schedule for expanding …rms that will stay in the market next period is then
      given by

                                                                                                      1
                 wh (z 0 ; l0 ) = (1       )b +                                   (z 0 ) (l0 )                 Pf (z 0 ; l0 )cf :
                                                   1       +

Firing Wages To derive the …ring wage schedule, we begin by writing the value of em-
ployment at a …ring …rm in the interim stage as
                         1
          Jfe (z 0 ; l) =    pf (z 0 ; l)(1 + r)J u + (1 pf (z 0 ; l)) (wf (z 0 ; l0 ) + J e (z 0 ; l0 )) ;
                       1+r
where l0 = L(z 0 ; l): This expression re‡ects the fact that workers who are not …red are paid
just enough to retain them. Since workers are indi¤erent between staying and leaving, the
two outcomes inside the bracket have equal value, i.e.,

                                       wf (z 0 ; l0 ) + J e (z 0 ; l0 ) = (1 + r)J u ;

which yields the wage schedule according to which workers in …ring …rms are paid:

                                       wf (z 0 ; l0 ) = rJ u        [J e (z 0 ; l0 )   J u ]:




Appendix 3: Steady State Equilibrium
    Let the transition density of the Markov process on z be denoted by h(z 0 jz): Given a
measure of aggregate expenditure abroad denominated in foreign currency, DF ; a steady
state equilibrium for a small open economy consists of: a measure of domestic di¤erentiated
goods NH ; an exact price index for the composite good P ; an aggregate domestic demand
index for industrial goods DH ; aggregate income I; a measure of workforce in services Ls ; a
measure workers in di¤erentiated goods sector Lq ; a measure of workers searching for jobs

                                                               44
in the industrial sector U ; a measure of unemployed workers Lu ; the job …nding rate e; the
vacancy …lling rate ; the exit rate exit ; the fraction of …rms exporting x ; the measure
of entrants M ; the value and associated policy functions V(z; l); L(z; l); I h (z; l) ; I c (z; l);
I x (z; l) ; J o ; J u ; J s ; and J e ; the wage schedules wh (z; l) and wf (z; l); the exchange rate k;
and end-of period and interim distributions (z; l) and e (z; l) such that:

   1. Steady state distributions: In equilibrium, (z; l) and e (z 0 ; l) reproduce them-
      selves through the Markov processes on z, the policy functions, and the productivity
                                                                                   e
      draws upon entry. In order to de…ne the interim distribution, e (z; l); let e (z 0 ; l) be the
      interim frequency measure of …rms de…ned as
                                       R       0           c
                     e
                     e (z 0 ; l) =       z   R jz) 0(z; l)I (z; l)dz
                                           h(z                       if l 6= le
                                       0                         c               :
                                   e (z ) + z h(z jz) (z; l)I (z; l)dz if l = le


      Then, e (z 0 ; l) is given by

                                                                        e
                                                                        e (z 0 ; l)
                                          e (z 0 ; l) =                           ;
                                                           R R e
                                                            0
                                                               e (z 0 ; l)dz 0 dl
                                                               z    l

      while the end-of period distribution is
                                             R
                                                               e (z 0 ; l)I(L(z0 ;l);l0 ) dl
                                      (z 0 ; l0 ) = R Rl                                            ;
                                                               e (z 0 ; l)I(L(z0 ;l);l0 ) dz 0 dl
                                                      z0   l

      where I(L(z0 ;l);l0 ) is an indicator function with I(L(z0 ;l);l0 ) = 1 if L(z 0 ; l) = l0 :

   2. Market clearance in the service sector: Demand for services comes from two
      sources: consumers spend a (1        ) fraction of aggregate income I on it, and …rms
      demand it to pay their …xed operation and exporting costs, as well as labor adjustment
      and market entry costs. Aggregate income I itself is the sum of wage income earned by
      service and industrial sector workers, market services supplied by unemployed workers,
      tari¤ revenues rebated to worker-consumers, and aggregate pro…ts in the industrial
      sector distributed to worker-consumers who own the …rms.
      The average labor adjustment cost is given by
                                   Z Z
                               c=        C(l; L(z; l)) e (z; l)dldz:
                                              z   l

      The market clearance condition is then given by

                             Ls + bLu = (1            )I + NH (c + cp +                 x cx )   + M ce :

   3. Labor market clearing: Total production employment in the industrial sector is
      given by                            Z Z
                           Lq = NH l = NH      l (z; l)dldz;
                                                                        z   l


                                                           45
  where                                               Z Z
                                          l=                    l (z; l)dldz                    (35)
                                                       z    l
  is the sector’s average employment. Every period a fraction l of workers in that sector
  is laid o¤ due to exits and downsizing:
             R R         c
                                                  R R c
                  [1   I   (z; l)]l (z; l)dldz +        I (z; l)I f (z; l)[l L(z; l)] (z; l)dldz
         l =
              z l                             R  R  z l

                                                z l
                                                     l (z; l)dldz

  Then, the equilibrium ‡ow condition is

                                                      U e = Lq l :

  In equilibrium, a measure of Lu = (1 e)U of workers who search do not …nd a job,
  and labor market clearing condition is given by

                                          1 = Ls + Lq + Lu :

  On the vacancies side, the aggregate number of vacancies in this economy is given by
                                 Z Z                                  e (z; l)
                       V = NH             v(z; l)I h (z; l)                      dldz = NH v;
                                  z   l                                      h

  where                               Z Z                                    e (z; l)
                            v = NH                    v(z; l)I h (z; l)                 dldz;   (36)
                                          z       l                              h
  is the average level of vacancies, and h is the fraction of hiring …rms:
                                      Z Z
                                 h =      I h (z; l) e (z; l)dldz:
                                                  z    l

  The total number of vacancies, V; together with U; determines matching probabilities
   (V; U ) and e(V; U ) that …rms and workers take as given.

4. Firm turnover: In equilibrium, there is a positive mass of entry M every period so
   that the free entry condition (21) holds with equality. The fraction of …rms exiting is
   implied by the steady state distribution and the exit policy function,
                                   Z Z
                            exit =     [1 I c (z; l)] (z; l)dldz + ;
                                      z       l

  and measure of exits equals that of entrants,

                                                  M=             exit NH :


5. Trade balance: Adding up …nal and intermediate demand, total domestic expendi-
   tures on imported varieties equals DH ( m c k)1 . Taking the import tari¤ into ac-
   count, domestic demand for foreign currency (expressed in domestic currency) is thus

                                                           46
                   1
      DH (   m c k)
              m
                   = DH m ( c k)1 : Tari¤ revenue is given by DH m ( c k)1 ( m 1),
      and is returned to worker-consumers in the form of lump-sum transfers. Total export
                   kD P 1
      revenues are F cX      with the foreign market price index for exported goods PX as
      de…ned in Section 2.3. Trade is balance given by
                                                     1
                                    DH (    m c k)                     kDF PX1
                                                                   =                    :
                                             m                                c
                                   |        {z           }             |    {z     }
                            domestic demand for foreign currency       export revenue


      The exchange rate k moves to ensure that this condition holds. Balanced trade ensures
      that national income matches national expenditure.

  6. Workers are indi¤erent between taking a certain job in the undi¤erentiated sector and
     searching for a job in the industrial sector: J o = J s = J u :




Appendix 4: Numerical Solution Algorithm
    To compute the value functions, we discretize the state space on a log scale using 550
grid points for employment and 60 grid points for productivity. We set the maximum …rm
size as 2000 workers and numerically check that this is not restrictive. In the steady state, a
negligible fraction of …rms reaches this size, which is also the case in the data. The algorithm
works as follows:

  1. Formulate guesses for DH ; wf (z; l); wh (z; l); dF and : Given ; calculate e = (1      )1= :

  2. Given DH ; wf (z; l); dF , and wh (z; l); calculate the value function for the …rm, V(z; l);
     using equation (19) and …nd the associated decision rules for exiting, hiring, and ex-
     porting. Calculate the expected value of entry, Ve ; using equation (21). Compare Ve
     with ce : If Ve > ce ; decrease DH (to make entry less valuable) and if Ve < ce ; increase
     DH (to make entry more valuable): Go back to Step 1 with the updated value of DH
     and repeat until DH converges.

  3. Given wf (z; l); dF , and the converged value of DH from Step 2; update wf (z; l). To
     do this, …rst calculate J e (z 0 ; l0 ) using equations (24) and (27), and imposing the equi-
     librium condition J u = J o : Given J e (z; l); update …ring wage schedule using equation
     (29). Compare the updated …ring wage schedule with the initial guess. If they are not
     close enough go back to Step 1 with the new …ring wage schedule and repeat Steps
     1 to 3 until wf converges. Note that if …ring wages are too high, then J e (z; l)— the
     value of being in a …rm at the start of a period— is high, since the …rm is less likely to
     …re workers. A high value of J e (z; l), however, lowers …ring wages. Similarly, if …ring
     wages are too low, then J e is low, which pushes …ring wages up.

  4. Given dF and ; the converged value of DH from step 2; and the converged value of
     wf (z; l) from Step 3, update wh (z; l) using equation equation (28).


                                                  47
  5. Given , the converged value of DH from Step 2; the converged value of wf (z; l) from
     Step 3, and the converged value of wh (z; l) from step 4, calculate the trade balance.
     To do this:

      (a) Given …rms’ decisions, calculate (z; l) and e (z; l), the stationary probability
          distributions over (z; l) at the end and interim states, respectively.
      (b) Given e (z; l); calculate the average number of vacancies and the average employ-
          ment in the industrial sector using equations (35) and (36).
       (c) Take a guess for NH : Given NH and v, calculate the mass of unemployed U in the
           industrial sector from
                                             M (V; U )          U
                                 (V; U ) =             =                 ;
                                                V        ((vNH ) + U )1=

           which is one equation in one unknown. Given U; calculate Lu = (1 e)U: Then,
           given l; the size employment in the service sector is given by Ls = 1 Lu NH l:
           Given NH ; Ls ; Lu ; M (mass of entrants); and I (aggregate income), check if supply
           and demand are equal in the service sector:

                           Ls + bLu = (1        ) I + NH (c + cp +   x cx )   + M ce :
                           | {z } |                         {z                     }
                             supply                      demand


           Update NH until supply equals demand.
      (d) Given the value of NH from Step 4c, calculate exports and imports. If exports
          are larger than imports, lower dF ; if exports are less than imports, increase dF :
          Go back to Step 1 with the updated value of dF ; and repeat until convergence.

  6. Given the converged value of DH from Step 2; the converged value of wf (z; l) from
     Step 3, the converged value of wh (z; l) from Step 4, and the converged value of dF from
     Step 5, update : In order to do that, …rst calculate EJhe using (24). Given EJhe and e;
     calculate J u using (23). If J o > J u ; increase (to attract workers to the di¤erentiated
     goods sector) and if J o < J u ; we lower (to make the di¤erentiated goods sector less
     attractive). Go back to Step 2, and repeat until converges.

Estimation Procedure In our policy experiments, we use the complete algorithm above
to compute equilibrium outcomes for given a set of parameters, including the cost of entry
ce : In these experiments, both dF and DH are equilibrium objects that respond to changes
in m , c and cf . While estimating the model, however, we use the Olley-Pakes intercept
d~H estimated from (31) to calculate …rms’ net revenue schedule R( ): Similarly, we treat
dF as a moment to be matched: given d~H and the simulated value of the foreign market
size parameter DF , we calculate using equation (10), which allows to use the implied dF
directly in our solution algorithm. The equilibrium price level P and exchange rate k can
easily be solved in equilibrium so that trade balance holds and d~H is consistent with DH .
Also, assuming that the economy is in a steady state with positive entry, we back out ce by
setting it equal to the equilibrium value of entry Ve . This approach to discipline the cost of

                                                48
entry ce is in line with the quantitative literature (Hopenhayn and Rogerson 1993). These
shortcuts allow us to skip Steps 2 and 5d in the estimation and considerably reduce the
computation time.


Appendix 5: Further Results and Data Sources

                                    Table 5: Isolated E¤ects


                                                         Baseline    (I)    (II)    (III)
             m                                            1.21      1.11    1.21    1.21
            cf                                             0.6      0.6     0.3      0.6
             c                                             2.5      2.5     2.5      2.1
          Size Distribution
            20th percentile                                16        17      16     17
            40th percentile                                25        26      24     27
            60th percentile                                39        41      38     46
            80th percentile                                78        84      78     104
            Average …rm size                               46        49      46     57
          Firm Growth Rates
            <20th percentile                               1.15     1.14    1.12    1.17
            20th-40th percentile                           0.26     0.28    0.27    0.29
            40th-60th percentile                           0.18     0.19    0.18    0.22
            60th-80th percentile                           0.15     0.16    0.16    0.19
          Aggregates
             % of …rms exporting                            1       1.339   0.989   2.191
            Revenue share of exports                        1       1.339   0.999   2.060
            Exit rate                                       1       0.949   0.832   1.025
            Job turnover                                    1       1.032   1.006   1.096
            Mass of …rms                                    1       0.918   1.001   0.764
            Unemployment rate in the industrial sector      1       1.076   1.001   1.213
            Industrial share of employment                  1       0.985   1.002   0.949
            Standard deviation of log wages (…rms)          1       1.002   0.979   1.035
            Standard deviation of log wages (workers)       1       1.002   0.978   0.989
            Log 90-10 wage ratio (…rms)                     1       1.010   0.978   1.045
            Log 90-10 wage ratio (workers)                  1       1.020   0.981   1.009
            Exchange rate (k)                               1       0.97    1.05    0.727
            Real income                                     1       1.042   0.993   1.180

Notes: Each column presents the outcomes from an isolated counterfactual scenario. Columns (I): reducing
tari¤ s, Columns (II): reducing …ring costs, Columns (III): reducing iceberg trade costs.




5.1     Sectoral Labor Flows in Colombia
The Colombian Statistical Agency DANE publishes monthly labor market indicators. We
accessed the following link on September 26, 2013:


                                                  49
http://www.dane.gov.co/…les/investigaciones/empleo/ech/totalNacional/Mensual/IML_MensualTnacional_01_08.xls.
The …le is in Spanish but variable names can be easily translated using online translators. In
this …le, the worksheets titled "ocup ramas trim tnal" indicates monthly sectoral urban em-
ployment levels (Población ocupada según posición ocupacional, CABECERAS ). The work-
sheet titled "cesantes ramas trim tnal" reports last sector of employment for the unemployed
(Población desocupada censate según ramas de actividad anterior, CABECERAS ). We ex-
clude agriculture and mining, and aggregate service industries. The ratio of out‡ows from
employment to unemployment gives sectoral transition rates. For the 2000-2006, average
transition rates are 0.137 for manufacturing and 0.148 for services.




                                               50
