NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TWO MONETARY TOOLS:
INTEREST RATES AND HAIRCUTS
Adam Ashcraft
Nicolae Gârleanu
Lasse Heje Pedersen
Working Paper 16337
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16337

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

We are grateful for useful discussions with Tobias Adrian, Darrell Duffie, Livia Levine, Guido Lorenzoni,
Andrei Shleifer, and Michael Woodford as well as from participants at the Liquidity Working Group
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Conference on Financial Frictions and Macroeconomic
Modeling, Cowles Foundation Conference in General Equilibrium and its Applications, the Annual
Meeting of the American Economic Association, the Money and Banking Workshop at the University
of Chicago Department of Economics, New York University, the Stockholm School of Economics,
and University of California at Berkeley. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Adam Ashcraft, Nicolae Gârleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Two Monetary Tools: Interest Rates and Haircuts
Adam Ashcraft, Nicolae Gârleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 16337
September 2010
JEL No. E32,E44,E5,G01,G12
ABSTRACT
We study a production economy with multiple sectors financed by issuing securities to agents who
face capital constraints. Binding capital constraints propagate business cycles, and a reduction of the
interest rate can increase the required return of high-haircut assets since it can increase the shadow
cost of capital for constrained agents. The required return can be lowered by easing funding constraints
through lowering haircuts. To assess empirically the power of the haircut tool, we study the introduction
of the legacy Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). By considering unpredictable rejections
of bonds from TALF, we estimate that haircuts had a significant effect on prices. Further, unique survey
evidence suggests that lowering haircuts could reduce required returns by more than 3% and provides
broader evidence on the demand sensitivity to haircuts.

Adam Ashcraft
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
adam.ashcraft@ny.frb.org
Nicolae Gârleanu
Haas School of Business
F628
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
garleanu@haas.berkeley.edu

Lasse Heje Pedersen
NYU Stern Finance
44 West Fouth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
lpederse@stern.nyu.edu

“If it is known that the Bank of England is freely advancing on what in ordinary
times is reckoned a good security – on what is then commonly pledged and easily
convertible – the alarm of the solvent merchants and bankers will be stayed.”
— Bagehot (1873), p. 198.
Financial institutions play a key role as credit providers in the economy, and liquidity
crises arise when they become credit constrained themselves. In such liquidity crises, financial
institutions’ ability to borrow against their securities plays a key role, as Bagehot points out.
In the private markets, it can become virtually impossible to borrow against certain illiquid
securities, and, more broadly, the “haircuts” (also called “margin requirements”) on many
securities increase in crises.1 Furthermore, security prices may drop significantly, especially
for securities with high haircuts. To alleviate the financial institutions’ funding problems,
and their repercussions on the real economy, central banks have a number of monetary-policy
tools available, such as interest rate cuts and lending facilities with low haircuts.
This paper studies the links between haircuts, required returns, and real activity, and
evaluates the different monetary policy tools theoretically and empirically. In a production
economy with multiple sectors financed by agents facing margin constraints, we show that
binding constraints increase required returns and propagate business cycles. The centralbank policy of reducing the interest rate decreases the required returns of low-haircut assets,
but may increase those of high-haircut assets, since it may increase the shadow cost of
capital for constrained agents. A reduction in the haircut of an asset unambiguously lowers
its required return, and can ease the funding constraints on all assets. Empirically, we
estimate that lowering haircuts through lending facilities significantly decreased the required
return during the recent crisis, and we provide unique survey evidence suggesting a strong
demand-sensitivity to haircuts.
Our model features heterogeneous-risk-aversion agents who are limited to holding positions with total haircuts not exceeding the agents’ capital. While this is a single funding
constraint, it affects securities differently depending on their haircuts. This is the key funding constraint for real-world financial institutions; for instance, Bear Stearns, Lehman, and
AIG collapsed when they could not meet their margin constraints.
In the model, risk-tolerant agents take leveraged positions in equilibrium, and, as we will
see, play a role that resembles that of the real-world financial institutions described above.
When these leveraged agents’ margin requirements become binding, their shadow cost of
capital increases, driving up equilibrium required returns, especially for high-haircut assets,
which use more of the now expensive capital. This mechanism lowers investment and output,
and leads to persistent effects of i.i.d. productivity shocks, thus exacerbating business cycle
swings, especially in high-haircut sectors. The margin-constraint business cycle is driven
by risk-tolerant agents’ wealth as the key state variable, which falls whenever asset values
and labor income do. The consequences are disproportionately severe for the high-haircut
1

To understand the meaning of a haircut, suppose that before the crisis a financial institution could
borrow $98 with a $100 bond as collateral. The $2 difference is the lender’s extra margin of safety and is
called a 2% haircut. This allows the borrower up 50-to-1 leverage. If the haircut went to 20%, the institution
would need to finance $20 of the position with its own capital and could only support a 5-to-1 leverage.

2

sectors because constrained investors reallocate capital towards assets that can be financed
(i.e., leveraged) more easily.
Central banks often fight low real activity by reducing the interest rate to lower the
required return on capital. This policy, however, makes leveraged investing more attractive, thus possibly increasing the shadow cost of capital, which in turn my actually increase
the required return on high-haircut assets. Low-haircut assets’ returns, on the other hand,
depend only weakly on the shadow cost of capital — the extreme case is that of an asset
with zero haircut, whose required return is driven purely by the interest rate and riskiness,
and independent of the state of the constraint — and therefore are brought down by reducing interest rates. Naturally, decreases in required returns are accompanied by increased
investment and production, and vice-versa.
This observation motivates a natural policy question: What can be done when lowering
the interest rate does not help high-haircut sectors (or when the nominal interest rate is
already zero)? As Bagehot points out, the central bank can lend against a wide range of
securities and, we might add, at a modest yet prudent haircut. We show that if the central
bank decides to accept a particular security as collateral at a lower haircut than otherwise
available, this always lowers its required return. The required returns of other securities
either all increase or all decrease, depending on what happens to the shadow cost of capital.
The most intuitive case is that the shadow cost of capital decreases due to the new source
of funding, thus helping other securities as well, and we show that this happens when the
haircut is reduced sufficiently.
Further, the shadow cost of capital decreases if the haircut on enough securities can be
lowered. This observation is relevant for the debate about whether central banks should
extend their lending facilities to legacy securities or restrict attention to new issues. The
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) program was initially focused on newly
issued securities, since these imply new credit provided to the real economy. Lowering the
haircut on these securities helps reduce their required returns, but does little to ease the
overall funding constraints in the financial sector. The legacy TALF program applied to
existing securities and therefore had the potential to alleviate the funding problems more
broadly — and flatten the haircut-return curve as a result.
As a final theoretical result, we show that the shadow cost of capital can be reduced
through asset purchases or capital injections. Hence, these policy tools also lower required
returns and stimulate real activity, but they may be associated with significant costs and
risks.
Empirically, we find that central-bank-provided loans at modest haircuts can be a powerful tool for lowering yields and stimulating economic activity. We arrive at this conclusion
by studying the introduction of the legacy TALF that provided loans with lower haircuts and
longer maturity than otherwise available. Yields went down significantly when the TALF
program was announced, increased when Standard and Poor’s (S&P) changed its ratings
methodology in a way that would make a number of securities ineligible for TALF, and
finally went down again, and further than before, when TALF was implemented. We note
that the yield of both TALF eligible and ineligible securities reacted to the news, consistent

3

with the idea that the common shadow cost of capital was affected.
While suggestive, this string of yield reactions does not provide conclusive evidence,
since so many other things went on at the same time. We use two approaches to isolate
the effect of TALF: (1) We study evidence from a survey conducted in March 2009 (before
the legacy TALF was introduced) asking market participants the prices they would bid for
certain securities without TALF, with access to high-haircut term funding, and with access
to low-haircut term funding; and (2) We study the reaction of market prices, adjusting for
non-TALF effects by considering the price response to unpredictable bond rejections from
the TALF program.
The survey indicated that participants would pay 6% more for a super senior CMBS bond
if they had access to a 3-year loan with a high haircut than they would pay if they had no
access to term leverage. The bid price was higher for lower haircuts and longer maturities,
reaching 50% above the no-TALF bid for the longest-term loan with a low haircut. The
significance of the effect is also apparent in terms of yields: Participants required a 15%
yield without access to term leverage (which was the yield prevailing in the market), but
their required bond yields drop to 12% with access to 3-year loans with a low haircut (similar
to what was actually implemented in TALF), and to 9.5% for 5-year loans. Hence, according
to this survey, low-haircut term leverage similar to TALF had the potential to lower yields
by 3-5% for super senior bonds.
These results are evidence of significant demand sensitivity to haircuts. To make sure
that the higher bid reflects the value of financing, not the value of being able to default on
the loan, we focus on super-senior commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), as these
are the safest bonds. The participants in the survey were asked to estimate the losses on the
pool in a stress scenario, and, even in the stress scenario, the estimated losses on the pool
imply no losses on the safest super-senior tranches.
The survey evidence is corroborated by transaction-price data showing the effect of TALF
on actual bond yields, controlling for other effects. Indeed, we find a statistically significant
rise in the yield spread of bonds that are unexpectedly rejected from the TALF program by
the Fed, over and above the yield change of other bonds in the same security class during
the same week. In other words, the required return rises for bonds that fail to benefit from
TALF’s lower haircuts. As further evidence consistent with the model, we find that this rise
in yield is greater during the early part of the program (July-September, 2009) when capital
constraints were more binding, than in the later period (October 2009-March 2010). During
the early period, we estimate that the a TALF rejection lead to an immediate 80 bps rise in
yield, with the effect eventually falling to 40 bps.
The effect of lowering haircuts during crises can likely far exceed the estimated 40 bps
long-term effect, for a couple of reasons. First, the economy and capital constraints had
already improved substantially during this early legacy TALF period relative to the height
of the crisis (e.g., March 2009 when the survey was conducted). Thus, the haircut effect
during the height of the crisis would likely have been significantly larger. Second, we are
only measuring the effect of a bond’s haircut on its own yield, not that of the lending program
on the liquidity in the system more broadly. In the language of our theory, we only estimate

4

the effect of moving a bond along the haircut-return curve, not the flattening of the curve
itself.
Our overall evidence suggests that the haircut tool is a powerful one, consistent with our
model. To put the magnitude in perspective, recall that the Fed lowered the Fed funds rate
from 5.25% in early 2007 all the way to the zero lower bound (0-0.25%), a 5% reduction.
Since we estimate that the haircut tool implemented with a program such as TALF can lower
yields by well in excess of 0.40%, perhaps up to 3-5% as our survey suggests, its effectiveness
appears economically significant.
The estimated economic magnitude can be understood in the context of the model
as follows: Lowering the haircut by 80% lowers the required return by approximately
10%×80%×40%=3% if the shadow cost of capital was around 10% for the 40% of risk-bearing
capacity that were constrained during the crisis. With standard production functions, this
leads to large effects on investment, capital, and output in the affected sectors.
Our paper is related to several large literatures. Borrowing constraints of entrepreneurs
and firms affect business cycles and collateral values (Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist (1998), Detemple and Murthy (1997), Geanakoplos (1997, 2003), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001), Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2005), Coen-Pirani (2005), and Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008)).2
Rather than focusing on borrowers’ “balance-sheet effects” (or “credit-demand” frictions), we consider the lending channel (or “credit-supply” frictions), as Holmström and
Tirole (1997), Repullo and Suarez (2000), and Ashcraft (2005). The impact on the macroeconomy of financial frictions has been further studied recently by Kiyotaki and Moore (2008),
Adrian and Shin (2009), Gertler and Karadi (2009), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2009), Cúrdia
and Woodford (2009), Reis (2009), and Adrian, Moench, and Shin (2009). Also, Lorenzoni
(2008) shows that there can be inefficient credit booms due to fire-sale externalities with
credit constraints.
Our asset-pricing implications are related to Hindy (1995), Cuoco (1997), Aiyagari and
Gertler (1999), and especially Gârleanu and Pedersen (2009). Required returns are also
increased by transaction costs and market-liquidity risk (Amihud and Mendelson (1986),
Longstaff (2004), Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005, 2007), Acharya and Pedersen (2005),
Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino (2007), and He and Krishnamurthy (2008)). Market liquidity interacts with margin requirements as shown by Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009),
who also explain why margin requirements tend to increase during crises because of liquidity
spirals, a phenomenon documented empirically by Adrian and Shin (2008) and Gorton and
Metrick (2009a, 2009b).
We complement the literature by generating cross-sectional predictions in a multi-sector
model with credit supply frictions due to margin constraints, by showing how interest rate
cuts may be ineffective for high-haircut assets during crises, and evaluating the effect of
another monetary tool — haircuts — theoretically and empirically.
Haircuts play a central role in the paper. One may wonder, however, whether this
2

See also the related literatures in corporate finance and banking, Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Holmström
and Tirole (1998, 2001), and Allen and Gale (1998, 2004, 2005).

5

institutional feature is of passing importance. To the contrary, we would argue that loans
secured by collateral with a haircut have played an important role in facilitating economic
activity for thousands of years. For instance, the first written compendium of Judaism’s
Oral Law, the Mishnah, states:
“One lends money with a mortgage on land which is worth more than the value
of the loan. The lender says to the borrower, ‘If you do not repay the loan within
three years, this land is mine.’” 3
— Mishnah Bava Metzia 5:3, circa 200 AD.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 lays out the model, Section 2 derives the economic dynamics and effects of haircuts and interest rate cuts, Section 3 presents
the empirical evidence, and Section 4 concludes.

1

Model

We consider a simple overlapping-generations (OLG) economy where firms and agents interact at times ..., -1, 0, 1, 2,... At each time t, J new young (representative) firms are started
and there are J old firms that were started during the previous period t − 1. Old firm j
produces output Ytj depending on its capital Ktj , labor use Ljt , and productivity Ajt , which
is a random variable. The output is
Ytj = Ajt Fi (Ktj , Ljt ),

(1)

where Fi (Ktj , Ljt ) = (Ktj )α (Ljt )β is a Cobb-Douglas production function with α + β ≤ 1. The
productivity shocks Ajt have mean Āj and variance-covariance matrix ΣA , assumed invertible.
Each type of firm uses its own specialized labor with wage wtj . Given the wage, firm j chooses
its labor demand to maximize its profit P̄ :
P̄ (Ktj , Ajt , wtj ) = max
Ajt Fi (Ktj , Ljt ) − wtj Ljt .
j

(2)

Lt

Each young firm invests Itj units of output goods, which become as many units of capital
j
the following period: Kt+1
= Itj . Capital cannot be redeployed once productivity shocks are
realized — in effect, it is specific to a type of firm (and depreciates fully each period as in
Bernanke and Gertler (1989)).4 The firm chooses investment to maximize its present value,
3

The Talmud provides further detail on how the haircut should be treated in the event of default:
“Rav Huna: If this condition was made when the money was given, then it is binding, even if
the field is worth more than the loan. If the condition was made after the money was given, then
the lender can only take the portion of the land equivalent to the value of the loan.”
— Babylonian Talmud Bava Metzia 66a-66b.

4

If depreciation is only partial and disinvestment is costless following production, then the results are
qualitatively the same.

6

which is computed using the pricing kernel ξt+1 :5

j
j
j
j
max
E
t ξt+1 P̄ (It , At+1 , wt+1 ) − It .
j

(3)

It

Each young firm j issues shares in supply θj , which we normalize to θj = 1 in most of the
j
paper. These shares represent a claim to the firm’s profit P̄t+1
next period, t + 1. The shares

j
j
j
j
are issued at a price of Pt = Et ξt+1 P̄ (It , At+1 , wt+1 ) . (Note that we use the notation Ptj
j
for the price of the same firm when old.) The
for the price of a young firm at time t and P̄t+1
firm uses the proceeds from the sale to invest the Itj units of capital. The balance (which
we show to always be non-negative) Ptj − Itj represents a profit to the initial owners of the
technology.
Each time period, young agents are born who live two periods. Hence, at any time,
the economy is populated by young and old agents. Agents differ in their risk aversion; in
particular, a agents have a high risk aversion γ a , while b agents have a lower risk aversion
γ b.
All agents are endowed with a fixed number of units of labor for each technology and part
of the technology for new firms. Specifically, a young agent (or “family”) of type n ∈ {a, b}
inelastically supplies η n units of labor to each type of firms, where the total supply of labor
is normalized to 1, η a + η b = 1, and owns a fraction ω n of each of the young firms. At time
t, a young agent n ∈ {a, b} therefore has a wealth Wtn that is the sum of his labor income
and the value of his endowment in technologies
X j
X j
Wtn =
wt η n +
(Pt − Itj )ω n .
(4)
j

j

Agents have access to a linear (risk-free) saving technology with net rate of return rf and
choose how many shares θ to buy in each young firm. Depending on an agent’s portfolio
choice, his wealth evolves according to
Wt+1 = Wt (1 + rf ) + θ> (P̄t+1 − Pt (1 + rf )).

(5)

Shares in asset j are subject to a haircut or margin requirement mjt , which limits the amount
that can be borrowed using one share of asset j as a collateral to P j (1 − mjt ). We can think
of haircuts/ margin requirements as exogenous or as set as in Geanakoplos (2003). Hence,
each agent must use capital to buy assets and is subject to the margin requirement
X j
(6)
mt |θj |Ptj ≤ Wtn .
j
5

Given that markets are incomplete, different types of agents may employ different pricing kernels, but
the homogeneity of the production function means that, since they agree on the current price of the firm,
they also agree on the optimal investment policy.

7

The agents derive utility from consumption when old and seek to maximize their expected
quadratic utility:6
max Et (Wt+1 ) −
θ

γn
var(Wt+1 ).
2

(7)

An equilibrium is a collection of processes for wages wt , investment It , stock prices Pt ,
and pricing kernels ξt so that markets clear.

1.1

Haircuts, Credit Supply, and the Required Return

To solve for the equilibrium, we first take the firms’ investments as given and solve for the
agents’ optimal portfolio choice and the equilibrium required return. Agent n’s portfolio
choice problem can be stated as
max Wt (1 + rf ) + θ> (Et (P̄t+1 ) − Pt (1 + rf )) −
θ

γn >
θ Σt θ,
2

(8)

where the variance-covariance matrix Σt = Vart (P̄t+1 ) is invertible in equilibrium (as shown
by (26) below.) The first-order condition is
0 = Et (P̄t+1 ) − Pt (1 + rf ) − γ n Σt θ − ψtn D(mt )Pt ,

(9)

where ψtn is a Lagrange multiplier for the margin constraint,7 and D( · ) makes a vector into
a diagonal matrix.8 Hence, the optimal portfolio is
θtn =

1 −1
Σ (Et (P̄t+1 ) − Pt (1 + rf ) − ψtn D(mt )Pt ).
γn t

(10)

We assume that we are in the natural case in which the risk-averse agent is unleveraged
and therefore has a zero Lagrange multiplier, i.e., ψ a = 0. (This outcome arises naturally
with endogenous interest rates, see Gârleanu and Pedersen (2009).) Let ψ = ψ b . The
market-clearing condition, namely
θ̄ = θta + θtb ,

(11)

then implies that
θ̄ =

1 −1
1
Σt (Et (P̄t+1 ) − Pt (1 + rf )) − ψt b Σ−1
D(mt )Pt ,
γ
γ t

6

(12)

The results do not rely on this utility function. Indeed, preferences are mainly used below to derive
the required return as a margin CAPM, and an almost identical margin CAPM relationship is derived with
constant relative risk aversion in continuous-time in Gârleanu and Pedersen (2009). Further, Cuoco (1997)
derives a modified CAPM for general convex constraints and general preferences.
7
Equation (9) holds if the optimal choice θn is strictly positive, which appears the most natural case. We
state Proposition 1 under this assumption. In the appendix we provide the complete result.
8
For any vector v ∈ RJ , D(v) is a diagonal J × J matrix with (j, j) entry vj .

8

where we use the notation γ as the representative agent’s risk aversion,
1
1
1
= a + b.
γ
γ
γ

(13)

γ
,
γb

these calculations yield the equilibrium price

Pt = D(1 + rf + ψt xmt )−1 Et (P̄t+1 ) − γΣθ̄ .

Letting x =

(14)

j
j
Prices can be translated into returns rt+1
= P̄t+1
/Ptj −1, giving rise to a modified CAPM. To
P
−1
j j
i
>
mkt
θi Pti
state such a result, we let rt+1 = qt rt+1 be the market return, where qt =
j θ Pt
is the market-capitalization weight of asset i, and define the market beta in the usual way,
j
mkt
mkt
).
)/ vart (rt+1
i.e., βtj = covt (rt+1
, rt+1

Proposition 1 (Margin CAPM) The required return on security j depends on its market
beta and its margin requirement:
j
Et (rt+1
) − rf = λt βtj + mjt ψt x,

(15)


P
j j
j
mkt
m
q
) − rf −
where the market risk premium is λt = Et (rt+1
t t ψt x, mt is the margin
j
requirement on asset j, and ψt is the shadow cost of agent b’s margin constraint.
The positive relation between the required return and beta is a central principle in finance (called the “security market line”). With margin constraints, the required return also
depends on the margin requirement when constraints are binding, since the risk-tolerant
agents cannot hold as many securities as they would otherwise. Importantly, the effect of
the constraint differs in the cross-section of assets: Assets that have high haircuts/margins
use a lot of the investors’ capital and, therefore, are associated with higher required returns.
Example. Figure 1 illustrates graphically the dependence of the required return on haircuts
(the “haircut-return line”) when the constraint is slack, as well as when it binds. In the
former case, the haircut levels do not affect the required returns, but when the constraint
binds, i.e., during crises, the required return increases with the haircut.
In the following sections, we consider a number of other economic properties of the model
solved with the same parameters as those this figure is based on. The parameters are as
follows. All firms have production-function parameters α = 0.3 and β = 1 − α = 0.7, and
productivity shocks are identically distributed and independent with mean Ā = 3.3 and
standard deviation 0.67. There are 40 firms with relatively low haircut levels (m = 0.1),
and 10 more firms with evenly spaced haircuts m ∈ {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1}. We assume that the
absolute risk-aversion coefficients of the two agents are γ a = 28.5 and γ b = 1.5. In the
“crisis” state, when b is constrained, his wealth is W b = 7.7, and the “non-crisis” state
captures any wealth level W b > 8.1. Finally, the base-case interest rate is rf = 0.02.

9

0.14
Constraint does not bind
Constraint binds (crisis)
0.13

Required Return

0.12

0.11

0.1

0.09

0.08

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Haircut (m)

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 1: Required Return Increases in the Margin Requirement (or Haircut).

1.2

Investment, Income, and Output

Now we turn to the firm’s optimal labor choice and investment. First, when the old firm j
optimizes over its labor choice Ljt , we get the first-order condition
βj Ajt (Ktj )α (Ljt )β−1 = wtj .

(16)

Given that 1 unit of labor is supplied inelastically, the equilibrium wage is
wtj = βj Ajt (Ktj )α ,

(17)

since it gives rise to a labor demand of Ljt = 1. Importantly, a lower capital stock K — due
to a lower investment in the previous period — results in lower wages, a phenomenon that
plays an important role in the later analysis.
j
When young, the firm chooses its optimal investment It−1
in a competitive environment
and hence takes the wage at time t as given. Hence, to solve the young firm’s investment
problem at time t − 1, consider first the optimal labor choice when the firm arrives at time
j
t with a capital of It−1
, while wages are set based on capital at time Ktj (due to the “other”

10

j
= Ktj in equilibrium):
firms of this type so not necessarily equal to investment, although It−1
1
! 1−β
j j
α
β
A
(I
)
j
t t−1
Ljt =
(18)
wtj
1
! 1−β
j
)α
βj Ajt (It−1
=
(19)
βj Ajt (Ktj )α
α

α

j
) 1−β (Ktj )− 1−β .
= (It−1

(20)

Equation (16) shows that the profit is a fraction 1−β of the output (due to the Cobb-Douglas
production function), so the profit is
αβ

α

j
j
(1 − β)Ajt (It−1
)α (Ljt )β = (1 − β)Ajt (It−1
) 1−β (Ktj )− 1−β ,

which gives the young firm’s investment problem as




j βj
 −α
 αj
j
j
j
j 1−βj
1−βj
Kt+1
− It .
max
(1 − βj )Et ξt+1 At+1 It
j

(21)

(22)

It

The maximum value attained by (22) is Ptj − Itj . The first-order condition is


j βj
 αj
 −α
αj
j
j
j 1−βj −1
1−βj
(1 − βj )Et ξt+1 At+1 It
Kt+1
= 1,
1 − βj

(23)

which implies
Ptj =

1 − βi j
I
αi t

≥

Itj .

(24)

A direct implication of (24) is that the firm’s initial value (before the shares are issued) is
non-negative.
Investment decisions determine profits (i.e., the value of old firms), whose moments can
j
be calculated explicitly given that P̄t+1
= (1 − β)Ajt+1 (Itj )α :
 j 
Et P̄t+1
= (1 − β)Āj (Itj )α
(25)
2
α
α
Σt = (1 − β) D(It )ΣA D(It ).
(26)
In turn, these moments determine the required return as discussed in Section 1.1. Hence,
combining (25)–(26) with (14) gives the equation that determines investment:


1
= D Itα−1 Et (At+1 ) − γ(1 − β)D Itα−1 ΣA Itα .
(27)
α
To see the intuition behind this formula, consider as an example the case when productivity
shocks are independent across firms and α = 1/2. Under these assumptions,
(1 + rf + ψt xmt )

(Itj )1/2

=

1 + rf +

1
E (Ajt+1 )
2 t
γ 1−β
vart (Ajt+1 )
2

+ ψt xmjt
11

.

(28)

1.01

1

0.99

Investment

0.98

0.97

0.96

0.95

0.94
Constraint does not bind
Constraint binds (crisis)
0.93
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Haircut (m)

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 2: Less Real Investment in High-Haircut Sectors when Constraints Bind.

Naturally, investment increases with the expected productivity Et (Ajt+1 ) and decreases with
productivity risk vart (Ajt+1 ). Further, investment decreases when the required return is
elevated by ψ due to investors’ binding margin constraint, especially for assets with high
margin requirements mjt . This cross-sectional effect is illustrated in Figure 2.

2

Haircuts, Business Cycles, and Monetary Policy

We now turn to the equilibrium properties of the economy and the effects of monetary
policy. The model is set up to generate no business cycles in the absence of the credit
frictions. However, when the margin constraints of the risk-tolerant agents become binding,
required returns increase and business cycles arise.
Proposition 2 (Margin-Constraint Accelerator) Absent margin constraints, output is
independent over time. With margin constraints, output, income, investment, consumption,
wages, and required returns are correlated over time, due to the propagation of a productivity
shock sufficiently severe to make the risk-tolerant investors’ margin requirement bind.
Margin-constraint-driven business cycles are propagated through the persistent effect on the
wealth of the risk-tolerant agents. The basic mechanism is that binding constraints raise
the required return, reducing real investment, which reduces the following period’s expected
12

output and income, which in turn makes the financing constraint harder to satisfy, and so on.
As seen in Figure 3, lower real investment reduces labor income and the value of technologies,
leading to lower real investment in the future, until the risk-tolerant agents are recapitalized.
1.05

1

Investment

0.95

0.9

0.85

0.8

0.75
low haircut
high haircut
0.7
−1

0

1

2

3

4

Time

Figure 3: Real Investment Following a Shock that Makes Margin Requirements Bind.

Next, we consider the effect of a reduction in interest rates. While, in New Keyensian
models, monetary policy acts through a reduction in the nominal interest rate, which in turn
reduces the real rate because of sticky prices, we take a short-cut and consider the effect of
reducing the real rate directly. To concentrate on the margin constraint as the only channel
through which different assets interact, we assume throughout this section that productivity
shocks are independent in the cross section and that the constraint is binding at time t. In
the interest of simplicity, we also make the usual assumption α + β = 1.
Proposition 3 (Interest-Rate Cuts) If type-a agents are sufficiently risk averse, then a
cut in the current interest rate increases the shadow cost of capital ψt , increases the required
return of high-haircut assets, and lowers the real investment in high-haircut assets. More
precisely, there exists a cutoff m̄t with mini mit < m̄t < maxi mit such that the required return
on asset i increases and the real investment I i decreases if and only if mit > m̄t .9
The effect of an interest-rate cut is illustrated in Figure 4. A reduction in the interest
rate lowers the required return for assets with low haircuts, but it increases the required
9

More general results hold, but we omit them in the interest of simplicity.

13

return for high-haircut assets. This outcome obtains because risk-tolerant investors’ desire
for leverage increases with the lower interest rate, elevating the shadow cost of capital. The
higher shadow cost of capital increases the required return, and this effect overwhelms the
direct effect of the interest rate cut for high-haircut assets. As a result, the real investment
and output decrease in high-margin sectors.
0.15
0.14

interest rate = 0.04
interest rate = 0.02
interest rate = 0.00

0.13

Expected return

0.12
0.11
0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Haircut (m)

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 4: Interest Rate Cut: The Steepening of the Haircut-Return Relationship.
Hence, to increase investment and output in illiquid, i.e., high-haircut, sectors, a central
bank needs to either move them down the haircut-return curve, or flatten the entire curve.
Said differently, it needs to either (a) target these assets to make them more liquid, or (b)
improve the overall liquidity of the system:
Proposition 4 (Haircut Cuts) (a) If the margin requirement on asset j is reduced, then
the required return for that asset decreases and real investment in the asset increases. The
real investments in the other assets either all increase or all decrease.
(b) The required returns decrease and real investments increase for all assets if mjt is decreased
sufficiently or if the haircuts on sufficiently many assets are decreased by a given fraction.
Figure 5 illustrates the statement of this proposition. The margin constraint on one of
the assets is reduced from mj = 0.7 to mj = 0.5, which has two effects. First, if asset j
is infinitesimal, aggregate quantities remain the same, but the required return on asset j
decreases (and investment increases) as it is moved down the haircut-return curve. Second,
the reduction in haircut relaxes — this is the typical outcome, although the converse is
14

0.14
before asset−j haircut cut
after asset−j haircut cut
0.13

Required Return

0.12

0.11

0.1

0.09

0.08

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Haircut (m)

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 5: Haircut Cut for One Asset.

theoretically possible — the margin constraint of agent b, i.e., reduces his shadow cost of
capital ψ, which flattens the haircut-return line, further reducing the required return for
asset j as well as that of other assets.
Proposition 4 is the central result that underlies our empirical tests. In the next section,
we find that the haircut-return curve indeed flattens when the central-bank lending facilities
are announced, which is consistent with part (b), and that a security’s yield responds to
news about its central-bank provided haircut, consistent with part (a).
It is worth discussing why the central bank can provide loans at lower haircuts than
otherwise available in the market. This assumed ability rests on two premises: First, the
central bank is special in that it does not have a margin constraint — in contrast, it has a
unique access to money that it can lend during crises. Second, while haircuts must be large
enough to protect lenders from credit risk, the funding markets can be broken so badly in
crises — with market haircuts rising as high as 100% — and therefore, the central bank can
offer lower haircuts while taking little credit risk.
Just as is the case with productivity shocks covered by Proposition 2, the effects of policy intervention are persistent. For instance, reductions in the interest rate or in haircuts
change the real investment and therefore future labor income and investment. Indeed, lowering haircuts sufficiently or for sufficiently many assets increases output both in the current
and future time periods. These dynamic effects follow intuitively from the previous propositions, so let us instead end this section by considering the effects of capital injections in the

15

institutions whose investment ability is constrained by margin requirements, or purchases of
assets in sectors in which the government wants to promote real investment.
Proposition 5 (Capital Injection and Asset Purchases) (a) If agent b’s wealth is increased, required returns go down and real investment increases for all assets.
(b) If the government buys shares in asset i, then the real investment in that asset increases
and the investments in all other assets either all increase or decrease. If the government
purchase is sufficiently large, then all real investments increase.

3

Haircuts and Prices: The Effect of TALF

Our theory suggests that the ability to borrow against securities plays an important role in
liquidity crises and their resolution. Consistent with this implication, central banks around
the world created a number of lending facilities to provide collateralized loans at lower
haircuts than otherwise available during a crisis (but often higher than the market-provided
haircut during good times).
The main lending facility in the U.S. is the Federal Reserve’s Discount Window, which is
available only to banks with reserve accounts. The discount window can be used to supply
liquidity to banks in times of stress, enabling them to increase lending to the rest of the economy. However, during the crisis of 2007-2009 banks’ own balance-sheet problems impaired
this transmission mechanism, and therefore the Fed introduced additional lending facilities,
including, for the first time ever, facilities that were available more broadly to non-banks.
The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) is a good example. TALF was put
in place in 2008 to provide loans against asset-backed securities (ABS) at a haircut, available
to any U.S. company or investment fund. The program was motivated by the credit-supply
frictions that we model:
“New issuance of ABS declined precipitously in September and came to a halt in October.
At the same time, interest rate spreads on AAA-rated tranches of ABS soared to levels well
outside the range of historical experience, reflecting unusually high risk premiums. The ABS
markets historically have funded a substantial share of consumer credit and SBA-guaranteed
small business loans. Continued disruption of these markets could significantly limit the
availability of credit to households and small businesses and thereby contribute to further
weakening of U.S. economic activity. The TALF is designed to increase credit availability
and support economic activity by facilitating renewed issuance of consumer and small business ABS at more normal interest rate spreads.” — Press Release, November 25, 2008,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
The original TALF was directed at lowering the haircut only on newly issued securities,
because these securities are related to the new loans provided to the real sector of the
economy. This makes it difficult to assess the price effect of the program since these yet-tobe-issued securities were naturally not traded when the program was announced.
16

TALF was later extended to legacy securities, that is, securities that had been issued
before 2009. The extension of TALF to legacy securities sought to reduce the liquidity
discount for these securities, improving the balance sheet of financial institutions that held
them, and to lower the opportunity cost of making new loans. In the language of our model,
the new-issue TALF sought to move newly issued securities down the haircut-return curve,
while the legacy TALF sought to flatten the curve itself (Proposition 4).
We next describe the events surrounding the introduction of the legacy TALF, and then
we test empirically its effect.

3.1

The Introduction of the Legacy TALF

The first indication that the Federal Reserve would attempt to support the legacy CMBS
market was made in a joint announcement by the Federal Reserve and Treasury on March
19, 2009, suggesting that legacy CMBS with a current AAA rating and legacy RMBS with
an original AAA credit rating were being studied for inclusion in the TALF program. The
new-issue TALF program had its first subscription on the same date, and provided investors
with term non-recourse leverage against eligible collateral in order to stabilize funding for
non-banks who relied on the term ABS market. The US Treasury also announced details
around the securities public-private investment program (PPIP), where the taxpayer would
take an equity stake in a joint venture with selected asset managers in order to purchase
legacy securities. As illustrated in Figure 6, CMBS prices rallied significantly across the
capital structure, consistent with a flattening of the haircut return curve (Proposition 4).
The vertical lines in the graph correspond to this key date as well as four others, summarized
below the graph.
On May 19, 2009 the Federal Reserve Bank of New York confirmed that the legacy TALF
program would move forward for CMBS and released preliminary terms. In particular,
eligible collateral was limited to super senior fixed-rate conduit CMBS bonds with a AAA
credit rating from at least two rating agencies and no lower rating. Despite the fact that the
program did not make junior AAA bonds eligible collateral, Figure 6 illustrates that spreads
for all original AAA bonds continued their rally following the announcement. This broad
effect is consistent with the TALF lowering the shadow cost of capital (ψ in our model) by
relieving financial institutions’ capital constraints as intended by the Fed.
On May 26, 2009, however, Standard and Poor’s released a “Request for Comment” on
proposed changes to their rating criteria for fixed-rate conduits. In the release, the rating
agency suggested that these changes would not only put junior AAA-rated bonds on negative
downgrade watch, but also a significant fraction of super senior bonds just made eligible for
the TALF program. While the statement contained no new information about the credit
risk of the bonds (it was simply a change in ratings methodology), AAA CMBS spreads
retreated broadly following the announcement, since such a rating action would make the
bonds ineligible for TALF. Research groups affiliated with CMBS dealers complained in their
weekly reports about the action, and encouraged the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to
drop Standard and Poor’s as a rating agency for the program.
On June 26, 2009 the rating agency went forward with its proposed changes to criteria,
17

and put much of the fixed-rate conduit universe on rating watch negative. Over 90 percent
of junior AAA bonds were placed on watch, and more than 20 percent of super senior bonds
were also placed on watch.
One week later, on July 2, the Federal Reserve announced the final program details for
the legacy program, which had its first subscription on July 16, 2009. These details clarified
that investors would have to have acquired the bond in an arms-length transaction in the
30 days before the subscription date, a requirement meant to facilitate price discovery. In
addition to a standard three-year TALF loan maturity, the program permitted investors
to take out a five-year loan, which was better suited to the longer-dated CMBS collateral.
However, the loans came with a carry cap that limited the amount of income that an investor
could receive immediately to ensure that the Federal Reserve was paid in full before investors
received one dollar of upside.

3.2

Price Sensitivity to Haircuts: New Survey Evidence

Figure 6 already provides suggestive evidence on the effect of TALF on market prices, but we
need a more rigorous approach to answering the central questions of whether TALF caused
yields to narrow and, if so, by how much. We first examine unique survey data on these
specific questions, and next examine market prices.
In March 2009 a survey was conducted among market participants, including both investors and dealers, about how they would value term nonrecourse collateralized loans provided for the purchase of certain CMBS securities. The respondents indicated that lowering
haircuts could have a large effect on price and liquidity in the CMBS market. The price
effect could be driven by both the value of access to capital, consistent with our model, and
the participants’ option to walk away from the loan. Since we are interested in the value of
access to capital, we focus on the safest securities, which, according to our estimates, had
very small risk on a hold-to-maturity basis.
These CMBS bonds are securities backed by a pool of commercial real-estate loans.
The cash flows from the securities are split into various tranches. We focus on the most
senior tranches, those that have priority in case there is not enough money to pay all the
tranches. In particular, we focus on the tranches that were rated AAA. Even within the AAA
securities, there are differences in seniority, however. The most senior ones — the so-called
super-senior ones — are called A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, and A1A, the next most senior are called
AM (mezzanine within those originally rated AAA, but relatively senior more broadly), and
the least senior ones are called AJ (junior within AAA). The A1 and A2 receive cash flows
earlier than A3, A4, and A5, but have the same seniority, while A1A receive payments from
a different part of the pool as explained in more detail in Appendix A.
Losses in Stress Scenarios. Market participants were asked about their expectations
for credit loss in both a “base case” and “stress scenario,” each defined by the respondent.
Figure 7 shows the distribution of the participants’ stress losses for each pool, illustrated
using a box plot. The top of each box is the 75th percentile, the bottom of the box is the
25th percentile, the middle line is the median, and the largest and smallest observation are
indicated with whiskers.
18

The figure shows that the median market participants generally thought that pool stress
losses would be around 20%, and less than 10% for the MLMT pool. These overall pool
stress loses are small enough that the super senior CMBS bonds would avoid any losses.
Indeed, for the super senior bonds to incur losses, each pool must lose more than 30% of its
value, except the 2004 MLMT pool which was only subordinated at a 20% rate. (Given that
these loans often have recoveries of at least 50%, a 30% loss requires that more than 60%
of the pool ultimately default.) Focusing on the most pessimistic market participants, only
super senior bonds from the 2007 vintage seemed vulnerable to loss. (However, the figure
also illustrates that several of the AJ and AM bonds were at risk of loss in a stress scenario.)
Prices and Haircuts. The key part of the survey asked market participants the amount
they would bid for the bond without a Fed facility (their “cash bid”), the amount they would
bid under a number of alternative financing arrangements, and their guess at the seller ask
price. In particular, the possible financing arrangements in the survey were Fed-provided
collateralized loans with either a low or a high haircut (15 and 25 percent for super senior
bonds; 33 and 50 percent for other bonds) using a loan rate of swaps plus 100 basis points,
and loan maturity of 3 years, of 5 years, or matching the maturity of the bond.
Table 2 details the mean survey responses for each bond and our main finding is illustrated
more simply in Figures 8–11. In particular, Figure 8 shows the price of the super-senior (A4)
bonds. The x-axis has three different haircut options, from low to high: The low haircut
proposed in the survey, the high haircut in the survey, and the case of no TALF program
(i.e., the market-provided haircut, which is higher than the high survey haircut, often 100%
at that time, meaning that the collateral was not accepted, certainly at those maturities).
For simplicity, we normalize the prices by dividing by the no-TALF price (i.e. the cash bid).
This is illustrated for 3-year loans, 5-year loans, and maturity-matched loans (approximately
10 year loans).
We see that lower haircuts are associated with substantially higher prices, and, the longer
the loan, the larger the effect. With a 3-year loan with a high haircut, respondents say they
are willing to pay 6% more for these securities. If the haircut is lowered, their bid increases
to 18% over their cash bid, a strikingly large effect. If the loan is extended to 5 years, the
price premium increases to 33%, and a maturity-matched loan has a 51% premium. This
strong price sensitivity to the maturity of the loan is consistent with a fear of having to
refinance the collateral in a bad market, which was expressed by the investors in follow-up
discussions.
These prices can also be expressed in terms of annualized yield to maturity as we do in
Figure 9. The average yield of these bonds was around 15% at the time of the survey (about
12% above the swap rate at that maturity). Having access to a 5-year term loan lowers the
yield to 11% with a high haircut, and to 9.5% at a low haircut. To put these numbers in
perspective, recall that during the crisis the Fed had lowered the Fed funds rate from 5.25%
in early 2007 all the way to the zero lower bound (0-0.25%). If the TALF could lower the
yields by several percentage points as our survey suggests, then it is a powerful tool.
Figure 10 shows that the effect of access to leverage is much stronger on the lower priced
AJ bonds. In some extreme cases, the bid price more than doubles with the TALF program

19

relative to the bid price without it. This stronger effect could be due to the fact that these
bonds were even more difficult to finance in the market, or because of the value of walking
away from the loan.
To really focus on the shadow value of capital, Figure 11 plots the results for only
the safest super senior bonds, namely those that were significantly over-collateralized, even
beyond the most pessimistic respondent’s stress scenario. Taking the responses at face value,
this means that any losses on these bonds would be unlikely, and in the unlikely event of a
loss, recovery rates would likely be high.
We see that the price effect of lowering haircuts is large even in the case of the safest
super senior bonds, consistent with the program relieving a binding margin requirement
for financial institutions. This interpretation is consistent with follow-up discussions with
market participants in which they described their methodologies. The typical firm used
discount rates over 20 percent even for risk-free cash flows that had to be completely funded
with the firm’s own capital. Finally, Table 2 also shows that survey-based ask prices were
significantly above cash bid prices, illustrating market illiquidity.

3.3

Do Haircuts Affect Market Prices?

Having established a strong link between haircuts and prices in survey data, we next consider
how market prices reacted to the program. As discussed above, yields narrowed significantly
around the introduction of the program, but many other events occurred at the same time.
Hence, to assess the causality of haircuts on market prices, we apply a finer statistical tool.
Specifically, we consider the market response to news that a bond is rejected from use in the
TALF program.
This strategy is based on the fact that TALF was available only for AAA-rated supersenior bonds accepted by the Fed after a review of the credit risk of the loan. When a
bond was rejected, it would not benefit from the program’s low haircuts, and, therefore, our
model predicts that its yield should rise by an amount that is increasing in the shadow cost
of capital.
We note that the Fed’s decision is unlikely to have conveyed private information about
the bonds. While the Fed employed outside vendors with expertise in commercial real estate,
the risk assessment process only used information available from publicly-available prices,
offering documents, and servicing reports.
The decisions to reject bonds was nevertheless news to the market, as market participants
were generally confounded by which bonds were rejected. For example, investment bank
research that discussed the efficacy of the risk-assessment procedures denoted the process as
a “black box” and, following the November subscription, Citi wrote “So once again we come
up short in trying to understand the Fed’s rejection process.”
To assess the impact of TALF eligibility, we run the following regression using weekly
data on yield spreads of approximately 1,600 super-senior fixed-rate conduit bonds from
August 2008 through March 2010 with standard errors corrected for heteroskedasticity and

20

clustered at the security level (omitting the coefficients):
∆spread j,t =

4
X
k=0

crk 1(reject)j,t−k +

4
X

cak 1(accept)j,t−k +

k=0

4
X

c∆
k ∆spread j,t−k +fe j,t +εj,t . (29)

k=1

The dependent variable is each bond j’s change in yield spread during week t, the c’s are
regression coefficients, and the explanatory variables are indicator functions for whether this
bond was rejected during the current week or any of the previous four weeks, indicator functions for whether the bond was accepted during the same time periods, lagged yield changes,
and fixed effects (fe j,t ) for each combination of week and security class. The interpretation
of the coefficients on the rejection dummies is the effect of rejection on the change in yield
spread, over and above the general market yield changes for non-submitted bonds of that security class during that week (captured by the fixed effects), and similarly for the acceptance
dummies.
Figure 12 shows the estimated response of spreads to being rejected or accepted from
the TALF program. We construct this graph by setting the initial yield spread to 300 bps
and then tracing the response to a TALF decision by iterating (29) using the estimated
coefficients. The initial response to a rejection is a statistically significant rise in the yield
spread by over 20 bps, and this effect is reduced to 3 bps over time. The larger initial effect
could be due to price pressure associated with selling by agents who will only hold the bonds
if they can get access to leverage. In contrast, the effect of TALF acceptance is only about
5 bps and appears mostly temporary. The larger effect of rejection can be explained by the
fact that only a small fraction of bonds were rejected (between 1% and 10%, except in the
last weeks of the program), so a rejection is more surprising.
The model implies that financing terms (i.e., access to low haircuts) are more important
when the shadow cost of capital is high, i.e., during times of binding capital constraints. To
investigate this implication, Figure 13 considers the effect of TALF rejections separately for
the early sub-sample (July 2009 through September 2009) and the late sub-sample (October
2009 through March 2010) by estimating (29) separately for each period. The early period
includes what appeared to be the end of the 2007-2009 U.S. banking crisis, while banks and
the economy were doing better in many respects during the later period (e.g., lower TED
spreads, rising stock market, etc.).
Figure 13 shows that the effect of TALF rejections was much larger in the early period.
During the early period, a rejection was followed by a statistically significant 80 bps increase
in yield spreads, and the effect eventually went down to about 40 bps. During the later
sample, the impact of a rejection was smaller and more transitory, with an immediate impact
of only 15 bps. Hence, it appears that the legacy TALF program had a significant impact on
CMBS spreads, at least for the first three months of the program, when capital constraints
were still tight. As liquidity returned to the markets, the liquidity provided by the program
became less important. The dependence of the rejection effect on liquidity provides another
argument against that the rejection effect was driven by information.

21

4

Conclusion: Two Monetary Tools

We model how required returns increase when credit-suppliers hit their margin constraints,
reducing economic activity and propagating business cycles. The effect is largest for illiquid
assets that are difficult to finance in a crisis, that is, assets with high haircuts.
Surprisingly, while an interest rate cut reduces the required return for liquid low-margin
assets, it can increase the required return for illiquid high-margin assets. This is because the
lower interest rate increases the desire for leverage and, as a result, increases the shadow cost
of capital. This effect increases the required return for high-margin assets, countervailing
the direct effect of the interest rate cut.
A haircut cut, on the other hand, always reduces the required return on the affected
asset and stimulates real activity in that sector. This can be achieved if the central bank
accepts such securities as collateral in exchange for loans. Hence, haircuts provide a second
monetary policy tool in addition to the standard interest-rate tool.
While haircuts can be decreased in crises by offering loans at moderate haircuts, they
cannot be similarly increased in good times when credit might be excessive. Indeed, if
a central bank offers collateralized loans at high haircuts, borrowers can simply get their
loans elsewhere. However, in addition to the market-imposed margin constraints, financial
institutions also face regulatory capital requirements that can be captured in our framework
in a straightforward way.10 Hence, to reduce business cycles, a central bank may need capital
requirements in good times and lending facilities that stand ready in periods of liquidity crisis.
We examine empirically the effectiveness of the second monetary tool, studying the natural experiment of the introduction of the TALF lending facility. We find strong effects of
providing collateralized loans at low haircuts. Survey evidence shows that yields on affected
securities might drop as much as 5% during the height of the crisis, illustrating a significant
demand-sensitivity to haircuts.
We also consider the effect on actual market prices of TALF. To isolate the effect of
TALF, we estimate the change in yield following the Fed’s unpredictable announcement of
a bond’s acceptance or rejection from the program. The yield spread of rejected bonds rises
significantly relative to other bonds, and the rejection effect is largest during crisis times
when the shadow cost of capital is high.
This approach estimates the effect of moving certain securities down the haircut-return
curve (Figure 5) by reducing their haircuts. Another important potential benefit of lending programs is that they can reduce the required compensation for tying up capital more
broadly, i.e., flattening the haircut-return curve (Figure 5 and Proposition 4) because the
program improves the funding conditions of constrained agents. Consistent with this consideration, the yields on both affected and unaffected securities went down when it was an10

Regulatory requirements are mathematically of a similar form:
X Reg,i
mt
|θti |Pti ≤ Wt ,
i

where mReg,i
is the regulatory capital requirement for security i.
t

22

nounced that legacy TALF was being considered, down when legacy TALF was confirmed,
up when a rating-methodology change made TALF less applicable, and finally down when
TALF was actually implemented.
The total effect of the haircut tool is thus to move securities down the haircut-return
curve and to flatten the curve itself, reducing the yield on securities, which in turn improves
the credit supply to the real economy. In the data, as in the model, this monetary tool
appears to be effective during crises.

23

A

Appendix: Background on CMBS Securities

CMBS bonds are securities backed by a pool of commercial real estate loans. The cash flows
from the securities are split into various tranches. We focus on the most senior tranches,
those that have priority in case there is not enough money to pay all the tranches. In
particular, we focus on the tranches that were originally rated AAA (and, as we will see,
continued to be rating AAA for the most part). Even within the AAA securities, there are
differences in seniority, however. The most senior ones — the so-called super-senior ones —
are called A1, A2, A3, A4, A5 and A1A, the next most senior are called AM (mezzanine
within AAA, but relatively senior more broadly), and the least senior ones are called AJ
(junior within AAA). The A1 and A2 receive cash flows earlier than A3 and A4, but have
the same seniority, while A1A receive payments from a different part of the pool as explained
below.
The real estate loans in the pool underlying fixed-rate conduit CMBS have a fixed interest
rate, a maturity of 5, 7, or 10 years, and amortization schedule over 30 years (implying a
principal payment at maturity). The loan pool typically includes more than 100 loans, but
the largest 10 loans can represent 40 percent of the overall balance. While the pool can
be diversified by geography and property type, given the balloon nature of the loans there
is correlated refinancing risk. The so-called super-senior tranches generally had 30 percent
subordination at issue in the most recent vintages (i.e. starting in 2005), but had as little
as 20 percent subordination in earlier vintages. In contrast, the AM and AJ tranches, each
which also had AAA ratings at issue, only had 20 percent and 12 percent subordination,
respectively. These bonds have structural leverage given their subordination to the super
senior class, which makes it possible for investors to incur losses of 100 percent.
The loan pool underlying fixed-rate conduit CMBS is often tranched into one pool of
multi-family loans and another pool of all other loans. Principal payments from the multifamily loans are directed to the A1A tranche. Given the involvement of the GSEs in agencysponsored multi-family CMBS issue, it should not be surprising that loans in this pool are
generally adversely selected from the multi-family universe. Cash flows from other property
types (office, retail, industrial, etc.) are directed to sequential-pay super senior classes, which
generally included A1, A2, A3, and A4. Upon receipt, principal is first distributed to the A1
tranche until it paid in full, and then to the A2 tranche. This time-tranching makes the A1
and A2 bonds have shorter average lives (5 years) and the A3 and A4 bonds longer average
lives (10 years). Despite the time tranching, all of these bonds are structurally senior. In
particular, if credit losses on the overall loan pool rise above 30 percent, the allocation of
losses and principal from that point in time goes pro-rata among the super senior tranches.
The survey instrument focused on AAA-rated tranches from five fixed-rate conduit CMBS
deals illustrated in Table 1.

24

B

Appendix: Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1.
portfolio choice is

Given the constraint (6), the first-order condition for the

0 = Et (P̄t+1 ) − Pt (1 + rf ) − γ n Σt θ − ψtn D(ytn ) D(mt )Pt ,

(B.1)

where ytn,i = 1 if θi > 0, ytn,i = −1 if θi < 0, and ytn,i ∈ [−1, 1] if θti = 0. Under the
assumption that W a is sufficiently large, agent a is unconstrained, i.e., ψta = 0, and equating
aggregate supply and demand gives a more general version of Equation (14) in the text:11


Et rt+1 − (rf + ψt xD(yt )D(mt )) = γD(Pt )−1 Σθ̄
(B.2)

mkt
= γPtmkt Covt rt+1 , rt+1
.
(B.3)
Aggregating (B.3) (i.e., pre-multiplying by q > ) gives
 mkt


mkt
Et rt+1
− (rf + ψt xmmkt
) = γPtmkt V art rt+1
,
t

(B.4)

where mmkt
is the market-value weighted haircut m, taking into account the sign y of the
t
constrained agent’s position:
mmkt
= qt> D(yt )mt .
t
Combining (B.3) and (B.4) yields the result in the proposition, given that yti = 1 ∀i, t.
Proof of Proposition 2. Let W̄ b denote the wealth invested by agent b in the risky assets
when not constrained. If the realization of the productivity vector At is low enough, then
Wtb < W̄ b , i.e., agent b becomes constrained and the investment level changes. (According to
Proposition 5, investment actually decreases, in all sectors, under the additional assumptions
that ΣA is diagonal and α + β = 1.) Consequently, the reduced output due to the low
productivity shock predicts a level of output different from the average output.
The proofs of Propositions 3-5 are based on the following three equilibrium restrictions:
The optimality of aggregate demand (Equation (12)), the first order condition for agent a’s
demand (Equation (10)), and the binding margin constraint of agent b (Equation (6)):
0 = −(Iti )1−α (1 + rtf + ψt xmit yti ) + Āi − γΣiA (Iti )α θ̄i
0 = −(Iti )1−α (1 + rtf ) + Āi − γ a ΣiA (Iti )α θti,a
X
1−β i
0 =
mit (θ̄i − θti,a )
It − Wtb .
α
i

(B.5)
(B.6)
(B.7)

Equation (B.5) is accompanied by the complementary-slackness condition (1 + yti )(1 −
= 0, in addition to the restriction yti ∈ [−1, 1]. Comparing (B.5) and (B.6) shows that,

yti )θti,b
11

We use the notation ψ b = ψ and y b = y.

25

since γ a > γ, yti > 0: otherwise θti,a < θ̄ti , i.e., θti,b > 0, which means yti > 0 — this would be
a contradiction. Note the implication that there is no shorting in equilibrium.
If θi,b > 0 for all i, then we have a system of J + J + 1 equations, to be solved for
the same number of unknowns, namely agent a’s security positions (θ1,a , ..., θJ,a ), the firms’
investments (I 1 , ..., I J ), and the shadow cost of capital ψ. We have eliminated agent b’s
security positions using the equilibrium relation θi,a + θi,b = θ̄i , and we have eliminated share
i j
I from Equation (24). The same conclusion holds in general, noting
prices using Ptj = 1−β
αi t
that for every i such that θb,i = 0 an unknown y i is introduced.
Proof of Proposition 3. Suppose first γ a = ∞, i.e., agent b is the sole investor in risky
assets. A decrease in rtf must be accompanied by increases in Iti for some i and decreases
for other i, in order to preserve the satisfaction of the margin constraint (B.7). Iti decreases,
however, if and only if rtf + ψt mit increases. It follows that ψt increases, and that rtf + ψt mit
increases if and only if mit is large enough. Reasoning by continuity, we infer that the results
hold also when the risk tolerance (γ a )−1 is close enough to zero.
A more general result can be derived. In particular, for any value γ a , it holds that,
∂ (rtf +ψt mit )
∂I i
if θti,b > 0, then
> 0, and therefore ∂rft < 0, for mit below a certain threshold,
∂rf
t

possibly equal to 1. If θti,b = 0, then

∂Iti
∂rtf

t

< 0.

Proof of Proposition 4. (a) Suppose first that θtj,b > 0. A decrease in mjt implies that
(1 − θti,a )I i increases for some i, so that I i increases. If i 6= j, Equation (B.5) then implies
that ψt decreases, so that Iti increases for all i such that θti,b > 0. In the case θti,b = 0, I i may
only increase, since θti,b and I i react in the same direction, and θti,b ≥ 0.
If Iti decreases for all i 6= j, θti,b > 0, which implies that ψt increases, then it must be the
case that either Itj increases (and therefore ψt mjt decreases), or Iti with θti,b = 0 increases.
The latter is impossible, though, since it requires that ψt mit yti decreases, while ψt increases,
as does yti (from some value in [−1, 1] to 1, since θti,a decreases with a fall in Iti , and therefore
θti,b becomes strictly positive).
Suppose now that θtj,b = 0. Then either the decrease in mjt has no impact, or θtj,b becomes
strictly positive, while I j increases. The effect on Iti for i 6= j is as above.
(b) Suppose first that θj,b > 0. If mjt becomes 0, then (1 − θtj,a )I i increases for some i 6= j,
which, following the first steps above, leads to a decreased ψt and higher investment in all
assets. If, on the other hand, θtj,b = 0, then Itj clearly increases, while all other investments
are unaffected.
Finally, if all haircuts mit are lowered by the same fraction  ∈ (0, 1), then some product
(1 − θti0 ,a )I i0 increases, so that ψt mti0 decreases, which implies that ψt mit decreases for all i.
Proof of Proposition 5. (a) Equation (B.7) implies that an increase in W b must be
accompanied by a decrease in θi,a or an increase in I i for some i. Equation (B.6) implies
that θi,a and I i are negatively related to each other, so that, for some i, both θi,a decreases
and I i increases.
26

Finally, from (B.5) it follows that the increase in I i must be offset by a decrease in ψ.
For all j 6= i with θj,b > 0, therefore, I j must also increase. If θj,b = 0, then I j does not
change as long as θj,b does not.
(b) If θ̄i goes down, then either θi,a or θi,b must decrease. If θi,a decreases, then I i must
increase (by (B.6)). If θi,b decreases, then either I i increases or θj,b I j increases for some j 6= i.
In this case, then, I j increases, and therefore ψ decreases, which implies that θi,b increases,
which is a contradiction. We conclude that I i increases. Note that investments in the other
technologies either all increase or all decrease. If θ̄i becomes 0, then θj,b I j increases for some
j 6= i, so that ψ must decrease, implying that I j increases for all j with θj,b > 0.

C

Appendix: Data sources

The survey was conducted by one of the authors in mid-March 2009 of eight market participants, including CMBS dealers as well as money managers who traded CMBS.
The econometric analysis exploits a proprietary data set on end of week prices for more
than 2,000 originally-rated AAA tranches of the outstanding fixed-rate conduit universe for
2009, as well as credit ratings actions on those tranches for the same time period.

27

References
Acharya, V. V., and L. H. Pedersen, 2005, “Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 77, 375–410.
Adrian, T., E. Moench, and H. Shin, 2009, “Financial Intermediation, Asset Prices and
Macroeconomic Dynamics,” .
Adrian, T., and H. S. Shin, 2008, “Liquidity and Leverage,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.
, 2009, “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics,” Handbook of Monetary
Economics, forthcoming.
Aiyagari, S., and M. Gertler, 1999, “Overreaction of Asset Prices in General Equilibrium,”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 2(1), 3–35.
Allen, F., and D. Gale, 1998, “Optimal Financial Crisis,” Journal of Finance, 53(4), 1245–
1284.
, 2004, “Financial Intermediaries and Markets,” Econometrica, 72(4), 1023–1061.
, 2005, “Financial Fragility, Liquidity, and Asset Prices,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 2(6), 1015–1048.
Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson, 1986, “Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 17(2), 223–249.
Ashcraft, A., 2005, “Are banks really special? New evidence from the FDIC-induced failure
of healthy banks,” American Economic Review, 95(5), 1712–1730.
Bagehot, W., 1873, Lombard Street: a description of the money market. H.S. King.
Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler, 1989, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,”
American Economic Review, 79(1), 14–31.
Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist, 1998, “The financial accelerator in a quantitative
business cycle framework,” National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge, Mass.,
USA.
Brunnermeier, M., and L. H. Pedersen, 2009, “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,”
Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Caballero, R., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2001, “International and domestic collateral constraints in a model of emerging market crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(3),
513–548.

28

Coen-Pirani, D., 2005, “Margin requirements and equilibrium asset prices,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(2), 449–475.
Cuoco, D., 1997, “Optimal consumption and equilibrium prices with portfolio constraints
and stochastic income,” Journal of Economic Theory, 72(1), 33–73.
Cúrdia, V., and M. Woodford, 2009, “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy,” working paper, Columbia University.
Detemple, J., and S. Murthy, 1997, “Equilibrium asset prices and no-arbitrage with portfolio
constraints,” Review of Financial Studies, pp. 1133–1174.
Duffie, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen, 2005, “Over-the-Counter Markets,” Econometrica, 73, 1815–1847.
Duffie, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen, 2007, “Valuation in Over-the-Counter Markets,”
Review of Financial Studies, 20, 1865–1900.
Fostel, A., and J. Geanakoplos, 2008, “Leverage Cycles and the Anxious Economy,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1211–1244.
Gârleanu, N., and L. H. Pedersen, 2009, “Margin-Based Asset Pricing and Deviations from
the Law of One Price,” UC Berkeley and NYU, working paper.
Geanakoplos, J., 1997, “Promises, Promises,” in The Economy as an Evolving Complex
System II, ed. by W. B. Arthur, S. N. Durlauf, and D. A. Lane. Addison Wesley Longman,
Reading, MA, pp. 285–320.
, 2003, “Liquidity, Default and Crashes: Endogenous Contracts in General Equilibrium,” in Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications II, Econometric Society Monographs: Eighth World Congress, ed. by M. Dewatripont, L. P. Hansen,
and S. J. Turnovsky. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, vol. 2, pp. 170–205.
Gertler, M., and P. Karadi, 2009, “A model of unconventional monetary policy,” working
paper, New York University.
Gertler, M., and N. Kiyotaki, 2009, “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business
Cycle Analysis,” Handbook of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Gorton, G., and A. Metrick, 2009a, “Haircuts,” Yale, working paper.
, 2009b, “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” Yale, working paper.
He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2008, “Intermediated Asset Prices,” Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Hindy, A., 1995, “Viable Prices in Financial Markets with Solvency Constraints,” Journal
of Mathematical Economics, 24(2), 105–135.
29

Holmström, B., and J. Tirole, 1997, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the
Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 35–52.
, 1998, “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy,
106(1), 1–39.
, 2001, “LAPM: A Liquidity-Based Asset Pricing Model,” Journal of Finance, 56(5),
1837–1867.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2),
211–248.
, 2008, “Liquidity, Business Cycles and Monetary Policy,” working paper, Princeton
University.
Longstaff, F., 2004, “The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in US Treasury Bond Prices,” The
Journal of Business, 77(3), 511–526.
Lorenzoni, G., 2008, “Inefficient credit booms,” Review of Economic Studies, 75(3), 809–833.
Lustig, H., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, 2005, “Housing collateral, consumption insurance, and
risk premia: An empirical perspective,” Journal of Finance, pp. 1167–1219.
Mitchell, M., L. H. Pedersen, and T. Pulvino, 2007, “Slow Moving Capital,” American
Economic Review, 97(2), 215–220.
Reis, R., 2009, “Interpreting the Unconventional US Monetary Policy of 2007-09,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.
Repullo, R., and J. Suarez, 2000, “Entrepreneurial moral hazard and bank monitoring: a
model of the credit channel,” European Economic Review, 44(10), 1931–1950.
Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny, 1992, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
Equilibrium Approach,” Journal of Finance, 47(4), 1343–1366.

30

Deal

Issue Date

JPMCC 2006- 6/1/2006
CB15
WBCMT
2005-C21

10/1/2005

CSMC
2007-C3

6/1/2007

CD
CD4

3/1/2007

2007-

MLMT 2004- 11/1/2004
BPC1

Class

CUSIP

Maturity

Ave.
life

Coup Mooon
dys

A-4
AM
AJ
APB
A-4
AM
AJ
A-2
A-4
AM
AJ
A-2B
A-3
A-4
AMFX
AJ
A-2
A-3
A-5
AJ

46627QBA5
46627QBC1
46627QBD9
9297667F4
9297667G2
9297667J6
9297667K3
22544QAB5
22544QAE9
22544QAG4
22544QAH2
12513YAC4
12513YAD2
12513YAF7
12513YAH3
12513YAJ9
59022HEU2
59022HEV0
59022HEX6
59022HFT4

6/12/2043
6/12/2043
6/12/2043
10/15/2044
10/15/2044
10/15/2044
10/15/2044
6/15/2039
6/15/2039
6/15/2039
6/15/2039
12/11/2049
12/11/2049
12/11/2049
12/11/2049
12/11/2049
10/12/2041
10/12/2041
10/12/2041
10/12/2041

7.08
7.23
7.24
2.89
5.88
6.50
6.56
3.06
8.01
8.16
8.16
2.76
4.82
7.63
7.83
7.90
0.46
2.47
5.40
5.57

5.81
5.86
5.89
5.17
5.21
5.21
5.21
5.72
5.72
5.72
5.72
5.21
5.29
5.32
5.37
5.40
4.07
4.47
4.86
4.92

Aaa
Aaa
A2
Aaa
Aaa
Aaa
Aaa
Aaa
Aaa
Aaa
A1
Aaa
Aaa
Aaa
Aaa
A1
NR
NR
NR
NR

Fitch

S&P

Realpoint

AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
NR
NR
NR
NR
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA/*AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA

NR
NR
NR
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA

Perf
Perf
Perf
Outperf
Outperf
Outperf
Outperf
Perf
Perf
Perf
Perf
Perf
Perf
Perf
Perf
Perf
Outperf
Outperf
Outperf
Outperf

% 60+ % fore- Orig.
Cur. % pool % pool
delinqu closure subor- subord loss
loss
dination
encies
ibase stress
nation
6.64
6.64
6.64
1.36
1.36
1.36
1.36
2.04
2.04
2.04
2.04
3.69
3.69
3.69
3.69
3.69
0.44
0.44
0.44
0.44

1.78
1.78
1.78
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.94
3.42
3.42
3.42
3.42
3.42
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

30.00
20.00
12.25
30.00
30.00
20.00
13.38
30.00
30.00
20.00
12.50
30.00
30.00
30.00
20.00
11.13
20.00
20.00
20.00
12.38

30.44
20.30
12.43
35.14
35.14
23.43
15.67
30.07
30.07
20.05
12.53
30.10
30.10
30.10
20.06
11.16
21.00
21.00
21.00
13.00

10.72

21.97

4.67

11.43

13.47

24.24

11.14

20.40

3.16

6.58

Table 1: Descriptive statistics on the CMBS securities used in the survey. These statistics
are as of the time of the survey in March 2009.

31

Deal

Issue Date

JPMCC 2006- 6/1/2006
CB15
WBCMT
2005-C21

10/1/2005

CSMC
2007-C3

6/1/2007

CD
CD4

2007- 3/1/2007

MLMT 2004- 11/1/2004
BPC1

Class

A-4
AM
AJ
APB
A-4
AM
AJ
A-2
A-4
AM
AJ
A-2B
A-3
A-4
AMFX
AJ
A-2
A-3
A-5
AJ

Ask price Cash bid

61.97
42.14
25.07
86.33
76.48
54.10
40.42
77.45
58.39
39.99
22.03
78.75
66.28
62.55
41.47
23.84
95.91
84.31
77.91
46.23

56.96
33.69
21.03
84.81
73.58
46.41
34.82
73.83
52.94
31.02
17.77
76.63
61.58
57.40
33.20
19.99
96.86
84.27
76.04
43.56

3-year loan
high
low
haircut haircut
62.75
70.84
34.12
45.39
24.72
30.40
88.60
92.14
72.00
77.09
46.04
52.61
33.94
43.31
84.57
89.40
59.31
66.79
34.79
39.39
22.90
28.14
85.30
88.56
74.78
80.08
62.37
68.74
35.03
39.81
23.21
28.87
95.20
96.05
87.35
90.68
77.60
80.83
48.27
53.47

5-year loan
high
haircut
74.43
37.97
27.32
88.51
80.81
51.53
38.06
85.35
69.71
39.81
26.04
85.55
81.07
70.26
41.37
26.63
92.46
86.39
82.54
53.21

low
haircut
82.23
51.12
39.12
93.14
85.95
59.41
48.33
90.08
76.35
44.31
31.07
89.11
86.79
75.88
44.94
33.02
94.11
89.27
86.80
61.47

Maturitymatched loan
high
low
haircut haircut
84.79
92.51
49.18
63.04
31.44
44.79
90.55
95.15
86.57
92.51
63.62
72.05
47.27
60.42
88.04
92.56
81.27
89.68
47.24
60.42
29.70
43.40
88.52
93.32
85.89
91.61
80.89
88.37
49.38
59.05
30.37
43.62
93.65
95.06
88.84
92.35
85.30
90.55
61.81
72.33

Table 2: Mean survey response across participants for each security in the survey.

32

3000
Basis points
1000
2000
0
01jul2008 01oct2008 01jan200901apr2009 01jul2009 01oct2009 01jan201001apr2010
Super Senior Tranche
AM Tranche

AJ Tranche

Figure 6: The yield spread on super senior CMBS bonds, riskier mezzanine AM bonds, and
even more junior AJ bonds. The vertical lines represent the key announcement dates listed
below:
Date
11/25/2008
3/19/2009
5/19/2009
5/26/2009
6/26/2009
7/16/2009

Announcement
Initial TALF for ABS, suggesting possible expansion for CMBS
Legacy securities will be part of TALF
Super senior legacy fixed-rate conduit CMBS eligible for TALF
S&P considers methodology change for fixed-rate conduit CMBS
S&P implements new methodology
First subscription for legacy TALF

33

0

Percent of Original Pool Balance
10
20
30

40

Stress Case Projected Loss

CD 2007−C4

CSMC 2007−C3

JPMCC 2006−CB15

MLMT 2004−BPC1

WBCMT 2005−C21

Figure 7: Distribution of survey responses regarding the potential stress loss of each CMBS
pool. In this box plot, the top of each box is the 75% percentile, the bottom of the box is
the 25% percentile, the middle line is the median, and the largest and smallest observation
are indicated with whiskers.

34

Super Senior Bonds
1.60

Price Relative to No-TALF Price

1.50
1.40
1.30

3-year
5-year

1.20

Matched

1.10
1.00
0.90
Low TALF haircut

High TALF haircut

No TALF

Haircut regime

Figure 8: The figure shows the average survey bid price of super senior CMBS A4 bonds
by haircut group. The participants bid the highest price if they have access to a TALF loan
with a low-haircut TALF, lower if the TALF loan has a high haircut, and lowest if they
don’t have access to TALF. All prices are normalized by the no-TALF price. The three lines
correspond to a 3-year TALF loan, a 5-year TALF loan, or a maturity-matched TALF loan
(longest).

35

Super Senior Bonds
16%

12%

Yield

3-year
5-year

8%

Matched

4%

0%
Low TALF haircut

High TALF haircut

No TALF

Haircut regime

Figure 9: The figure shows the annual yields corresponding to the average survey bid price
of super senior CMBS A4 bonds by haircut group. The yield (i.e., the required return) is
lowest with a TALF loan with a low-haircut TALF, higher if the TALF loan has a high
haircut, and highest if there is no TALF. The three lines correspond to a 3-year TALF loan,
a 5-year TALF loan, or a maturity-matched TALF loan (longest).

36

AJ Tranch
2.10

Price Relative to No-TALF Price

1.90

1.70
3-year

1.50

5-year
Matched

1.30

1.10

0.90
Low TALF haircut

High TALF haircut

No TALF

Haircut regime

Figure 10: The figure shows the average survey bid price of CMBS AJ bonds by haircut
group. The participants bid the highest price if they have access to a TALF loan with a
low-haircut TALF, lower if the TALF loan has a high haircut, and lowest if they don’t have
access to TALF. All prices are normalized by the no-TALF price. The three lines correspond
to a 3-year TALF loan, a 5-year TALF loan, or a maturity-matched TALF loan (longest).

37

Safest Super Senior Bonds
1.50

Price Relative to No-TALF Price

1.40

1.30
3-year

1.20

5-year
Matched

1.10

1.00

0.90
Low TALF haircut

High TALF haircut

No TALF

Haircut regime

Figure 11: The figure shows the average survey bid price of the safest super senior CMBS
A4 bonds by haircut group. The participants bid the highest price if they have access to a
TALF loan with a low-haircut TALF, lower if the TALF loan has a high haircut, and lowest
if they don’t have access to TALF. All prices are normalized by the no-TALF price. The
three lines correspond to a 3-year TALF loan, a 5-year TALF loan, or a maturity-matched
TALF loan (longest).

38

325
320

Yield spread (bps)

315
310
305
Rejection
Acceptance

300
295
290
285
-4 -3 -2 -1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

Time relative to TALF decision (weeks)

Figure 12: The price effect of TALF rejections. This figure shows the yield-spread response
of CMBS bonds that are accepted or rejected from the TALF program. The yield spread of
rejected bonds rises after the decision as these bonds will not benefit from the low haircuts
provided by TALF.

39

395

Yield spread (bps)

375

355

335

July to Sep
Oct to March

315

295

275
-4 -3 -2 -1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

Time relative to TALF rejection (weeks)

Figure 13: The price effect of TALF rejections by sub-sample. This figure shows the yieldspread response of CMBS bonds that are rejected from the TALF program for, respectively,
the period from July to September 2009 (the ending of the financial crisis) and from October
2009 to March 2010 (when the banking crisis was mostly over). The effect of rejections is
significantly larger in the former period, consistent model’s prediction that haircuts have a
larger effect on prices when capital constraints are tight and the shadow cost of capital is
high.

40

