NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNITIZATION OF SPATIALLY CONNECTED RENEWABLE RESOURCES
Daniel T. Kaffine
Christopher J. Costello
Working Paper 16338
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16338

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

We thank seminar participants at UC San Diego, Association of Environmental and Resource Economists
Annual Meeting, Property and Environment Research Center, and UC Santa Barbara. Funding was
provided by the Paul Allen Family Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Daniel T. Kaffine and Christopher J. Costello. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Unitization of spatially connected renewable resources
Daniel T. Kaffine and Christopher J. Costello
NBER Working Paper No. 16338
September 2010
JEL No. Q22
ABSTRACT
Spatial connectivity of renewable resources induces a spatial externality in extraction. We explore
the consequences of decentralized spatial property rights in the presence of spatial externalities. We
generalize the notion of unitization - developed to enhance cooperative extraction of oil and gas fields
- and apply it to renewable resources which face a similar spatial commons problem. We find that
unitizing a common pool renewable resource can yield first-best outcomes even when participation
is voluntary, provided profit sharing rules can vary by participant.

Daniel T. Kaffine
Colorado School of Mines
dkaffine@mines.edu
Christopher J. Costello
Bren School of Environmental
Science & Management
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
costello@bren.ucsb.edu

The collapse of many of the world’s fisheries (Worm et al. 2006; Myers and Worm
2003; Jackson et al. 2001) has led to the search for policy approaches to prevent further
collapse and, perhaps, recover depleted stocks (Worm et al. 2009). The failure of traditional
regulation structures to halt this collapse has led economists to propose various propertyrights based approaches including Individual Tradeable Quotas (ITQs), which allocate units
of harvest, and Territorial User Rights Fisheries (TURFs), which allocate units of space to
private firms, cooperatives, or fishermen.1 Economists argue that appropriate assignment of
rights internalizes externalities and facilitates stewardship, leading to sustainability through
a profit motive.2 In the United States, there is growing policy interest in ocean zoning
and marine spatial planning, further motivating our inquiry. Yet for spatially connected
resources, the spatial commons problem may persist, even when spatial property rights
(TURFs) are assigned, monitored, enforced, and perpetual (Janmaat 2005). This occurs
because most harvested species of fish exhibit large geographic scales of movement in some
part of their life cycle. While enlarging TURFs can help internalize spatial externalities,
White and Costello (2010) find that the spatial scale required to internalize dispersal may
be several hundreds or thousands of square kilometers.3 Ocean allocations of that size to
a single owner are unlikely, and as such, consideration of coordination (or the lack thereof)
between multiple owners of a spatially connected stock becomes paramount.
While compelling, the problem of spatial externalities in a common pool is not new. Multiple owners of mineral rights to an oil or gas field, where adjacent owners have an incentive
to over-invest in capital and extract at too rapid a rate, has similar (though not identical)
characteristics. A well-known solution in that context is unitization, where landowners are
contractually obligated to pool profits to minimize redundant drilling and extraction effort.4
3

We generalize the concept of unitization as a possible solution to the spatial renewable resource problem. The idea is that by sharing profits, each owner has an interest in the profits
of other owners, and is thus less likely to over-harvest her own patch for personal gain if it
would harm her neighbor. The conditions under which this system works to solve the commons problem is amenable to bioeconomic analysis, and is made possibly only by leveraging
recent advances in the theory of spatial bioeconomics.
We stress that this is not simply a theoretical exercise, as there are several examples
of such institutions that have arisen organically from historical communal use of spatially
connected renewable resources.5 For example, the sakuraebi (a small pink shrimp) fishery of
Japan is an example of a profit-sharing system across TURFs that was introduced to alleviate
inefficiencies associated with decentralized harvest by three separate TURFs within Suruga
Bay. While the introduction of the TURF system had promoted rationalization within
each of the three TURFs, stock dispersal and heterogeneity had led to stringent competition
between TURFs; this competition went so far as to include on and off-shore violence (Uchida
and Wilen 2004). Ten years of this destructive behavior led the shrimp fishermen to form
the Sakuraebi Harvesters’ Association (SHA) to coordinate harvest between the individual
TURFs. The SHA manages fishing activity on a daily basis, and as a result, only half the
fleet will be engaged in fishing on any given day. From the landed sales, a percentage fee
is collected by the SHA, with the remaining revenue net of fixed costs divided among boat
captains and crew members (Uchida and Baba 2008).
Another spatial fishery of note is the fishing cooperatives of Baja California, Mexico, a
collection of small community-based cooperative fisheries that primarily target spiny lobster and abalone. Several of these fisheries in the Vizcaino Peninsula region have formed
4

a federation (Fedecoop) to coordinate harvest across the spatial fisheries. Each of the 9
members of Fedecoop contribute a 30% profit share to the federation, which in turn provides
benefits for the individual cooperatives. While not a spatially defined fishery, the Chignik
salmon fishery of Alaska featured a short-lived cooperative whereby roughly 20% of license
holders participated in fishing, while the remaining members were idle. Revenues where
then returned to cooperative members based on a pre-determined formula, such that fishing
members received $63,000 and non-fishing members received $23,000 (Costello and Deacon
2007).6
While sharing institutions have emerged in ad hoc examples, no comprehensive theory
exists to help guide the design of these institutions across spatial property rights owners. For
example, can first-best efficient harvest be achieved with unitization? How does the structure
of profit sharing affect the achievement of first-best outcomes? How would design depend on
the biological or economic characteristics of the fishery? Is contractual obligation required?
Or can the unitization scheme be designed to incentivize participation? We address these
questions below.
This work incorporates a general framework of harvest decisions where a number of
owners make decentralized decisions regarding spatially explicit resource use. The general
renewable resource model we consider is both dynamic and spatial; resources grow and disperse. Spatial connectivity among resource “patches” (e.g. fish/larval movement) creates a
spatial externality.7 Unsurprisingly, in the absence of coordination, patch owners will tend to
overexploit the resident stock. Thus, any discussion of efficiency will have to consider both
dynamic and spatial externalities, in addition to strategic behavior between patch owners.
The dynamic aspect of the model is in the spirit of existing dynamic optimization models
5

(Clark 1990), while the spatial aspects build on existing models of “patchy” bioeconomics,
e.g. Brown and Roughgarden (1997) Sanchirico and Wilen (1999), Sanchirico and Wilen
(2001), Sanchirico and Wilen (2002) Sanchirico and Wilen (2005) and Costello and Polasky
(2008). A related literature considers the joint exploitation of a single resource stock by several agents, building on seminal work in Levhari and Mirman (1980) and Munro (1979). This
“fish wars” literature identified a persistent externality of one country on another where the
resource stock moved across jurisdictions, a phenomenon that has recently been corrobated
empirically (McWhinnie 2009). While many of the insights of that literature also apply
here, we extend the bioeconomic model to allow for resource production and dispersal in
each jurisdiction (i.e. a “metapopulation”) and explore the ability of unitization to correct
the ensuing externality across spatial property rights owners.
By exploiting the special structure of our dynamic and spatial game we are able to obtain
sharp analytical results of an otherwise intractable problem. Our benchmark case accords
with the results of Janmaat (2005) who finds that for spatially connected renewable resources,
spatial property rights alone do not yield efficient outcomes, except in trivial cases. We
then consider coordination between patch owners via a generalization of unitization. Under
unitization, each member contributes a share of her profit to a general pool that is ultimately
redistributed across members in a particular way. The details of the levels of contribution
and redistribution affect both efficiency and participation; this is the focus of much of our
analysis.
If properly designed, unitization acts to mitigate the commons problem. Thus the individual patch owner’s decisions appear more like those of the sole owner. We find that
under contractually mandatory participation, unitization can yield first-best outcomes, but
6

only when all profits are pooled. We show that allowing for endogenous participation in the
unitization scheme can still yield first-best outcomes, provided that shares can vary across
participants. We proceed by developing an analytical model of spatially-connected renewable
resources and deriving results regarding the ability of a well-engineered unitization scheme to
achieve efficiency in resource use when participation is mandatory, and when it is voluntary.

1

A model of spatial property rights for renewable resources

We require a spatially explicit dynamic bioeconomic model that is analytically tractable yet
allows for spatial heterogeneity in economics, biology, and the environment. We build upon
the dynamic model structure in Costello and Polasky (2008). Each of N resource patches,
indexed i = 1, 2, ..., N , is exclusively managed by a single owner who chooses harvest in
her own patch in discrete time periods, t = 0, 1, 2, .... Tenure is assumed to be guaranteed
and infinite.8 While our theory applies to any spatially connected renewable resource, it
facilitates exposition to focus on the fishery as an example.

1.1

Growth and spatial connectivity

Stock at the beginning of time t in patch i is given by xit . Harvest in each patch i is a decision
variable at each time t and is given by hit , and escapement eit is defined as eit = xit − hit .
Patches are spatially interconnected, e.g. by migrating fish or larvae dispersing via ocean
currents. The timing is thus: the present period stock (xit ) is observed and then harvested

7

(hit ) resulting in escapement (eit ). This escapement produces young who disperse according
to the following equation of motion:

xit+1 =

N
X

fj (ejt )Dji ,

(1)

j

where fj (ejt ) is a patch specific growth function that reflects idiosyncracies of patch ecology
(e.g. habitat quality) and Dji is the fraction of resident stock that disperses from patch j
to patch i each period, Dji ≥ 0,

PN
i

Dji = 1, where Djj ≤ 1 reflects self-retention (Mitarai

et al. 2009).9 The initial stock in patch i is xi0 . The function fi (e) is assumed to have the
standard properties for all i: fi0 (e) > 0, fi00 (e) < 0, and fi (0) = 0.

1.2

Economic returns

In addition to patch specific heterogeneity in production and dispersal, we allow for differential economic returns. The current period profit from harvesting hit from patch i at time
t is given by the harvest model:10

Πit = (pi − ci )hit
= bi (xit − eit ),

(2)
(3)

where pi and ci are patch-specific prices and marginal harvest costs, we define as marginal
profit bi ≡ pi − ci , and make use of the identity hit ≡ xit − eit . By assuming bi > 0
∀i, we ensure that some harvest would always be (at least myopically) profitable in every
patch. Before considering the problem faced by decentralized patch owners under unitization,

8

the next section derives two key results for comparison: the sole owner solution and the
uncoordinated, decentralized solution.

2

Benchmark results

2.1

The sole owner

Consider the benchmark case where a sole owner simultaneously manages all N interconnected resource patches. Even for a sole owner, this poses a formidable challenge as it
generalizes the standard renewable resource harvesting problem to account for spatial interconnections (via Dji ) among an arbitrarily large collection of patches. By imposing a
modest amount of structure on this problem, we will be able to derive closed form analytical
results. We thus restrict attention to interior solutions where some harvest occurs in each
patch. While corner solutions (where some patches are optimally left unharvested or are
harvested to extinction) are a theoretical possibility (see Costello and Polasky (2008)), we
assume that conditions are such that some positive but non-extinguishing harvest is optimal:
xit > hit > 0 ∀i, t. We also adopt a benign assumption about dispersal:
Assumption 1. There is some out-of-patch dispersal: Dii < 1, ∀i.
This assumption simply requires that patches are in fact spatially-connected, such that
some of the larvae from patch i will disperse to patch j. A violation of this assumption (so
Dii = 1) trivializes the problem by eliminating spatial connectivity, whereby the sole owner
solves a series of N unconnected standard renewable resource harvesting problems.
The sole owner’s objective is to maximize the discounted net present value of profit
9

(Equation 2) across all patches and all time. Letting xt denote the vector [x1t ...xN t ], the
sole owner’s dynamic programming equation is:

Vt (xt ) = max
et

I
X

bi (xit − eit ) + δVt+1 (xt+1 ),

(4)

i=1

which is subject to the biological constraints (Equation 1), and a discount factor δ ≤ 1.
Differentiating with respect to escapement gives the following necessary condition for an
interior solution:

−bi + δ

N
X
∂Vt+1 (xt+1 ) ∂xjt+1
j=1

∂xjt+1

∂eit

= 0 ∀i,

(5)

where the first term captures the marginal cost of increasing escapement (and thus decreasing
harvest) in the current period, and the second captures the marginal benefit in future payoffs
to all patches from that increase in escapement. Because all patches are owned by the same
harvester, spillovers from dispersal from each patch are fully internalized.
This complicated dynamic optimization problem has a special structure, called “state independent control,” for which the first-order conditions are independent of stock, xit (Costello
and Polasky 2008). This allows us to separate the problem temporally, and implies that escapement is location-specific, but time-independent (Proposition 1 in Costello and Polasky
(2008)). This result accords with, but extends, existing resource models with perfectly elastic
demand for which a bang-bang solution is implemented to achieve an optimal escapement.
Because optimal escapement in patch i is constant, additional units of stock are simply
harvested, so the shadow value on stock is simply its net price:
final term,

∂xjt+1
∂eit

∂Vt+1 (xt+1 )
∂xjt+1

= bj ∀j. The

equals fi0 (eit )Dij by rewriting Equation 1 in terms of xjt+1 and differenti-

10

ating with respect to eit . Thus, what would otherwise be an extremely complicated spatial
temporal optimization problem has a first order condition that compactly reduces to:

−bi + δ

N
X

bj fi0 (eSO
it )Dij = 0 ∀i.

(6)

j=1

The optimal level of escapement under a sole owner eSO
it will trade off the present benefit of
harvest against the sum of future growth and dispersal to all patches, yielding a spatially
modified golden rule for spatially-connected renewable resources:

fi0 (eSO
it ) =

δ

PN

bi

j=1 bj Dij

∀i.

(7)

By the concavity of fi (ei ), eSO
is thus decreasing in own price (bi ) and increasing in the
it
discount factor, δ. Note that Equation 7 collapses to the familiar golden rule of resource
economics in the absence of space: f 0 (e) = 1/δ. While Equation 7 provides a useful benchmark, the remainder of this paper is devoted to the case of decentralized ownership of these
resource patches.

2.2

Uncoordinated Spatial Ownership

The other benchmark case we will require is uncoordinated, decentralized ownership of the
N patches. When coordination is absent, each of the N patch owners maximizes her patchspecific returns, taking as given the behavior of connected patch owners. The dynamic
programming equation for owner i is:

Vit (xt ) = max bi (xit − eit ) + δVit+1 (xt+1 ).
eit

11

(8)

Owner i’s choice must now account for the effect of all other patch owners’ decisions on her
value function. The necessary condition for owner i is:
·

¸
∂Vit+1 (xt+1 ) ∂x1t+1 ∂Vit+1 (xt+1 ) ∂x2t+1
∂Vit+1 (xt+1 ) ∂xN t+1
−bi + δ
+
+ ... +
= 0, or (9)
∂x1t+1
∂eit
∂x2t+1
∂eit
∂xN t+1
∂eit
N
X
∂Vit+1 (xt+1 ) ∂xjt+1
−bi + δ
= 0.(10)
∂x
∂e
jt+1
it
j=1
Consider a Cournot-style model where each owner simultaneously chooses her own escapement taking all other escapements as given. Fixing ejt+1 implies

∂Vit+1 (xt+1 )
∂xjt+1

= 0 ∀j 6= i.

This follows because owner j simply harvests the additional stock down to ejt+1 , leaving no
residual profit for capture by owner i. This useful observation implies that the necessary
condition for owner i reduces to:
−bi + δ

∂Vit+1 (xt+1 ) ∂xit+1
= 0.
∂xit+1
∂eit

Because this remains a state independent control problem,

(11)
∂Vit+1 (xt+1 )
∂xit+1

= bi and

∂xit+1
∂eit

=

fi0 (eit )Dii by differentiating Equation 1.11 The best response function of owner i simply
reduces to:

−bi + δbi fi0 (eit )Dii = 0.

(12)

Importantly, owner i’s choice is independent of other owners’ escapements. Rewriting the
necessary condition, Equation 12, gives the following uncoordinated escapement rule eUitC for
owner i:

fi0 (eUC
it ) =

12

1
.
δDii

(13)

Because owner i’s best response is independent of ejt (j 6= i), Equation 13 defines a unique
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium vector of escapements for each owner under decentralized
ownership. This result leads to the following first proposition regarding the efficiency of
spatial property rights in the absence of coordination.
SO
Proposition 1. Under Assumption 1, eUC
it < eit .

Proof. By Equation 7 we have fi0 (eSO
it ) =

δDii +δ

1
PN

j6=i (bj /bi )Dij

<

1
δDii

= fi0 (eUC
i ). Because

SO
fi0 (e) > 0 and fi00 (e) < 0, eUC
it < eit .

The magnitude of the difference between the sole owner and uncoordinated equilibria
will depend on the extent of the spatial externality, captured by the out-dispersal term in
the denominator δ

PN

j6=i (bj /bi )Dij .

The larger is this term, the larger is the wedge between

the sole owner’s escapement in that patch and that which is chosen by the uncoordinated
owner.12 To the extent that uncoordinated harvest is inefficiently excessive (see Proposition
1), coordination will be required to align incentives across spatial rights holders. While it is
true that uncoordinated spatial property rights may fail to completely solve the commons
problem, it is likely that the owners themselves would also recognize this fact, and take
steps to coordinate. We address this topic below, beginning with a simple, yet powerful
coordinating mechanism.

3

Unitization

We have shown that even with well defined and enforced spatial property rights, uncoordinated owners will typically not achieve economically efficient resource use (Proposition

13

1). Coordination may be induced by a Coasian bargaining solution or by other mechanisms
requiring side payments between users. Real world examples of spatial property rights in
renewable resources may involve hundreds of interconnected patches, and thus the number
of side payments would quickly become large ( N (N2−1) ).13 We thus focus on unitization as a
simple budget balanced, fully internal mechanism with no required side payments.

3.1

Unitization

Consider a unitization scheme where each owner makes a contribution 0 ≤ αi ≤ 1 of her
profits to a pool.14 Dividend 0 ≤ γi ≤ 1 of this aggregate pool is then redistributed to
patch i, such that

PN
i

γi = 1.15 A particular unitization scheme is defined by {α, γ}, where

α = [α1 , α2 , ..., αN ] and γ = [γ1 , γ2 , ..., γN ]. For the first part of our analysis, we adopt the
following assumption regarding participation in unitization:
Assumption 2. All N owners are contractually obligated to participate in the unitization
scheme, {α, γ}.
Under Assumption 2, patch owners are legally bound to participate in the unitization
scheme, as is typically the case for mineral rights owners in unitized oil and gas fields. If
αi = 0 ∀i, no profit sharing occurs, and thus the resource is not unitized and owners are
uncoordinated. If αi = 1 ∀i, then all profits are shared (as is the case for unitized oil and
gas fields); subsequent redistribution to each owner is governed by γ. In the general case
(0 < αi < 1) each individual owner chooses escapement conditional on αi and γi , taking
other owners’ decisions as given.16

14

The dynamic programming equation for patch owner i is given by:
Vit (xt ) = max(1 − αi )bi (xit − eit ) + αi γi
eit

N
X

bj (xjt − ejt ) + δVit+1 (xt+1 )

(14)

j=1

with necessary condition:
−(1 − αi )bi − αi γi bi + δ

N
X
∂Vit+1 (xt+1 ) ∂xjt+1
j=1

∂xjt+1

∂eit

= 0.

(15)

Because owner i takes all ejt (j 6= i) as given, from the perspective of owner i, owner
j immediately harvests any additional stock down to the given escapement level yielding
marginal value, bj . That value accrues to owner i based on the dividend, and we obtain:
∂Vit+1 (xt+1 )
∂xjt+1

= γi bj ∀i, j. Combining this along with differentiation of Equation 1 gives owner

i’s best response function:
Ã
−(1 − αi )bi − αi γi bi + δ (1 − αi )bi fi0 (eit )Dii + αi γi

N
X

!
bj fi0 (eit )Dij

= 0,

(16)

j=1

which remains independent of any other owner’s escapement decision. The left hand terms
represents the current period marginal cost of increasing escapement: (1−αi ) forgone private
harvest value, and αi γi share of the foregone harvest value. The right term represents the
marginal benefit: discounted private (1 − αi ) and pooled (αi γi ) share of future value of
marginal growth and dispersal of the resource.
{α,γ}

Thus, we can immediately write the resulting optimal escapement rule eit

as a function

of the unitization scheme {α, γ}as follows:
{α,γ}

fi0 (eit

)=

(1 − αi )bi + αi γi bi
.
P
δ((1 − αi )bi Dii + αi γi N
j=1 bj Dij )

(17)

Equation 17 defines a unique subgame perfect Nash equilibrium vector of escapements for
each owner under unitization scheme {α, γ}.17 How does the profile of escapements under
15

unitization compare to the profile under a sole owner of the spatially connected renewable
resource? It turns out that the escapement under unitization is inefficiently low (i.e. harvest
is excessive) in all patches, as is formalized below:
{α,γ}

Proposition 2. Under Assumptions 1-2 and provided αi < 1, ei

< eSO
i , ∀i.

(1−αi )bi +αi γi bi
P
δ((1−αi )bi Dii +αi γi N
j=1 bj Dij )
PN
bj Dij
simply that j=1
> 1,
bi Dii

Proof. Per Equations 7 and 17, this requires that
Rearranging, this requires
{α,γ}

holds, and thus ei

P
(1−αi )bi N
j=1 bj Dij
bi (1−αi )bi Dii

> 1, or

>

δ

PN

bi

j=1 bj Dij

.

which trivially

< eSO
i .

While Proposition 2 shows that unitization leads to inefficient harvest levels, it seems
intuitive that sharing a larger fraction of profits would enhance efficiency because larger
contributions lead owners to take more account of the spatial externality. This intuition is
formalized below:
Proposition 3. Under Assumptions 1-2, an increase in contribution 0 < αi < 1 leads to an
increase in the efficiency of the fishery.
{α,γ}

Proof. Proposition 2 implies fi0 (ei

) > fi0 (eSO
i ). Next, we show that

implicit function theorem and Equation 17,
the concavity of fi (·),

dei
dαi

dei
dαi

=−

bi γi

PN

δ[(1−αi )bi Dii +αi γi

j6=i

PN

dei
dαi

> 0. By the

Dij

2 00 {α,γ} )
j=1 bj Dij ] fi (ei

. By

> 0. We next show that total fishery profits are increasing in

and regardless of ej . The total fishery present value (assumescapement ei when ei < eSO
i
ing the steady-state is reached after the initial period) for a given vector of escapements
e1 , e2 , ..., eN is given by:
π(e1 , e2 , ..., eN ) =

N
X
i=1

N
δ X
bi (xi0 − ei ) +
bi (xi − ei )
1 − δ i=1

16

(18)

The change in fishery present value due to a change in escapement in one patch ei is
given by:

N
dπ
δ X
= −bi +
(
bj fi0 (ei )Dij − bi )
dei
1 − δ j=1

(19)

which is independent of ej , ∀j 6= i. The present value of the fishery is maximized when
Equation 19 is equal to zero, which yields escapement identical to the sole owner escapement
0
0 SO
eSO
defined in 7. For ei < eSO
i
i , fi (ei ) > fi (ei ), and thus

dπ
dei

> 0. Finally, the change in

total fishery present value due to a change in contribution αi is simply given by
dπ
{α,γ}
dei

{α,γ}

dei
dαi

dπ
dαi

=

> 0.

The intuition underlying Proposition 3 is that an increase in the contribution increases
the dependence of owner i’s profits on the performance of spatially connected owners. Thus,
owner i will place more weight on how her escapement affects the profits of her neighbors.
We have shown that escapement under “partial” unitization (when αi < 1 ∀i) is inefficiently low and that increasing the contribution αi increases the efficiency of the fishery.
This raises the question: How efficient is full unitization (αi = 1 ∀i)? Let eF
i be the escapement chosen by each owner under full unitization. The following proposition shows that this
escapement level will be equivalent to the first-best.
Proposition 4. Under Assumptions 1-2, the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium escapement
under full unitization (αi = 1 ∀i) is identical to the economically efficient sole owner’s
SO
escapement, eF
i = ei , ∀i.

17

Proof. Setting αi = 1 in Equation 17 yields the following escapement rule under full unitization:

fi0 (eF
i ) =

δ

PN

bi

j=1 bj Dij

.

(20)

The result follows by inspection of Equations 20 and 7.
This intuitive yet powerful result seems to solve our efficiency problem: simply constraining all users to fully share profits yields economic efficiency. Under full unitization, each
owner chooses the escapement in her patch that maximizes the joint return of all patches,
which is precisely the decision that a sole owner would make. This derivation yields an
additional useful result:
Corollary 1. Under Assumptions 1 - 2 and full unitization αi = 1, the efficiency of unitization is independent of the dividend γi ∀i.
Proof. This result follows from the fact that Equation 20 is independent of γi .
Provided that all patch owners are mandated to participate in the scheme, each patch
owner’s escapement choice is identical to the first-best choice, regardless of the dividend.
However, while the intensive margin decision of escapement is independent of the dividend,
the extensive margin decision to participate will clearly depend on this dividend. In the
following section, we consider the effects of unitization when participation is voluntary.

18

4

Unitization with Endogenous Participation

In oil and gas unitization in the United States, participation is typically mandatory. Mineral
rights holders in unitized oil and gas fields are required to share profits in a fully unitized
manner (αi = 1 ∀i). We have shown that a similar legal obligation might solve the spatial
externality problem present for spatially connected renewable resource owners. But we ask
whether contractual obligation is necessary for efficiency. Here we endogenize participation
decisions in order to determine if unitization need be mandatory in order to produce a
first-best efficient outcome.

4.1

Repeated play by patch owners

To explore the individual rationality of participation in the unitization scheme {α, γ}, we
couch our bioeconomic model as an infinitely repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma game with N
members. The relevant per-period payoffs are given below:
ΠC
i

= γi

N
X

F
bj (xF
j − ej ),

(21)

j=1
UC
ΠN
= bi (xF
i
i − ei ),

(22)

UC
ΠD
= bi (xUC
i
i − ei ).

(23)

ΠC
i represents the shared profit of cooperation when all players choose the fully efficient
UC
N
escapement levels eF
i . Πi represents i’s profit from defecting and choosing ei while the other
D
owners play eF
j6=i . Finally, Πi represents i’s profit when all owners choose their uncoordinated

escapement, eUC
i , i.e. when everyone defects.
There are many potential strategies to consider, and we adopt a Nash reversion strategy
to punish defectors. Under this punishment strategy, any defector is punished forever by all
19

other owners reverting to eUC
i . Here, if owner i defects during period t, she will enjoy the fruits
of her defection in that first period, and will be ‘punished’ by every other owner defecting
in the subsequent periods. Thus, we can calculate the dynamic benefits of cooperation and
defection as follows. The present value of profits from cooperation forever are the discounted
sum of ΠC
i :

JiC

=

ΠC
i

+

∞
X

δ t ΠC
i

t=1
N
X

1
=
γi
1−δ

(24)
F
bj (xF
j − ej ).

j=1

Defection amounts to choosing the uncoordinated escapement of eUC
i , which leads to a
steady-state defection stock of xUC
i . Thus, the present value of profit to owner i from defecting
is:
JiD

=

ΠN
i

+

∞
X

δ t ΠD
i
(25)

t=1

δ
UC
UC
bi (xUC
= bi (xF
i − ei ).
i − ei ) +
1−δ
The first term represents the first period benefit of defection (choosing the uncoordinated
level of escapement while every other owner is still playing cooperatively), while the second
represents the discounted stream of benefits from the steady-state uncoordinated equilibrium.
Given the history of play, each owner will consider her profit taking as given the escapement
of other owners. In essence, owners will consider the short-term benefits of defection versus
the long-term difference in profits between sharing a cooperative equilibrium and going it
alone. If we find conditions under which JiC ≥ JiD for all owners i, then unitization is efficient
and supportable as a subgame perfect Nash Equilibrium. Whether this occurs will depend

20

on the design of the unitization scheme. Because efficiency requires αi = 1 ∀i (Proposition
4), we focus on the importance of the set of dividends γ = [γ1 , γ2 , ..., γN ].

4.2

Patch-specific dividends

We leverage the fact that our unitization scheme allows the dividends γi to vary across
patch owners. The key question here is: Does a set of dividends exist that 1) encourages
full participation and 2) is feasible? In considering this question, the result in Corollary 1
becomes crucial. Because harvest efficiency by each patch owner is independent of γi , we
can consider the minimum γi , denoted γ̂i , such that patch owner i would prefer cooperation
(equation 24) to defection (equation 25). As long as

PN
i

γ̂i ≤ 1, the share structure is

feasible and yields first-best efficiency for the fishery.
From Equation 24 and Equation 25, the minimum dividend γ̂i for owner i requires:

N

X
1
δ
F
F
UC
UC
γ̂i
bj (xF
bi (xUC
j − ej ) = bi (xi − ei ) +
i − ei ).
1 − δ j=1
1−δ

(26)

Solving for γ̂i gives the indifferent dividend for patch i:

γ̂i =

UC
UC
bi ((1 − δ)xF
i + δxi − ei )
.
PN
F
F
b
(x
−
e
)
j
j
j
j=1

(27)

To explore the determinants of γ̂i , we will adopt the following approach. Consider a
spatially connected renewable resource with N patch owners, and focus on two such owners,
labeled i and j. What characteristics of these patch owners lead to high, or low, values of γ̂i
and γ̂j ? To answer this question, we isolate effects by holding in common all characteristics
between patches i and j, save one. We define the following conditions:

21

Condition 1. Patches i and j have “equi-inflow” if Dki = Dkj for all k.
Condition 2. Patches i and j have “equi-price” if bi = bj .
Condition 3. Patches i and j have “equi-production” if fi (e) = fj (e).
Condition 4. Patches i and j have “equi-retention” if Dii = Djj .
We are interested in comparing γ̂i to γ̂j . We begin by noting that the denominator
for γ̂i from Equation 27 is the same as the denominator for γ̂j . Whether γ̂i ≶ γ̂j requires
considering only the numerators:
UC
UC
F
UC
UC
bi ((1 − δ)xF
i + δxi − ei ) ≶ bj ((1 − δ)xj + δxj − ej )

(28)

We derive and will subsequently make use of the following lemmas:
UC
Lemma 1. Under Conditions 3 and 4, eUC
i = ej .

Proof. This follows from inspection of Equation 13, and invoking Conditions 3 and 4.
F
UC
UC
Lemma 2. Under Condition 1, xF
i = xj and xi = xj .

Proof. Equation 1 implies that xi = f1 (e1 )D1i + f2 (e2 )D2i + ... + fN (eN )DN i and xj =
f1 (e1 )D1j + f2 (e2 )D2j + ... + fN (eN )DN j . For any set of escapements e1 , e2 , ..., eN , these are
equal by Condition 1.
These facts give rise to the following propositions regarding the characteristics of patches
that determine the dividend required to induce voluntary participation.
Proposition 5. Suppose that Conditions 1, 3, and 4 hold, and bi > bj , then γ̂i > γ̂j .

22

Proof. Under the assumed Conditions, Lemmas 1 and 2 hold, so the only difference in the
numerator is bi and bj . The result γ̂i > γj follows trivially.
Proposition 6. Suppose that Conditions 1, 2 and 3 hold, and Dii > Djj , then γ̂i < γ̂j .
Proof. By Lemma 2 and Condition 2, comparing the numerator requires only comparing
−eUi C ≶ −eUC
j . From Equation 13, and invoking Condition 3 and the assumption about
retention, eUj C < eUi C , and therefore, γ̂i < γ̂j .
Proposition 7. Suppose that Conditions 1, 2, and 4 hold, and fi0 (ē) > fj0 (ē) ∀ē, then γ̂i < γ̂j .
≶ −eUC
Proof. By Lemma 2 and Condition 2, only need to compare −eUC
j . From Equation
i
13, and invoking Condition 4 and the assumption about growth, eUC
< eUC
j
i , and therefore,
γ̂i < γ̂j .
The intuition underlying Proposition 5 is straightforward: patches with a higher price or
lower marginal cost of harvest (higher bi ) require a larger dividend γi of total fishery profits
to discourage defection. Proposition 6 hinges on the fact that patches with less self-retention
(smaller Dii ) will harvest to a lower level of escapement when defecting, making initial defection more profitable relative to patches with higher self-retention. Proposition 7 reveals
a counterintuitive result on the minimum dividend required to entice patch owners into
the unitization scheme. In contrast to Proposition 5 which found that more economically
productive patches require larger dividends, Proposition 7 shows that more biologically productive patches (higher fi0 (ē) ∀ē) require smaller dividends to encourage participation. This
result follows from the fact that patches with higher productivity will choose higher levels
of escapement when defecting, decreasing the benefit of initial defection and thus requiring
a smaller dividend to entice cooperation.
23

In order for the dividend structure described by Equation 27 to be feasible, the individual
dividends must sum to less than unity:
PN

F
UC
i=1 bi ((1 − δ)xi + δxi
PN
F
F
j=1 bj (xj − ej )

− eUC
i )

≤ 1.

(29)

This leads to our next proposition regarding the efficiency of unitization under voluntary
participation:
Proposition 8. Under Assumption 1, there exists a discount factor δ̃ < 1 such that for any
δ ≥ δ̃, full unitization with endogenous participation is supportable, and first-best, economically efficient harvest can be achieved.
Proof. The denominator of Equation 29 is simply the first-best value of the fishery in steady
state. If δ = 1, the numerator is equal to the value of the fishery in the absence of unitization,
and as this is less than the first-best value of the fishery, the ratio in Equation 29 is strictly
less than one. On the other hand, if δ = 0, the numerator is strictly greater than the
F
denominator, as eUC
i < ei and the ratio is strictly greater than one. Thus, by the intermediate

value theorem, there exists some 0 < δ̃ < 1 such that the ratio in Equation 29 is equal to
one. For δ ≥ δ̃, the dividend given by Equation 27 is feasible and full participation with full
unitization is supportable, yielding first-best outcomes per proposition 4.
This finalizes our main result: by generalizing the concept of unitization, we have shown
that fully efficient exploitation can be voluntarily achieved by completely self-interested patch
owners and that this result does not require infinite patience.

24

4.2.1 Alternative strategy considerations
Our result relies on Nash reversion as a means to punish defectors. It may be worth considering punishment strategies other than Nash reversion. One shortcoming of Nash reversion
is that it is not renegotiation proof (Van Damme 1989) and punishers may have an incentive
to ‘let bygones be bygones’ and allow a defector back into the cooperative and resume profit
sharing. An extension that considers the potential of renegotiation proof strategies (such
as Bhat and Huffaker (2007) and Cave (1987)) or more sophisticated punishment strategies
(as in Tarui et al. (2008)) in unitized spatially connected renewable resources may prove
insightful.

4.2.2 Practical considerations
In the above analysis, the dividend was allowed to vary across patches. However, as a practical matter, such varying shares may be difficult for owners to agree upon. Fish harvested
in patch i may come from larvae produced by stock in patch j, which may make agreement
on unit shares difficult to come by. Wiggins and Libecap (1985) and Libecap and Wiggins
(1985) detail contracting issues in oil unitization, emphasizing the difficulties of unit share
agreement as a result of imperfect information. The biological systems underlying renewable
resources may make the process of agreeing on unit shares even more contentious.18

5

Conclusions

Spatial connectivity of renewable resources induces a spatial externality in extraction. For
this reason, spatial property rights alone are insufficient to solve the commons problem. We
25

generalize the notion of unitization, developed to coordinate extraction of common oil and gas
fields, to spatially connected renewable resources. This coordination mechanism is framed
within a spatial bioeconomic model with a patchy “metapopulation.” Patch owners then
compete in a dynamic game because owner i’s harvest affects all other owners in subsequent
periods. Our main result is that unitization can serve to coordinate spatial property rights
owners. If designed properly, first-best harvest can be achieved, even in cases when the
resource would be completely destroyed in the absence of unitization. The unitization scheme
relies on two instruments: an owner-specific contribution (the fraction of profits an owner
must yield to the common pool) and an owner-specific dividend (the fraction of the pool
redistributed to the owner). By allowing the unitization scheme to vary by participant (e.g.,
as a function of patch-specific biological productivity or economic returns), the mechanism
can induce voluntary participation by all spatial property rights owners.
The special structure of our difference game allows us to obtain sharp analytical results,
but the analysis is not without caveats. There is an implicit assumption throughout the
paper that the sole owner would achieve socially efficient harvest. While common in the
bioeconomics literature, this is somewhat of a heroic assumption, but it does reduce the
complexity of our problem. Incorporating other features such as ecological benefits or varying discount rates into the spatial bioeconomic model presented here may prove interesting.19
Considering harvest incentives under a more general economic model may also be fruitful,
as would considering the case of spatial reserves under spatial property rights. For example,
might a patch owner find it optimal to pay another patch owner to completely shutdown
harvest in her patch (Costello and Kaffine 2010)? While we have focused on spatial property rights over renewable resources, this unitization scheme might apply more generally.
26

For example, if property rights are assigned on the basis of allowable fish catch (individual
transferable quotas (ITQs)), owners may benefit from coordination on harvest via a unitization mechanism. Owners of ITQ in the crab fishery in New Zealand coordinate via a
mechanism similar to this where owners contribute quota share to a cooperative (“Crabco”)
and profits are redistributed differentially to participants at the end of the season (Soboil
and Craig 2008).
While the unitization scheme presented here yields first-best outcomes under mandatory participation and can yield first-best outcomes under voluntary participation, practical
considerations may constrain implementation, and unitization structures with less than full
participation and less than full unitization may maximize the value of spatial renewable
resource extraction.

27

Notes
1

For example, the 2007 reauthorization of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation

and Management Act allows for various tradeable property schemes. A recent study (Costello,
Gaines, and Lynham 2008) suggests that ITQs have been successful in slowing fishery collapse.
2

See Hannesson (2004) for an excellent discussion of attempts to privatize the ocean with

ITQ’s and spatial rights. Examples of formalized spatial property right systems include
TURFs in Chile, community cooperatives in Japan and Mexico, and the 200 mile Exclusive
Economic Zones (EEZs) established by the Law of the Sea; a famous informal example occurs
in the Maine lobster fishery where harbor ‘gangs’ exercise de facto spatial rights (Acheson
1988).
3

For example, for spiny lobster, substantial losses (relative to optimal management) were

still found even with TURF alongshore widths of 100km, principally due to larval transport
by ocean currents and not because of adult movement. This stands in sharp contrast to the
size of existing TURFs in Chile and Japan (discussed extensively in Cancino, Uchida, and
Wilen (2007)) which may extend less than 1 km alongshore.
4

The problem of unitization and contracting between users of a nonrenewable common

pool resource has been studied in depth for the oil industry in a series of papers by Libecap
and Wiggins (Libecap and Wiggins (1984),Wiggins and Libecap (1985), Libecap and Wiggins
(1985)). They examine the contracting success, and frequently the failure, of private firms
drilling the same common oil field. They generally find that heterogeneity plays a key role
in thwarting the success of contracts to lessen rent dissipation and overproduction.

28

5

We focus here on examples of profit sharing across spatial units of ownership, as opposed

to profit sharing within spatially defined units of ownership. Within a spatially-defined unit
of ownership (i.e. a TURF), profit-sharing can be used to induce cooperation between
multiple harvesters. For example, profits are pooled among cooperative members within the
walleye pollack fishery of the Nishi region of Japan and redistributed to TURF members
(Uchida and Watanobe 2008). The loco fisheries in Chile’s TURF system also use partial
revenue pooling mechanisms within a TURF to mitigate race-to-fish incentives (Uchida and
Wilen 2005). Within the deep sea crab fishery of New Zealand, quota owners have “invested”
their quota shares within Crabco, the sole company involved in the crab fishing operation.
Profits are returned to investors based on the share invested in the company (Mincher 2008).
6

The cooperative was disbanded by a court ruling that held that the cooperative was

illegal on the grounds that it was illegal for a fisherman to profit from a right to fish without
undertaking any actual fishing activity.
7

This feature is present at some life-history stage for many commercially viable species.

8

See Costello and Kaffine (2008) for a discussion of how uncertain tenure affects harvest

incentives for renewable resources.
9

10

The parameter Dji captures larval dispersal across space and will be species-specific.
We leave the exploration of decentralized spatial bioeconomic models with stock effects

to future work.
11

State independence of the control variable also implies that the open loop and feedback

control rules are identical. This result was established, and coined state separability for
continuous time models by Dockner, Geichtinger, and Jorgensen (1985).
12

We make a few notes about Proposition 1 when Assumption 1 does not hold. If fi0 (0) ≤
29

1
,
δDii

the optimal escapement is eUC
it = 0 by the non-negativity constraint on eit . On the other

hand, if Dij = 0 for i 6= j, the optimal escapement is equivalent to the economically efficient
sole owner’s. Without dispersal, each owner controls a self-contained fiefdom and property
rights can be assigned confidently without concern for coordination or cooperation; efficient
harvest will occur for owners solely interested in their own profits. However, as noted in the
introduction, larval dispersal in fisheries is typically larger than practical spatial property
right assignments to individual users.
13

A small example is in Baja California where the 9 spatial property rights owners in the

cooperative “Fedecoop” would require 36 separate annual side payments. A large example is
in Chile where 453 permanent TURFs exist for harvesting an abalone-like snail, which could
require > 100, 000 side payments.
14

Consistent with our assumption that profits (rather than, e.g., revenues) are shared,

Libecap and Smith (1999) argue that production and cost shares must coincide to induce
efficiency in unitization contracts for oil and gas extraction.
15

In practice, the redistribution may not be entirely pecuniary. For example, in Chile

and Japan profit sharing partly pays for science, monitoring, and enforcement. For oil and
gas, coordination is undertaken by a “unit operator” a concept that has been adopted (in
principle, not in name) in some fisheries, e.g. the Chignik Salmon Cooperative (Deacon,
Parker, and Costello 2008).
16

Heintzelman, Salant, and Schott (2009) consider a similar profit sharing solution for

homogenous agents harvesting a common property resource and find that coordinating can
improve economic outcomes.
17

Note that equilibrium profile of escapements under the three cases we consider (sole
30

owner, uncoordinated owners, and unitization) are all independent of the state, and are thus
constant over time. We henceforth suppress time subscripts for ease of exposition.
18

Libecap and Wiggins (1984) argue that the difficulties of agreeing on a complete uniti-

zation contract led many oil fields to adopt prorationing, which created some margins for
rent dissipation, but was easier to reach agreement on.
19

Clark and Munro (1980) consider the case of varying discount factor when the sole owner

deviates from the social discount factor. They find that corrective taxes may be necessary
to ensure economically efficient behavior.

31

References
Acheson, James M., 1988. The Lobster Gangs of Maine. University Press of New England.
Bhat, M.G. and R.G. Huffaker, 2007. Management of a transboundary wildlife population: A self-enforcing cooperative agreement with renegotiation and variable transfer
payments. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 53:54–67.
Brown, Gardner and Jonathan Roughgarden, 1997. A metapopulation model with private property and a common pool. Ecological Economics 22:65–71.
Cancino, Jose P., Hiro Uchida, and James E. Wilen, 2007. TURFs and ITQs: Collective
vs. individual decision making. Marine Resource Economics 22:391–406.
Cave, J., 1987. Long-term competition in a dynamic game: The cold fish war. The
RAND Journal of Economics 18:596–610.
Clark, Colin, 1990. Mathematical Bioeconomics: The Optimal Management of Renewable Resources. New York: Wiley Interscience, 2 edition.
Clark, Colin and Gordon Munro, 1980. Fisheries and the processing sector: Some implications for management. Bell Journal of Economics 11:603–616.
Costello, C. and R. Deacon, 2007. Efficiency gains from fully delineating rights in an
itq fishery. Marine Resource Economics 22:347–361.
Costello, Christopher J., Steven D. Gaines, and John Lynham, 2008. Can catch shares
prevent fisheries collapse? Science 321:1678–1681.
Costello, C.J. and D.K. Kaffine, 2010. Marine protected areas in spatial property-rights
32

fisheries. Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics forthcoming.
Costello, C.J. and D.T. Kaffine, 2008. Natural resource use with limited tenure property
rights. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 55:20–36.
Costello, C.J. and S. Polasky, 2008. Optimal harvesting of stochastic spatial resources.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 56:1–18.
Deacon, R.T., D.P. Parker, and C. Costello, 2008. Improving Efficiency by Assigning
Harvest Rights to Fishery Cooperatives: Evidence From the Chignik Salmon Co-op.
Ariz. L. Rev. 50:479.
Dockner, E., G. Geichtinger, and S. Jorgensen, 1985. Tractable classes of nonzero-sum
open-loop nash differential games. Journal of Optimiziation Theory and Applications
45:179–195.
Hannesson, R., 2004. The Privatization of the Oceans. MIT Press.
Heintzelman, Martin D., Stephen W. Salant, and Stephan Schott, 2009. Putting freeriding to work: A partnership solution to the common-property problem. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management Forthcoming.
Jackson, J.B.C., M.X. Kirby, W.H. Berger, K.A. Bjorndal, L.W. Botsford, B.J. Bourque,
R.H. Bradbury, R. Cooke, J. Erlandson, J.A. Estes, et al., 2001. Historical Overfishing and the Recent Collapse of Coastal Ecosystems. Science 293:629–637.
Janmaat, J.A., 2005. Sharing clams: tragedy of an incomplete commons. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 49:26–51.
Levhari, David and Leonard J. Mirman, 1980. The great fish war: an example using a

33

dynamic Cournot-Nash solution. Bell Journal of Economics 11:322–334.
Libecap, Gary D. and Steven N. Wiggins, 1984. Contractual responses to the common
pool: Prorationing of crude oil production. American Economic Review 74:87–98.
Libecap, Gary D. and Steven N. Wiggins, 1985. The influence of private contractual
failure on regulation: The case of oil field unitization. Journal of Political Economy
93:690–714.
Libecap, GD and JL Smith, 1999. The self-enforcing provisions of oil and gas unit
operating agreements: theory and evidence. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15:526–548.
McWhinnie, S.F., 2009. The tragedy of the commons in international fisheries: An empirical examination. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 57:321–
333.
Mincher, R., 2008. New Zealand’s Challenger Scallop Enhancement Company: from
reseeding to self-governance. FAO FISHERIES TECHNICAL PAPER 504.
Mitarai, S., D.A. Siegel, J.R. Watson, C. Dong, and J.C. McWilliams, 2009. Quantifying
connectivity in the coastal ocean with application to the Southern California Bight.
Journal of Geophysical Research 114:C10026.
Munro, G.R., 1979. The optimal management of transboundary renewable resources.
The Canadian Journal of Economics 12:355–376.
Myers, R.A. and B. Worm, 2003. Rapid worldwide depletion of predatory fish communities. Nature 423:280–283.

34

Sanchirico, James N. and James E. Wilen, 1999. Bioeconomics of spatial exploitation
in a patchy environment. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
37:129–151.
Sanchirico, James N. and James E. Wilen, 2001. A bioeconomic model of marine reserve
creation. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 42:257–276.
Sanchirico, James N. and James E. Wilen, 2002. The impacts of marine reserves on
limited-entry fisheries. Natural Resource Modeling 15:340–400.
Sanchirico, James N. and James E. Wilen, 2005. Optimal spatial management of renewable resources: matching policy scope to ecosystem scale. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 50:23–46.
Soboil, ML and A. Craig, 2008. Self governance in New Zealand’s developmental fisheries: deep-sea crabs. FAO fisheries technical paper 504:269–276.
Tarui, N., C.F. Mason, S. Polasky, and G. Ellis, 2008. Cooperation in the commons
with unobservable actions. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
55:37–51.
Uchida, Hirotsuga and O. Baba, 2008. Fishery management and the pooling arrangement in the sakuraebi fishery in japan. FAO FISHERIES TECHNICAL PAPER
504.
Uchida, Hirotsuga and M. Watanobe, 2008. Walleye pollack (Suketoudara) fishery management in the Hiyama region of Hokkaido, Japan. FAO FISHERIES TECHNICAL
PAPER 504.

35

Uchida, Hirotsuga and James E. Wilen, 2004. Japanese coastal fisheries management
and institutional designs: A descriptive analysis. In The Twelfth Biennial Conference
of International Institution of Fishery Economics and Trade, Tokyo, Japan.
Uchida, Hirotsuga and James E. Wilen, 2005. Harvester cooperative, pooling arrangements and market power. Working Paper .
Van Damme, Eric, 1989. Renegotiation-proof equilibria in repeated prisoners? dilemma.
Journal of Economic Theory 47:206–217.
White, Crow and Christopher J. Costello, 2010. Matching spatial property rights fisheries with scales of fish dispersal. Ecological Letters In Review .
Wiggins, Steven N. and Gary D. Libecap, 1985. Contractual failure in the presence of
imperfect information. American Economic Review 75:368–385.
Worm, B., E.B. Barbier, N. Beaumont, J.E. Duffy, C. Folke, B.S. Halpern, J.B.C.
Jackson, H.K. Lotze, F. Micheli, S.R. Palumbi, et al., 2006. Impacts of Biodiversity
Loss on Ocean Ecosystem Services. Science 314:787–790.
Worm, B., R. Hilborn, J Baum, T. Branch, J. Collie, C. Costello, M. Fogarty, E. Fulton,
J Hutchings, S. Jennings, O. Jensen, H. Lotze, P. Mace, T. McClanahan, C. Minto,
S. Palumbi, A. Parma, D. Ricard, A. Rosenberg, R. Watson, and D. Zeller, 2009.
Rebuilding global fisheries. Science 325:578–585.

36

