NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IDEA GAP IN PINK AND BLACK
Lisa D. Cook
Chaleampong Kongcharoen
Working Paper 16331
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16331

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

The authors are grateful to Josh Lerner, Trevon Logan, and Rosemarie Ziedonis for insightful comments
and to Ajay Agarwal, Bronwyn Hall, Bill Kerr, Fiona Murray, Paula Stephan, seminar participants
at Duke University, Michigan State University, and NBER, and a number of inventors, firms, and
interviewees for their helpful conversations. Funding from the National Bureau of Economic Research
and Kauffman Foundation and from the Vice President for Research and Graduate Studies Fund at
Michigan State University is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Lisa D. Cook and Chaleampong Kongcharoen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Idea Gap in Pink and Black
Lisa D. Cook and Chaleampong Kongcharoen
NBER Working Paper No. 16331
September 2010
JEL No. O30,J15,J16
ABSTRACT
Previous studies have found large gender and racial differences in commercialization of invention.
Using novel data that permit enhanced identification of women and African American inventors, we
find that gender and racial differences in commercial activity related to invention are lower than once
thought. This is despite relatively lower patent activity among women and African Americans. Further,
among determinants of commercialization, the evidence suggests that advanced training in engineering
is correlated with better commercialization outcomes for women and African Americans than for U.S.
inventors as a whole, for whom advanced training in life sciences is more important.

Lisa D. Cook
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824
lisacook@msu.edu
Chaleampong Kongcharoen
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
kongchar@msu.edu

1

Introduction
The two critical endpoints in the innovative process are basic scientiﬁc research and com-

mercialization of invention. Women and African Americans have increasingly participated at
the beginning and end of this process. The share of women receiving doctoral degrees in science and engineering increased from nine percent in 1970 to 40 percent in 2005. For African
Americans, this share grew from less than 0.01 percent to four percent over the same period.1
With respect to the commercialization of ideas, the gap appears to be closing, as well. From
the best data available in 1998, women inventors assigned 51 percent of their patents to
ﬁrms in 1977-1982, and, by 1998, they assigned 75 percent of their patents to ﬁrms.2 Among
African Americans, in 1975, 44 percent of patents were assigned to ﬁrms, and, by the year
2000, it was 56 percent compared to 82 percent for all inventors who obtained U.S. patents
that year.3
Using techniques that allow enhanced identiﬁcation of inventors by gender and ethnicity,
we collect new data on women and African American patentees. The evidence suggests that
disparities related to commercialization are indeed much smaller than previously thought.
We calculate that, on average, between 2001 and 2008, women and African American inventors commercialized 79 and 77 percent of their inventions compared to 80 percent for all
U.S. inventors.4 Between 2001 and 2006, for the largest ﬁrms, patent assignments by women
and African Americans exceeded those of all U.S. inventors – 56 percent and 59 percent
compared to 50 percent. These ﬁndings stem largely from more comprehensive identiﬁcation
of women and African Americans in patent data and from more recently available patent
data.
Related to commercialization, we ask several questions with the new data. In general,
among women and African Americans, what are the patterns and determinants of diﬀerences
1

Authors’ calculations, NSF(2009a),and NSF(2009b).
USPTO (1999).
3
Cook (2007a) and USPTO (2009).
4
USPTO (2009).
2

1

in rates of patenting and commercialization relative to all U.S. inventors? Are there social
and professional networks that are more salient for commercial activity than others? If so,
do these vary by gender or race? Are certain ﬁelds of inquiry better at allowing diverse
patent teams to emerge that may change the probability of commercialization?
From these inquiries we also ﬁnd that increases in advanced engineering degrees predict increases in assigned patents, including to the largest ﬁrms, by women and African
American inventors, while increases in life-sciences doctorates predict this outcome in the
total population of U.S. patentees. Nonetheless, female and African American patents are
associated with a lower probability of assignment to ﬁrms, although there are appreciable
diﬀerences across technology categories. Increases in citations received are correlated with
patents assigned for women but vary by type of ﬁrm for African Americans. All-male and
all-female patent teams commercialize their patents less than mixed-gender patent teams.
Importantly, while we ﬁnd that the commercialization gap is closing, the evidence suggests
that the gap in patent activity is wide for women and wider still for African Americans.
Given the burgeoning literature on the importance of ethnic and social networks on creative and scientiﬁc outcomes, the contributions of this paper are three-fold. First, we extend
the data used by previous papers on women patentees by taking advantage of greater ethnic
heterogeneity to identify gender and by using more recently available data. The share of nonU.S. citizens in U.S. Ph.D. recipients in science and engineering increased from 18 percent in
1978 to 42 percent in 2008, which implies that new identiﬁcation methods could be useful in
capturing an increasing number of patent-holders.5 Second, our analysis uses the new data
to build on earlier work that identiﬁes and analyzes patenting and commercialization patterns among women. Third, to the authors’ knowledge, this is the ﬁrst systematic analysis
of recent African American patenting and patent-related commercialization behavior.

5

NSF (2009c)

2

2

The Literature
For some time researchers have attempted to understand the innovation production prob-

lem, especially inventors or scientists who participate in this process, e.g., Schmookler (1957).
Patenting diﬀerentials between certain groups have begun to receive attention. Ding, Murray, and Stuart (2006) employ longitudinal data from a random sample of 4,227 academic life
scientists and ﬁnd that women faculty members patent at approximately 40 percent of the
rate of men. Ashcraft and Breitzman (2007) present patterns of women’s inventive activity
in the IT sector from 1980 to 2005. They show that nine percent of IT patents have at least
one female inventor and that this share has increased over time. Similarly, Agarwal, Kapur
and McHale (2007), Kerr (2008), and Cook (2007b) examine patent diﬀerences by ethnicity
and race.
Less attention has been given to diﬀerences in commercialization of invention. The research that does exist suggests that patent commercialization activity diﬀers along gender
and racial lines. Diﬀerences by gender were ﬁrst documented by the National Science Foundation (NSF (1995)). Morgan, Kruytbosch, and Kannankutty (2001) use survey data from
NSF’s Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT) and compare activity
related to commercialized products or processes and related to licenses between scientists in
the academic and industrial sectors. They ﬁnd that success rates of female scientists in commercializing their innovations are three and 13 percent lower than for their male counterparts
in both academia and industry. Murray and Graham (2007) suggest that characteristics of
female scientists, such as attitudes toward risk and competition and commercial experiences
play an important role in the commercial activity of female academic scientists. They also
ﬁnd that social networks and venture capitalists’ views of female scientists widen the gender
gap in commercial science at academic institutions.
Systematic diﬀerences in patent-related commercialization activity by race were ﬁrst
examined by Cook (2007b). Using data on African American inventors before and after the
Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, the author ﬁnds that changes in commercialization activity among
3

African Americans do not correspond to changes in the commercialization activity of other
U.S. inventors over the same period.6
While the literature on the gender gap in commercialization is growing, the data used
in existing studies are primarily limited to women in academia and to those with English
or American names. This study builds on the current literature by broadening the scope of
inquiry to include all women inventors and African American inventors and to include new
sets of questions to increase our understanding of their invention-related behavior.

3

The Data
This paper focuses on two groups of inventors - women and African Americans. Patents

are considered women’s patents or African American patents if they have at least one woman
or one African American inventor.7 Female patentee data are derived from matching names of
inventors who obtained patents from the USPTO between 1975 and 2008 to commonly-used
women’s names. Female names are matched using commercial name-matching software,
discussed in the Data Appendix, which includes identiﬁcation of Asian- and Slavic-origin
names, among other ethnicities. Each record from the USPTO contains information on the
invention, e.g., title, citations, and patent classiﬁcation, and on the inventor, e.g., name and
address. This method yielded more women’s patents than in other studies, such as the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO, 1999), because women’s names of foreign origin were
not identiﬁed or may have been underidentiﬁed previously. In total, we ﬁnd 169,061 U.S.
women’s patents granted between 1975 and 2008. Between 1977 and 1998, the number of
U.S. women’s patents in our dataset is 66,967 compared to 60,065 utility patents identiﬁed
by the USPTO.8
6

The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 provides for the transfer of exclusive control of government-funded inventions
to universities and ﬁrms for further development and commercialization.
7
In this paper, patents refer to utility patents, the largest category of patents.
8
Unless otherwise stated, women’s patents in this study refer to patents for which one inventor is a
woman, and the ﬁrst-named inventor resides in the United States. Following USPTO (1999) and related
studies, a patent in which a woman inventor resided in the United States but the ﬁrst-named inventor does

4

In our research, two African American inventor data sets are used. First, the African
American Inventors data set from Cook (2004, 2005, 2007a) is the most extensive datacollection eﬀort of its kind to date. It was constructed by matching African American
inventors and potential patentees to USPTO patent data for the period 1963 to 2006, yielding
1,861 patents and 427 inventors.9
A second data set is created by using the Census Bureau’s (2009) list of common names
by race, USPTO data, and commercial technology. Inventor names are randomly drawn
from the USPTO inventor ﬁle, which contains 7,881,906 inventor-invention units between
1975 and 2008. Using the Census list and inventor address and zip-code data from the
USPTO, we generate unique ﬁrst-, middle-, and last-name matches.10 From this method
we obtain 1,626 inventors and 4,657 patents. Finally, these data are merged with the Cook
(2007a) data, resulting in 6,518 patents and 2,053 inventors, 305 of which are African American women. Given our conservative approach in identifying female and African American
inventors (ambiguous cases considered to be male or not African American), in the empirical
analysis that follows our results will be biased towards zero, i.e., not ﬁnding the gaps of
interest.
A central challenge in this study is to identify individual-level commercialization activity.
Forms of commercialization considered in the literature have often been in the secondary
market, e.g., licensing (Arora and Ceccagnoli, (2006)), the achievement of ﬁrst sale (Nerkar
and Shane, (2007)), having a product under review, having a product in market, or having
a start-up company (Campbell et al., (2004)). We consider assignment to a corporation,
university, organization, or anyone other than oneself a proxy for commercialization activity.
That is, the assignment represents commercialization activity at the date of patent issue.
not reside in the United States is excluded. The authors acknowledge that we adopt a crude but widely-used
measure of women’s and African Americans’ patents.
9
Sources used include directories of scientists and engineers, data from national organizations, and obituaries. See Cook (2009) for a detailed description of the data.
10
Names that have zero probability of being African American names, as determined by the Census list,
are not included in the matching process. See Data Appendix for a detailed explanation of the name-matching
process.

5

Further data on female and African American patents are obtained by matching patent
numbers of women and African American inventors to Hall, Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg (2001,
updated 2009), the National Bureau of Economic (NBER) patent database. These data
comprise the patent number, number of citations, assignee code, USPTO patent class and
sub-class, and NBER-Hall, Jaﬀe, and Trajtenberg technological class.
Many patent-commercialization studies focus on the commercialization activity of federal
laboratories or universities with a small group of institutes or one institute. The measure
of commercialization by assignment to ﬁrms is clear, because the main objective of ﬁrms
is to seek a return on their investment. Some researchers, e.g. Morgan et al. (2001), obtain commercialization data from inventors’ surveys. Data on licensing or commercialization
activities are, however, unavailable on a large scale. As an indirect approach, we connect
potential commercial activity with assignment to ﬁrms with the following argument. Generally, patent owners will renew their patents if they calculate that a patent’s future value is
higher than its renewal cost, e.g., Pakes and Schankerman (1998) and Serrano (2008). And
the patent value should have a strong relationship with future revenue from licensing, selling,
or launching a new product. Using data from 1983 to 2001, Serrano (2008) ﬁnds that the
proportion of patents expired in ﬁrms is less than one in the individual-owner or unassigned
category. Consequently, we assume that patents owned by ﬁrms have a higher propensity to
gain pecuniary beneﬁt than patents owned by non-ﬁrms.
To better understand commercialization outcomes and opportunities, women’s and African
American patents are matched to COMPUSTAT data by using a company-matching ﬁle in
the NBER patent database (2006). COMPUSTAT data comprise all publicly-traded ﬁrms
on the New York, American, NASDAQ, and regional stock exchanges in the U.S. We expect
ﬁrms in the COMPUSTAT data set to engage in higher levels of patent commercialization
relative to other ﬁrms. Between 1976 and 2006, there were 841,341 patents assigned to
COMPUSTAT ﬁrms out of 1,748,776 U.S.-origin patents. Women and African Americans
assigned 78,938 and 1,808 of their patents to COMPUSTAT ﬁrms.

6

4

Graphical Evidence
Prior to inspecting and testing data on commercialization of patents, we begin by sum-

marizing data from the revised data on women inventors and new data on African American
inventors. To recall, the central questions are: Has the gender gap in commercialization
remained, or has it closed over time? Is there evidence that African Americans are becoming
more active in the process of commercializing new technologies?

General
Figures 2 and 3 and Table 1A present patents per million obtained by U.S. inventors, U.S.
women inventors, and African American inventors. Since the mid-1980’s, the populationweighted number of patents has increased for all three groups. On average, U.S. inventors
were granted 168 patents per million between 1980 and 1989 and 278 patents per million
annually between 1990 and 1999. Over time, the share of advanced degrees in science and
engineering (S&E) ﬁelds has risen for women and African Americans. Figures 4 and 5 show
that the largest share of S&E doctorates among women and African Americans has been in
the life sciences, but there is signiﬁcant heterogeneity otherwise. Data on the distribution
of patents by technological ﬁeld and assignment status for each inventor group are given in
Tables 1B, 1C, and 1D and Figures 6 to 8. Fields of invention are broadly similar for U.S.
and African American inventors and are only similar in computers and communications and
other ﬁelds for U.S. and female inventors.
Related to ownership, the proportion of patents assigned to ﬁrms is relatively stable
for U.S. inventors between 1963 and 2008 as can be seen in Figures 9 to 11 and Table
1C, which gives the evolution of assignment behavior by decade. For women and African
Americans, shares of patents assigned to ﬁrms have increased markedly since 1963. Evidence
from assignment to COMPUSTAT ﬁrms is in Figure 12 and in Table 1D and shows that the
share of total U.S. patents assigned to publicly-traded corporations declined slightly from 50

7

percent between 1976 and 1980 to 47 percent for the period between 1996 and 2000. These
data imply that U.S. inventors are increasingly less likely to rely on large corporations to
pursue commercialization of invention.
Forward citations and backward citations for each group are presented by technology
category in Figures 13 and 14.11 Forward citations of U.S. inventors, U.S. women inventors,
and African American inventors are similar and growing over the period of study.

Women
Changes in patent activity among women have been in tandem with changes among U.S.
inventors. U.S. women inventors were granted between 17 patents per million between 1980
and 1989 and 56 patents per million annually between 1990 and 1999. On average, women
inventors participate more actively in the drugs and medical ﬁeld than other U.S. inventors.
This observation is consistent with relatively higher shares of women receiving life sciences
degrees and relatively lower shares receiving engineering degrees since 1970 (Figure 4). The
share of electrical inventions among women’s patents is six percentage points lower than that
of U.S. inventors between 1975 and 2008. The share of chemical patents for female inventors
drops slightly over time but is still higher than for that of U.S. inventors.
The average annual share of women’s patents assigned to ﬁrms increased from 54 percent
between 1975 and 1980 to 79 percent between 2001 and 2008. The share of unassigned
women’s patents dropped from 39 percent between 1975 and 1980 to 12 percent between 2001
and 2008. In contrast to U.S. trends, the share of female patents assigned to COMPUSTAT
ﬁrms grew in the late 1970’s and early 1980’s and has stayed above 50 percent. Similar
to the U.S., individuals, government, and other non-ﬁrm entities own 26 percent of patents
granted to women inventors over the period 1963 to 2008.
11

Citations received in the NBER data set are weighted by the method proposed in Hall, Jaﬀe and
Trajtenberg (2001, updated 2009). Citations made are calculated from citations among patents granted
between 1976 and 2006 using the NBER U.S. patent citations data set.

8

Considering each technology, quality, as measured by the median number of citations
for patents, is increasing in tandem with those of all U.S. inventors. However, since 1980,
the median number of citations received for women’s patents has been higher than for U.S.
inventors’ patents for most technology categories, except drugs and medical.
Single-sex and mixed patent teams perform very diﬀerently. From Table Appendix 1,
we observe that female-only teams assign their patents to ﬁrms only 42 percent of the time,
compared to 74 and 80 percent for all-male and mixed teams. Moreover, more than half
of female-only patents are not assigned to any organization, while just one ﬁfth and onetenth of all-male- and mixed-gender-team patents are not assigned to any organization.
Further, all-female patents are less commercialized in drugs and medical, mechanical, and
other technological categories than in chemical and computer and communications. The
ﬁnding that the assignment rate to ﬁrms is higher for mixed-gender teams than single-gender
teams is consistent with but a more general ﬁnding than that of Ashcraft and Breitzman
(2007), who ﬁnd a similar pattern among IT patents.

African Americans
Corresponding to patent activity for U.S. inventors and women inventors, the populationweighted number of patents has increased for African Americans. African American inventors
obtained between 3.7 and 4.5 patents per million between 1980 to 1989 and 1990 to 1999.
This ﬁnding is intuitive, given signiﬁcant increases in the supply of potential patentees, e.g.,
advanced degree recipients in the sciences, among African Americans. For African American
inventors, the distribution of ﬁelds of invention mirrors that of all U.S. inventors. This
observation also corresponds to shares of African Americans receiving science and engineering
degrees (Figure 5). As is the case for women, the share of chemical patents falls slightly but
is still higher than that of U.S. inventors.
The average annual share of African American patents assigned to ﬁrms was relatively
unchanged at 60 percent between 1963 and 1990 but jumped to 77 percent between 2001
9

and 2008. Assignment patterns by organization are not uniform across groups. Individuals,
government, and other non-ﬁrm entities own 33 percent of African American patents, which
is substantially higher than the share for women and U.S. inventors between 1963 and 2008.
Quality, as measured by the median number of citations for African American patents,
is increasing, which is consistent with those of women and all U.S. inventors.
From the initial evidence, we do not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant commercialization gap for the most
valuable ﬁrms. From a t-test of mean shares of patents assigned to COMPUSTAT ﬁrms,
we can reject the null hypothesis that the U.S. mean is greater than or equal to the mean
for women and for African Americans. Given the aforementioned signiﬁcant increase in the
number of women patentees gleaned using new methods, the gap closes at least partly as a
result of including women with non-English names in the analysis, which has not been done in
previous work. While this ﬁnding is diﬀerent from most in the literature, it is consistent with
the ﬁndings of Morgan et al. (2001). They use the National Science Foundation workforce
survey data to show that, conditional on a patent being granted, rates of commercialization
between men’s and women’s patents are similar, although not identical.
Nonetheless, a similar test of means for patent activity and general assigned-patent activity reveals signiﬁcant diﬀerences across groups. We reject the null hypothesis that the
U.S. means are less than or equal to those of women and African Americans. The evidence
implies that the broader patent and commercialization gaps are not yet closed.

5

Empirical Evidence
In this section, we extend the analysis to ask if the gaps found above persist when

accounting for other factors. Speciﬁcally, we will test whether determinants of patent and
innovative activity diﬀer across groups for patents, assigned patents, and patents assigned to
COMPUSTAT ﬁrms. With the new data on women and African Americans, we can proceed
by estimating standard models of patent activity from the literature.

10

Following Griliches (1990), in the knowledge production function innovative activity,
measured by patents, is determined by observable investment, e.g., R&D expenditure, or
number of research scientists, and unobservable error. Many researchers have tested this
relation between innovative activity and inputs using ﬁrm-level data, e.g., Hall, Griliches,
and Hausman (1986), and Pakes and Griliches (1984). Aggregate innovative activity using
country-level data has also been studied.
Chellaraj, Maskus, and Mattoo (2009) modify the “national ideas production function”
proposed by Porter and Stern (2000) to incorporate the contribution of skilled immigration
and foreign graduate students to U.S. innovative activity. Chellaraj, Maskus and Mattoo
(2009) propose an approach to disentangle the allocation-of-resources variable into R&D
expenditure, stock of scientists and engineers, ﬂow of total graduate students, ﬂow of international graduate students, and ﬂow of immigrants. We adopt the Chellaraj, Maskus
and Mattoo (2009) model to study patterns of patenting activity for all U.S. inventors,
U.S. women inventors, and African American inventors. Speciﬁcally, the R&D resources we
use are R&D expenditure, number of employed S&E doctoral researchers, and number of
doctoral graduates.
To formally test the implications of Chellaraj et al. (2009), two types of data are used
to investigate patent and commercialization activity for each inventor group. We use timeseries data to explain changes in patent and commercialization over time. We then use
cross-section data and discrete-choice analysis to better account for unobserved heterogeneity
among inventor groups.

A. Time-Series Estimation
Patent Activity
We would like to answer the question: “Are there observable diﬀerences in patenting
and commercial activity between inventor groups over time?” Speciﬁcally, we estimate the

11

following time-series model for each group:
P AT EN Tt = α + β1 RDt−1 + β2 SEEM Pt−1 + β3 SEGRADt−1
(1)
+ β4 EN GM GRADt−1 + β5 DU M M Yt + β6 T IM Et + ϵt ,
where P AT EN Tt is log of U.S. patents granted by application year, RDt−1 is lag of log of
total U.S. R&D expenditure (deﬂated), SEEM Pt−1 is lag of log of employed doctorate scientists and engineers, SEGRADt−1 is lag of log of S&E PhD graduates, and EN GM GRADt−1
is lag of log of engineering Master’s graduates. All variables are weighted by population.12
Following Griliches (1990), each variable is lagged one year to capture time to innovate.13,14
Models estimated include time trend and a dummy for extension to a 20-year patent term
in 1995, which is believed to have induced a sizeable increase in the number of patent applications.
Data used in estimation are patents granted between 1976 and 2008. As is customary, we
drop the last four application years to avoid truncation lag problems.15 Baseline statistics
for each variable are given in Table 2. A Phillips and Perron (1988) test is used to determine
the presence of a unit root. We ﬁnd evidence of a unit root in the patent sample, and each
variable is ﬁrst-diﬀerenced before OLS models are estimated. OLS regressions are executed
for U.S., U.S. women, and African American inventors to shed light on diﬀerences among
these three inventor groups.16
The endogeneity bias problem in R&D expenditure is well known in the literature. Fol-

12

See Data Appendix for data sources.
Chellaraj, Maskus, and Mattoo (2009) suggest ﬁve- and seven- year lags for models with patent applications and grants, respectively, as the dependent variable.
14
Dummies for years 1980 and 1984 are included to capture the eﬀect of the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and its
amendment which allow universities to retain intellectual property rights and to license innovation developed
by federal funds.
15
The range of the African American data set from Cook (2007a) is shorter, between 1976 and 2002.
16
Baseline statistics are reported for four samples of African American inventors. Data from Cook (2007a)
are the AA1 sample, data from commercial encoding are the AA2 sample, and the combined AA1 and AA2
samples are the AA3 sample. The AA4 sample is the AA3 sample plus African-origin names. Results do
not diﬀer substantially between those obtained among samples. Therefore, results from the combined AA4
sample are the ones generally reported. The combined sample drops duplicate patents.
13

12

lowing Kanwar and Evenson (2009) and Liu and La Croix (2008), we execute two-stage least
squares estimation (2SLS) using lag of log of GDP per capita (GDP P Ct−1 ), high-school enrollment rate (HSERt ), and degree-institution enrollment rate (DIERt ) as instruments.17
The ﬁrst-stage equation is

RDt = γ1 + γ2 GDP P Ct−1 + γ3 HSERt + γ4 DIERt + ϵt .

(2)

From Table 3, for U.S. inventors, a one-percent increase in the growth rate of engineering
doctorates is correlated with a 0.74-percent increase in the growth rate of patent activity.
The results from 2SLS estimation mirror the results from OLS, and this result is robust
across models estimated in the full sample.
We use multiple inventors’ discounting to assign the same weight to each patent.18
Women’s patent activity measured by multiple inventors’ discounting is presented in the
fourth and eighth columns of Table 3 (summary statistics for all groups appear in Table
1A). The results are similar to those without discounting.
In equation (1), we establish context for examining commercialization activity by ﬁrst examining patent activity in each group. To address patent diﬀerences across inventor groups,
we deﬁne the dependent variable as the diﬀerence in U.S. inventor patents per million and
each group’s patents per million. Estimates are presented in Table 4. For African Americans,
a one-percent increase in the growth rate of doctoral S&E employment is correlated with a
1.4-percent decrease in the growth rate of the diﬀerence between U.S. inventors’ and African
American patent activity. This implies that an increase in African American doctoral S&E
employment narrows the gap between U.S. inventors and African American patent activities.

17

See Data Appendix for data sources. Kanwar and Evenson (2009) argue that we expect enrollment rate
to change with scientiﬁc development or R&D expenditure but not patenting activity.
18
Computation of fractional contribution to a patent using multiple inventors’ discounting has been executed in the literature, e.g., in Ashcraft and Breitzman (2007) and Kerr (2009). The interpretation should
be that if one of six inventors on a patent team is a woman, the patent is one sixth of a woman’s patent.

13

Commercialization Activity
Patterns of commercial activity, measured by number of patents assigned to ﬁrms and
number of patents assigned to ﬁrms in COMPUSTAT, are investigated and presented in this
section. Patent activity by ﬁrms is assumed to be driven by proﬁtability.19 In the Griliches
(1990) knowledge model, proﬁtability is one of the ultimate ends of knowledge and depends
on valuable knowledge growth, which is unobservable. Additions to the stock of knowledge
rely on R&D resource allocation, or R&D expenditure. A simple model can be derived from
Griliches (1990) in which proﬁtability is a function of R&D allocation. Using this simple
relationship, we can write down the model to be estimated for commercial activity as in the
previous section:
ASSIGN M EN Tt = α + β1 IN DRDt−1 + β2 SEEM Pt−1 + β3 SEGRADt−1
(3)
+ β4 EN GM GRADt−1 + β5 DU M M Yt + β6 T IM Et + ϵt ,
where ASSIGN M EN Tt is log of percentage of patents assigned to ﬁrms by application year
and IN DRDt−1 is lag of log of U.S. R&D spending in the industrial sector. The results for
assignment to ﬁrms are presented in Table 5. After controlling for policy change, a 10-percent
increase in the growth rate of industrial R&D expenditure is associated with a 0.7-percent
increase in the growth rate of assignment to ﬁrms for U.S.-inventor patents. A 10-percent
increase in the growth rate of life-science doctorates is correlated with a 1.8-percent increase
in the growth rate of U.S. patents assigned to ﬁrms. For women inventors, a 10-percent
increase in the growth rate of physical-science Ph.D.’s is correlated with a 1.5-or 1.8-percent
decrease in the growth rate of patents assigned to ﬁrms. Among African Americans, a
10-percent increase in the rate of growth of physical science Ph.D.’s is correlated with a
1.9- or 1.7-percent increase in the rate of growth of assigned patents. In contrast, a 10percent increase in the growth rate of African American life-science doctorates is correlated
with a decline of 5 percent in the growth rate of African American patents assigned to
19

Other factors, e.g., defensive patenting, as in Hall and Ziedonis (2001), are omitted in this analysis.

14

ﬁrms. A review of NSF 2003 survey data on employment in S&E disciplines shows that 37
percent of African American Ph.D.’s employed as biological scientists teach at postsecondary
institutions, while only 17 percent of African Americans employed as physical scientists
teach at postsecondary institutions.20 Since the lion’s share of patenting occurs at industrial
laboratories, i.e., not at postsecondary institutions, and since most of that activity is assigned
to ﬁrms, a negative relation between the rate of arrival of life-science doctorates and the rate
of arrival of assigned patents is not surprising.
In line with Griliches (1990) and related papers, we ﬁnd that a one-percent increase in
the growth rate of expenditure on industrial R&D is associated with a 1.1-percent increase
in the growth rate of assignment to ﬁrms.21 A 10-percent increase in the growth rate of
master’s in engineering graduates is correlated with a 9.5-percent increase in the growth
rate of assignment for African American inventors. These results suggest that there may be
relatively more or fewer scientiﬁc or commercial spillovers for African American inventors in
certain ﬁelds of invention. For 2SLS estimation, the correlations between R&D expenditure
and growth rate of assignment are statistically insigniﬁcant. Estimated coeﬃcients on other
independent variables are similar to those from OLS estimation.
Estimates from the sample of COMPUSTAT ﬁrms are presented in Table 6. For African
Americans, an increase of 10 percent in the growth rate of engineering doctorates is correlated
with an increase of 1.4 or 1.5 percent in the growth rate of assignment to COMPUSTAT
ﬁrms. Other results remain largely the same as for all assigned patents.
Diﬀerences in commercialization activity, measured by percentage of U.S. inventors’
patents assigned to ﬁrms (or COMPUSTAT ﬁrms) minus percentage of each group’s patents
assigned to ﬁrms (or COMPUSTAT ﬁrms), are presented in Tables 7 and 8. Results from
Tables 7 and 8 are consistent with those from Tables 5 and 6. These results are suggestive
that advanced engineering degrees may play an important role in closing gaps between U.S.
20

NSF (2007a).
In general, given a shorter time series than that used by Griliches (1990), Chelleraj, et al. (2009), and
others estimating the relation between patent output and measures of R&D, we expect that our results may
be similar but not identical to these papers.
21

15

inventors and each group examined.
Older and newer results from the literature on women in science and engineering may
shed light additional light on our ﬁndings. A number of papers document relatively higher
exit rates, rates of departure from degreed ﬁeld of study, among women compared to men
in science and engineering, e.g., Hall (2007), Hewlett, et al. (2008), Hill, et al. (2010),
Hunt (2010), Morgan (2000), Preston (1994, 2004, 2006), Sonnert and Holton (1995), and
Stephan and Levin (2005). Among the explanations given are isolation related to being a
minority with less mentoring and fewer networks, diﬃculty of balancing extended work days
in science and engineering with family commitments, and discrimination, including negative
stereotypes associated with women in science. Hunt (2010) ﬁnds that excess exit rates among
women are concentrated in engineering and that this is largely due to dissatisfaction over
pay and promotion opportunities. Given higher exit rates in science and engineering and
especially engineering, it is likely that these constraints are less binding for those “survivors”
who remain in corporate laboratories, where it can be assumed that much patent-related
work is done. If the perception is that the contributions of “survivors” are highly valued,
the correlation between assignment to COMPUSTAT ﬁrms and the presence of a woman on
a patent is not surprising.
Both NSF data and the literature suggest that explanations oﬀered for outcomes for
women may extend to African Americans. In general, exit rates are higher for African
American doctorates in S&E ﬁelds than for their counterparts. The 2003 NSF survey also
establishes that, 35 percent of African American S&E doctorates were employed in non-S&E
occupations, in comparison to 25 percent of all S&E doctorates. Further, unlike women in
the larger S&E population, African American women constitute the majority of total African
American S&E graduates. In addition, women make up 45 percent of all African American
doctorates who are employed in S&E occupations, while women make up only 28 percent
of all doctorates in the total S&E occupations. While the research on African Americans
is limited, related work, e.g., Price’s (2009) study of the economics profession, also suggests

16

that the literature on women S&E graduates may be applicable to African Americans.
Given limited comparable data and scholarship on African Americans and to shed light on
the mechanisms underlying our ﬁndings, between 2003 and 2009 we conducted interviews in
a small sample of African Americans. Those in the sample have at least one of the following
characteristics: patentee, entrepreneur, former employee of a government laboratory, former
employee in S&E ﬁeld, or current employee in S&E ﬁeld.22 Two thirds are entrepreneurs, the
majority of whom have ﬁrms related to self-generated patents or other forms of intellectual
property (IP) or licenses for the use of another ﬁrm’s intellectual property. One entrepreneur
notwithstanding, all have training in math or science, which was not a selection criterion.
There are two signiﬁcant ﬁndings from the interviews. First, social, professional, and ﬁnancial networks for inventive and business activities were cited as important but often missing.
This ﬁnding is broadly consistent with the evidence from data on black business ownership
and performance from Fairlie and Robb (2009) and from female academic scientists studied in Murray and Graham (2007). Generating networks to compensate for missing ones,
e.g., through internships, small-business programs, golf-club memberships, seemed to feature prominently in the allocation of ﬁrm resources. Not surprisingly, those with the least
binding network constraints were previously at large ﬁrms or who are licensees or aﬃliates
of well-known (IP) ﬁrms (or both). Second, as was found for women, most entrepreneurs
reported encountering more perception problems than their white and Asian counterparts
due to the small number of African American IT and IP-related ﬁrms. While this evidence
is not extensive, it is suggestive that there may be common features between women and
African Americans in science and in science-related employment that may help to explain
patterns of commercialization activity.

22

Employees in S&E ﬁelds could be employed in industry or in government. See Data Appendix for
information on the sample.

17

B. The Inventor’s Commercialization Decision
Time-series estimation using aggregate data allowed us to study patterns of patenting and
commercialization by women, African American, and U.S. inventors. However, the aggregate
data and analysis are limited, because they sum female and African American patents in
diﬀerent technologies and team characteristics in the same year together. Therefore, we
use cross-section data to exploit patent and team characteristics to more closely evaluate
commercialization activity. We examine the inventor’s decision to assign a patent to a ﬁrm
and treat each patent as a unit of observation. With this slightly diﬀerent approach, our
main question is: “How do gender and race covary with commercial activity measured by
assignment to ﬁrms?” Speciﬁcally, we estimate the following probit model:
P r(ASSIGN F IRMi = 1) = F (α + β1 Wi + β2 AAi + β3 T EAMi + β4 CIT AT IONi
+ β5 Wi × T EAMi + β6 AAi × T EAMi + β7 Wi × CIT AT IONi
+ β8 AAi × CIT AT IONi +

5
∑

β9,j T ECHij

j=1

+

5
∑

β10,j Wi × T ECHij +

j=1

5
∑

β11,j AAi × T ECHij + ϵi ),

j=1

(4)
where ASSIGN F IRMi is a dummy variable with the value one if patent i has been assigned
to a ﬁrm; Wi and AAi are dummy variables with the value one if there is a woman or
African American inventor on a given patent team; and T EAMi is number of inventors on
patent team, which is a proxy for patent collaboration; CIT AT IONi is number of forward
citations23 ; T ECHij is a dummy variable with the value one if patent i is in technological
23

Patent citations are used in the innovation literature to measure knowledge spillovers and quality of
patents, e.g., Hall, Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg (2001, updated 2009). Citations received or made inform linkages
between inventors and innovations, and patent quality is positively associated with the number of forward
citations, or patents citing a given patent. If the original patent is cited by a number of following patents,
this indicates that the original patent is important or has high quality, e.g., Hagedoorn and Cloodt (2003)
and Trajtenberg (1990). In addition to patent counts, citations received may be used to measure patenting
activity, e.g., Hall, Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg (2005) and Acharya, Baghai and Subramanian (2009).

18

category j. We expect the number of inventors to increase with the probability of assigning
a patent to a ﬁrm.24 Moreover, dummies for women’s and African American patents as
proxies for networks and discrimination are included in the regressions. Using taste-based
preferences of the employer proposed by Becker (1971), we would predict that the probability
of patents assigned to a ﬁrm may be negatively correlated with the share of women or African
Americans on the patent team. Controls for technological categories and forward citations are
also included. We pool patents granted between 1976 and 2008 together to estimate model
(7) as a probit model. Further, we estimate probit models with two ﬁve-year-subsamples,
between 1976 and 1980, and between 2001 and 2005 to capture changes in commercialization
activity for women and African Americans.
We are concerned that the assignments of some patents may be driven by a few proliﬁc
inventors. It is possible that the error terms are correlated for the observations relating to
the same proliﬁc inventors. To address this issue robust standard errors that are clustered on
the identity of the most proliﬁc inventor in a patent team are reported for probit models.25
Results are presented in Tables 9A and 9B. For the population of U.S. inventors between
1976 and 2006, having women or African American inventors on the patent team reduces the
probability of assigning patents to ﬁrms by 0.11 and 0.07. An additional inventor increases
the probability of assigning patents to ﬁrms by 0.09. In the 1970’s subsample, if other
variables are held constant, women have a lower probability of assigning to ﬁrms than men
by 0.22. For African Americans, the probability of assigning patents to corporations is lower
than other races by 0.09. These gaps remain in the 2000’s subsample. The opportunity for
women and African American inventors to assign their patents to ﬁrms, compared to men and
other races, is worse. Given the nonlinearity of probit estimation, the marginal eﬀects cannot
be summed directly.26 The predicted probabilities of having women and African Americans
24

Jones (2009) proposes that an increase in size of patent team is caused by an increasing specialization
requirement and an increase in the burden of knowledge.
25
Singh and Fleming (2009), for example, address the possibility of correlation among error terms involving
the same inventor by clustering on the identity of the ﬁrst inventor.
26
Moreover, the method and code in the literature, e.g. Ai and Norton (2003) who use only one interaction
term, cannot be used in our estimation. Our dummy variables for women and African Americans are

19

on a patent team are calculated and presented in Figures 15A and 15B. Gaps between women
and men and African American and other races in most technological categories are evident.
For example, predicted probabilities of assigning patents to ﬁrms for women and African
Americans are lower than their counterparts by 0.11 and 0.08 in the ﬁeld of mechanical
invention.
The diﬀerence between technological categories is considered in Tables 10A and 10B.
Pooled data between 1976 and 2006 are separated into six technological categories. From
results in Table 10A, the gender gap in commercialization is large in the mechanical and miscellaneous categories. For mechanical patents, having team members who are women reduces
the probability of assigning patents to ﬁrms by 0.18. The gap between African Americans
and other races is also large in the computer, electrical, mechanical, and miscellaneous categories. The results for COMPUSTAT ﬁrms are presented in Tables 11A, 11B, 12A, and
12B. Having a female or African American inventor renders ambiguous results for the entire
period, but this result varies by subperiod for women. We would expect signiﬁcantly higher
rates of assignment to COMPUSTAT ﬁrms in four of six categories if a woman inventor
participates on the patent team. We would expect signiﬁcantly lower assignment rates if an
African American inventor participates in a mechanical or miscellaneous invention. Fewer
patents assigned to the most valuable ﬁrms are anticipated when the size of a female inventor’s patent team increases. More COMPUSTAT patents are expected when women and
African American inventors receive citations for their drug and miscellaneous patents.

C. The Inventor’s Post-Invention Decisions
In the probit models, the inventor’s decision is whether or not to assign a patent to a
ﬁrm or a publicly-listed ﬁrm. In fact, the inventor’s decision is broader and not taken in
isolation. She must decide among ﬁrms, government agencies, universities, and individuals
as potential assignees. To capture this decision more completely, we estimate the following
interacted with several variables, such as number of team members and number of forward citations.

20

multinomial logit regression:
(
ln

Pk
Pn

)
= αkn + βkn,1 Wi + βkn,2 AAi + βkn,3 T EAMi + βkn,4 CIT AT IONi
+ βkn,5 Wi × T EAMi + βkn,6 AAi × T EAMi + βkn,7 Wi × CIT AT IONi
+ βkn,8 AAi × CIT AT IONi +

5
∑

βkn,9,j T ECHij

(5)

j=1

+

5
∑

βkn,10,j Wi ×

j=1

T ECHij

+

5
∑

βkn,11,j AAi × T ECHij + ϵkn,i ,

j=1

k = F, G, U,
where Pf , Pg , Pu , and Pn are the probabilities of assigning a patent to ﬁrm, government,
university, and individual. The model in Equation (5) is estimated using both data on
assignment to ﬁrms and on assignment to COMPUSTAT ﬁrms. Results are reported in
Table 13A and 13B. Holding other variables constant, the probability of assigning to a
COMPUSTAT ﬁrm (a non-listed ﬁrm) is lower for women’s patents than for men’s patents
by 0.01 (0.1). For African Americans, the probability of assigning to a non-listed ﬁrm is
lower than for U.S. inventors by 0.06. Among women, we expect more patents assigned to
universities in all speciﬁcations. Moreover, women and African Americans are more likely to
assign their patents to government entities than their counterparts. This may be due to a
number of factors, such as greater employment and contracting opportunities, relatively more
penalties for discrimination, and preference for working in the government sector. However,
our data will not allow us to rule out any of these alternative explanations.

6

Conclusion and Future Research
Using unique data on women and African American inventors, we ﬁnd that commer-

cialization behavior among women and African American inventors is closer to that of U.S.
inventors than previously thought. This evidence emerges despite signiﬁcantly lower patent

21

activity among women and African Americans. A common feature of the two groups is that
increases in advanced engineering degrees predict increases in commercialization. In contrast, for all U.S. inventors, greater investment in life-science doctorates is correlated with
greater commercialization activity. Increasing citations received or the number of participants on a patent team is not systematically associated with better commercial outcomes for
African Americans and women, as it is for the broader population of inventors. We ﬁnd that
expected assignment rates are higher for women and African Americans when the assignee is
a government entity. Finally, the evidence indicates that mixed-gender patent teams are better at commercialization than all-male and all-female teams. Our ﬁndings partly result from
enhancing identiﬁcation of women and African American patentees and taking advantage of
more recently available data. These results are all the more striking, given our conservative
strategy of identifying female and African American inventors.
Indeed, this research may raise more questions than it answers. The evidence is suggestive that experience in organized and sustained groups dedicated to scientiﬁc discovery, as
in engineering programs, may provide a critical link to invention-related commercial activity. Future work may focus on further explorations of these mechanisms; racial and gender
diﬀerences by innovative ﬁeld, especially scientiﬁc and commercial spillovers for women and
African American inventors; and examination of additional commercialization activities.

References
Acharya, Viral V., Ramin P. Baghai and Krishnamurthy V. Subramanian, “Labor Laws and
Innovation,” Working paper, June, 2009.
Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur and John McHale, “Birds of a Feather - Better Together?
Exploring the Optimal Spatial Distribution of Ethnic Inventors,” NBER working paper No.
12823, January 2007.
Ai, Chunrong and Edward C. Norton, “Interaction terms in logit and probit models,” Economics letters, Vol.80(2003), 123 – 129.

22

Arora, Ashish and Marco Ceccagnoli, “Patent Protection, Complementary Assets, and
Firms’ Incentives for Technology Licensing,” Management Science, Vol.52, No.2 (February,
2006), 293 – 308.
Ashcraft, Catherine and Anthony Breitzman, “Who Invents IT: An Analysis of Women’s
Participation in Information Technology Patenting,” National Center for Women & Information technology, 2007.
Becker, Gary S. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1971.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. “Are Emily and Greg More Employable than
Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,” The American
Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 4 (Sep., 2004), pp. 991 – 1013.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Current-dollar and “real” GDP,” http://www.bea.gov/
national/xls/gdplev.xls, last accessed July 2009.
Campbell, Eric G., Joshua B. Powers, David Blumenthal and Brian Biles, “Inside the Triple
Helix Technology Transfer and Commercialization in the Life Sciences,” Health Aﬀairs,
Vol.32 (January/February 2004), 64 – 76.
Chellaraj, Gnanaraj, Keith E. Maskus and Aaditya Mattoo, “The Contribution of International Graduate Students to US Innovation,” Review of International Economics, Vol.16,
No.3 (August 2008), 444 – 462.
Commission on Professionals in Science and Technology. Professional Women and Minorities: A Total Human Resources Data Compendium. 16th edition, Washington, DC., 2006.
Cook, Lisa D., African American Inventors Data Set, 2004, updated in 2005 and 2007a.
Cook, Lisa D., “The Economic Cost of Conﬂict on Innovation: Evidence from Africa American Patents, 1870 – 1940,” Stanford University, 2005.
Cook, Lisa D., “How Good is Government at Commercializing Innovation? Evidence from
African American Inventors, 1969 - 2003,” forthcoming in F. Scott Kieﬀ and Troy Paredes,
eds., Commercialization Innovation. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Cook, Lisa D., “Inventing Social Networks: Evidence from African American ‘Great Inventors’,” Working paper, Michigan State University, 2007b.
Ding, Waverly W., Fiona Murray and Toby E. Stuart, “Gender Diﬀerences in Patenting in
the Academic Life Sciences’, Science, Vol.313 (August 4, 2006), 665 – 667.
Fairlie, Robert W. Fairlie and Alicia M. Robb. Race and Entrepreneurial Success: Black-,
Asian-, and White-Owned Businesses in the United States. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2009.
Fryer, Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt. “The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively
Black Names,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No.3 (Aug. 2004), 767 – 805.
23

Griliches, Zvi., “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol.28, No.4 (December 1990), 1661 – 1707.
Hagedoorn, John and Myriam Cloodt, “Measuring Innovative Performance: Is there an
Advantage in Using Multiple Indicators?” Research Policy, Vol.32, No.8 (September 2003),
1365 – 1379.
Hall, Bronwyn H. and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis, “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An Empirical Study of Patenting in the US Semiconductor Industry, 1979-95,” The Rand Journal of
Economics, Vol.32, No.1 (Spring 2001), 101 – 128.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Zvi Griliches and Jerry A. Hausman, “Patents and R & D: Is There a
Lag?, ” International Economic Review, Vol.27, No.2 (June 1986), 265 – 83.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaﬀe and Manuel Trajtenberg, “The NBER Patent Citation
Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” NBER Working paper No.8498,
October 2001, updated 2009.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaﬀe and Manuel Trajtenberg, “Market Value and Patent
Citations,” The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol.36, No.1 (Spring 2005), 16 – 38.
Hall, Linley Erin. Who’s Afraid of Marie Curie? The Challenges Facing Women in Science
and Technology. Emeryville, C.A.: Seal Press, 2007.
Hewlett, Sylvia Ann, Carolyn Buck Luce and Lisa J. Servon. “The Athena Factor: Reversing the Brain Drain in Science, Engineering, and Technology,” Harvard Business Review
Research Report 10094, 2008.
Hill, Catherine, Christiane Corbett, and Andresse St. Rose. Why So Few? Women in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Science. Washington: American Association of University Women, 2010.
Hunt, Jennifer. “Why Do Women Leave Science and Engineering?,” NBER working paper
no. 15853, March 2010.
Jones, Benjamin F., “The Burden of Knowledge and the “Death of Renaissance Man”:Is
Innovation Getting Harder?” The Review of Economic Studies,” Vol. 76, No. 1 (January
2009), 283 – 317.
Kanwar, Sunil and Robert Evenson, “On the strength of intellectual property protection
that nations provide” Journal of Development Economics 90, (2009), 50-56.
Kerr, William R., “Ethnic Scientiﬁc Communities and International Technology Diﬀusion,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.90, No.3 (August 2008), 518 – 537.
Liu, Ming, and Sumner La Croix. “The Impact of Stronger Property Rights in Pharmaceuticals on Innovations in Developed and Developing Countries, ” Working paper, University
of Hawai’i-Manoa.

24

Morgan, Laurie A. “Is Engineering Hostile to Women? An Analysis of Data from the 1993
National Survey of College Graduates,” American Sociological Review, Vol. 65, No.2 (2000),
316 – 321.
Morgan, Robert P., Carlos Kruytbosch and Nirmala Kannankutty, “Patenting and Invention Activity of U.S. Scientists and Engineers in the Academic Sector: Comparisons with
Industry,” Journal of Technology Transfer, Vol.26, No.1-2 (January 2001), 173 – 183.
Murray, Fiona and Leigh Graham, “Buying Science & Selling Science: Gender Diﬀerences
in the Market for Commercial Science,” Industrial and Corporate Change, Vol. 16, No.4
(August 2007), 657 – 689.
National Science Foundation (NSF), Survey of Doctorate Recipients, http://sestat.nsf.
gov/docs/sdr95.pdf, 1995.
National Science Foundation (NSF), Survey of Doctorate Recipients, 2007a.
National Science Foundation (NSF), “National Patterns of R&D Resources: 2006 Data Update,” http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf07331/ September 2007b.
National Science Foundation (NSF), Survey of Earned Doctorates (various issues), http:
//webcasper.nsf.gov. last accessed July 2009a.
National Science Foundation (NSF), Division of Science Resources Statistics, special tabulations of U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data System, Completions Survey, 1966 – 2005, 2009b.
National Science Foundation (NSF), “Doctorate Recipients from U.S. Universities: Summary
Report 2007 -2008”, NSF special report 10-309, December. 2009c, http://www.nsf.gov/
statistics/nsf10309/.
Nerkar, Atul and Scott Shane, “Determinants of Invention Commercialization: An Empirical Examination of Academically Sourced Inventions,” Strategic Management Journal. 28,
(2007), 1155 – 1166.
Pakes, Ariel and Zvi Griliches, “Estimating Distributed Lags in Short Panels with an Application to the Speciﬁcation of Depreciation Patterns and Capital Stock Constructs,” Review
of Economic Studies, Vol.51, No.2 (April 1984), 243 – 62.
Phillips, Peter C.B. and Pierre Perron, “Testing for Unit Roots in Time Series Regression,”
Biometrika, Vol.75, No.2 (June 1988), 335 – 346.
Porter, Michael and Scott Stern, “Measuring the ‘Ideas’ Production Function: Evidence
from International Patent Output,” NBER working paper no. 7891, September 2000.
Preston, Anne. E. “Why Have All the Women Gone? A Study of Exit of Women from the
Science and Engineering Professions,” American Economic Review Vol. 84 (1994), 1446 –
1462.

25

Preston, Anne E. Leaving Science: Occupational Exit from Science Careers. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation, 2004.
Preston, Anne E. “Women Leaving Science,” Haverford College working paper, 2006.
Price, Gregory N. “The Problem of the 21st Century: Economics Faculty and the Color
Line,” The Journal of Socio-Economics. Vol. 38 (2009), 331– 343.
Schmookler, Jacob. “Inventors Past and Present,” Review of Economics and Statistics. 39
(3), (August 1957), 321–33.
Schmookler, Jacob. Invention and Economic Growth. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1966.
Serrano, Carlos J. “The Dynamics of the Transfer and Renewal of Patents,” NBER working
paper no. 13938, April 2008.
Singh, Jasjit, and Lee Fleming. “Long Inventors as Source of Breakthroughs: Myth or Reality? ” INSEAD working paper, June 2009.
Sonnert, Gerhard and Gerald Holton. Gender Diﬀerences in Science Careers. New
Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1995.
Stephan, Paula E. and Sharon G. Levin. “Leaving Careers in IT: Gender Diﬀerences in
Retention,” Journal of Technology Transfer, Vol.30 (2005), 383 – 396.
Trajtenberg, Manual, “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of Innovations,” The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol.21, No. 1 (Spring 1990), 172 – 187.
Trajtenberg, Manual, Gil Shiﬀ, and Ran Melamed, “The “Names Game”: Harnessing Inventors’ Patent Data for Economic Research,” NBER working paper no. 12479, September
2006.
United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USTPO), Buttons to Biotech, 1996 Update
Report, with supplemental data through 1998, http://www.uspto.gov/go/stats/wom_98.
pdf, 1999.
United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO), “U.S. Patents - Custom Data Extracts”, 2009.
U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce, “Frequently Occurring Surnames from
Census 2000,” http://www.census.gov/genealogy/www/freqnames2k.html, 2008, last accessed July 2009.
U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce, “Population Estimates,” http://www.
census.gov/popest/estimates.html (Various issues).
U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Science, National Center for Education
Statistics. “Digest of Education Statistics: 2008” http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/
d08/index.asp, March 2009, last accessed February 2010.

26

Data Appendix
Data Sources
Data on utility patents between 1963 and 2006 come from the NBER patent database, Hall,
Jaﬀe, and Trajtenberg (2001, updated 2009) and between 2007 and 2008 come from USPTO (2009).
The NBER patent database is available at http://www.nber.org/patents. The NBER patent
database 2006 edition is extended in 2008 by matching USPTO data by assignment and technology
codes to NBER ﬁles. All patents granted between 1976 and 2006 have a unique assignee number
that can identify them as COMPUSTAT ﬁrms. Data on science and engineering doctorates are from
NSF (2009a). Data on science and engineering master’s graduates are from NSF (2009b). Data on
employed science and engineering doctorates are taken from Commission on Professionals in Science
and Technology (2006). Data on population by race and gender are from U.S. Census Bureau
(various issues). Data on total U.S. and industrial R&D expenditure are from NSF (2007b). Total
U.S. R&D expenditure data are used in Tables 3 and 4. Industrial R&D expenditure data are used
in Tables 5 to 8. GDP data are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2009). R&D expenditure
per capita is deﬂated by GDP deﬂator from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2009). Data on
high-school enrollment rates and degree-institution enrollment rates are from U.S. Department of
Education (2009).

Female Name-Matching
Female-inventor patents have been identiﬁed systematically by matching ﬁrst names using professional software developed by the Melissa Data Corporation.27 Inventors with ﬁrst names which
are male-only or which could not be easily characterized as male or female were assumed to be
male. Patent origin is determined by the residence of the ﬁrst-named inventor. From 7,881,906
inventor-invention units in the USPTO inventor ﬁle between 1975 and 2008, there are 197,850 female inventor-invention units with ﬁrst-named inventor residing in the U.S. If we use simple unique
27

Other methods have been used in the literature. For example, Ashcraft and Breitzman (2007) identify
inventor gender in their IT inventor database by scanning name, matching with Social Security Administration top 1000 boys’ and girls’ names, and searching websites for “not typical” American names, e.g.,
Sanjay.

27

last-, ﬁrst-, and middle initial, there are 86,962 U.S. women inventors. These inventors account for
169,061 U.S. women’s patents.

African American Encoding Process
From 7,881,906 inventor-invention units in the USPTO inventor ﬁle between 1975 and 2008,
we generated unique last-, ﬁrst-, and middle name. After dropping repeated names and foreign
inventors, we obtained 1,167,019 unique U.S. inventor names. Then, 500,000 names were drawn to
encode ethnic groups using software developed by Ethnic Technologies. In order to reduce ineﬃciency from submitting low-probability African American last names, e.g., Indian or Chinese last
names, we used the probability of African Americans using a particular surname from U.S. Census
Bureau (2008) as a threshold for selecting data. The surname was not drawn if the probability of
African Americans using that surname is zero. Ethnic groups, including African Americans, are
encoded by their ﬁrst name, last name, and address. Inventor address and zip code data from the
USPTO data are used in the matching process. As these data are not always available, data are
collected using various online databases of addresses and zip codes, e.g., Google. From this process
we obtain 1,167 African American inventors.

Overlapping Patents and Patentees
There is a small number of overlapping patents and patentees, and they are counted once in
the merged series. It is not surprising that the two methodologies produce overlapping but not
identical data sets. The Cook (2007a) data, which begin in 1963, capture a larger cohort of older
inventors, whose names would be less distinct than those in more recent cohorts. Identifying black
names, e.g., as in done in Bertrand and Mullinathan (2004) and Fryer and Levitt (2004), is more
straightforward in data starting from the mid-1970’s when increasing heterogeneity is observed
among African American ﬁrst names, which the software exploits. In addition, the approach in
Cook (2007a) is more conservative, as it matches inventors, engineers, and other potential patentees who are African American to patent data rather than matching patentees to names that are

28

potentially African American.

African American Interviews
Participants were selected from the African American patent database, professional directories,
conference proceedings, and industry lists, e.g., at blackenterprise.com. The sample is not random
but is meant to be representative. Interviews were conducted in Stanford, CA; Oakland, CA; Atlanta, GA; Decorah, IA; Ann Arbor and East Lansing, MI; the greater Boston, MA area; and the
greater Washington, DC area. Nine interviews were conducted in person, by phone, and by email
between 2003 and 2009.

Distinct Inventor
A distinct inventor is deﬁned by having same last name, ﬁrst name, and middle initial. If the
initial middle name is blank but the ﬁrst and last names overlap with another record with the same
ﬁrst name, last name, and NBER subcategory, we treat them as the same inventor.28

28

This practice is consistent with that of the literature, e.g., Jones (2009) and Singh (2004). Another
algorithm can be found in Trajtenberg, Shiﬀ, and Melamed (2006).

29

0

Number of patents
50000 100000 150000 200000

Figure 1: Total USPTO patents, foreign patents, U.S. patents,
Application year, 1970 – 2008

1970

1980

1990
Application year

2000

2010

Total USPTO patents
Foreign patents
U.S. patents

Source: Authors’ calculation from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009) and USPTO (2009).
Note: Patent data are truncated beginning in 2002, because patents from more recent patent applications had not been granted
by 2008.

30

0

10

20

20

30
Share

40

Patents per million
40
60
80

50

100

Figure 2: Female Patent Activity and Science and Engineering Graduates,
1970 – 2008

1970

1980

1990
Application year

2000

2010

U.S. patents granted to U.S. women inventors
Women in S&E doctoral graduates
Women in S&E master’s graduates

Source: Authors’ calculation from USPTO (2009), NSF (2009a), NSF (2009b), and U.S. Census Bureau (Various years).
Patent data are truncated beginning in 2002, because patents from more recent patent applications had not been granted by 2008.

0

0

2

4

Share

6

Patents per million
2
4

8

6

10

Figure 3: African American Patent Activity and Science and Engineering Graduates, 1970 – 2008

1970

1980

1990
Application year

2000

2010

U.S. patents granted to African American inventors
African American in S&E doctoral graduates
African American in S&E master’s graduates

Source: Authors’ calculation from USPTO (2009), Cook (2007a), commercial encoding, NSF (2009a), NSF (2009b), and U.S.
Census Bureau (Various years).
Note: African American inventor patents are sum of Cook (2007a) data and commercially encoded data (see Data Appendix).
Patent data are truncated beginning in 2002, because patents from more recent patent applications had not been granted by 2008.

31

0

.2

Share
.4

.6

.8

Figure 4: Share of Women in Science, Engineering, and Health Doctoral Degrees Awarded,
by Field of Doctorate, 1968-2006

1968−1980

1981−1990

1991−2000

2001−2006

Engineering

Life sciences

Physical sciences

Mathematics

All science and engineering

Source: Authors’ calculation from National Science Foundation (2009a).
Note: All science and engineering includes engineering, geosciences, life sciences, mathematics and computer sciences and
physical sciences.

0

.01

Share
.02

.03

.04

Figure 5: Share of African Americans in Science, Engineering, and Health Doctoral Degrees
Awarded, by Field of Doctorate, 1968-2006

1968−1980

1981−1990

1991−2000

2001−2006

Engineering

Life sciences

Physical sciences

Mathematics

All science and engineering

Source: Authors’ calculation from National Science Foundation (2009a)
Note: All science and engineering includes engineering, geosciences, life sciences, mathematics and computer sciences and
physical sciences.

32

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Figure 6: Distribution of Patent Grants, U.S. Women Inventors, by Technological Category,
1975-2008

1975−1980

1981−1990

1991−2000

Chemical
Drugs & Med
Mechanical

2001−2008

Computer & Comm
Electrical
Other

Source: Authors’ calculation from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009) and USPTO (2009).
Note: Utility patents only. Technological categories are from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009).

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Figure 7: Distribution of Patent Grants, African American Inventors, by Technological Category,
1963-2008

1963−1970

1971−1980

1981−1990

Chemical
Drugs & Med
Mechanical

1991−2000

2001−2008

Computer & Comm
Electrical
Other

Source: Authors’ calculation from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009), Cook (2007a), commercial encoding, and USPTO (2009).
Note: 1) African American inventor patents are sum of Cook (2007a) data and commercially encoded data (see Data Appendix).
2) Utility patents only. Technological categories are from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009).

0

.1

.2

.3

Figure 8: Distribution of Patent Grants, U.S. Inventors, by Technological Category, 1963-2008

1963−1970

1971−1980

1981−1990

Chemical
Drugs & Med
Mechanical

1991−2000

2001−2008

Computer & Comm
Electrical
Other

Source: Authors’ calculation from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009) and USPTO (2009).
Note: Utility patents only. Technological categories are from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009).

33

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Figure 9: Distribution of Patent Grants, U.S. Women Inventors, by Ownership, 1975-2008

1975−1980

1981−1990

1991−2000

Unassigned & Individual
Government

2001−2006

Firm
University, Institution, & Hospital

Source: Authors’ calculation from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009) and USPTO (2009).
Note: Utility patents only.

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Figure 10: Distribution of Patent Grants, African American Inventors, by Ownership, 1963-2008

1963−1970

1971−1980

1981−1990

Unassigned & Individual
Government

1991−2000

2001−2006

Firm
University, Institution, & Hospital

Source: Authors’ calculation from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009), Cook (2007a), commercial encoding, and USPTO (2009).
Note: Utility patents only. African American inventor patents are sum of Cook (2007a) and commercial encoding (see Data
Appendix).

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Figure 11: Distribution of Patent Grants, U.S. Inventors, by Ownership, 1963-2008

1963−1970

1971−1980

1981−1990

Unassigned & Individual
Government

1991−2000

2001−2006

Firm
University, Institution, & Hospital

Source: Authors’ calculation from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009) and USPTO (2009).
Note: Utility patents only.

34

30

40

Percent
50

60

70

Figure 12: Utility Patents Assigned to COMPUSTAT Firms, Percent of Total Patent Grants,
1976 - 2006

1976

2008
Application year
U.S. women inventors
African American inventors
U.S. inventors
All inventors

Source: Authors’ calculation from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009), Cook (2007a), commercial encoding, and USPTO (2009).
Note: 1) African American inventor patents are sum of Cook (2007a) data and commercially encoded data (see Data Appendix).
2) Utility patents assigned to COMPUSTAT firms are patents granted between 1976 and 2006. Total patents granted are patents
granted by USPTO between 1976 and 2008.

35

25
5
0

0

2

4

10

6

15

8

20

10

Figure 13: Median of Forward Citations, 1976 - 2006, by Grant Year
1) Chemical
2) Computer & Comm.

1976−1980

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

1991−2000

2001−2006

1976−1980

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

2001−2006

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

10
5
0

0

5

10

15

4) Electrical

15

3) Drugs & medical

1991−2000

1976−1980

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

1991−2000

2001−2006

1976−1980

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

2001−2006

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

6) Other

0

0

2

2

4

4

6

6

8

8

10

5) Mechanical

1991−2000

1976−1980

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

1991−2000

2001−2006

1976−1980

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

1991−2000

2001−2006

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

Source: Authors’ calculation from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009), Cook (2007a), commercial encoding, and USPTO (2009).
Note: 1) African American inventor patents are sum of Cook (2007a) and commercial encoding (see Data Appendix).
2) Technological categories are from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009).

36

10
0

0

2

5

4

6

10

8

15

Figure 14: Median of Backward Citations, 1976 - 2006, by Grant Year
1) Chemical
2) Computer & Comm.

1976−1980

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

1991−2000

2001−2006

1976−1980

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

2001−2006

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

4) Electrical

0

0

2

4

5

6

8

10

10

3) Drugs & medical

1991−2000

1976−1980

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

1991−2000

2001−2006

1976−1980

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

2001−2006

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

5
0

0

5

10

6) Other

10

5) Mechanical

1991−2000

1976−1980

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

1991−2000

2001−2006

1976−1980

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

1981−1990

All inventors
U.S. women inventors

1991−2000

2001−2006

U.S. inventors
African American inventors

Source: Authors’ calculation from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009), Cook (2007a), commercial encoding, and USPTO (2009).
Note: 1) African American inventor patents are sum of Cook (2007a) and commercial encoding (see Data Appendix).
2) Technological categories are from Hall, et al. (2001, updated 2009).

37

Figure 15A: Predicted Probability of Having Women on Team

Source: Authors’ calculation from column (1) in Table 9B.

Figure 15B: Predicted Probability of Having African Americans on Team

Source: Authors’ calculation from column (1) in Table 9B.

38

Table 1A: Patents per Inventor, 1976-2008
Inventors

U.S. inventors
U.S. women inventors
African American inventors

Number of Patents
per Inventor
Mean
Median
3.5
1.0
2.4
1.0
3.5
1.0

Number of Patents,
by Discounting
Mean
Median
1.7
1.0
1.0
0.5
1.9
1.0

Patents per million

234.9
40.1
5.9

Source: Cook and Kongcharoen (2009); USPTO; authors’ calculation;
U.S. Census Bureau (Various years).
Number of patents obtained by discounting are discounted by multiple inventors (see text).
Patents per million are patents granted between 1976 and 2008, for which applications
were made between 1976 and 2004.

Table 1B: Inventor/Patent Ratio, by Classiﬁcation, 1976-2008
Inventors
U.S. inventors
U.S. women inventors
African American inventors

Chemical

Computer

Drugs

Electrical

Mechanical

Other

All patents

2.2
3.6
2.8

2.3
3.8
3.2

2.4
3.8
3.9

2.1
3.5
2.8

1.8
3.1
2.4

1.7
2.4
2.2

2.0
3.4
2.9

All multipleinventor patents
3.0
3.9
3.5

Source: Authors’ calculation; USPTO (2009), Cook (2007a), Cook and Kongcharoen (2009), Hall, et al. (2001)
Note: See Data Appendix for explanation of matching processes.

39

Table 1C: Distribution of Patents Granted, Women, African American, U.S., and All Inventors, Share, by Ownership Category and Granted Decade, 1963 - 2008
None or Individual
1963-1970
1971-1980
1981-1990
1991-2000
2001-2008
1963-2008
Firm
1963-1970
1971-1980
1981-1990
1991-2000
2001-2008
1963-2008
Government
1963-1970
1971-1980
1981-1990
1991-2000
2001-2008
1963-2008
University
1971-1980
1981-1990
1991-2000
2001-2008
1963-2008

U.S. women Inventors

African American Inventors

U.S. Inventors

All Inventors

n.a.
0.40
0.28
0.19
0.12
0.17

0.18
0.28
0.33
0.26
0.16
0.25

0.24
0.24
0.25
0.22
0.14
0.21

0.24
0.22
0.19
0.16
0.11
0.17

n.a.
0.54
0.65
0.71
0.79
0.73

0.58
0.59
0.57
0.68
0.77
0.66

0.72
0.72
0.70
0.72
0.80
0.74

0.73
0.75
0.77
0.79
0.85
0.79

n.a.
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.02

0.24
0.13
0.08
0.02
0.02
0.07

0.03
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.02

0.03
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02

0.02
0.04
0.08
0.08
0.07

0.00
0.02
0.05
0.05
0.03

0.00
0.02
0.04
0.04
0.03

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.02

Source: Authors’ calculations from Hall et al. (2001, updated 2009), USPTO (2009), Cook (2007a),
and Cook and Kongcharoen (2009).
Notes: 1) African American inventor patents are sum of Cook (2007a) data and commercially encoded
data (see Data Appendix).
2) Technological categories are from Hall et al. (2001, updated 2009).
3) The “university” assignee category includes universities, foundations, research institutions, and hospitals.
4) Data for women began in 1975.

Table 1D: Patents Matched to COMPUSTAT, Share, by Application Year, 1976 - 2006
1976-1980
1981-1990
1991-2000
2001-2006

U.S. women inventors
0.44
0.54
0.54
0.56

African American inventors
0.46
0.49
0.55
0.59

U.S. inventors
0.50
0.49
0.47
0.50

All inventors
0.40
0.40
0.42
0.47

Source: Authors’ calculations from Hall et al. (2001, updated 2009), USPTO (2009), Cook (2007a),
and Cook and Kongcharoen (2009).
Notes: 1) African American inventor patents are sum of Cook (2007a) data and commercially
encoded data (see Appendix).
2) Patents per million are patents granted between 1976 and 2008, for which applications were
made between 1976 and 2006.

40

Table 2: Baseline Statistics

Patents per million,
by application year
Percentage of patents assigned
to ﬁrms, by application year
Percentage of patents assigned
to COMPUSTAT ﬁrms,
by application year
R & D expenditure
per capita, deﬂated
Industrial R & D expenditure
per capita, deﬂated
Employed S&E
doctorates per million
S&E doctorates,
graduates per million
S&E doctorates, graduates
per million, engineering
S&E doctorates, graduates
per million, life sciences
S&E doctorates, graduates
per million, physical sciences
Master’s, graduates
per million, engineering
N

U.S.
Inventors
234.9
(74.6)
73.1
(4.4)
48.6
(2.1)

U.S. Women
Inventors
40.1
(28.6)
68.8
(8.3)
52.7
(4.7)

African
American
Inventors (1)
1.6
(0.5)
61.3
(13.8)
45.3
(12.6)

African
American
Inventors (2)
2.76
(1.0)
67.9
(7.5)
47.9
(7.3)

African
American
Inventors (3)
4.2
(0.8)
65.3
(8.9)
47.2
(6.6)

African
American
Inventors (4)
5.9
(2.0)
68.9
(9.6)
51.3
(6.6)

719.4
(159.1)
406.9
(140.1)
1727.8
(237.5)
38.0
(3.4)
8.8
(2.0)
20.3
(1.3)
9.0
(1.2)
90.7
(13.1)
27

719.4
(159.1)
406.9
(140.1)
624.9
(268.1)
30.7
(11.5)
3.3
(2.2)
19.7
(6.6)
4.6
(1.5)
25.1
(12.3)
27

703.4
(153.1)
393.4
(135.7)
255.4
(100.8)
7.3
(2.4)
1.4
(0.8)
4.0
(1.2)
1.2
(0.4)
14.5
(4.2)
25

703.4
(153.1)
393.4
(135.7)
263.2
(107.1)
7.6
(2.6)
1.5
(0.8)
4.2
(1.4)
1.2
(0.4)
15.1
(4.6)
27

703.4
(153.1)
393.4
(135.7)
263.2
(107.1)
7.6
(2.6)
1.5
(0.8)
4.2
(1.4)
1.2
(0.4)
15.1
(4.6)
27

703.4
(153.1)
393.4
(135.7)
263.2
(107.1)
7.6
(2.6)
1.5
(0.8)
4.2
(1.4)
1.2
(0.4)
15.1
(4.6)
27

Sources: USPTO, Cook (2007a); see Appendix.
Notes: 1) African American Inventors samples: (1) is from Cook (2007a); (2) is from commercial
encoding; (3) is samples (1) and (2) merged, excluding common patents; and (4) is sample (3) with
African-origin names.
2) S&E ﬁelds include engineering, geosciences, life sciences, mathematics and physical sciences.
3) The Survey of Doctorate Recipients is a biennial survey, and missing data are linear interpolated.
4) Standard deviations appear in parentheses below the mean.
5) Data for U.S., U.S. women, African American (2), (3), and (4) inventors are patents
granted between 1976 and 2008, for which applications were made between 1976 and 2004.
Data for African American (1) inventors are patents granted between 1976-2008, for which
applications were made between 1976 and 2002.

41

Table 3: Time-Series Estimation
Dependent Variable: Log of Patents per Million

R&D expenditure
per capita, lagged, deﬂated
Employed S&E
doctorates per million
Engineering Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Life sciences Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Physical science Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Engineering Master’s
granted, per million
Constant
Time trend
Dummies for patent reform
F
N

OLS
U.S. Women
African
U.S.
U.S. Women
Inventors
American
Inventors
Inventors
(discounting) Inventors
-0.260
0.330
0.340
1.915***
(0.661)
(1.225)
(1.152)
(0.725)
0.480
-0.799
-0.352
-1.494
(0.948)
(1.648)
(1.597)
(1.127)
0.742***
0.064
-0.528
-0.084
(0.244)
(0.192)
(0.604)
(0.071)
-0.004
0.441
0.032
0.384
(0.495)
(0.653)
(0.175)
(0.318)
-0.469
-0.277
0.427
0.046
(0.523)
(0.499)
(0.621)
(0.094)
-0.705
-0.451
-0.219
0.177
(0.647)
(0.626)
(0.439)
(0.546)
0.031
0.283
0.233
0.024
(0.055)
(0.203)
(0.193)
(0.180)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
27.846
26

16.317
26

13.713
26

3.700
26

2SLS
U.S. Women
African
U.S.
U.S. Women
Inventors
American
Inventors
Inventors
(discounting) Inventors
-0.202
0.252
0.453
0.757
(0.835)
(1.554)
(1.375)
(1.762)
0.270
-0.209
0.204
-1.402
(0.869)
(0.967)
(0.987)
(1.268)
0.709***
0.142
0.103
-0.086
(0.248)
(0.247)
(0.229)
(0.074)
-0.183
0.192
0.223
0.453
(0.542)
(0.570)
(0.545)
(0.325)
-0.546
-0.505
-0.440
0.030
(0.597)
(0.593)
(0.530)
(0.107)
-0.657
-0.385
-0.455
-0.068
(0.682)
(0.619)
(0.600)
(0.673)
0.048
0.282
0.222
0.086
(0.069)
(0.176)
(0.161)
(0.209)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
32.057
26

19.374
26

15.030
26

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted between 1976 and 2008, for which applications were made between 1976 and 2004.
2) U.S. women inventor (discounting) data are discounted by multiple inventors (see text).
3) The African American sample is sum of Cook (2007a) and commercial encoding.
4) Ph.D.’s granted are separated into ﬁelds: engineering, life sciences, and physical sciences.
5) Log of patents per million data are by application year and are ﬁrst-diﬀerenced in estimation.
6) Log of R&D expenditure per capita, deﬂated, Employed S&E Doctorates, Ph.D.’s granted, and Master’s in engineering are
ﬁrst-diﬀerenced and lagged one year in estimation.
7) Industrial R&D expenditure per capita is deﬂated by GDP deﬂator from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2009).
8) Models are estimated as OLS and 2SLS models. Instruments for R& D spending in the IV regressions are lag of log GDP per
capita, high-school enrollment rates, and degree-institution enrollment rates.
9) A time trend is included in each model.
10) Newey-West robust standard errors for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are in parentheses.
11) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance; (**), at the 5 percent level;
and (*), at the 10 percent level.

42

3.553
26

Table 4: Time-Series Estimation
Dependent Variable: Log of Diﬀerence in Patents per Million

R&D expenditure
per capita, lagged, deﬂated
Employed S&E
doctorates per million
Engineering Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Life sciences Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Physical science Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Engineering Master’s
granted, per million
Constant
Time trend
Dummies for patent reform
F
N

OLS
U.S. Women African American
Inventors
Inventors
0.054
-0.124
(0.754)
(0.465)
-0.680
-1.380**
(1.203)
(0.640)
0.073
0.036
(0.120)
(0.040)
0.219
0.074
(0.428)
(0.195)
-0.277
0.072
(0.307)
(0.063)
-0.540
-0.335
(0.461)
(0.286)
0.169
0.187**
(0.156)
(0.094)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
11.605
43.850
26
26

U.S. Women
Inventors
0.255
(1.043)
-0.526
(0.849)
0.103
(0.149)
0.150
(0.408)
-0.377
(0.382)
-0.492
(0.451)
0.163
(0.145)
Yes
Yes
13.856
26

2SLS
African American
Inventors
-0.317
(0.566)
-1.444**
(0.632)
0.038
(0.043)
0.074
(0.188)
0.069
(0.058)
-0.356
(0.292)
0.197**
(0.093)
Yes
Yes
45.338
26

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted between 1976 and 2008, for which applications were made
between 1976 and 2004.
2) The African American sample is sum of Cook (2007a) and commercial encoding.
3) Ph.D.’s granted are separated into ﬁelds: engineering, life sciences, and physical sciences.
4) Log of diﬀerence in patents per million = log (U.S. inventors patents per million each group’s patents per million). Data are by application year and ﬁrst-diﬀerenced.
5) Log of R&D expenditure per capita, deﬂated, Employed S&E Doctorates, Ph.D.’s granted,
and Master’s in engineering are ﬁrst-diﬀerenced and lagged one year in estimation.
6) Industrial R&D expenditure per capita is deﬂated by GDP deﬂator from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (2009).
7) Models are estimated as OLS and 2SLS models. Instruments for R& D spending in the IV regressions
are lag of log GDP per capita, high-school enrollment rates, and degree-institution enrollment rates.
8) A time trend is included in each model.
9) Newey-West robust standard errors for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are in parentheses.
10) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance; (**),
at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

43

Table 5: Time-Series Estimation
Dependent variable: Log of Percentage of Patents Assigned to Firms

Industrial R&D expenditure
per capita, lagged, deﬂated
Employed S&E
doctorates per million
Engineering Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Life sciences Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Physical science Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Engineering Master’s
granted, per million
Constant
Time trend
Dummies for patent reform
F
N

OLS
U.S. Inventors U.S. Women African American
Patents
Patents
Patents
0.065**
0.137
1.146***
(0.031)
(0.164)
(0.420)
-0.060
-0.190
0.964
(0.099)
(0.274)
(0.860)
-0.047
0.147*
0.032
(0.031)
(0.083)
(0.072)
0.182**
0.120
-0.504*
(0.081)
(0.171)
(0.262)
-0.008
-0.151**
0.191**
(0.059)
(0.065)
(0.078)
-0.055
0.181
0.951**
(0.047)
(0.152)
(0.379)
-0.005
-0.029
-0.132
(0.006)
(0.037)
(0.109)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
33.063
26

5.385
26

8.086
26

2SLS
U.S. Inventor U.S. Women African American
Patents
Patents
Patents
-0.051
-0.068
-0.026
(0.094)
(0.197)
(1.119)
-0.009
-0.059
0.876
(0.108)
(0.312)
(1.042)
-0.030
0.163*
0.033
(0.036)
(0.093)
(0.108)
0.218**
0.095
-0.419
(0.087)
(0.150)
(0.284)
-0.019
-0.182**
0.166**
(0.065)
(0.079)
(0.084)
-0.091*
0.148
0.510
(0.048)
(0.162)
(0.457)
-0.001
-0.018
-0.034
(0.009)
(0.041)
(0.133)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
48.961
26

4.516
26

1.576
26

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted between 1976 and 2008, for which applications were made between 1976 and 2004.
2) The African American sample is sum of Cook (2007a) and commercial encoding.
3) Ph.D.’s granted are separated into ﬁelds: engineering, life sciences, and physical sciences.
4) Log of percentage of patents assigned data are by application year and are ﬁrst-diﬀerenced in estimation.
5) Log of industrial R&D expenditure per capita, deﬂated, Employed S&E Doctorates, Ph.D.’s granted, and Master’s in
engineering are ﬁrst-diﬀerenced and lagged one year in estimation.
6) Industrial R&D expenditure per capita is deﬂated by GDP deﬂator from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2009).
7) Models are estimated as OLS and 2SLS models. Instruments for R&D spending in the IV regressions are lag of log GDP per
capita, high-school enrollment rates, and degree-institution enrollment rates.
8) A time trend is included in each model.
9) Newey-West robust standard errors for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are in parentheses.
10) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance; (**), at the 5 percent level;
and (*), at the 10 percent level.

44

Table 6: Time-Series Estimation
Dependent variable: Log of Percentage of Patents Assigned to COMPUSTAT Firms

Industrial R&D expenditure
per capita, lagged, deﬂated
Employed S&E
doctorates per million
Engineering Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Life sciences Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Physical science Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Engineering Master’s
granted, per million
Constant
Time trend
Dummies for patent reform
F
N

OLS
U.S.
U.S. Women African American
Inventors
Inventors
Inventors
0.013
0.110
0.737
(0.061)
(0.201)
(0.567)
-0.208
-0.661
1.054
(0.183)
(0.437)
(1.327)
-0.048
0.136
0.141**
(0.063)
(0.108)
(0.066)
0.299**
0.179
-0.821***
(0.135)
(0.200)
(0.277)
-0.117
-0.190*
0.135
(0.133)
(0.102)
(0.105)
-0.094
0.229
1.131**
(0.076)
(0.168)
(0.468)
-0.005
0.006
-0.081
(0.011)
(0.048)
(0.128)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
26.603
27

8.006
27

10.057
26

2SLS
U.S.
U.S. Women
Inventors
Inventors
-0.007
0.015
(0.190)
(0.302)
-0.204
-0.556
(0.179)
(0.431)
-0.039
0.153
(0.076)
(0.114)
0.330**
0.157
(0.168)
(0.181)
-0.113
-0.236**
(0.143)
(0.115)
-0.098
0.222
(0.075)
(0.194)
-0.007
0.011
(0.015)
(0.051)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
43.706
26

8.158
26

African American
Inventors
-0.377
(1.124)
0.829
(1.205)
0.151*
(0.088)
-0.750***
(0.282)
0.109
(0.088)
0.781*
(0.460)
0.016
(0.140)
Yes
Yes
8.455
26

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted between 1976 and 2008, for which applications were made between 1976 and 2004.
2) The African American sample is sum of Cook (2007a) and commercial encoding.
3) Ph.D.’s granted are separated into ﬁelds: engineering, life sciences, and physical sciences.
4) Log of percentage of patents assigned to COMPUSTAT ﬁrms data are by application year and are ﬁrst-diﬀerenced in estimation.
5) Log of industrial R&D expenditure per capita, deﬂated, Employed S&E Doctorates, Ph.D.’s granted, and Master’s in
engineering are ﬁrst-diﬀerenced and lagged one year in estimation.
6) Industrial R&D expenditure per capita is deﬂated by GDP deﬂator from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2009).
7) Models are estimated as OLS and 2SLS models. Instruments for R&D spending in the IV regressions are lag of log GDP per
capita, high-school enrollment rates, and degree-institution enrollment rates.
8) A time trend is included in each model.
9) Newey-West robust standard errors for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are in parentheses.
10) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance; (**), at the 5 percent level;
and (*), at the 10 percent level.

45

Table 7: Time-Series Estimation
Dependent Variable: Diﬀerence in Percentage of Patents Assigned to Firms

Industrial R&D expenditure
per capita, lagged, deﬂated
Employed S&E
doctorates per million
Engineering Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Life sciences Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Physical science Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Engineering Master’s
granted, per million
Constant
Time trend
Dummies for patent reform
F
N

OLS
U.S. Women African American
Inventors
Inventors
-2.150
-69.930**
(7.630)
(28.815)
7.059
-42.683
(10.447)
(51.398)
-7.619*
-2.303
(4.317)
(4.764)
-0.759
34.156**
(8.589)
(16.519)
3.257
-11.933***
(3.733)
(4.611)
-7.283
-61.965**
(7.901)
(24.215)
0.658
6.225
(1.732)
(6.666)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1.535
6.657
26
26

U.S. Women
Inventors
1.021
(10.751)
3.281
(11.436)
-8.297*
(4.576)
0.950
(7.615)
4.929
(4.278)
-7.254
(8.510)
0.412
(1.760)
Yes
Yes
1.178
26

2SLS
African American
Inventors
-8.674
(72.376)
-42.180
(65.498)
-2.103
(6.959)
29.464*
(17.571)
-10.703**
(5.060)
-36.947
(28.335)
1.171
(8.415)
Yes
Yes
1.992
26

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted between 1976 and 2008, for which applications were made
between 1976 and 2004.
2) The African American sample is sum of Cook (2007a) and commercial encoding.
3) Ph.D.’s granted are separated into ﬁelds: engineering, life sciences, and physical sciences.
4) Diﬀerence in percentage of patents assigned to ﬁrms = percentage of U.S. inventors’ patents assigned
to ﬁrms - percentage of each group’s patents assigned to ﬁrms. Data are by application year and ﬁrst-diﬀerenced.
5) Log of industrial R&D expenditure per capita, deﬂated, Employed S&E Doctorates, Ph.D.’s granted,
and Master’s in engineering are ﬁrst-diﬀerenced and lagged one year in estimation.
6) Industrial R&D expenditure per capita is deﬂated by GDP deﬂator from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (2009).
7) Models are estimated as OLS and 2SLS models. Instruments for R&D spending in the IV regressions
are lag of log GDP per capita, high-school enrollment rates, and degree-institution enrollment rates.
8) A time trend is included in each model.
9) Newey-West robust standard errors for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are in parentheses.
10) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance; (**),
at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

46

Table 8: Time-Series Estimation
Dependent Variable: Diﬀerence in Percentage of Patents Assigned to COMPUSTAT Firms

Industrial R&D expenditure
per capita, lagged, deﬂated
Employed S&E
doctorates per million
Engineering Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Life sciences Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Physical science Ph.D.’s
granted, per million
Engineering Master’s
granted, per million
Constant
Time trend
Dummies for patent reform
F
N

OLS
U.S. Women African American
Inventors
Inventors
-1.591
-32.712
(8.257)
(31.226)
20.577
-34.757
(21.322)
(62.964)
-5.281
-7.418**
(4.560)
(3.447)
-0.175
42.313***
(9.020)
(13.957)
0.076
-6.140
(5.581)
(5.848)
-5.649
-56.455**
(7.598)
(24.661)
-1.160
1.417
(2.251)
(6.204)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2.871
10.991
27
26

U.S. Women
Inventors
3.540
(12.569)
15.779
(20.834)
-6.088
(4.549)
2.514
(7.966)
1.849
(5.827)
-5.401
(8.610)
-1.577
(2.383)
Yes
Yes
1.429
26

2SLS
African American
Inventors
10.807
(58.247)
-27.516
(58.604)
-7.710*
(4.483)
39.444***
(13.788)
-5.128
(5.015)
-42.015*
(22.433)
-2.324
(7.039)
Yes
Yes
7.431
26

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted between 1976 and 2008, for which applications were made
between 1976 and 2004.
2) The African American sample is sum of Cook (2007a) and commercial encoding.
3) Ph.D.’s granted are separated into ﬁelds: engineering, life sciences, and physical sciences.
4) Diﬀerence in percentage of patents assigned to ﬁrms = percentage of U.S. inventors’ patents assigned
to ﬁrms - percentage of each group’s patents assigned to ﬁrms. Data are by application year and ﬁrst-diﬀerenced.
5) Log of industrial R&D expenditure per capita, deﬂated, Employed S&E Doctorates, Ph.D.’s granted,
and Master’s in engineering are ﬁrst-diﬀerenced and lagged one year in estimation.
6) Industrial R&D expenditure per capita is deﬂated by GDP deﬂator from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (2009).
7) Models are estimated as OLS and 2SLS models. Instruments for R&D spending in the IV regressions
are lag of log GDP per capita, high-school enrollment rates, and degree-institution enrollment rates.
8) A time trend is included in each model.
9) Newey-West robust standard errors for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are in parentheses.
10) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance; (**),
at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

47

Table 9A: Probit Estimation

Dependent Variable: Dummy of Assignment to a Firm
Explanatory Variables
Female inventor
African American
inventor
Number of inventors in team
Citations received
Chemical
Computer
Drugs
Electrical
Mechanical

Grant Year dummy
State dummy
Pseudo R2
N

(1)
-0.1107***
(0.0030)
-0.0676***
(0.0167)
0.0833***
(0.0009)
0.0011***
(0.0000)
0.1597***
(0.0018)
0.2119***
(0.0017)
0.0232***
(0.0031)
0.1714***
(0.0017)
0.0763***
(0.0017)

(2)
-0.2160***
(0.0109)
-0.0919*
(0.0446)
0.1094***
(0.0047)
0.0011***
(0.0001)
0.2145***
(0.0038)
0.1628***
(0.0044)
0.0595***
(0.0072)
0.1541***
(0.0036)
0.0773***
(0.0035)

(3)
-0.0786***
(0.0040)
-0.0061
(0.0227)
0.0610***
(0.0010)
0.0012***
(0.0001)
0.0914***
(0.0028)
0.1967***
(0.0026)
0.0233***
(0.0041)
0.1512***
(0.0025)
0.0672***
(0.0027)

Yes
Yes
0.1393
1,747,848

Yes
Yes
0.1318
193,236

Yes
Yes
0.1526
421,327

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted to U.S. inventors between 1976 and 2006 for column (1),
between 1976 and 1980 for column (2), and between 2001 and 2005 for column (3).
2) All models are estimated as probit models.
3) Coeﬃcients in each columns are marginal eﬀects (discrete change). Robust standard errors of
marginal eﬀects are clustered on the identity of the proliﬁc inventor and are in parentheses.
4) The omitted technology category is Other.
5) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance;
(**), at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

48

Table 9B: Probit Estimation
Dependent Variable: Dummy of Assignment to a Firm
Explanatory Variables
Female inventor
African American
inventor
Number of inventors in team
Citations received
Female x Team
Female x Citation received
African American x Team
African American x Citations
received
Chemical
Computer
Drugs
Electrical
Mechanical
Female x Chemical
Female x Computer
Female x Drugs
Female x Electrical
Female x Mechanical
African American x Chemical
African American x Computer
African American x Drugs
African American x Electrical
African American x Mechanical

Grant Year dummy
State dummy
Pseudo R2
N

(1)
-0.1047***
(0.0060)
-0.0622
(0.0366)
0.0890***
(0.0010)
0.0010***
(0.0000)
-0.0307***
(0.0018)
0.0005***
(0.0001)
-0.0138
(0.0095)
0.0011*
(0.0005)
0.1555***
(0.0019)
0.2072***
(0.0017)
0.0126***
(0.0033)
0.1674***
(0.0018)
0.0726***
(0.0017)
0.0684***
(0.0047)
0.0977***
(0.0047)
0.0912***
(0.0050)
0.0764***
(0.0055)
0.0558***
(0.0051)
0.0509
(0.0339)
-0.0343
(0.0418)
0.0685*
(0.0318)
-0.0378
(0.0402)
0.0109
(0.0308)

(2)
-0.2787***
(0.0255)
-0.0226
(0.0664)
0.1102***
(0.0048)
0.0011***
(0.0001)
-0.0157
(0.0102)
0.0001
(0.0006)
-0.0662*
(0.0272)
-0.0026
(0.0020)
0.2102***
(0.0039)
0.1610***
(0.0044)
0.0529***
(0.0076)
0.1521***
(0.0037)
0.0750***
(0.0035)
0.1373***
(0.0148)
0.1259***
(0.0296)
0.1283***
(0.0180)
0.0783**
(0.0271)
0.0645**
(0.0227)
0.1124
(0.0636)
-0.2249
(0.1395)
0.1349*
(0.0671)
0.0578
(0.0780)
0.0713
(0.0636)

(3)
-0.0530***
(0.0082)
0.0507
(0.0435)
0.0662***
(0.0012)
0.0011***
(0.0001)
-0.0213***
(0.0020)
0.0003
(0.0002)
-0.0063
(0.0100)
0.0004
(0.0010)
0.0884***
(0.0030)
0.1933***
(0.0027)
0.0187***
(0.0045)
0.1483***
(0.0026)
0.0639***
(0.0029)
0.0351***
(0.0072)
0.0505***
(0.0070)
0.0395***
(0.0077)
0.0445***
(0.0078)
0.0436***
(0.0073)
-0.0250
(0.0570)
-0.1402
(0.0827)
-0.0123
(0.0605)
-0.1892*
(0.0857)
-0.0320
(0.0542)

Yes
Yes
0.1404
1,747,849

Yes
Yes
0.1324
193,236

Yes
Yes
0.1537
421,327

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted to U.S. inventors between 1976 and 2006 for column (1),
between 1976 and 1980 for column (2), and between 2001 and 2005 for column (3).
2) All models are estimated as probit models.
3) Coeﬃcients in each columns are marginal eﬀects (discrete change). Robust standard errors of
marginal eﬀects are clustered on the identity of the proliﬁc inventor and are in parentheses.
4) The omitted technology category is Other.
5) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance;
(**), at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

49

Table 10A: Probit Estimation
Dependent Variable: Dummy of Assignment to a Firm
Explanatory Variables
Female inventor
African American
inventor
Number of inventors
in team
Citations received

Chemical Computer
-0.0366*** -0.0232***
(0.0044)
(0.0036)
-0.0229
-0.0631**
(0.0245)
(0.0220)
0.0401*** 0.0325***
(0.0015)
(0.0009)
0.0004*** 0.0002***
(0.0001)
(0.0000)

Grant Year dummy
State dummy
Pseudo R2
N

Yes
Yes
0.0909
288,662

Drugs
Electrical Mechanical
-0.0456*** -0.0574*** -0.1821***
(0.0071)
(0.0059)
(0.0079)
0.0154
-0.0686*
-0.1016**
(0.0348)
(0.0290)
(0.0341)
0.0610*** 0.0427*** 0.1489***
(0.0021)
(0.0014)
(0.0021)
0.0008*** 0.0008*** 0.0022***
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
(0.0001)

Yes
Yes
0.0894
287,230

Yes
Yes
0.0896
189,342

Yes
Yes
0.0804
304,917

Other
-0.2594***
(0.0052)
-0.1417***
(0.0398)
0.2061***
(0.0029)
0.0033***
(0.0002)

Yes
Yes
0.1308
304,462

Yes
Yes
0.1444
373,213

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted to U.S. inventors between 1976 and 2006.
2) All models are estimated as probit models.
3) Coeﬃcients in each column are marginal eﬀects (discrete change). Robust standard errors of
marginal eﬀects are clustered on the identity of the proliﬁc inventor and are in parentheses.
4) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance;
(**), at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

Table 10B: Probit Estimation
Dependent Variable: Dummy of Assignment to a Firm
Explanatory Variables
Female inventor
African American
inventor
Number of inventors
in team
Citations received
Female x Team
Female x Citations received
African American x Team
African American x Citations
received
Grant Year dummy
State dummy
Pseudo R2
N

Chemical Computer
0.0266***
0.0035
(0.0070)
(0.0072)
-0.0283
-0.2066**
(0.0493)
(0.0674)
0.0456*** 0.0340***
(0.0017)
(0.0010)
0.0003*** 0.0002***
(0.0001)
(0.0000)
-0.0230*** -0.0103***
(0.0024)
(0.0024)
0.0003
0.0002
(0.0002)
(0.0001)
0.0025
0.0227*
(0.0115)
(0.0112)
-0.0002
0.0016**
(0.0012)
(0.0006)
Yes
Yes
0.0920
288,663

Yes
Yes
0.0898
287,230

Drugs
0.0186
(0.0113)
0.0442
(0.0542)
0.0713***
(0.0025)
0.0007***
(0.0001)
-0.0281***
(0.0032)
0.0013***
(0.0002)
-0.0041
(0.0178)
-0.0014
(0.0010)
Yes
Yes
0.0910
189,342

Electrical Mechanical
-0.0330** -0.0963***
(0.0117)
(0.0198)
-0.0795
-0.0227
(0.0518)
(0.0572)
0.0436*** 0.1526***
(0.0015)
(0.0021)
0.0008*** 0.0022***
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
-0.0072* -0.0379***
(0.0032)
(0.0069)
-0.0001
0.0011*
(0.0002)
(0.0005)
-0.0060
-0.0362
(0.0122)
(0.0232)
0.0018
-0.0004
(0.0010)
(0.0016)
Yes
Yes
0.0805
304,917

Other
-0.2528***
(0.0133)
0.0490
(0.0732)
0.2076***
(0.0032)
0.0033***
(0.0002)
-0.0038
(0.0068)
0.0001
(0.0005)
-0.1194***
(0.0352)
0.0042*
(0.0020)

Yes
Yes
0.1311
304,462

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted to U.S. inventors between 1976 and 2006.
2) All models are estimated as probit models.
3) Coeﬃcients in each column are marginal eﬀects (discrete change). Robust standard errors of
marginal eﬀects are clustered on the identity of the proliﬁc inventor and are in parentheses.
4) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance;
(**), at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

50

Yes
Yes
0.1443
373,213

Table 11A: Probit Estimation
Dependent Variable: Dummy of Assignment to a COMPUSTAT Firm
Explanatory Variables
Female inventor
African American
inventor
Number of inventors
in team
Citations received
Chemical
Computer
Drugs
Electrical
Mechanical

Grant Year dummy
State dummy
Pseudo R2
N

(1)
-0.0015
(0.0036)
-0.0103
(0.0187)
0.0670***
(0.0009)
0.0005***
(0.0000)
0.2729***
(0.0032)
0.3856***
(0.0029)
0.1163***
(0.0047)
0.3052***
(0.0030)
0.1158***
(0.0028)

(2)
-0.1331***
(0.0111)
-0.0513
(0.0521)
0.1022***
(0.0036)
0.0008***
(0.0002)
0.3095***
(0.0058)
0.2905***
(0.0064)
0.1457***
(0.0104)
0.2522***
(0.0054)
0.0948***
(0.0050)

(3)
0.0159**
(0.0052)
0.0486
(0.0292)
0.0542***
(0.0012)
0.0003***
(0.0001)
0.1868***
(0.0059)
0.3900***
(0.0048)
0.1120***
(0.0072)
0.3104***
(0.0054)
0.1236***
(0.0055)

Yes
Yes
0.1161
1,747,828

Yes
Yes
0.122
193,236

Yes
Yes
0.1263
421,327

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted to U.S. inventors between 1976 and 2006 for column (1),
between 1976 and 1980 for column (2), and between 2001 and 2005 for column (3).
2) All models are estimated as probit models.
3) Coeﬃcients in each columns are marginal eﬀects (discrete change). Robust standard errors of
marginal eﬀects are clustered on the identity of the proliﬁc inventor and are in parentheses.
4) The omitted technology category is Other.
5) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance;
(**), at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

51

Table 11B: Probit Estimation
Dependent Variable: Dummy of Assignment to a COMPUSTAT Firm
Explanatory Variables
Female inventor
African American
inventor
Number of inventors
in team
Citations received
Female x Team
Female x Citations received
African American x Team
African American x Citations
received
Chemical
Computer
Drugs
Electrical
Mechanical
Female x Chemical
Female x Computer
Female x Drugs
Female x Electrical
Female x Mechanical
African American x Chemical
African American x Computer
African American x Drugs
African American x Electrical
African American x Mechanical

Grant Year dummy
State dummy
Pseudo R2
N

(1)
0.0032
(0.0067)
-0.0433
(0.0342)
0.0714***
(0.0009)
0.0005***
(0.0000)
-0.0232***
(0.0017)
0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0008
(0.0087)
0.0007
(0.0007)
0.2677***
(0.0033)
0.3828***
(0.0029)
0.1034***
(0.0049)
0.3007***
(0.0031)
0.1114***
(0.0028)
0.0674***
(0.0083)
0.0474***
(0.0091)
0.1061***
(0.0101)
0.0783***
(0.0102)
0.0697***
(0.0089)
0.1073*
(0.0445)
-0.0208
(0.0454)
0.1161*
(0.0516)
-0.0574
(0.0440)
-0.0209
(0.0424)

(2)
-0.2704***
(0.0220)
-0.0223
(0.0782)
0.1019***
(0.0036)
0.0008***
(0.0002)
0.0145
(0.0119)
0.0011
(0.0007)
-0.0975**
(0.0317)
-0.0013
(0.0025)
0.3033***
(0.0060)
0.2881***
(0.0065)
0.1370***
(0.0109)
0.2491***
(0.0054)
0.0918***
(0.0050)
0.1985***
(0.0261)
0.1453**
(0.0501)
0.1979***
(0.0312)
0.1289**
(0.0395)
0.0733*
(0.0319)
0.2722***
(0.0807)
-0.2324*
(0.1145)
0.2387*
(0.0929)
0.0507
(0.0975)
0.1461
(0.0961)

(3)
0.0371***
(0.0111)
0.0664
(0.0662)
0.0585***
(0.0013)
0.0003***
(0.0001)
-0.0176***
(0.0022)
0.0001
(0.0003)
0.0098
(0.0112)
-0.0001
(0.0011)
0.1793***
(0.0062)
0.3901***
(0.0050)
0.1021***
(0.0078)
0.3060***
(0.0055)
0.1194***
(0.0057)
0.0556***
(0.0139)
-0.0061
(0.0144)
0.0628***
(0.0151)
0.0572***
(0.0161)
0.0501**
(0.0154)
0.0418
(0.0708)
-0.0749
(0.0738)
-0.0175
(0.1011)
-0.1571*
(0.0759)
-0.0830
(0.0720)

Yes
Yes
0.1167
1,747,829

Yes
Yes
0.1228
193,236

Yes
Yes
0.1269
421,327

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted to U.S. inventors between 1976 and 2006 for column (1),
between 1976 and 1980 for column (2), and between 2001 and 2005 for column (3).
2) All models are estimated as probit models.
3) Coeﬃcients in each columns are marginal eﬀects (discrete change). Robust standard errors of
marginal eﬀects are clustered on the identity of the proliﬁc inventor and are in parentheses.
4) The omitted technology category is Other.
5) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance;
(**), at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

52

Table 12A: Probit Estimation
Dependent Variable: Dummy of Assignment to a COMPUSTAT Firm
Explanatory Variables
Female inventor
African American
inventor
Number of inventors
in team
Citations received

Chemical Computer
0.0426*** 0.0168**
(0.0061)
(0.0062)
0.0541
-0.0183
(0.0333)
(0.0332)
0.0528*** 0.0303***
(0.0017)
(0.0013)
0.0001
-0.0003***
(0.0001)
(0.0000)

Grant Year dummy
State dummy
Pseudo R2
N

Yes
Yes
0.1053
288,662

Drugs
Electrical Mechanical
0.0439*** 0.0216**
-0.0225**
(0.0084)
(0.0082)
(0.0074)
0.0789
-0.0584
-0.0708*
(0.0455)
(0.0362)
(0.0324)
0.0547*** 0.0480*** 0.0885***
(0.0020)
(0.0016)
(0.0018)
0.0001
0.0007*** 0.0018***
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
(0.0001)

Yes
Yes
0.0554
287,230

Yes
Yes
0.0934
189,342

Yes
Yes
0.0649
304,915

Yes
Yes
0.082
304,449

Other
-0.0701***
(0.0040)
-0.0525*
(0.0211)
0.1009***
(0.0016)
0.0017***
(0.0002)
Yes
Yes
0.105
373,213

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted to U.S. inventors between 1976 and 2006.
2) All models are estimated as probit models.
3) Coeﬃcients in each column are marginal eﬀects (discrete change). Robust standard errors of
marginal eﬀects are clustered on the identity of the proliﬁc inventor and are in parentheses.
4) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance;
(**), at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

Table 12B: Probit Estimation
Dependent Variable: Dummy of Assignment to a COMPUSTAT Firm
Explanatory Variables
Female inventor
African American
inventor
Number of inventors
in team
Citations received
Female x Team
Female x Citations received
African American x Team
African American x Citations
received
Grant Year dummy
State dummy
Pseudo R2
N

Chemical Computer
0.1163*** 0.0785***
(0.0102)
(0.0097)
0.0624
-0.0794
(0.0659)
(0.0625)
0.0590*** 0.0341***
(0.0019)
(0.0015)
0.0001
-0.0004***
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
-0.0257*** -0.0205***
(0.0031)
(0.0027)
0.0001
0.0001
(0.0002)
(0.0001)
-0.0004
0.0101
(0.0168)
(0.0164)
-0.0009
0.0012
(0.0018)
(0.0009)
Yes
Yes
0.1058
288,663

Yes
Yes
0.0559
287,230

Drugs
Electrical Mechanical
0.1144*** 0.0558***
0.0484**
(0.0132)
(0.0152)
(0.0151)
0.0360
-0.0631
-0.0199
(0.0718)
(0.0599)
(0.0557)
0.0643*** 0.0493*** 0.0914***
(0.0023)
(0.0017)
(0.0018)
0.0000
0.0007*** 0.0018***
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
-0.0247*** -0.0104* -0.0272***
(0.0031)
(0.0041)
(0.0047)
0.0004*
-0.0002
0.0006
(0.0002)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
0.0112
-0.0009
-0.0135
(0.0153)
(0.0181)
(0.0175)
0.0002
0.0005
-0.0018
(0.0013)
(0.0013)
(0.0016)
Yes
Yes
0.0945
189,342

Yes
Yes
0.0649
304,915

Other
-0.0859***
(0.0080)
-0.0323
(0.0658)
0.1004***
(0.0017)
0.0016***
(0.0002)
0.0039
(0.0038)
0.0008**
(0.0003)
-0.0257
(0.0300)
0.0034*
(0.0014)

Yes
Yes
0.0823
304,449

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted to U.S. inventors between 1976 and 2006.
2) All models are estimated as probit models.
3) Coeﬃcients in each column are marginal eﬀects (discrete change). Robust standard errors of
marginal eﬀects are clustered on the identity of the proliﬁc inventor and are in parentheses.
4) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance;
(**), at the 5 percent level; and (*), at the 10 percent level.

53

Yes
Yes
0.1051
373,213

Table 13A: Multinomial Logit Estimation

Explanatory Variables
Female inventor
African American
inventor
Number of inventors
in team
Citations received
Chemical
Computer
Drugs
Electrical
Mechanical
Grant year dummies
Pseudo R2
N

(1)
Dependent variable: Assignment to
All ﬁrms Government University
-0.1061***
(0.0014)
-0.0665***
(0.0060)
0.1126***
(0.0003)
0.0011***
(0.0000)
0.0650***
(0.0011)
0.1129***
(0.0010)
-0.0883***
(0.0019)
0.0732***
(0.0010)
0.0434***
(0.0009)
Yes

0.0027***
(0.0004)
0.0165***
(0.0022)
0.0029***
(0.0001)
-0.0005***
(0.0000)
0.0138***
(0.0005)
0.0233***
(0.0007)
0.0181***
(0.0007)
0.0290***
(0.0007)
0.0112***
(0.0005)
Yes

0.0048***
(0.0004)
-0.0071***
(0.0014)
0.0032***
(0.0001)
-0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0465***
(0.0009)
-0.0014**
(0.0005)
0.1408***
(0.0019)
0.0215***
(0.0007)
-0.0027***
(0.0005)
Yes

(2)
Dependent variable: Assignment
COMPUSTAT Non-listed Government
ﬁrm
ﬁrm
-0.0095***
-0.0944***
0.0030***
(0.0016)
(0.0012)
(0.0004)
-0.0067
-0.0606***
0.0173***
(0.0074)
(0.0063)
(0.0023)
0.1014***
0.0139***
0.0032***
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
(0.0001)
0.0007***
0.0005***
-0.0005***
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
0.2076***
-0.1296***
0.0123***
(0.0013)
(0.0010)
(0.0005)
0.3114***
-0.1842***
0.0203***
(0.0012)
(0.0009)
(0.0007)
0.0340***
-0.1096***
0.0171***
(0.0019)
(0.0012)
(0.0007)
0.2395***
-0.1520***
0.0265***
(0.0013)
(0.0009)
(0.0007)
0.0994***
-0.0487***
0.0106***
(0.0014)
(0.0011)
(0.0005)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.1589
1,747,881

to
University
0.0048***
(0.0004)
-0.0072***
(0.0015)
0.0036***
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0420***
(0.0009)
-0.0045***
(0.0005)
0.1357***
(0.0019)
0.0177***
(0.0007)
-0.0038***
(0.0005)
Yes

0.1171
1,747,881

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted to U.S. inventors between 1976 and 2006.
2) All models are estimated as multinomial logit models. In model (1), there are 4 choices of assignment that are ﬁrm, government,
university, and individual. In model (2), there are 5 choices of assignment that are COMPUSTAT ﬁrm, non-listed ﬁrm, government,
university, and individual.
3) Coeﬃcients in each column are marginal eﬀects (discrete changes). Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors of are in parentheses.
4) The base case is none or individual assignment. The omitted technology category is Other.
5) The “university” assignee category includes universities, foundations, research institutions, and hospitals.
6) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance; (**), at the 5 percent level; and (*),
at the 10 percent level.

54

Table 13B: Multinomial Logit Estimation
Explanatory Variables
Female inventor
African American
inventor
Number of inventors
in team
Citations received
Female x Team
Female x Citations received
African American x Team
African American x Citations
received
Chemical
Computer
Drugs
Electrical
Mechanical
Female x Chemical
Female x Computer
Female x Drugs
Female x Electrical
Female x Mechanical
African American x Chemical
African American x Computer
African American x Drugs
African American x Electrical
African American x Mechanical
Grant year dummies
Pseudo R2
N

(1)
Dependent variable: Assignment to
All ﬁrms Government University
-0.1620***
(0.0055)
-0.1126***
(0.0282)
0.1130***
(0.0004)
0.0011***
(0.0000)
-0.0108***
(0.0015)
0.0005***
(0.0001)
-0.0013
(0.0099)
0.0004
(0.0004)
0.0641***
(0.0012)
0.1096***
(0.0010)
-0.0940***
(0.0021)
0.0717***
(0.0011)
0.0419***
(0.0009)
0.0637***
(0.0027)
0.0642***
(0.0030)
0.0746***
(0.0025)
0.0487***
(0.0032)
0.0134***
(0.0041)
0.0619***
(0.0136)
0.0027
(0.0208)
0.0682***
(0.0111)
0.0154
(0.0183)
0.0308**
(0.0139)
Yes

0.0040***
(0.0015)
0.0098
(0.0083)
0.0031***
(0.0001)
-0.0004***
(0.0000)
-0.0012***
(0.0002)
0.0000
(0.0000)
-0.0008
(0.0005)
-0.0004***
(0.0002)
0.0133***
(0.0006)
0.0241***
(0.0008)
0.0161***
(0.0008)
0.0287***
(0.0007)
0.0109***
(0.0006)
0.0034**
(0.0016)
-0.0069***
(0.0010)
0.0067***
(0.0018)
-0.0002
(0.0014)
0.0045**
(0.0021)
0.0104
(0.0093)
0.0311*
(0.0161)
-0.0100***
(0.0032)
0.0239*
(0.0134)
0.0027
(0.0075)
Yes

0.0175***
(0.0020)
0.0179*
(0.0103)
0.0043***
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0000)
-0.0035***
(0.0001)
-0.0001***
(0.0000)
-0.0001
(0.0009)
0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0443***
(0.0010)
-0.0012**
(0.0005)
0.1408***
(0.0021)
0.0212***
(0.0007)
-0.0032***
(0.0005)
0.0046***
(0.0016)
-0.0035**
(0.0015)
-0.0009
(0.0013)
0.0002
(0.0016)
0.0099***
(0.0028)
-0.0175***
(0.0023)
-0.0110**
(0.0050)
-0.0156***
(0.0024)
-0.0114***
(0.0042)
-0.0193***
(0.0032)
Yes

0.1603
1,747,881

(2)
Dependent variable: Assignment
COMPUSTAT Non-listed Government
ﬁrm
ﬁrm
-0.0076
-0.1358***
0.0031*
(0.0051)
(0.0031)
(0.0015)
-0.0676*
-0.0400*
0.0090
(0.0269)
(0.0196)
(0.0083)
0.1042***
0.0119***
0.0035***
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
(0.0001)
0.0007***
0.0005***
-0.0005***
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
-0.0207***
0.0089***
-0.0013***
(0.0012)
(0.0009)
(0.0002)
0.0003***
0.0002***
0.0000
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
(0.0000)
0.0048
-0.0071
-0.0007
(0.0083)
(0.0049)
(0.0006)
0.0004
-0.0000
-0.0004**
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
(0.0001)
0.2070***
-0.1292***
0.0117***
(0.0014)
(0.0010)
(0.0005)
0.3115***
-0.1866***
0.0208***
(0.0012)
(0.0009)
(0.0007)
0.0256***
-0.1075***
0.0152***
(0.0020)
(0.0012)
(0.0008)
0.2386***
-0.1520***
0.0261***
(0.0013)
(0.0010)
(0.0007)
0.0978***
-0.0483***
0.0102***
(0.0014)
(0.0012)
(0.0005)
0.0343***
0.0221***
0.0051**
(0.0051)
(0.0049)
(0.0017)
-0.0142*
0.0735***
-0.0066***
(0.0056)
(0.0057)
(0.0010)
0.0666***
0.0056
0.0078***
(0.0051)
(0.0048)
(0.0019)
0.0264***
0.0133*
0.0011
(0.0059)
(0.0058)
(0.0016)
0.0221***
-0.0131*
0.0053*
(0.0065)
(0.0059)
(0.0022)
0.1326***
-0.0776***
0.0130
(0.0248)
(0.0215)
(0.0103)
-0.0090
0.0070
0.0331*
(0.0286)
(0.0267)
(0.0168)
0.1342***
-0.0657**
-0.0100**
(0.0255)
(0.0230)
(0.0034)
-0.0332
0.0475
0.0247
(0.0279)
(0.0273)
(0.0138)
-0.0181
0.0471
0.0030
(0.0279)
(0.0263)
(0.0078)
Yes
Yes
Yes

to
University
0.0151***
(0.0020)
0.0155
(0.0102)
0.0047***
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0000)
-0.0036***
(0.0001)
-0.0001***
(0.0000)
0.0003
(0.0009)
-0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0396***
(0.0009)
-0.0045***
(0.0005)
0.1361***
(0.0020)
0.0172***
(0.0007)
-0.0044***
(0.0005)
0.0072***
(0.0018)
-0.0022
(0.0017)
0.0002
(0.0014)
0.0024
(0.0018)
0.0113***
(0.0029)
-0.0174***
(0.0025)
-0.0107*
(0.0053)
-0.0158***
(0.0026)
-0.0115**
(0.0044)
-0.0198***
(0.0033)
Yes

0.1180
1,747,881

Notes: 1) Patent data are patents granted to U.S. inventors between 1976 and 2006.
2) All models are estimated as multinomial logit models. In model (1), there are 4 choices of assignment that are ﬁrm, government,
university, and individual. In model (2), there are 5 choices of assignment that are COMPUSTAT ﬁrm, non-listed ﬁrm, government,
university, and individual.
3) Coeﬃcients in each column are marginal eﬀects (discrete changes). Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors of are in parentheses.
4) The base case is none or individual assignment. The omitted technology category is Other.
5) The “university” assignee category includes universities, foundations, research institutions, and hospitals.
6) Coeﬃcients marked with an asterisk (***) are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance; (**), at the 5 percent level; and (*),
at the 10 percent level.

55

Table Appendix.1: Distribution of Patents Granted, Women, and, U.S. inventors, by Ownership and Technological Category, 1975 - 2008

No assign
Firm
Individual
Government
University

No assign
Firm
Individual
Government
University

No assign
Firm
Individual
Government
University

A. All women on team
Comp.& Drugs&
Chemical Comm. Medical Elec. Mech.
0.21
0.18
0.38
0.27
0.59
0.71
0.80
0.48
0.68
0.39
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.05
0.01
0.12
0.02
0.01
B.Women as a part of team
Comp.& Drugs&
Chemical Comm. Medical Elec. Mech.
0.04
0.04
0.06
0.05
0.18
0.84
0.93
0.73
0.87
0.77
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.09
0.02
0.19
0.05
0.03
C.No women on team
Comp.& Drugs&
Chemical Comm. Medical Elec. Mech.
0.11
0.08
0.20
0.11
0.28
0.82
0.89
0.65
0.83
0.69
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.04
0.02
0.13
0.03
0.01

Total
Other
0.80
0.19
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.53
0.42
0.00
0.01
0.03
Total

Other
0.31
0.66
0.00
0.01
0.02

0.09
0.80
0.00
0.02
0.08
Total

Other
0.40
0.58
0.00
0.01
0.01

0.20
0.74
0.00
0.02
0.03

Source: Authors’ calculations; USPTO(2009), Cook and Kongcharoen (2009),
and Hall et al. (2001, updated 2009).
Notes: 1) Technological categories are from Hall et al. (2001, updated 2009).
2) The “university” assignee category includes universities, foundations, research
institutions, and hospitals.

56

