                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ASSESSING INHERENT MODEL BIAS:
  AN APPLICATION TO NATIVE DISPLACEMENT IN RESPONSE TO IMMIGRATION

                                            Giovanni Peri
                                            Chad Sparber

                                        Working Paper 16332
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16332


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2010




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Giovanni Peri and Chad Sparber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Assessing Inherent Model Bias: An Application to Native Displacement in Response to Immigration
Giovanni Peri and Chad Sparber
NBER Working Paper No. 16332
September 2010
JEL No. J61,R23

                                              ABSTRACT

There is a long-standing debate among academics about the effect of immigration on native internal
migration decisions. If immigrants displace natives this may indicate a direct cost of immigration in
the form of decreased employment opportunity for native workers. Moreover, displacement would
also imply that cross-region analyses of wage effects systematically underestimate the consequences
of immigration. The widespread use of such area studies for the US and other countries makes it especially
important to know whether a native internal response to immigration truly occurs. This paper introduces
a microsimulation methodology to test for inherent bias in regression models that have been used in
the literature. We show that some specifications have built biases into their models, thereby casting
doubt on the validity of their results. We then provide a brief empirical analysis with a panel of observed
US state-by-skill data. Together, our evidence argues against the existence of native displacement.
This implies that cross-region analyses of immigration's effect on wages are still informative.


Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

Chad Sparber
Department of Economics,
Colgate University,
13 Oak Drive,
Hamilton, NY, 13346.
csparber@mail.colgate.edu
1        Introduction

There is a long-standing debate on whether immigration reduces the employment opportunities of
natives. Economic analyses often exploit the wide variation in immigration rates across US states
(or cities) and skill groups to identify whether immigration is associated with low native employment
growth due to internal migration or job displacement across skill-state (or skill-city) cells. Though
this correlation cannot definitively identify the eﬀects of immigration (since causality is unclear and
there may be omitted variables bias), researchers often cite such results as prima facie evidence for or
against the crowding-out theory.
        The importance of this issue is not limited to simply understanding the direct question of native
displacement and employment opportunities. It also informs the validity of performing cross-regional
analyses of the wage eﬀects of immigration (or “area studies”). For example, most of the literature on

US immigration across local labor markets finds little impact of immigration on wages.1 These studies
typically argue that mechanisms other than internal migration allow each region to absorb the higher
supply of workers.2 If so, then cross-regional analysis is informative of the impact of immigrants on
wages at the national level. In the presence of displacement, however, the wage eﬀects of immigration
would dissipate throughout the US — not just in the states receiving large numbers of immigrants. Thus,

cross-region wage regressions would miss (or underestimate) the eﬀects of immigration if displacement
exists.3
        In analyzing internal migration, researchers must make numerous methodological decisions. Should
the unit of analysis be states, cities, or census tracts? Should regressions include a panel with fixed
eﬀects or employ just a single long-term cross section? Which individuals should be included in the

sample selection? Should regressions concern the population, labor force, or employees? These all
are important questions to answer. This paper focuses on a most basic choice: how to specify the
explanatory and dependent variables in the regression model that aims at estimating displacement.

While this seems a trivial issue, we will show that some specifications in the literature may have built
a bias into the estimates of the displacement coeﬃcient they intended to identify.
        We begin with a brief literature review in Section 2. It is far from exhaustive, but we focus on
    1
     See Card (2001), Card (2007), Card (2009), Card and Lewis (2007) and Peri and Sparber (2009).
    2
     Recent papers have proposed diﬀerent mechanisms as margins of adjustment to immigration. Lewis (2005) indicates
the choice of technique, Ottaviano and Peri (2008) focus on native-immigrant complementarieties and capital adjustment,
Peri and Sparber (2009) emphasize changes in relative specialization.
   3
     See Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot (2008) or Hanson (2008) for recent surveys.



                                                          2
studies that have employed cross-regional internal migration regressions at similar levels of aggregation
as this will facilitate model comparison. We highlight two seminal works: Card (2001) — which finds no
evidence for displacement using US city data — and Borjas (2006) — which argues for large displacement

eﬀects at the city-level: roughly 3 natives are displaced for every ten immigrants.
    In Section 3 we ask whether the disparate conclusions in these and other studies can be a result

of model specification. Our procedure is similar in spirit to Wolf (2001), who advocates using mi-
crosimulation to develop appropriate empirical models. We extend this idea by using microsimulation
to test for inherent model bias. First we construct hypothetical data using data generating processes

that assume, in turn, that the inflow of foreign-born immigrants is negatively correlated, uncorrelated,
or positively correlated with the inflow of natives. We then test whether previous empirical models
are able to correctly identify the sign and magnitude of the underlying assumed correlation. Unfortu-
nately, empirical model specification is not inconsequential. In particular, Borjas (2006) specifications
are biased toward identifying displacement, and this bias grows larger as the variance of native flows

rises in proportion to the variance of immigrant flows, independently of their correlation.
    This paper does not attempt to replicate the results of prior studies. Diﬀerences in sample se-
lection, period of analysis, and other issues would encumber that endeavor while detracting from the

main issue — we care to show the importance of model specification in correctly identifying the dis-
placement eﬀect of immigrants on natives. Nonetheless, Section 4 employs a number of alternative
empirical specifications to briefly analyze the association between immigration and native migration
using observed data from 32 skill-cells and 51 US states (including the District of Columbia) over
Census years 1970-2000. Of the models we explore, only the Borjas (2006) specifications reveal a
significantly negative correlation. Given the bias uncovered in Section 3, we suspect that this finding
for native displacement is spurious, and instead conclude that no evidence for displacement exists.



2     Native Displacement in the Existing Literature

A straightforward definition of displacement would ask how many native workers ( ) respond to the
arrival of a single immigrant ( ) by leaving their region (state or city) of residence .4 Assuming that

the native employment response (∆ ) to an immigrant inflow (∆ ) is linear (at least in first order
   4
     This definition could be further refined to account for arrivals of immigrants who share similar skill characteristics
or occupations of natives within regions.




                                                            3
approximation), this would imply that the coeﬃcient  in Expression (1) would allow us to identify
the presence (if   0) and the magnitude (absolute value of ) of such a phenomenon.


                                            ∆ =  +  · ∆ +                                           (1)


   The term  in Equation (1) captures all the determinants of native employment changes in region 
and year  other than the response to immigration inflows. If we allow ( ) to represent the systematic
determinants of native employment changes, the final term would reduce to  = ( ) +  , where
 is a residual zero-mean random component. By controlling for ( ), we could directly estimate
 from a standard regression of (1). In practice, few if any papers actually employ this direct test of
displacement. The regression is likely to be confounded by a number of problems, one being that the
average and standard deviation of ∆ and ∆ are likely to be proportional to the total population
in the cell, potentially inducing a spurious positive correlation.


2.1   Card (2001) and Card (2007)

Card (2001) and Card (2007) oﬀer a solution by standardizing native and foreign-born changes by
population levels. This allows for well behaved residuals (after also controlling for systematic eﬀects).
Card (2001) begins with the identity in (2), which relates the flow (between periods  − 1 and ) of

native and foreign-born individuals in any observable cell. The variables  and  represent the stock
of native and foreign-born workers, while  =  +  is total employment. The superscripts  and

  refer to established and newly-arrived immigrants, respectively.

                    µ               ¶       µ                 ¶       µ                   ¶       µ           ¶
                         − −1                − −1                  − −1                
                                        =                         +                           +                   (2)
                           −1                    −1                       −1                    −1

   Card (2007) instead adopts a more generalized approach by substituting  =  +  to

arrive at the quantitatively equivalent identity in (3).

                             µ                  ¶       µ                 ¶       µ               ¶
                                  − −1                   − −1                  − −1
                                                    =                         +                                   (3)
                                    −1                       −1                      −1

   The key to the empirical estimation in both papers is that the final term (in either identity) may
be causally correlated with the other terms. Card (2001) tests whether newly-arrived immigrants



                                                               4
                                    ³              ´        ³            ´
                                         −−1                 
displace natives by regressing            −1         on       −1         across a single cross-section of 175 US cities and
six occupation groups for the year 1990 (with 1985 representing  − 1). Though this precludes him
from exploiting the advantages of a panel dataset, his regressions do include dummy variables for cities

and occupation groups.5 Negative values would imply displacement. Regressions employing various
sample selection criteria and instrumental variables techniques, however, find robustly non-negative
coeﬃcients ranging from 0.02 to 0.27. Thus, his results argue against a native internal migration
response.
       The most significant methodological diﬀerence between Card (2001) and (2007) is that the former

tests the eﬀects of newly-arrived immigrants, whereas the latter’s interest is in the eﬀects of foreign-
born flows in the aggregate. Table 3 of Card (2007) provides estimation results for regressions of
Equation (4) across a single cross-section of US cities ().6

                             µ                   ¶                            µ                   ¶
                                  − −1                                     − −1
                                                       =  +   ·                                 +                (4)
                                     −1                                           −1

       Under this specification, displacement occurs if estimated coeﬃcients are less than one.7 Although

the migration analysis is not as thorough as in Card (2001), the results again argue against displace-
ment. Estimated coeﬃcients are near two for OLS regressions and near one for IV specifications. None
of the estimates is significantly below one.


2.2      Borjas (2006)

Unlike most analyses of internal migration, Borjas (2006) has the distinct quality of being motivated by
theory. It begins with a model of labor demand such that native and foreign born workers are perfect
substitutes within skill-region groups. Foreign-born arrivals are assumed to be exogenous and constant

over time. Wages respond immediately to the increase in labor supply, whereas native labor supply has
a lagged response because it is diﬃcult for natives to instantaneously move. Theoretical implications
can be found on pages 226-8. Relevant ones for this paper include 1) Internal native migration

mitigates wage eﬀects identified through spacial regressions, thereby attesting to the importance of
   5
     Estimated coeﬃcients appear in the fourth column of his Table 4.
   6
     Since Card (2007) is a single cross-section of cities, but not city-by-occupation cells, dummy variables are not
permitted. Regressions do include the log of initial city population as a control.                            
   7                                                                                               −−1
     An equivalent and perhaps more direct approach would replace the dependent variable with        −1
                                                                                                                 and test
whether   0.




                                                                    5
determining whether an internal migration response occurs; 2) The current stock (and wage) of native
workers is determined by preexisting conditions including initial (pre-immigration) native stocks; and
3) Internal migration coeﬃcients are accurately estimated only if regressions control for local labor

market conditions.
   Borjas’s theory oﬀers useful insights for estimating the eﬀects of immigration, particularly in

highlighting the need to control for pre-determined conditions and trends. Unfortunately, parameters
in the theoretical model cannot be estimated directly. Instead, Borjas imposes a series of assumptions
to derive the empirical specification in (5).

                             µ           ¶
                                
 ln( ) =  +  1 ·               +  ·  +  +  +   + ( ×  ) + ( ×   ) + ( ×   ) +  (5)
                              + 

   Borjas performs this regression across 32 skill groups  (4 education by 8 experience groups), 51
states , and 5 Census years . The terms  ,  , and   control for skill, state, and year fixed eﬀects.

The three subsequent terms control for all two-way interactions between these eﬀects. Finally, 
represents optional controls that include, depending on the specification, the lagged level or growth
rate of native employment.
   Equation (5) oﬀers a few clear advantages over prior methodologies. First, the full array of fixed
eﬀects account for the initial conditions that, according to theory, would bias results if omitted from the

model. Second, the fixed eﬀects imply that the coeﬃcient  1 is identified by the variations over
time within narrowly defined skill-region cells. This should directly identify the eﬀect of immigrants
on the group of natives most closely competing with them for jobs. Third, Borjas (2006) uses a long

panel, not just a single cross-section.
   Closer inspection of the dependent and explanatory variables in (5) reveals a potentially severe

limitation, however. It is easy to see that  appears both in the dependent variable ln ( ) and
                                                             
in the denominator of the explanatory variable             + .   Thus, the construction of the dependent
and explanatory variables may mechanically force a negative correlation between them even when no

displacement relationship between immigrant inflows and native outflows truly exists.
   To illustrate this issue, suppose that initial employment levels 0 and 0 are predetermined in
period  = 0. They are fixed and controlled for by fixed eﬀects  ×  . The dependent variable at  = 1
                                                                                      0 +∆
will then be ln(0 + ∆ ) while the explanatory variable will be            0 +0 +∆ +∆ .   Even if there
is zero correlation between the random variables ∆ and ∆ (so that displacement is nonexistent),

                                                           6
                                                                                                    0 +∆
one would find a negative correlation between ln(0 + ∆ ) and                            0 +0 +∆ +∆       since ∆
appears in the numerator of former and the denominator of the latter. For example, the correlation

would be negative and fully driven by the presence of ∆ in the case that ∆ were a constant for
all  .
        Borjas (1980) introduces the concept of a “division bias” somewhat reminiscent of this by noting

that measurement error of  (in this case) would lead to biased coeﬃcient estimates. The problem is
more severe in this context, however, as the bias exists because of (and is a function of) the variance of
∆ (which is in large part independent of ∆ ). As we will see in Section 3.3.1, this bias intensifies

with the increase in the standard deviation of ∆ relative to the standard deviation of ∆ .
        Borjas (2006) is aware of the potential for some form of division bias and addresses it by replacing
the dependent variable with a measure of net native migration. His resulting alternative specification
is computationally similar to Equation (6). The denominator in the dependent variable now includes
an average of the native population in the current and previous time periods. Borjas argues that

division bias should be mitigated because a measure of current-year native employment appears in the
denominator on both sides of the equation.



µ                           ¶                  µ               ¶
       − −1                                 
                                = + 2 ·                 +· + + +  +( × )+( ×  )+( ×  )+
    ( + −1 ) 2                           + 
                                                                                                                     (6)
   Nonetheless, this specification may also be biased. If we again consider 0 and 0 as given and
                                                                              ³              ´
                                                                                   ∆0
controlled for by the fixed eﬀects, the dependent variable in  = 1 will be ln 0 +05∆
                                                                                              . As before,
                                                0 +∆
the explanatory variable will be          0 +0 +∆ +∆ .    The term ∆ raises the dependent variable
while decreasing the explanatory variable. This would induce a negative correlation independently of

any true displacement mechanism, as long as the random variable ∆ has a positive variance.
        Results for state-level regressions of Borjas’s (2006) baseline specification are in Panel II of his
Table 3. For the sample including just male employees, he finds a significant coeﬃcient of -0.383. The
magnitude drops to -0.218 for a sample with all employees, but it remains significant. These estimates
imply that for every ten immigrants arriving in a skill-state cell, between 1.6 and 2.8 natives leave or
                                          ³                  ´
                                              −−1
lose their jobs.8 Robustness checks using ( +−1 )2 as the dependent variable are in Borjas’s
                                                                                   2
    8                                                               −                    − 
        Figures can be calculated by dividing coeﬃcients by 1 +                 , where           ≈ 0172 in the Borjas



                                                               7
Table 4. Coeﬃcients are -0.284 and -0.232 for male and all native employees, respectively. Thus,
Borjas maintains that the native internal migration response to immigration is large and significant.


2.3    Other Specifications

Card (2001, 2007) and Borjas (2006) — though perhaps the most influential — are not the only papers

that have analyzed internal migration. Here we review a few more that have used alternative empirical
specifications to estimate displacement.
    Cortes’s (2006) working paper on immigration and price-levels included the regression in (7) to
analyze internal migration among low-education workers across the 25 largest US cities in the 1980,
1990, and 2000 Censuses ( and  represent city and time fixed eﬀects). She argues that displace-

ment would be implied by negative estimates of   , but she finds an OLS figure around 0.20 and
an IV value near 0.05. She therefore argues against displacement.


                            ln ( +  ) =  +  1 · ln ( ) +  +  +                              (7)

    Unfortunately, this model presents potentially serious limitations. First, it is not clear how one
should deal with observations in which  (or  ) is zero, although this does not occur in Cortes’s
data set. Second, the models might find a positive correlation due to scale eﬀects. Namely, some
skill-state groups may be much larger than others, and a positive correlation in the size of native and
immigrant employment may lead to positive estimates of   . Fixed eﬀects and the measurement

of variables in logarithms should mitigate this problem, but it might not solve it altogether.9 Third
and most importantly, note that  appears in both the dependent and explanatory variables. This
is likely to build a positive correlation into the model and produce spuriously positive estimates of

  when some small displacement does exist. Equation (9) provides an alternative specification
that avoids this positive bias by adopting ln ( ) as the dependent variable.
(2006) data.
   9
     Perhaps these limitations encouraged Cortes to respecify her model for the (2008) published version. This alternative,
in Equation (8), tests whether the eﬀects of immigration in a city spill-over into larger regions (). The model is close to
the working paper version of Card (2005) and implies displacement if   1. Cortes’s (2008) point estimates (her Table
4) are often less than one, leading her to concede that there may be “some displacement taking eﬀect,” but none of the
estimates is significantly diﬀerent from one.
                                                               
                                    +              
                                                   =+·            +   +   +                              (8)
                                                         




                                                             8
                               ln ( ) =  +  2 · ln ( ) +  +  +                             (9)

         Evidence for displacement is provided in Borjas, Freeman, and Katz (1997, page 31) who argue that
“To isolate the impact of immigration on the net migration of native workers, one needs a diﬀerence-in-

diﬀerence comparison of how a given state’s population grows before and after the immigrant supply
shock.” This methodology requires the identification of a single date in which such an immigrant supply

shock occurred. The authors choose 1970 as the break date, and use cross-state variation to perform
the regression in (10). Their estimate of    = −0756 is significant and favors displacement.

µ                     ¶µ ¶              µµ                   ¶ µ ¶ µ                   ¶ µ ¶¶
    1990 − 1970     1                1990 − 1970    1    1970 − 1960     1
                       ·    = +   ·                      ·    −                    ·       +
         1970         20                     1970         20        1960         10
                                                                                             (10)
         Note that this methodology is similar to fixed eﬀects regressions of the employment change of
native workers on the inflows of immigrants so that the coeﬃcient is identified on changes of first dif-
ferences (diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences). In Section 3 we will adopt specifications of this type that therefore
encompass specification (10) above.
         Other papers estimating some form of an internal migration equation generally argue against
displacement. See Peri (2009), Card and Lewis (2007), Card and DiNardo (2000), and Card (2005)
for example.10 We do not evaluate their methodologies in this paper, however.



3         Simulated Data and Resulting Regressions

Observed data can complicate regressions that attempt to identify displacement. This may include,

for example, issues such as variation in cell size, the influence of outliers, pre-determined conditions,
trends, omitted variables, or other features that may bias estimates and generate spurious results. By
creating artificial data, however, we can perform a microsimulation analysis and run regressions that

abstract away from these complications in order to evaluate the eﬃcacy (and potential inherent bias)
of the regression specifications themselves.

         In this section we simulate a world in which we know whether or not displacement exists. We
    10
     Peri (2009, page 2) analyzes California relative to the rest of the US. He finds no evidence for displacement, and
instead argues that foreign and native born workers within a skill group complement each other to the same extent as
workers of diﬀerent experience levels do. Card and Lewis (2007) estimate the eﬀect of low skilled Mexican immigrants
on native employment. Their Table 5 results find an eﬀect of low skilled immigrants on natives between 0 and 0.5 that
is rarely significant.


                                                          9
assume the data generating process given by Expression (1). We create several datasets with unique
assumed values of . Negative values, according to our definition, imply displacement. Positive values
imply that immigrants somehow attract natives. After creating our datasets, we then evaluate the

regression results given by specifications (4)-(9) to assess whether they identify the correct displace-
ment implications given the assumed data generating process. As we will see, some specifications are

inherently biased and identify displacement conclusions inconsistent with the true process in the data.


3.1      Data Generating Processes

Following the structure of the state and skill-level data as used in Borjas (2006), we will create a
dataset with 8,160 cells representing 5 census years (1960-2000), , 51 states (including the District
of Columbia), , and 32 skill groups (4 education groups by 8 experience groups), . We simulate
the data but the unconditional moments (average and standard deviation of ∆ and ∆ ) are
chosen to match those in the data.

       To construct these moments (as well as the data used in the Section 4 empirical analysis), we use
the 1% sample from the 1960 Census, Form 2 State sample in 1970, and the 5% samples from 1980-
2000.11 We include non-group quarter, civilian employees, age 18-64, who record having positive weeks

worked, for wages, in identifiable occupations and industries.12 We identify four education groups —
those with less than a high school degree, high school graduates, those with some college experience,

and workers with a bachelors degree or more education. For experience groups, we first identify the
age a worker was likely to enter the workforce. We assume dropouts entered at age 17, high school
graduates at 19, those with some college experience at 21, and college graduates at age 23. We then

calculate a person’s potential experience as their age minus their age of workforce entry. Individuals
are then placed into groups of 1-5 years of experience, 6-10 years, and so on. Those with less than one
year of experience are dropped. Next, we sum the number of individuals (by census weights) employed

in each year-state-education-experience cell to obtain  and  and their changes over time.
       We create simulated data by normalizing initial employment levels in each skill-state cells to 200,000

employees, 6% of which are foreign born (figures are comparable to the average in employment cells in
1960). We then draw hypothetical values of ∆ from a random normal distribution of mean 1,055
  11
    We use IPUMS data from Ruggles et. al. (2005).
  12
    Perhaps our most controversial sample selection decision was to include individuals who are currently enrolled in
school. Although those people are employed, they may be marginally attached to the labor force. Specific STATA
commands used for the sample selection are available upon request.


                                                         10
and standard deviation 2,534 — values that correspond to observed figures after removing observations
that lie more than three standard deviations away from the mean. Data for ∆ comes from the data
generating process in (1). We create five separate data series — one each for  = {−1 −05 0 05 1}.
Full displacement occurs when  = −1. Conversely,  = 1 implies a 1-for-1 native attraction to
immigration. The mean-zero error term  is drawn from a normal distribution designed to generate

a standard deviation of ∆ matched by the data (18,104, after removing outliers). The constant
 is chosen to ensure that the mean of ∆ equals 6,443, the value observed in the data (also after
removing outliers).


3.2   Regression Results for Simulated Data

The initial 1960 and 1960 values, combined with randomly generated ∆ and ∆ terms,
allow the creation of  and  for each simulated year and all the variables necessary for esti-
mating the specifications (4)-(9). Since the data generating process assumed identical initial values

across cells, we exclude initial year observations from the regressions. This leaves 6,528 remaining
observations, from which we drop all outliers (cells with a dependent or explanatory variable more
than three standard deviations from its mean).
   Table 1 shows the estimates of the relevant coeﬃcient in each of six specifications. The regressions
in Table 1 do not include fixed eﬀects. Results for the alternative specifications are listed in separate

columns and are defined in the column headers by the authors who employ the methodology. Headers
also show the exact specification of the dependent and explanatory variables. Each row uses a diﬀerent
value of   in the data generating process as defined by (1) and reported in the first column of

Table 1. The first row ( = −1) assumes perfect displacement. One native worker leaves his/her
state-by-skill cell of employment for every immigrant who enters. Each subsequent row then increases
 by increments of 0.5 so that the third row assumes no relationship between native and foreign
employment changes, and the final row assumes a perfect 1-for-1 native attraction to foreign workers.
   The first column tests Card’s (2007) methodology, which argues for displacement if ̂   1.

Estimates are consistently correct — they are significantly less than one when the data generating
process assumes displacement, near one for   values that assume zero-displacement, and greater
than one when the data incorporate attraction. The methodology appears to capture displacement

appropriately.



                                                   11
   The next two columns examine Borjas’s (2006) specifications. The first is his baseline model.
Unfortunately, ̂ 1 does not correctly identify displacement but instead exhibits a strong negative
bias — the model identifies significant false negatives even when the true generating process implies
that natives are perfectly attracted to immigrants (  = 1). We suspect this is a result of the bias
discussed in Section 2.2. Large variation of ∆ simultaneously depress the explanatory variable

while inflating the response variable, holding  and ∆ constant. The alternative Borjas (2006)
                     ³                   ´
                         −−1
specification using (  −−1 )2   as the dependent variable mitigates the bias, but it does not
fully solve the problem. Column 3 illustrates that this alternative still identifies a negative coeﬃcient
³           ´
  ̂ 2 for each data-set, including those simulated with assumed    0.
   In contrast, the first Cortes (2006) specification in the next column exhibits a positive bias. Perhaps
this too should be unsurprising given that  appears in some form on both sides of the regression

equation. The clearer “Cortes (2006) Alternative” specification instead regresses ln( ) on ln( ) and
tests  2 = 0. This alternative continues to exhibit a positive bias — probably due to scale eﬀects

— though it is less severe.
   The final column in Table 1 is a test of our generating process itself. Although the error terms in
the data generating process were drawn from a mean-zero distribution, finite sample noise implies that

the actual error observations are not mean-zero. Thus, estimation of (1) could result in coeﬃcients
that diﬀer from true values. Fortunately, diﬀerences driven by finite sample noise are small, and the
estimates are similar to the   values.

   Table 2 performs exactly the same regressions but with fixed eﬀects. This feature should be
particularly relevant for Borjas regressions (who argues for the necessity of fixed eﬀects) and the
non-dynamic specifications (since change-regressions should already diﬀerence-out any cell-specific
features). Fixed eﬀects specifications deliver results quite comparable to regressions without fixed
eﬀects, however. The Card (2007) specification continues to generate accurate conclusions, while
Borjas’s (2006) regressions continue to exhibit negative bias. That is, fixed eﬀects do not solve the
incorrect displacement identification in the two Borjas (2006) methods.




                                                   12
3.3     Exploring the Source of Bias

3.3.1    Relative Standard Deviation

The regressions in Tables 1 and 2 highlight an important limitation — the Borjas (2006) specifications

exhibit a large bias in favor of displacement. The regressions in Table 3 help to inform the source of
this bias. An important stylized fact about both the observed and simulated data is that the standard
deviation of ∆ is 7.14 times greater than that of ∆ . Section 2 discussed how large variation in

∆ exacerbates the bias toward negative values built into the Borjas model. Table 3 better explores
the importance of variation of ∆ . We now alter the data generating process so that the standard
deviation of the simulated ∆ values equal the observed level (middle row), half of the observed

level (top row), and twice the level of the observed figure (bottom row). Each row assumes   = 0
so that neither displacement nor attraction occurs. The estimated specifications include fixed eﬀects
only if the explanatory variables are not diﬀerenced.
   Two fascinating and important regularities emerge. First, the standard deviation of ∆ has
little eﬀect on the coeﬃcient estimates in columns 1, 4, 5, and 6, though larger standard deviations

usually correspond to larger standard errors. The Borjas estimates in Columns 2 and 3, in contrast,
are negative and increasing in absolute value as the standard deviation of ∆ rises (keeping the the
standard deviation of ∆ constant). Even when ∆ has a small standard deviation, the Borjas

method identifies a negative and significant correlation when there should be none. This confirms our
                                                ³            ´
                                                    
intuition that the negative correlation between  +  
                                                               and ln ( ) increases with the variance of

∆ even when the employment changes of natives and immigrants are uncorrelated.
   A graphical analysis of the assumed data generating process and the regression results is even more
illustrative. We do this by first generating several unique datasets. Each is defined by an assumed

value of  ∈ [−1 1], increasing by units of 0.1, and an assumed multiple of the standard deviation of
∆ relative to that of ∆ . We represent this multiple by  ∈ [02 2] and also increase it by units of
0.1. We repeat these steps for ten set random seed generators. This results in 3,990 unique datasets
from which we drop the 665 datasets that predict one or more negative values for  or  .
   Figure 1 displays four scatter-plots. The top two evaluate the Card (2007) methodology, and the

bottom two illustrate the baseline Borjas (2006) specification. The horizontal axis in the left two
graphs represents the  value assumed by the data generating process, while the horizontal axis in the
right two charts represents the assumed multiple of the observed relative standard deviation. Recall

                                                    13
that  = 0 implies zero displacement and  = 1 represents the observed relative standard deviation
value of 7.14. Each dot in the scatter-plot then represents the unique coeﬃcient estimate for the
relevant specification determined by , , and the random seed generator.

   At a minium, a methodology for examining displacement should deliver coeﬃcient estimates that
increase in the assumed  value. Better methodologies would exhibit small variation in the estimates

for a given . Moreover, estimates should be insensitive to assumptions regarding the relative standard
deviation of ∆ . The two top panels of Figure 1 clearly demonstrate that the Card (2007) methodology
meets these criteria. The top-left figure shows that as   varies, estimates of   cluster around

(1 +   ). This implies that displacement conclusions in Card (   1) are usually associated
                                                                                                 b
with displacement in the data (   0). The top-right figure also shows that the estimates of  

are centered around one for   = 0 no matter what value is taken by the standard deviation of
                                                                       b1 is almost always
∆. The corresponding graphs for Borjas (2006), in contrast, show that 
negative even when    0. When the relative standard deviation of ∆ rises, the estimates of
b1 are more likely to be negative in sign, larger in magnitude, and increasingly precise.



3.3.2   Number of Cells

A secondary issue might involve the size and number of cells. The advantage of small cells is that it
minimizes heterogeneity within cells when using real data. The disadvantage is that it reduces the
number of available observations while potentially increasing the risk of heavy influence from single
outliers. We explore the consequences of cell size by employing an alternative data generating process

that reduces the number of skill groups from 32 to just 2 (“high” and “low” education groups, for
example). We create data similar to the procedure described above, except that we increase in initial
cell size to 2,000,000, and we change the sampling procedure to match the appropriate moments in

the observed data. Using these smaller cells, the observed mean and standard deviation of ∆ are
(104,863; 192,159), while the corresponding values for ∆ are (16,747; 32,378).
   Table 4 presents results analogous to those in Tables 1 and 2, using fixed eﬀects when appropriate.

Table 5 examines the consequences of varying the standard deviation of ∆ in this smaller sample
with larger size cells. Both tables support the prior conclusions. Most regressions correctly identify the

correlation between immigration and internal native migration, but the Borjas specifications exhibit




                                                   14
a negative bias that grows as the standard deviation of ∆ increases.13



4         Empirical Results Using Observed Data

Wolf (2001, page 317) argues that if “microsimulation output produces a finding that is sharply at odds
with known [i.e., simulated] facts, then. . . one must return to the model, prepared to respecify it.”
Section 3 identified inherent biases in several models that have been employed by economists to assess

the displacement eﬀects of immigration. Of course, these biases would have been unknown to analysts,
thus preventing them from respecifying their models if necessary. In this section, we assess how each of
the previously-described model specifications performs when using observed — rather than simulated
— data. We neither advocate nor produce exact replication of prior work, as the analyses substantially
diﬀer along a number of dimensions (e.g., sample selection, the time period of analysis, the definition

of cells used in the regressions, etc.). However, the use of observed data within the methodological
framework of past studies should still be informative about the diﬀerences in displacement conclusions
that have emerged in the literature.
         Table 6 presents the results for these regressions. The data represents a panel of 51 “state” by 32
skill-group cells in each of four Census years (1970-2000) for a total of 6528 observations. Standard
errors are clustered at the skill-state level since actual data may be correlated within cells over time.

The estimates reported in the two rows of Table 6 are distinguished solely by whether or not the
regressions include fixed eﬀects. None of the specifications employ instrumental variables to control

for endogeneity, so one should be cautious in ascribing a causal role in correlative relationships. These
regressions simply reveal the correlation in the data, with and without controlling for an array of fixed
eﬀects.

         In the absence of fixed eﬀects, Borjas regressions argue for displacement, while all other specifi-
cations suggest a positive relationship between immigration and native employment. The inclusion
of fixed eﬀects reduces the magnitudes of each coeﬃcient. This supports the larger point in Bor-

jas (2006) — regressions exploring native internal migration should account for initial conditions and
trends. Otherwise results will be biased. It is important to add, however, that only Borjas’s baseline

specification continues to find a significantly negative relationship between immigration and native
    13
    Note that the standard deviation of ∆ is seven times larger than that of ∆ when using the less-aggregated
state-skill cells, and is six times larger when using more-aggregated cells. This similarity in relative variation might be
one reason why the Borjas magnitudes in Tables 3 and 5 are similar.


                                                            15
internal migration once fixed eﬀects are included. The other specifications either identify attraction
or neither displacement nor attraction. Given the inherent negative bias uncovered in the Borjas’
specifications, we believe that there is no evidence for a true displacement eﬀect. The correlation

evidence, at least prima facie, does not support displacement.
    In choosing a preferred specification, we might be inclined to advocate something like Card’s

(2007) methodology — Equation (4) — but with the following modification: Replace the dependent
        ³          ´      ³          ´
variable − −1
             −1
                     with    −−1
                              −1      First, this would lead to coeﬃcient estimates that are exactly
one less than the Card (2007) estimates provided in this (and his) paper and would provide a more

direct test of displacement. That is, the coeﬃcient would translate directly into the number of native
employees who respond to one extra immigrant worker in the group. Second, the model would not be
aﬀected by cell size, nor it would force any artificial correlation between the dependent and explanatory

variables. Third, it is even more demanding than (5) in controlling for pre-determined trends of native
employment growth since it expresses the variables in diﬀerences, not levels, and still controls for an
array of fixed eﬀects. The identifying variation therefore comes from deviations of growth rates from
skill-state specific trends. Finally, the regression can employ observations in which  or  equal
zero, unlike natural log specifications. Such a specification (including all fixed eﬀects and using the

US state-skill data) would generate a significant coeﬃcient of 1.361 and suggest a strong attraction
between immigrants and natives.



5    Conclusions

The debate on the labor market eﬀects of immigration is important from an academic and policy
point of view. It is essential that we have a good understanding of the potential crowding-out of
native workers that immigrants might cause. Analysis of the correlation between immigrant and
native employment within skill-state groups over time might be able to provide or deny support to
the crowding out theory. Should displacement exist, then not only would immigration decrease native

employment opportunities, but cross-region analyses of the wage eﬀects of immigration would be
invalid. In particular, the negative wage consequences of immigration would be much more severe

than the small eﬀects found by area studies if displacement occurs. As recent papers find diﬀerent
answers to this question using similar data but diﬀerent empirical methodologies, this paper aims at
explaining where these diﬀerences come from.


                                                   16
   We generated several artificial datasets and then used them to explore whether diﬀerent regression
specifications are able to robustly and correctly identify the native displacement consequences of
immigration. Some models (notably Card 2007) performed well and correctly uncovered negative

relationships when displacement was assumed in the data generating process, while also identifying a
positive relationship when native attraction to immigration was assumed. Borjas (2006) specifications,

however, exhibited a strong bias toward displacement. This is likely due to an inherent and mechanical
bias created by including a measure of native employment in the denominator of the explanatory
variable and in the numerator of the dependent variable. Further simulations support this conclusion

by showing that the bias becomes larger as the standard deviation of native employment changes
grows in relation to the standard deviation of immigration flows.
   Regressions that use real data fail to uncover a significant relationship between immigration and
native migration, and instead mostly estimate no displacement and no attraction. The exceptions,
however, are Borjas (2006) specifications that systematically find displacement. Though we cannot

interpret the eﬀects as causal, we believe that inherent bias in the Borjas specifications, coupled
with the consistency of results across alternative models, combine to provide no evidence in favor of
displacement. Our results therefore preserve the validity of other cross-region empirical analyses of

the eﬀects of immigration.




                                                 17
References

Borjas, George. 1980. “The Relationship between Wages and Weekly Hours of Work: The Role of
Division Bias.” Journal of Human Resources 15, no. 3: 409-423.

Borjas, George. 2006. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration.”

Journal of Human Resources 41, no.2: 221-258.

Borjas, George, Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence Katz. 1997. “How much Do Immigration and

Trade Aﬀect Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, no. 1: 1-67.

Card, David. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 43, no 2: 245-257.

Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
Higher Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19, no. 1: 22-64.

Card, David 2005 “Is The New Immigration Really So Bad?” Economic Journal, 2005, Volume 115,
pp.300.323.

Card, David. 2007. “How Immigration Aﬀects U.S. Cities.” CReAM Discussion Paper, no. 11/07.

Card, David 2009. “Immigration and Inequality.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
99:2, 1-21.

Card, David, and John DiNardo. 2000. “Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?” NBER
Working Paper, no. 7578, Cambridge, Ma.

Card, David, and Ethan Lewis. 2007. “The Diﬀusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Expla-
nations and Impacts.” In Borjas, George, editor Mexican Immigration to the United States. National
Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report, Cambridge MA.

Cortes, Patricia. 2006. “The Eﬀect of Low-Skilled Immigration on US Prices: Evidence from CPI
Data.” Ph.D. Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Cortes, Patricia. 2008. “The Eﬀect of Low-Skilled Immigration on US Prices: Evidence from CPI
Data.” Journal of Political Economy 116, no. 3: 381-422.



                                                18
Lewis, Ethan 2005. “Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique.” Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia Working Paper #05-08, May 2005.

Longhi, Simonetta, Peter Nijkamp, and Jacques Poot. 2008. “Meta-Analysis of Empirical Evidence on
the Labour Market Impacts of Immigration.” IZA Discussion Paper 3418, Institute for the Study of

Labor (IZA).

Hanson, Gordon H. 2008. “The Economic Consequences of the International Migration of Labor.”

NBER Working Paper 14490, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri. 2007. “The Eﬀect of Immigration on U.S. Wages and Rents:
A General Equilibrium Approach.” CReAM Discussion Paper no 13/07 London, UK.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Peri Giovanni 2008. “Immigration and National Wages: Clarifying the
Theory and the Empirics” NBER Working Paper 14188, July 2008.

Peri, Giovanni. 2009. “Rethinking the Area Approach: Immigrants and the Labor Market in California,
1960-2005.” Manuscript. UC Davis, Davis CA.

Peri, Giovanni, and Chad Sparber. 2009. “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages.” American

Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Association, Vol. 1(3): 135-69.

Ruggles, Steven , Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia

Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander (2005). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Ver-
sion 3.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and
distributor], 2004. http://www.ipums.org.

Wolf, Douglas A. 2001. “The Role of Microsimulation in Longitudinal Data Analysis.” Canadian

Studies in Population, Vol. 28(2): 313-339.




                                                19
                                                                             Table 1:
                                                   Empirical Models for Identifying Internal Migration Response
                                                    Estimates Using Simulated Data for Skill-Region-Time Cells
      Data              Empirical Model:              Card (2007)            Borjas (2006)        Borjas (2006)        Cortes (2006)       Cortes (2006)         Equation (1)
    Generating                                                                 Baseline            Alternative                              Alternative            in Text
     Process
                 Dependent
         ΔN      Variable:                         Δ(N+F)/(lag N+F)               ln(N)          (ΔN) / (Avg N)            ln(N+F)               ln(N)                ΔN
                 Explanatory
         ΔF      Variable:                          (ΔF) / (lag N+F)            F / (N+F)            F / (N+F)              ln(F)               ln(F)                 ΔF
        βDGP     Displacement if :                     βCard < 1               β Borjas1 < 0         βBorjas2 < 0         βCortes1 < 0        βCortes2 < 0           β<0
         -1      Coefficient on                          -0.056                  -3.626               -1.572                0.029              -0.035               -1.005
  (Displacement) Explanatory                            (0.089)                (0.079)***           (0.053)***           (0.006)***          (0.006)***           (0.088)***
        -0.5     Variable:                               0.430                   -3.415               -1.479                0.058              -0.005               -0.505
  (Displacement) (Standard Error)                     (0.089)***               (0.083)***           (0.055)***           (0.006)***            (0.006)            (0.089)***
          0                                              0.902                   -3.168               -1.382                0.087               0.026               -0.030
     (No effect)                                      (0.090)***               (0.087)***           (0.056)***           (0.006)***          (0.006)***             (0.089)
         0.5                                             1.376                   -2.884               -1.261                0.116               0.057                0.458
    (Attraction)                                      (0.089)***               (0.091)***           (0.058)***           (0.006)***          (0.006)***           (0.089)***
          1                                              1.854                   -2.554               -1.140                0.144               0.088                0.949
    (Attraction)                                      (0.089)***               (0.095)***           (0.061)***           (0.006)***          (0.006)***         (0.088)***
                 Obs (Min)                                6475                    6432                 6434                 6426                6422                 6500
                 Obs (Max)                                6481                    6438                 6445                 6433                6426                 6503
                 Fixed Effects                             No                      No                    No                   No                  No                  No
Note: Results from regressions employing data generated from the process described in Equation (1) of the text. The values of βDGP = {-1, -0.5, 0, 0.5, 1} used are reported in the
first column. Immigrants are said to displace natives if βDGP <0, and attract natives if βDGP >0. Each column uses a different empirical model for identifying displacement,
identified in the first three rows of the column. Each cell represents a coefficient estimate from the regression specification of the column’s methodology when the βDGP value in
the corresponding row is used in the data generating process (DGP). The final column, as a check, uses the DGP’s regression specification. Units of observations are skill-state
cells. There are 32 skill levels, 51 regions and 4 years.
***Significant at 1%; **Significant at 5%; *Significant at 10%




                                                                                        20
                                                                             Table 2:
                                       Empirical Models for Identifying Internal Migration Response, Adding Fixed Effects
                                                   Estimates Using Simulated Data for Skill-Region-Time Cells
       Data               Empirical Model:               Card (2007)            Borjas (2006)         Borjas (2006)         Cortes (2006)         Cortes (2006)     Equation (1)
     Generating                                                                   Baseline             Alternative                                 Alternative        in Text
      Process
                 Dependent
         ΔN      Variable:                            Δ(N+F)/(lag N+F)                ln(N)           (ΔN) / (Avg N)            ln(N+F)                ln(N)            ΔN
                 Explanatory
         ΔF      Variable:                            (ΔF) / (lag N+F)             F / (N+F)             F / (N+F)                ln(F)                ln(F)            ΔF
        βDGP     Displacement if :                         βCard < 1              β Borjas1 < 0          βBorjas2 < 0          βCortes1 < 0         βCortes2 < 0       β<0
         -1      Coefficient on                             0.151                   -3.746                -2.214                 -0.015               -0.082           -0.906
  (Displacement) Explanatory                               (0.105)                (0.082)***            (0.109)***             (0.007)**           (0.007)***        (0.103)***
        -0.5     Variable:                                  0.638                   -3.525                -2.044                 0.016                -0.050           -0.402
  (Displacement) (Standard Error)                        (0.106)***               (0.087)***            (0.112)***             (0.007)**           (0.007)***        (0.104)***
          0                                                 1.111                   -3.266                -1.865                 0.047                -0.017            0.064
     (No effect)                                         (0.106)***               (0.092)***            (0.116)***            (0.007)***            (0.007)**          (0.104)
         0.5                                                1.594                   -2.982                -1.657                 0.078                0.016             0.550
    (Attraction)                                         (0.106)***               (0.098)***            (0.121)***            (0.007)***            (0.007)**        (0.104)***
          1                                                 2.081                   -2.640                -1.431                 0.108                0.050             1.037
  (Attraction)                                           (0.105)***               (0.103)***            (0.125)***            (0.007)***           (0.007)***        (0.103)***
                 Obs (Min)                                  6475                     6432                  6434                   6426                 6422             6500
                 Obs (Max)                                  6481                     6438                  6445                   6433                 6426             6503
                 Fixed Effects                            Year*Skill               Year*Skill            Year*Skill            Year*Skill           Year*Skill        Year*Skill
                                                        Year*Region              Year*Region           Year*Region           Year*Region          Year*Region       Year*Region
                                                        Skill*Region             Skill*Region          Skill*Region          Skill*Region         Skill*Region      Skill*Region

Note: All Variables, specifications and definitions are as in Table 1. Year by Skill, Year by region and Skill by region effects are included in all regressions.
***Significant at 1%; **Significant at 5%; *Significant at 10%




                                                                                            21
                                                                         Table 3:
                             Sensitivity of Estimated Displacement to the Standard Deviation of Native Employment Growth
                                                 Estimates Using Simulated Data for Skill-Region-Time Cells


Data Generating           Empirical Model:                Card (2007)            Borjas (2006)        Borjas (2006)       Cortes (2006)        Cortes (2006)        Equation (1)
    Process                                                                        Baseline            Alternative                              Alternative           in Text
                          Dependent
         ΔN               Variable:                    Δ(N+F)/(lag N+F)               ln(N)          (ΔN) / (Avg N)           ln(N+F)               ln(N)                 ΔN
                          Explanatory
         ΔF               Variable:                     (ΔF) / (lag N+F)           F / (N+F)            F / (N+F)               ln(F)                ln(F)                ΔF
                          Displacement if :                βCard < 1              β Borjas1 < 0         βBorjas2 < 0         βCortes1 < 0        βCortes2 < 0            β<0
      βDGP=0                                                 0.953                  -1.056               -0.584                0.054               -0.007                -0.015
                          Coefficient on
  (Small σ[ΔN])                                           (0.045)***              (0.055)***           (0.065)***           (0.003)***           (0.004)**              (0.045)
                          Explanatory
      βDGP=0              Variable:                          0.902                  -3.266               -1.865                0.047               -0.017                -0.030
(Observed σ[ΔN])          (Standard Error)                (0.090)***              (0.092)***           (0.116)***           (0.007)***           (0.007)**              (0.089)
      βDGP=0                                                 0.870                  -5.646               -3.219                0.038               -0.027                -0.045
  (large σ[ΔN])                                           (0.134)***              (0.107)***           (0.149)***           (0.010)***           (0.011)**              (0.134)
                          Obs (Min)                           6458                   6417                 6412                 6414                 6407                  6500
                          Obs (Max)                           6489                   6474                 6481                 6446                 6442                  6500
                          Fixed Effects                        No                  Year*Skill           Year*Skill           Year*Skill          Year*Skill                No
                                                                                 Year*Region          Year*Region          Year*Region          Year*Region
                                                                                 Skill*Region         Skill*Region         Skill*Region         Skill*Region

Note: Variables, specifications and definitions in the Empirical Models are as in Table 1. The data generating process, described in the first column maintains the value of βDGP=0
while it modifies the standard deviation of the native employment changes, σ[ΔN] in each of the three rows. The middle row assumes σΔN/σΔF equals its observed value (7.14),
the top row assumes it equal to 3.57 (half of the observed value), and the bottom row assumes it equal to 14.28 (twice the observed value) Standard Errors in parentheses.
***Significant at 1%; **Significant at 5%; *Significant at 10%




                                                                                        22
                                                                                Table 4:
                                                     Sensitivity of Estimated Displacement to the Number of Cells
                                                       Estimates Using Simulated Data for Skill-Region-Time Cells
       Data              Empirical Model:               Card (2007)            Borjas (2006)         Borjas (2006)         Cortes (2006)   Cortes (2006)    Equation (1)
     Generating                                                                  Baseline             Alternative                           Alternative       in Text
      Process
                 Dependent
         ΔN      Variable:                           Δ(N+F)/(lag N+F)                ln(N)          (ΔN) / (Avg N)             ln(N+F)         ln(N)            ΔN
                 Explanatory
         ΔF      Variable:                            (ΔF) / (lag N+F)            F / (N+F)             F / (N+F)               ln(F)           ln(F)           ΔF
        βDGP     Displacement if :                       βCard < 1               β Borjas1 < 0          βBorjas2 < 0        βCortes1 < 0     βCortes2 < 0      β<0
         -1      Coefficient on                            0.060                   -3.873                 -1.670              -0.053           -0.118          -1.038
  (Displacement) Explanatory                              (0.284)                (0.443)***            (0.564)***            (0.038)        (0.041)***      (0.285)***
        -0.5     Variable:                                 0.546                   -3.698                 -1.515              -0.027           -0.088          -0.539
  (Displacement) (Standard Error)                        (0.287)*                (0.473)***             (0.588)**            (0.039)         (0.042)**       (0.289)*
          0                                                1.031                   -3.566                 -1.337              -0.003           -0.061          -0.161
     (No effect)                                        (0.289)***               (0.499)***             (0.612)**            (0.040)          (0.042)         (0.294)
         0.5                                               1.514                   -3.425                 -1.136               0.026           -0.034          0.339
    (Attraction)                                        (0.288)***               (0.519)***              (0.631)*            (0.040)          (0.043)         (0.293)
          1                                                1.997                   -3.120                 -0.900               0.055           -0.003          0.841
    (Attraction)                                        (0.285)***               (0.548)***               (0.656)            (0.040)          (0.042)       (0.290)***
                 Obs (Min)                                  406                      406                    405                  400             400            405
                 Obs (Max)                                  406                      408                    406                  402             402            407
                 Fixed Effects                               No                   Year*Skill            Year*Skill          Year*Skill       Year*Skill          No
                                                                                Year*Region           Year*Region          Year*Region     Year*Region
                                                                                Skill*Region          Skill*Region         Skill*Region    Skill*Region


Note: All Variables, specifications and definitions are as in Table 1. Skill groups are only 2 (rather than 32) in each region-year.
***Significant at 1%; **Significant at 5%; *Significant at 10%




                                                                                           23
                                                                        Table 5:
                    Sensitivity of Estimated Displacement to the Standard Deviation of Native Employment Growth with Fewer Cells
                                                Estimates Using Simulated Data for Skill-Region-Time Cells


Data Generating             Empirical Model:                 Card (2007)             Borjas (2006)        Borjas (2006)         Cortes (2006)    Cortes (2006)   Equation (1)
Process                                                                                Baseline            Alternative                            Alternative      in Text
                            Dependent
          ΔN                Variable:                     Δ(N+F)/(lag N+F)                ln(N)           (ΔN) / (Avg N)            ln(N+F)          ln(N)           ΔN
                            Explanatory
          ΔF                Variable:                      (ΔF) / (lag N+F)            F / (N+F)             F / (N+F)                ln(F)           ln(F)          ΔF
                            Displacement if :                  βCard < 1              β Borjas1 < 0          βBorjas2 < 0         βCortes1 < 0    βCortes2 < 0      β<0
       βDGP=0                                                   0.988                   -1.030                 -0.151                0.024           -0.030         -0.081
                            Coefficient on
   (Small σ[ΔN])                                             (0.144)***               (0.298)***              (0.332)              (0.020)          (0.021)        (0.147)
                            Explanatory
       βDGP=0               Variable:                           1.031                   -3.566                 -1.337               -0.003           -0.061         -0.161
 (Observed σ[ΔN])           (Standard Error)                 (0.289)***               (0.499)***             (0.612)**             (0.040)          (0.042)        (0.294)
       βDGP=0                                                   1.018                   -6.078                 -2.729               -0.043           -0.108         -0.242
   (large σ[ΔN])                                              (0.432)**               (0.541)***            (0.806)***             (0.059)         (0.064)*        (0.441)
                            Obs (Min)                            405                      405                   404                    399             399           407
                            Obs (Max)                            406                      408                   408                    401             402           407
                            Fixed Effects                         No                   Year*Skill            Year*Skill           Year*Skill      Year*Skill          No
                                                                                     Year*Region           Year*Region           Year*Region     Year*Region
                                                                                     Skill*Region          Skill*Region          Skill*Region    Skill*Region


 Note: All Variables, specifications and definitions are as in Table 3. Skill groups are only 2 (rather than 32) in each region-year.
 Standard Errors in parentheses. ***Significant at 1%; **Significant at 5%; *Significant at 10%




                                                                                            24
                                                                              Table 6:
                                                   Empirical Models Estimates of Internal Migration Response
                                   Estimates Using Observed Data for 32 Skills in 51 US States in Years 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000


Empirical Model:                                                 Card (2007)              Borjas (2006)          Borjas (2006)           Cortes (2006)          Cortes (2006)           Equation (1)
                                                                                            Baseline              Alternative                                    Alternative              in Text
Dependent
Variable:                                                    Δ(N+F)/(lag N+F)                   ln(N)            (ΔN) / (Avg N)              ln(N+F)                  ln(N)                   ΔN
Explanatory
Variable:                                                     (ΔF) / (lag N+F)                F / (N+F)             F / (N+F)                 ln(F)                   ln(F)                   ΔF
Displacement if :                                                βCard < 1                  β Borjas1 < 0           βBorjas2 < 0            βCortes1 < 0           βCortes2 < 0              β<0
Coefficient on                  No Fixed Effects                   3.288                       -0.551                -1.692                   0.425                  0.396                  1.397
Explanatory                                                     (0.527)***                   (0.277)**             (0.054)***              (0.009)***             (0.009)***             (0.234)***
Variable:                     Full Fixed Effects                   2.361                       -0.406                -0.363                   0.022                  0.009                  1.166
(Standard Error)                                                (0.871)***                  (0.093)***             (0.090)***              (0.004)***              (0.004)**             (0.436)***
Observations                                                        6528                        6528                  6528                    6528                   6528                   6528


Note: OLS results from regressions employing observed decennial data from 1970-2000, 51 states, and 32 education*experience skill-cells. Each column represents a different methodology for
identifying displacement and is identified by the column header. Regression in the top column present results without fixed effects. Regressions in the second row present results with year, skill,
region, year*skill, year*region, and skill*region fixed effects. Cells represent unique coefficient estimates given by the regression specification of the column’s methodology and the
exclusion/inclusion of fixed effects as indicated by rows.
Standard Errors in parentheses are cluster-robust at the skill-state level. ***Significant at 1%; **Significant at 5%; *Significant at 10%




                                                                                                   25
     Figure 1: Regression Coefficients for Card (2007) and Borjas (2006) Methodologies for Various
                                  Assumed Data Generating Processes

                                                       Card Methodology                                                                           Card Methodology




                                                                                                              2.5
                         2.5
       Estimated Displacement Coefficient




                                                                                            Estimated Displacement Coefficient
                                                                                                                          2
                                     2




                                                                                                               1.5
                          1.5




                                                                                                         1
           .5       1




                                                                                                .5
                         0




                                                                                                              0
                                            -1   -.5            0             .5   1                                             0           .5                1              1.5         2
                                                        Assumed Beta in DGP                                                          Multiple of SD(Delta_N)/SD(Delta_F) Assumed in DGP




                                                       Borjas Methodology                                                                        Borjas Methodology
                         2




                                                                                                              2
       Estimated Displacement Coefficient




                                                                                            Estimated Displacement Coefficient
                                    0




                                                                                                                         0
                          -2




                                                                                                               -2
                  -4




                                                                                                       -4
         -6




                                                                                              -6
                         -8




                                                                                                              -8




                                            -1   -.5            0             .5   1                                             0           .5                1              1.5         2
                                                        Assumed Beta in DGP                                                          Multiple of SD(Delta_N)/SD(Delta_F) Assumed in DGP




Note: Each point in the figures above represents a displacement regression coefficient identified by the stated regression
methodology resulting from unique datasets created by the data generating process (DGP) in Equation (1). These datasets are
distinguished by distinct random seed generators, assumed values of the true displacement coefficient (βDGP), and multiples (λ)
of the relative standard deviation of shocks to natives and shocks to immigrants (σΔN/σΔF). In particular, we adopt values of βDGP
∈ [-1, 1], increasing in increments of 0.1; values of λ∈ [0.2, 2], also increasing in increments of 0.1; and repeat the process for
ten random seed generators. This results in a potential of 3,990 datasets, coefficient estimates, and points on the figures above.
An assumed βDGP = 0 in the DGP corresponds to no displacement. The observed σΔN/σΔF value in the data (7.14) corresponds to
the multiple value (λ) of 1. Unbiased regression methodologies should identify coefficient estimates that are increasing in βDGP
and unrelated to λ.




                                                                                       26
