                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MUST LOVE KILL THE FAMILY FIRM?

                                          Vikas Mehrotra
                                           Randall Morck
                                          Jungwook Shim
                                      Yupana Wiwattanakantang

                                         Working Paper 16340
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16340


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2010




We are grateful for helpful comments from Royston Greenwood, Amir N. Licht, and seminar participants
at the Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice conference in Edmonton. All remaining errors are the
authors’ responsibility. Randall Morck thanks the SSHRC for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Vikas Mehrotra, Randall Morck, Jungwook Shim, and Yupana Wiwattanakantang. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Must Love Kill the Family Firm?
Vikas Mehrotra, Randall Morck, Jungwook Shim, and Yupana Wiwattanakantang
NBER Working Paper No. 16340
September 2010
JEL No. G3,G34,J12,O17,P5,Z1

                                             ABSTRACT

Family firms depend on a succession of capable heirs to stay afloat. If talent and IQ are inherited,
this problem is mitigated. If, however, progeny talent and IQ display mean reversion (or worse), family
firms are eventually doomed. This is the essence of the critique of family firms in Burkart, Panunzi
and Shleifer (2003). Since family firms persist, solutions to this succession problem must exist. We
submit that marriage can transfuse outside talent and reinvigorate family firms. This implies that changes
to the institution of marriage – notably, a decline in arranged marriages in favor of marriages for
“love”– bode ill for the survival of family firms. Consistent with this, the predominance of family firms
correlates strongly across countries with plausible proxies for arranged marriage norms. Interestingly,
family firm dominance interacted with arranged marriage norms also correlates with lower GDP per
FDSLWDVXJJHVWLQJWKDWFXOWXUDOLQHUWLDPD\DOVRLPSHGHFRQYHUJHQFHWRPRUHHIILFLHQWHFRQRPLF
organization.


Vikas Mehrotra                                      Jungwook Shim
University of Alberta                               National University of Singapore
School of Business                                  %XVLQHVV6FKRRO
Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G2R6                         Mochtar Riady Building
vmehrotr@ualberta.ca                                Singapore 119245
                                                    bspv11@nus.edu.sg
Randall Morck
Faculty of Business                                 Yupana Wiwattanakantang
University of Alberta                               National University of Singapore
Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6                            Business School
and NBER                                            BIZ 1 2-7, 15 Kent Ridge Drive
randall.morck@ualberta.ca                           Singapore 119245
                                                    bizyw@nus.edu.sg
“[To] pass down the ability to command the resources of the nation based on heredity rather than
merit … [is like] choosing the 2020 Olympic team by picking the eldest sons of the gold­medal winners
in the 2000 Olympics.”
                                                                         Warren Buffet, American financier1


1.         Introduction
If business acumen, presumably a combination of intelligence and talent, passed reliably from
generation to generation, either genetically or environmentally, family firms would logically
dominate economic activity. However, intelligence is presently thought, at most, only partly
hereditary, rendering the persistent importance of family firms in many economies a puzzle.
           Like hereditary monarchies, family businesses are vulnerable to a sub‐optimal succession
problem. Top positions in business and government should ideally go to the most talented from the
largest feasible pool of potential candidates. Even were talent partially inherited, the general
population almost certainly contains a more qualified successor than does the limited pool of the
current CEO’s progeny. The bigger the pool, the higher the likelihood it contains an extremely
talented person, all else equal.2
           A growing body of empirical evidence underscores this puzzle. Were IQ and business
acumen not fully hereditary, insufficiently talented heirs eventually weaken chains of succession,
leaving family firms uncompetitive vis‐à‐vis professionally managed firms. Economic selection
should thus favor professional management. Yet family firms predominate in many economies (La
Porta et al. 1999; Fogel 2006). Either business talent is more surely passed from generation to
generation than general intelligence, or another factor is at work.
           Discrepancies between different studies showing different effects of family control on firm
performance now appear resolved. In most of the developed world, large firms controlled by their
founders outperform; those controlled by biological heirs underperform.3 This laggard performance
seems inconsistent with highly inherited business acumen. Consequently, other factors must be
considered.


1 Quoted defending the U.S. inheritance tax in “Dozens of the Wealthy Join to Fight Estate Tax Repeal” by David
Cay Johnston, New York Times, Feb 14th 2001, electronic edition. Inheritance tax rates are known to correlate
inversely with family firm capitalization (Ellul et al. 2008).
2This follows from the statistical theory of extreme values, wherein the probability of drawing at least one
value above any pre‐specified threshold within the range of the distribution rises with the number of draws,
and approaches certainty as the number of draws approaches infinity (Haan and Ferreira 2006).
3   For a highly readable recent survey, see Bertrand & Schoar (2006).



                                                        2
        Certainly, in countries lacking sound property rights, transactions costs impede dealings
between unrelated parties. A more talented professional CEO might not be preferable if his loyalty
to the firm and its shareholders, including the founding family, is rendered suspect by weak legal
rights for shareholders (see, for e.g., La Porta et al. 1999; and Burkart, Panunzi and Shleifer, 2003),
or widespread corruption (Khanna and Palepu 2000; and Khanna and Rivkin 2001). In such cases, a
less talented son might be preferable to an outside agent‐manager; and family firms might emerge
as a second best solution in the absence of dependable shareholder rights (Burkart et al. 2003).
Family firms then ought to be more widespread and long‐lived in less developed countries, which is
observed (Fogel 2006). Consistent with this, family firms perform better in less developed
economies (Khanna and Yafeh 2007) and worse in more developed economies (Bennedsen et al.
2007; Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung 2005; Villalonga and Amit 2006). Without in any way disputing
this reasoning, we offer another potentially complementary explanation.
        We propose that family firms are an effective “second best” solution where arranged
marriage prevail and where people (in business families, at least) do not marry for love. This is
because arranged marriages let business families select for talent, as well as for business and
political connections (Bunkanwanicha et al, 2010). Landes (2006) concludes that arranged
marriages have played a key role in the preservation, predominance, and longevity of business
dynasties across the world. The sociology literature (e.g. Westermarck, 1922, and Coontz, 2005)
shows marriage for love to be a relatively recent and mostly Western phenomenon which arose
with English Romanticism in the 18th and 19th centuries. For most of history, most of the world
relied on parents to arrange the marriages of their children; and much of it still does. Strategically
crafted arranged marriages are especially evident in the historical descriptions of many long‐lived
family firms – Stevenson and Wolfers, (2008) posit that families, via marriage, play a vital role
“filling in” where incomplete market institutions would otherwise hinder economic development.
They argue that marriages internalize business alliances that may be subject ex‐post opportunism in
the absence of a well‐functioning legal system. James (2006) describes marriages as the primary
mechanism for perpetuating family enterprises in pre‐twentieth century Europe, and across much
of the rest of the modern world. James (2006) describes several cases of marriages designed
entirely around the corporate objectives of European family firms.4
        Given this, family firms should become less viable where arranged marriage is more
completely forsaken in favor of marriage‐for‐love, and succession choices should become more fully


4Thus, James (2006) describes the German Franz Haniel arranging for his son to marry a daughter of the
Belgian John Cockerills primarily to learn technological secrets of the Cockerill smelting plants.



                                                     3
divorced from biological heirs. Unfortunately, data on the prevalence of arranged marriages in
different countries and over time are lacking, so this cannot be tested directly.
         However, Hofstede (1980, 1991, 1994, 1998, 2001) uses survey results to construct cross‐
country data on various dimensions of culture that should arguably be closely related to marriage
patterns. For example, arranged marriage should be more resilient in cultures that embrace social
inequality more broadly. Cultures that devalue individual well‐being in favor of family or group
welfare are also arguably more resistant to marriage‐for‐love and more amenable to arranged
marriages. Cultures in which traditional masculine power roles are more evident might likewise
subject marriages to a patriarch’s veto. Finally, cultures that more strongly discourage risk‐taking
are arguably more resistant to change in general, and thus to changing longstanding marriage
patterns.
         Our econometric results show family firms to be rarer where national cultures accept
inequality more broadly, value the group or family more highly relative to the individual, or
denigrate risk‐taking more thoroughly. Masculinity is unrelated to the incidence of family firms.
These results are robust to controlling for per capita gross domestic product (GDP), so it is unlikely
that our results reflect poorer countries having both more family firms and more traditional cultural
norms.
         We therefore tentatively propose that the spread of marriage‐for‐love helps undermine the
family firm as a dominant business institution in many countries by depriving those firms of
suitable heirs. Morck & Yeung (2004), Fogel (2006), and others show family firm dominance
correlating with worse country economic and social outcomes: lower per capita GDP and GDP
growth, worse social conditions, and the like. We speculate that cultural norms that sustain family
firms might also impede talented potential entrepreneurs, thus locking in a stable state with lower
overall economic and social outcomes. Consistent with this speculation, we find a stronger negative
correlation between family firm dominance and per capita GDP where cultural norms are more
attuned to arranged marriage.
         Our paper also advances the broader research on the link between culture and economic
development. (See, for e.g., Bertrand and Schoar (2006) who show that countries with strong family
ties tend to have lower per capita GDP). We welcome further research to clarify these issues. The
rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the relevant literature. Section 3
describes our empirical framework and findings. Section 4 concludes.




                                                   4
2.     Literature Review
Our investigation relies on a series of premises: business acumen is a form of intelligence,
intelligence is not reliably transmitted from parents to children; the arranged marriage is not
displaced by marriage‐for‐love in many countries, and family firms remain important in many
countries. Given these premises, we investigate whether family firms and arranged marriages tend
to be more important in the same countries. This reasoning also suggests investigating whether
family firms perform relatively better or worse where arranged marriages likely persist more
completely.


2.1    Business Acumen as a Dimension of Intelligence
Our first premise is that managerial acumen is a dimension of intelligence. This is an idea with a
venerable intellectual history.
       Hayek (1941, p. 331) argues that a nation’s wealth depends on its business leaders’ superior
“foresight”. If they are blind to the future, they invest in inappropriate capital assets that changing
circumstances soon render worthless. If they foresee unfolding events, they invest in appropriate
assets whose value rises. It seems plausible that such foresight would require high intelligence.
       Schumpeter (1912) casts entrepreneurs as critical to economic growth because they possess
a rare creative ability to envision new products, processes, and opportunities. Although intelligence
tests are likely poor gauges of creativity, the traits Schumpeter describes are plausibly analogous, in
the sense of passing unreliably from generation to generation. Thus, Schumpeter (1951) concedes
that founding a great business dynasty might motivate entrepreneurs, but argues that such
dynasties readily fall before other upstart entrepreneurs.
       Intelligence is sometimes considered multidimensional, with IQ only one dimension.
Emotional intelligence (Gardner 1983) is especially popular in the leadership literature (Goleman
1995; Cooper & Sawaf 1997), and social intelligence is also gaining advocates (Albrecht 2006). Is
seems plausible that high intelligence in these and other dimensions would help a CEO both predict
future events to guide a great business well (Hayek 1941) and creatively envision new business
possibilities (Schumpeter 1912).


2.2    The Inheritability of Intelligence or Talent
That intelligence might be partly hereditary is an old idea, raised in the mid 19th century (Galton
1869), and abused to justify eugenics (Galton 1909) and ultimately genocide (Mastroianni 2006).



                                                  5
The thesis therefore remains charged, though not without advocates; most prominently the “bell
curve” hypothesis of Herrnstein & Murray (1994). Children’s’ test scores correlate positively,
though imperfectly, with their parents’ scores, but the underlying reasons are hotly disputed
(Fraser 1995; Jacoby et al. 1995; Fischer 1996; Kincheloe et al. 1996; Devlin 1997; Montagu 1999;
Lynn 2008).
        The central debate is whether this reflects a genetic transmission of intelligence or
upbringings more conducive to intellectual development. This debate is augmented by disputes
about how to measure intelligence, and even about whether or not it can be measured reliably.
        A parallel “nature versus nurture” debate exists regarding family business. Galton’s (1869,
1889) arguments linking genetically‐based intelligence to economic and social success are
consistent with Taussig’s (1930) finding that many important business leaders are the offspring of
professionals and entrepreneurs, but Taussig posits parental training and inherited family contacts
as preferred explanations. Similarly, the models of Becker (1981) and Becker and Tomes (1985)
also reject genetics in favor of rational parental investment in children’s human capital.
Distinguishing these hypotheses is problematic (Casey 1999).
        However, the American tycoon, Andrew Carnegie (1889), postulates a perverse “nurture
effect” regarding family firms with his famous conjecture that “the parent who leaves his son
enormous wealth generally deadens the talents of the son and leads him to lead a less useful and
less worthy life than he otherwise would”. Empirical work using tax returns shows that inherited
wealth presages reduced productivity (Holtz‐Eakin et al. 1993), though this refers to large bequests
in general, not control over family firms.
        We need not take a position in either debate. We need not measure intelligence, and do not.
Nor do we care if the sort of intelligence required to run a great business is the same as that
measured in IQ tests. We do not care whether this intelligence is hereditary via genes or childhood
environment, only that its transmission is unreliable. Neither side in the debate posits intelligence
being entirely hereditary. Rather, the debate pits a significant hereditary component against a
negligible hereditary component. For example, Galton (1869) argues that one’s characteristics are
positively correlated with those of one’s parents, but “regress to mediocrity” so that a child’s
characteristics are less extreme (nearer the population mean) than are its parents’ characteristics.
Galton (1889) demonstrates this regression primarily with anatomical characteristics (eye color,
height, and weight), but also studies individuals’ “success” and “eminence”.
        Regardless of whether business intelligence is partly hereditary or not hereditary at all,
selecting the next CEO from among the progeny of the current one is likely to yield a less



                                                  6
“intelligent” successor than would result from searching across a broader candidate pool (Caselli
and Gennaioli 2006). Despite dispute over many issues, the literature on the inheritability of
intelligence appears consistent with our thesis that intelligence is less than fully inherited.


2.3     The Persistent Importance of Arranged Marriage in Many Countries
Although love and marriage are now firmly associated in modern Western countries, their
conjunction is relatively recent and geographically restricted. For most of human history, marriages
were not about love, or even primarily about the needs and desires of the bride and groom. Rather,
aided by relatives and matchmakers, parents arranged marriages.
        Moreover, marriage was not considered as a relationship between two individuals, but
between two families – to create alliances and secure suitable in‐laws for furthering economic and
political ends.5 As such, marriages were carefully planned and negotiated. For example, Coontz
(2005) writes “Until the late eighteenth century, most societies around the world saw marriage as
far too vital an economic and political institution to be left entirely to the free choice of the two
individuals involved, especially if they were going to base their decision on something as
unreasoning and transitory as love.” In fact, Coontz (2005) goes so far as to suggest that “For
centuries, marriage did much of the work that markets and governments do today. It set up political,
economic, and military alliances. It coordinated the division of labor by gender and age. It
orchestrated people’s personal rights and obligations in everything from sexual relations to the
inheritance of property.” Along this line, Kaplan (1985) argues that “from a broad historical
perspective, love has had a rather weak association with – and has very rarely preceded –marriage.”
Kaplan also points out that dowries were common mechanisms for furthering political connections
and economic alliances. These studies view arranged marriage as buttressing the social dominance
of propertied classes throughout Western history.
        Arranged marriages also help maintain family property within the extended families. For
example, the House of Rothschild's success from the late eighteenth into the early twentieth century
was due not only to the founding family’s financial acumen, but also to their innovative marriage
strategies (Ferguson, 1998). The bank was organized into five branches in five countries headed by
the five sons. Their marriages were strictly arranged with family members to cement family ties and
preserve wealth within the family. Thus, Rothschild wealth accumulated within the family while

5Dissenting from this consensus, Mount (1982) argues that romantic love existed throughout history, and that
arranged marriages were not the universal norm sociologists believe them to have been. Arranged marriages
were found mainly among the nobility and other elite such as the landed class, where convenience mattered
more than love.



                                                     7
other fortunes diffused through marriages.6
           Supple (1957) documents the use of arranged and soft‐arranged marriages among the
German‐Jewish Diaspora in the 19th and early 20th century U.S. to cement business ties. Miller
(1979) reports that of the 185 top business leader at the beginning of the 20th century in the United
States, approximately 27% owed their position to kinship ties. Today, marriage‐for‐love is thought
prevalent in Western cultures and industrialized countries; with arrange marriage persisting
elsewhere (e.g., Sternberg and Weis, 2008). For example, in India today, over 90% of marriages are
arranged (Gautam, 2002). In Japan, nearly half of all marriages were arranged in the early 1970s.7
Arranged marriages or omiai continue to be very popular through the 1980s, when one in four
marriages was arranged; and though marriage‐for‐love become increasingly common in the 2000s,
some 6.2% of 2005 marriages are still arranged.8 A 1965 survey shows that 80% of Koreans
agreeing that parents strongly influence marital choice, and these attitudes persist into the 1980s
(Goodwin, 1999). Sprecher et al. (1995), interviewing 1,667 Americans, Russians, and Japanese,
find about 75 per cent of respondents willing to marry without love.
           Marriages are still often arranged within extended families (such as between cousins or half‐
cousins) in some cultures, including traditional African and Arab societies (Goodwin, 1999).
           Many Muslim countries’ legal systems strongly encourage arranged marriages. Pakistani
law, based on Koranic verses requiring fathers to protect their daughters, forbids women from
marrying without parental consent. Consequently, parents generally consider it their duty to marry
their daughters into good families, and detailed background investigations of potential grooms from
outside the family are expected (Shaw, 2001). .
           Many immigrant groups in the West continue to favor arranged marriage.9 Eldering and
Knorth (1998) argue that restrictive immigration policies in Western countries render arranged
marriages especially popular as a means to bring relatives along. Religiously mandated endogamy
and ethnic isolationism can also preserve arranged marriage customs in some immigrant


6Endogamy, typically marriage to first cousins, remains extremely important in many Muslim cultures –
presumably because the preservation of family wealth is an major objective in arranged marriages (Tabutin et
al. 2005).
7   Institute of Population and Social Security Research in Japan – see http://www.ipss.go.jp.
8Some researchers peg the incidence of arranged marriages in Japan a little higher. For example, Applbaum
(1995) reports that 25% to 30% of Japanese marriages are arranged at present.
9 Second generation female Turkish and Moroccan immigrants in the Netherlands are often “given away” to
their fathers’ friends or relatives (Sterckx and Bouw, 2005). Menon (1989) reports half of Indian immigrants
in America relying on arranged marriages; and Talbani and Hasanali (2000) one in four second‐generation
South Asian immigrants in North America report that their parents would likely arrange their marriage .



                                                         8
communities. Thus, arranged marriages persist as a major social institution across much of Asia
(Atal, 1992) and among ethnic minorities in Western countries, such as Ultra‐Orthodox Jews
(Rockman, 1994).
        In summary, barely a century ago marriage‐for‐love swept across the Western World.
Before that, and in other cultures now, arranged marriages pursue political, economic, and other
non‐amorous goals. Simmons et al. (1986) argue that traditional cultures with strong family values
are especially apt to prefer arranged marriage over marriage‐for‐love. Arranged marriage also in
high caste or elite subcultures, where family money, power and prestige loom larger.
         A growing economic literature reveals parental influence in marriages. Bisin and Verdier
(2000) and Bisin et al. (2004) show that parents propensity to expose their children to people of the
same religion influence marriage choices; and Fernandez et al. (2004) show empirically that a man
raised by a working mother is more likely to marry a working woman. Buunk et al. (2008) examine
evolutionary arguments linking arranged marriages to parental investment.


2.4     The Persistent Importance of Family Firms in Many Countries
Our second premise is that family firms are indeed important. Recent empirical work confirms
Chandler’s (1977) prophesy that professional management would displace family business remains
unfulfilled in most countries. Family firms dominate the economies Brazil (Da Silveira et al. 2007),
Chile (Khanna and Palepu 1999), India (Khanna and Palepu 2000; Khanna et al. 2005), Korea (Lim
et al. 2003), Sweden (Högfeldt 2005), Thailand (Chutatong et al. 2006; Bertrand et al. 2008). They
remain important in Canada (Morck et al. 2005a) and, to a lesser extent, the United Kingdom (Casey
1999) and United States. Family business remains the predominant organizational form across
Europe (Barca & Becht 2001; Faccio & Lang 2002) and East Asia (Claessens et al. 2000), and
throughout the developing world (Morck et al. 2005b; Khanna and Yafeh 2007).
        Most remarkably, this persistence continues despite evidence that businesses run by
descendents of their founders underperform. Although recent studies report “family firms”
outperforming other firms (e.g. Anderson and Reeb 2003), these findings turn on including founder‐
controlled firms – like Apple Computers, Google, and Microsoft – among family firms. If the term is
applied only to firms in which a second or subsequent generation takes control, family firms
significantly underperform in Canada (Morck et al. 2000), Denmark (Bennedsen et al., 2007), the
United Kingdom (Bloom & Van Reenen 2007), and the United States (Villalonga & Amit 2006; Miller
et al. 2008).




                                                 9
        Event studies show family succession clearly “causing” depressed performance expectations.
Firms’ stock prices fall significantly when a retiring CEO is replaced by his son (Smith & Amoako‐
Adu 2005; Perez‐Gonzalez 2006), though the effect is mitigated if the son has an elite education –
presumably indicating above‐average talent. Bennedsen et al. (2007) utilize a well‐designed
difference‐in‐difference analysis that also clearly indicates inherited control “causing” weak
performance, rather than the converse.
        Nonetheless, family firms appear to perform relatively better in less developed economies
(Khanna and Palepu 2000; Khanna and Yafeh 2005; Morck et al. 2005b; Khanna and Yafeh 2007).
This is consistent with the thesis that family firms are a second best solution in economies with
weak institutions (Burkart et al. 2003).10



3.      Data and Empirical Design
We now investigate the association between the dominance of family firms and the extent of
arranged marriages in different countries. In the regression analysis, we also control for the level of
general economic development of each country. Our sample consists of 41 countries, listed in
Appendix 1.


3.1     Dependent variables: Family Business
Our family firm dominance index is from Fogel (2006), and measures the fractions of 41 countries’
ten largest businesses (firms or business groups) that are controlled by old‐moneyed (second
generation or higher) families as of 1996. She traces inter‐corporate chains of control and
consolidates firms into business groups in countries where pyramiding or other control
enhancement mechanisms extend a business family’s control over more than one firm; and defines
family businesses as those whose top insiders are the heirs of their founders. Her data include
listed and unlisted firms. This is important, since listed firms are considerably rarer in some
countries than in others (La Porta et al. 1998).
        She then constructs two versions of her index: one weighting the top ten businesses equally
and another weighting them by total workforce. The latter thus measures the fraction of the total

10Another possibility cannot be precluded: well‐connected old‐moneyed families use their substantial
political influence to augment their firms’ performance by tilting the playing field in their favor (Faccio 2006;
Faccio et al. 2006). This is consistent both with their firms’ relatively good performance and their countries
relatively poor performance (Morck and Yeung 2004). Our hypothesis is that arranged marriage is one factor
among many, and in no way contests the potential validity of other explanations.




                                                       10
workforce of the top ten firms directed by old‐moneyed families. In some countries, such as
Australia, Denmark, Netherlands, U.S., and U.K., only a very small percentage of top ten businesses
are controlled by old‐moneyed families; in others, such as Thailand, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru,
Pakistan, Greece, and Turkey, all the top ten are family controlled. Most counties fall in between.


3.2    Independent variables
3.2.1 Proxies for arranged marriage
To proxy for arranged marriages adopted by different countries, we use the cultural values indexes
that were constructed by Hofstede (1980, 1991, 1994, and 1998). These cultural dimension indexes
are based on the two survey rounds from 72 countries that were conducted between 1967 and
1973, subsequently updated through the 1980s. The respondents were IBM employees in the initial
survey, but included commercial airline pilots and students in the 1980s updates. The data we use
are the latest survey that was conducted in 1994. These scores are available online at
http://www.geert‐hofstede.com/. The main cultural value measures Hofstede distills from these
surveys are:


Power Distance
This variable measures the extent to which social inequality is tolerated, even endorsed, by the
population overall. Ranging from 11 to 104, it takes higher values where cultural norms legitimize
more extreme social differences – as, for example, in Arab, Latin, and South East Asian countries.
Countries with lower power distance scores – for example, Northern Europe and Israel – have
cultures that more adamantly assert social equality.
       Hofstede finds higher power distance cultures to more consistently exalt obedience,
authority, conformity, supervision, and social hierarchy. In these countries, children are taught to
honor and obey their parents and elders, and to continue doing so as adults; and conformity is
considered an indispensable virtue. In contrast, in low power distance cultures, children are
encouraged to make decisions, pursue their own welfare, and take responsibility for their own
decisions.
       We propose that a higher power distance correspond to a greater propensity for children to
accept their parents’ choices in mate selection. Consistent with this, Squire (2008), and other gender
studies scholars, link arranged marriages to authoritarian patriarchal cultures. Also consistent with
this proposal, studies in psychology find people living in higher power distance cultures more prone
to suppress positive emotions (as well as negative emotions) because the social expression of


                                                  11
excessive positive affect could mean lack of deference (Basabe et al., 1999). This suppression
plausibly renders marriage‐for‐love less important.


Individualism
Using survey responses, Hofstede constructs an individualism score, which takes high values in
America, Australia, Canada, and Western Europe; where people tend to place their welfare as
individuals above the welfare of collectives to which they belong.          In contrast, the individualism
index takes low values in Latin America, South Asia, and East Asia, where people’s responses
indicate a willingness to subordinate their welfare as individuals to that of collectives to which they
belong – such as families, extended families, castes, tribes, sects, or nations. The family, or extended
family, is generally the most important of these.11
          In low individualism countries, individuals are apt to be defined primarily by their
contribution to group welfare. Hence, they attach great import to the effects of their behavior on the
group, and group members are often deeply involved in each others’ lives. In contrast, high
individualism societies laud independence and self‐reliance, and perople are motivated to develop
their individual talents in a search of personal fulfillment (Markus and Kitayama, 1991; Ting‐
Toomey, 1991).
          The psychology and social sciences literatures associate individualism with marriage‐for‐
love. In a study of 117 countries, Lee and Stone (1980) find a strong link between family structure
and marriage. Todd (1985) observed marriage‐for‐love to be far rarer in countries with extended
family systems than in countries characterized by nuclear families, in which people are more
individualistic Most directly, a survey by Sato, Hashimoto, and Verman (1995) finds students from
more collectivistic cultures – such as India, Thailand, and the Philippines – placing less emphasis on
less on love as the basis for marriage than students from more individualistic countries – such as
America, Australia, and Britain. Finally, the children of immigrants from collectivist cultures tend to
accept marriages arranged by their parents and tend not to practice dating (Lee, 1988; Lipson &
Miller, 1994; Segal, 1991; Stopes‐Roe and Cochrane, 1988; Rosenthal, 1988).
          This broader acceptance of arranged marriage in lower individualism cultures perhaps
reflects a lesser regard for marital satisfaction via psychological intimacy or personal sharing as an
objective (Ting‐Toomey, 1991). Rather, accepting an arranged marriage is part of one’s unavoidable
duty to one’s family. Brides are selected for good nature and grooms for status (Dion and Dion,
1993). In contrast, highly individualistic cultures validate personal feelings and the quest for

11   See Hofstede at http://www.geert‐hofstede.com/hofstede_brazil.shtml.



                                                      12
individual fulfillment. This validates love as a foundation of marriage, and necessitates that
marriage be a personal decision by the couple (Triandis, 1995). Given these findings, lower values of
the individualism index plausibly correspond to more arranged marriages.


Gender differentiation
We use Hofstede’s masculinity­femininity index, which contrasts the emotional roles expected of
men and women, to gauge the extent of gender differentiation in different cultures. Countries with
higher gender differentiation scores – such as Austria, Japan, Italy, Switzerland, and Venezuela ‐
assign males and females more starkly different roles. Males are expected to be tougher and more
assertive – more macho – and women, assigned more limited rights, are expected to be more
modest and tender. Lower gender differentiation cultures – such as Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and
the Netherlands – distinguish gender roles less sharply, and place more similar expectations on men
and women.
       Gilbert, Fiske, and Lindzey (1998) argue that higher gender differentiation cultures are less
apt to value romanticism. This suggests a link between high gender differentiation indexes and
arranged marriages; however Collins (1975) is unable to find such a relationship and argues that
arranged marriages tend to occur in higher gender differentiation cultures only if large extended
family structures are also pervasive. This is plausible, for greater gender differentiation might
permit males more freedom in choosing a mate, but still demand daughters’ acquiescence to the
interests of the family. In such cultures, girls might thus accept their parents’ choice of a partner,
while men might marry for “romantic” love (Dion and Dion, 1988). Indeed, the macho ideals of Latin
American culture have been linked to romantic notions of chivalry (Collins, 2001).            Overall,
however, greater gender differentiation would seem to lean towards a higher incidence of arranged
marriage.


Risk Avoidance
This index gauges the extent to which unknown situations are perceived as threatening. Cultures
with high risk avoidance scores are less tolerant of uncertainty, differences in opinion, and change.
High risk avoidance cultures encourage people to minimize ambiguity, and hence tend to favor
written laws and rules. These cultures are, virtually be definition, more conservative in general, and
thus less apt to forsake traditional institutions of any kind, including arranged marriage.
       The risk avoidance index is higher in countries where survey responses reveal cultural
norms that devalue various forms of risk taking. The highest risk avoidance country in our sample is



                                                  13
Greece, with Portugal, Belgium, Japan and Peru following in that order. Our lowest risk avoidance
country is Singapore, followed in declining order by Denmark, Hong Kong, Sweden and Ireland.


3.3     Correlation of Hofstede culture values with other culture surveys
        A potential criticism of the Hofstede culture values survey is that the respondents form a
professionally similar group (e.g. IBM employees in the first round of surveys). This can result in
biases in the survey responses. We note two features that make such a potential bias less critical in
our study. First, to the extent the Hofstede respondents constitute a similar socio‐economic group
across countries, their values ought to be convergent, and any persisting differences that we find are
therefore more likely to originate in country‐level differences in values. Second, surveys on cultural
values by other researchers, such as Schwartz (1994), find agreement with many of the key survey
values in Hofstede.     For instance, Nieves and Mujtaba (2006, table 1.3) report a significant
correlation between Hofstede’s Power Distance measure and Schwartz’s Hierarchy measure, and
between Hofstede’s Individualism measure and Schwartz’s Affective Autonomy measure (positive
self‐experiences). Schwartz (1994) himself validates many of Hodstede’s culture dimensions: in
particular, he finds a strong positive correlation between Hofstede’s individualism and his own dual
Autonomy measures, and between Hofstede’s Power Distance measure and his own Collectivism
measure. We believe that these findings imply that using other survey responses as instruments is
unlikely to alter our main findings in this study.
        Moreover, for the purposes of our study, it is important to find cultural correlates of
economic activity, given that our ultimate aim is to throw light on the predominance of family firms
in an economy. To this end, work by Gouveia and Ros (2000) shows that Hofstede’s culture value
measures display a stronger correlation with macro‐economic variables (such as GDP) than with
Schwartz’s scores (which correlate more strongly with macro‐social indicators such as human
development and literacy).


3.4     Hofstede culture values and marriage norms and preferences
        A related issue is the extent to which the Hofstede measures correlate with arranged
marriage norms. Extant literature is sparse on direct empirical evidence surrounding this issue, but
there are several papers that attest to the validity of the Hofstede values in our study. Buss (1999)
surveys more than 10,000 marriages across 37 countries and finds that Hofstede’s individualism
variable displays a strong negative correlation with bridegroom preferences (in brides) for chastity,
wealth and age difference, while Hofstede’s masculinity measure displays a strong positive


                                                     14
correlation with these preferences. To the extent a preference for chastity and age difference are
stronger in countries with a tradition of arranged marriages, Buss’s survey is consistent with our
thesis that Hofstede’s culture values are reasonable proxies for arranged marriage norms and
preferences.
        Similarly, Levine, Sato, Hashimoto and Verma (1995) administer a questionnaire to male
and female undergraduate students in 11 countries. Specifically, they ask the following question
directly related to preference for a love marriage: If a man (woman) had all the other qualities you
desired, would you marry this person if you were not in love with him (her)? The Yes responses
ranged from a low of 4% in the U.S. to over 50% in Pakistan. Indeed, the proportion of yes
responses correlated strongly with Hofstede’s individualism measure – the strength of the
correlation was stronger than between GDP per capita and Individualism. Levine et al conclude that
individualist cultures place a stronger emphasis on love as a basis for mate selection than
collectivist cultures do.
        Hofstede himself finds that when asked the question “things which some people think makes
for a successful marriage”, the response rate of “Living apart from the in­laws” displayed a strong
positive correlation with individualism, whereas the response rate of “shared religious belief” and
“adequate income” displayed a strong negative correlation with individualism. Similarly, Dion and
Dion (1983, 1996) find that societies that value individualism highly also rate the importance of
love in marriages very high. Indeed, children of immigrants from collectivist countries continue to
under‐value love in marriages even in their adopted individualist country. Similarly, and perhaps
not surprisingly, Lee and Stone (1980) analyze data from 117 societies, and find that societies with
arranged marriage norms scored low on the importance of love, while societies with autonomous
mate selection marriage norms scored high on the love scale. Supporting this evidence, Medora et al
(2002) compared respondents from India (with a high rate of arranged marriage) and the U.S., and
found that the Indian respondents scored lower on romanticism scores compared to their U.S.
counterparts.
        The studies cited here lend credence to our assertion that the Hofstede culture values,
especially individualism, power distance, and masculinity are useful proxies for separating arranged
marriage norms from autonomous mate selection norms, and further that the Hofstede culture
values are not an artifact of particular sampling methods.




                                                 15
3.5     Per Capita Gross Domestic Product
We control for general economic development, which Fogel (2006) shows to correlate with the
importance of large family businesses in an economy, and which Hofstede (1980) links to his
cultural variables. Our measure of general economic development is the logarithm of the country’s
per capita gross domestic product, converted to U.S. dollars at purchasing power parity exchange
rates. These data are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database, and are for
1996.
        Controlling for per capita GDP lets us gauge the importance of cultural variables in
explaining the dominance of family businesses over and above any effect due to both family
businesses and certain cultural norms being associated with certain levels of economic
development.


4.      Empirical Findings
4.1     General Patterns in the Data
Panel A of Table 1 presents standard descriptive statistics of the variables described above, and
Panel B displays their simple correlation coefficients with each other.
        Panel A shows family businesses providing an average of 61% and a median of 70% of all
the jobs provided by the top ten businesses or business groups in the typical country, indicating that
families control most of the large corporate sectors of most of the countries surveyed by Hofstede.
All four cultural values exhibit wide dispersion, allowing for a rich cross‐sectional examination of
linkages between family business dominance and cultural norms.
        Panel B shows a significant correlation between a greater predominance of large family
business and a greater acceptance of inequality, less individualism, and greater risk avoidance. The
only cultural factor not correlated with family business is gender differentiation. While Individualism
and Power Distance are significantly correlated, Gender Differentiation and Risk Avoidance appear
uncorrelated with other cultural attributes. The second panel further reveals all the cultural
measures, save Gender Differentiation, to correlate significantly with general economic
development, broadly supporting the findings of Tiang and Koveos (2008). Before proceeding to
more complicated statistical analysis, it is useful to examine these correlations in more detail.
        Figure 1 plots family business dominance on the vertical axis against Power Distance, our
measure of general social acceptance of inequality, on the horizontal axis. An OLS regression of the
former on the latter is represented by the solid line, and observations for each country each flagged



                                                  16
by the abbreviations listed in Appendix 1. The graph shows a clear positive relationship ‐ family
business is more prevalent where inequality is more socially acceptable.
       Closer inspection shows high income countries inhabiting the lower left corner, with low
family ownership and low Power Distance scores; and low income countries inhabiting the upper
right corner, with high family ownership and high Power Distance scores. This suggests general
economic development might provide a common factor behind the two variables on the axes. The
graph also reveals two interesting clusters of outliers – family businesses predominate in Austria,
Israel, and Sweden, despite inequality being socially unacceptable; but do not in Japan and
Singapore, despite a general acceptance of inequality.
       Figure 2 plots family business dominance against Individualism, the second of the cultural
variables described above. Countries whose cultures allow greater individualism are clearly less
conducive to large family businesses; while countries with more collectivist norms clearly favor
large family businesses. Again, higher income countries cluster in the high individualism – low
family business corner of the graph, while low income countries cluster in the low individualism –
high family business corner. Again, some of the most interesting countries are outliers: developed
East Asian countries (Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Japan) exhibit markedly few large family
businesses, given their relatively low individualism scores; and Sweden (along with a few other
European countries) post remarkably high family business control levels, given those societies’
seeming embrace of individualism.
        Figure 3 reveals no immediately apparent relationship between Gender Differentiation and
the predominance of large family businesses. Countries in which genders are treated quite equally,
like Sweden and the Netherlands, exhibit vastly different degrees of family control; as do countries
in which gender differentiation is greatest, like Mexico and Japan). No countries are clear outliers,
and no nonlinear relationship is evident either.
       Finally, Figure 4 plots Risk Avoidance against Family Firms to reveal a clear upward sloping
pattern, indicating that large family businesses are more common in countries whose cultures
devalue risk‐taking. While high income economies populate the low Risk Avoidance – low Family
Firm corner of the graph, the high Risk Avoidance – high Family Firm corner contains a mix of high
and low income countries ‐ like Belgium and Peru. This suggests that something other than general
cultural differences between high and low income countries is at work. Also, the countries not
lining up well with the general trend do not cluster geographically: Malaysia and Sweden are the
most extreme cases of low risk avoidance and high family control, while France and Japan are the
most extreme examples of low family control and high risk avoidance.



                                                   17
4.2     Regressions
These graphs suggest that large family businesses are more dominant in countries whose cultures
value collective welfare over individual welfare and devalue risk‐taking. These correlations are
consistent with the correlations between family ties (measured as the first principal component of
the family ties variables from the World Values survey) and the control of the corporate sector by
the top 5 families in 19 countries documented in Bertrand and Schoar (2006). The graphs relating
family business predominance to the acceptance of inequality and to gender differentiation are less
clear‐cut.   However, Fogel (2006) shows family business dominance and GDP per capita are
inversely related, and Panel B of Table 1 shows our cultural variables to be related to economic
outcomes too. Clarifying the statistical link between family business and cultural factors thus
requires controlling for general economic development.
        We therefore next run regressions of the form


[1]                                    ln                                 ·


The dependent variable is always Family Firms, our measure of the extent of old‐moneyed family
control over a country’s top ten businesses or business groups (see Fogel, 2006; actual data for this
variable are form 1996) and the logarithm of the country’s per capita GDP (in 1980,12 converted to
US dollars based on PPP) is included as a control variable. The independent variables of interest are
represented by the vector z, which contains one or more of Power Distance, Individualism, Gender
Differentiation, and Risk Avoidance or interactions involving these variables. The є are regression
residuals and the estimated parameters are the intercept a0, the coefficient of the control variable
a1, and a vector of coefficients on cultural factors, b.
        Table 2 suggests that high Risk Avoidance, followed by Individualism, are the most important
cultural correlates with extensive family control over a country’s big business sector. The table
regresses family control over big business on our various culture measures, one‐at‐a‐time and
together, while controlling for per capita GDP.
        First, comparing specifications 2.1 and 2.2 shows controlling for per capita GDP to render
Power Distance insignificant, confirming that the pattern in Figure 1 is indeed representative of high


12We also use contemporaneous GDP estimates from 1996 and find that the main results are unchanged.
However, we feel that the GDP estimate from 1980 is a more exogenous control variable since the GDP in
1996 may be influenced by the dependent variable.



                                                     18
income countries being both highly individualistic and unsupportive of family control; and of low
income economies being both more collectivist and accepting of family control. An ambient cultural
disapproval of inequality is associated with less family control of big business, but this is because
such an ambient culture is statistically correlated with poverty, which is statistically correlated with
family control over an economy’s big business sector.
        Second, contrasting specification 2.3 against 2.4, and 2.7 against 2.8 show Individualism and
high Risk Avoidance, respectively, to remain highly significantly correlated to family business
dominance after adjusting for the level of family control predicted by a given level of general
economic development. This suggests that these cultural variables capture independent effects.
Specifications 2.5 and 2.6 show that adjusting for per capita GDP fails to expose any hidden
relationship between Gender Differentiation and family business dominance.
        Finally, specifications 2.9 and 2.10 collect all our cultural variables in one regression, and
then check the effect of controlling for per capita GDP. Only Risk Avoidance is remains significant in
the specification with all variables, likely due to multicollinearity among the cultural measures
documented in table 1 panel B. While Power Distance and Individualism remain significant in the
presence of Risk Avoidance in specification 2.9, these two variables fade when exposed to per capita
GDP, in specification 2.10. All the even‐numbered specifications in the Table reveal a highly
significant negative correlation between the dominance of family firms and per capita GDP;
confirming earlier work by Morck and Yeung (2004) and Fogel (2008), and showing that this
relationship is not driven solely by cultural factors locking in both poverty and family control.13
        Given this, our second set of regressions explores whether the strength of the negative
relation between family firm dominance and per capita GDP might nonetheless be driven by cultural
factors associated with arranged marriages. We therefore regress per capita GDP on the same
control variable used in Table 2, past per capita GDP, and our vector of cultural factors z. However,
this time, we allow old‐moneyed family control over big business to moderate the effects of these
cultural factors. Per capita GDP is measured as the log of per capital GDP in 2005, sufficiently in the
future relative to the last update of the Hofstede survey in 1996.14 That is, we estimate


13We also repeat the regressions in table 2 using the Autonomy and Collectivism variables from Schwartz’s
(1994) culture survey. Autonomy produces a coefficient (p‐value=0.09) that is similar to Hofstede’s
Individualism – this is not surprising since Autonomy and Individualism are significantly positively correlated.
Schwartz’s Collectivism variable is not significant in explaining family firm dominance.
14We repeat the regressions with per capita GDP in 1996 as the dependent variable, and find similar results;
in fact, the statistical significance is higher. However, we believe that 2005 measures of per capita GDP are
less likely to reverse cause the cultural variables from Hofstede’s survey, and therefore prefer to report the
results with 2005 per capita GDP as the dependent variable.



                                                       19
[2]    ln                       2005                   ln                        +
                                                                                 ·


where all parameters and variables are as in [1], except that the vector of parameters b are
now varying parameters, rather than fixed parameters, and are estimated thus


[3]


       This approach, encapsulated by [2] and [3], entails regressing current per capita GDP
on interactions of our Family Firm measure with our various cultural factors, again
controlling for historical per capita GDP, viz.


[4]    ln                       2005                   ln
                                                                                     ·


       This is the simplest possible varying parameters estimation procedure.                   More
complicated models are possible, in which b(Family Firm) is noisy (i.e. [3] contains another
error term), or involving more intricate cross correlations, are possible, but our data – a
simple cross section of 41 countries, renders such techniques of questionable added value.
       Table 3 displays the results of this exercise. The coefficient of ‐0.02 on Power Distance 
Family Firm indicates that a culture that values power distance highly (and one that we assert favors
arranged marriage norms) exacerbates the income loss associated with the dominance of family
business in a country. On the other hand, the coefficient of +0.01 on Individualism  Family Firm
indicates that a high cultural predisposition towards individualism (favoring love‐marriage norms)
can mitigate income loss associated with family control over big business. Finally, the coefficient of
‐0.013 on Gender Differentiation  Family Firm indicates that a culture that values traditional gender
roles highly (favoring arranged marriage norms) exacerbates the income loss associated with the
dominance of family business in a country. The coefficient on risk avoidance interacted with family
firm dominance is not statistically significant. Historical economic prosperity always comes in with




                                                  20
a strong negative coefficient, showing that highly developed post‐industrial economies generally
grow more slowly than lower income economies.
           In the above analysis, outliers with extreme influence were identified using Cook’s distance.
In the first three specifications, one observation was dropped based on Cook’s distance criterion.
We have also estimated the same regressions with all observations, and get very similar results,
albeit with slightly weaker significance as would be expected.
           A potential issue with our inference is that cultural values are caused by changes in
economic performance. While this is certainly plausible, we caution against such a reverse causality
since cultural values as documented in Hofstede’s surveys, or as documented in several waves of
World Values Surveys, have shown remarkable stability in the face of economic progress. For
instance, Hofstede (2001) argues that “national cultural value systems are quite stable over time”.
Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2005) find that current country‐level differences in cultural variables
related to interpersonal trust have persisted for centuries. Schwartz, Bardi, and Bianchi (2000) find
very little change in culture variables for East‐Central European countries in the 1990’s, despite
major changes in legal and economic institutions. World Values Survey cross‐country data were
assembled several times over two decades spanning 1981‐2001, and differences between different
countries’ scores tend to remain very stable, though overall mean scores change somewhat over
time. Bertrand and Schoar (2006) also find support for this conclusion using responses from the
World Values Survey. Indeed, the persistence of cultural traits raises an intriguing possibility,
namely that cultural traits may perpetuate economic organization such as family ownership of
corporate assets in a way that prevents convergence to more efficient organization.
           To the extent culture helps perpetuate social norms such as arranged marriage, it is possible
that culture may well impede convergence to diffused ownership structures (and away from family
ownership of corporate assets). Our tests further indicate that cultural norms that favor arranged
marriages detract from the ability of family firms to create wealth.


5.         Conclusions
No‐one seriously advocates that the 2020 Olympic team consist of descendents of current gold
medalists. Hereditary monarchy, other than as a constitutional ornament, fell from favor because
the characteristics needed to provide good government did not obviously run in families (Paine et
al. 1776). Nor do great universities select doctoral students only from the children of their star
faculty.




                                                    21
        Yet family firms remain important and highly respected scholars laud their virtues (Shleifer
et al. 1996; Miller and Le Breton‐Miller 2005; James 2006). The ancient Chinese proverb “wealth
shall not pass beyond three generations” seems unfulfilled in much of the world. How does this
feudal vestige not only persist, but continue drawing praise in the modern merit‐based economy?
        Our results are consistent with the following view. In countries where cultural attributes
favor arranged marriages, family firms appear to dominate. While no strictly causal links can be
drawn from our study, the association between these two variables persists when we control for
GDP. We posit that arranged marriages allow mate selection to favor succession practices that allow
family firms to perpetuate for several generations. Absent such targeted mate selection, family firms
are unlikely to enjoy the kind of longevity that is observed in many countries.
        Our works opens a number of avenues for future research. Japanese family firms
supplement arranged marriages with the outright adoptions of suitable (unrelated) heirs, and that
firms run by adopted heirs display superior performance (Mehrotra et al. 2009) relative to blood‐
related heirs, and relative to professional managers.15 The formal adoption of a highly qualified
adult heir is probably a uniquely Japanese device, but our findings suggest arranged marriages
might serve a like purpose in a broader range of countries. How arranged marriages affect corporate
governance, corporate strategies, corporate organization, and other central questions about the
organization of economic activity remains largely unexplored (though see James, 2006; and others).
Second, these findings add cultural factors as yet another consideration affecting the open question
of the circumstances under which family firm dominance is welfare enhancing. Third, our findings
raise the issue of whether cultural traits are historical residues, and hence exogenous; or
endogenously related to the organization of a country’s business sector.




15These findings also cast doubt on the notion that business families are good at providing “grooming” for
successors.



                                                     22
                            FIGURE 1: OLS Regression of Family Firm Dominance vs. Power Distance Scores
Family Firms is the fraction of the top ten business or business groups, weighted by number of employees, controlled by families;
and is plotted against Power Distance scores from Hofstede’s website (www.geert‐hofstede.com/hofstede_dimensions.php).
Appendix 1 lists the abbreviations and names of the 41 countries included. The solid line is an OLS regression of Family Firms on
Power Distance, with a coefficient 0.009 and a zero coefficient rejected at a p‐level of 0.001.
                          100%                                                                       CHL        PER TUR
                                                                                       PAK    GRC               THA                   MEX   PHL    MYS
                                                                                                     PRT                     IND
                          90%                                                                                        BRA
                                                                                                       BEL
                                          AUT                                       ARG                            COL
                          80%              ISR
                                                                   SWE                               TWN
                          70%                                                                                                    IDN
                                                                                        ITA
   Family Firm Presence




                          60%                                                                             KOR
                                                                                    ZAF

                          50%
                                                                                                    ESP
                                                                            CAN                                     HKG
                          40%                          NZL                                                          FRA
                                                                   NOR
                          30%
                                                             IRL
                                                                    FIN
                          20%                                       NLD    USA
                                                             CHE       GBR                                                 SGP
                          10%
                                                 DNK          GER         AUS
                                                                                              JPN
                           0%
                                 0   10          20          30            40      50               60             70            80         90    100    110

                                                                                  Power Distance




                                                                                  23
                             FIGURE 2: OLS Regression of Family Firm Dominance vs. Individualism Scores
Family Firms is the fraction of the top ten business or business groups, weighted by number of employees, controlled by families;
and is plotted against Individualism scores from Hofstede’s website (www.geert‐hofstede.com/hofstede_dimensions.php).
Appendix 1 lists the abbreviations and names of the 41 countries included. The solid line is an OLS regression of Family Firms on
Individualism, with a coefficient ‐0.009 and a zero coefficient rejected at a p‐level of 0.001.
                          100%                              PHL
                                       PAK PER THA CHLMYS MEX GRC TUR
                                                       PRT                     IND
                          90%                                       BRA
                                                                                                                                BEL
                                           COL                            ARG                    AUT
                          80%
                                                                                           ISR
                                                   TWN
                          70%                                                                                            SWE
                                            IDN
   Family Firm Presence




                                                                                                                                   ITA
                          60%                     KOR
                                                                                                              ZAF
                          50%
                                                                                     ESP                                                 CAN
                          40%                             HKG                                                                             NZL
                                                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                                                  NOR
                          30%
                                                                                                                          IRL
                          20%                                                                               FIN
                                                                                                                                         NLD           USA
                                                    SGP                                                                                         GBR
                          10%                                                                                      CHE

                                                                          JPN                                     GER         DNK                AUS
                           0%
                                 0    10            20          30   40          50                    60               70               80      90          100

                                                                          Individualism




                                                                          24
FIGURE 3: OLS Regression of Family Firm Dominance vs. Gender Differentiation Scores
Family Firms is the fraction of the top ten business or business groups controlled by families; and is plotted against Gender
Differentiation scores from Hofstede’s website (www.geert‐hofstede.com/hofstede_dimensions.php).                                                        Appendix 1 lists the
abbreviations and names of the 41 countries included. The solid line is an OLS regression of Family Firms on Gender
Differentiation, with a coefficient ‐0.001 and a zero coefficient cannot be rejected given the p‐level of 0.822.

                          100%                                                                          MYS
                                                              CHL         THA    PER        TUR         PAK          GRC     PHL         MEX
                                                                    PRT                                        IND
                          90%                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                   BRA
                                                                                                               ARG           COL                  AUT
                          80%
                                                                                            ISR
                                                                                      TWN
                          70%        SWE
                                                                                             IDN                                            ITA
   Family Firm Presence




                          60%
                                                                                KOR
                                                                                                                           ZAF
                          50%
                                                                                      ESP                       HKG
                          40%                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                       FRA
                          30%              NOR
                                                                                                                                   IRL
                                                              FIN
                          20%                                                                                        USA
                                                  NLD
                                                                                                                                            CHE
                                                                                                  SGP                            GBR
                          10%
                                                   DNK                                                                 AUS       GER
                                                                                                                                                                 JPN
                           0%
                                 0           10          20         30           40                 50                60               70          80       90         100

                                                                                  Gender Differentiation




                                                                                             25
                       FIGURE 4: OLS Regression of Family Firm Dominance vs. Uncertainty Avoidance Scores
Family Firms is the fraction of the top ten business or business groups, weighted by number of employees, controlled
by old‐moneyed families; and is plotted against Risk Avoidance scores from Hofstede’s website (http://www.geert‐
hofstede.com/hofstede_dimensions.php). Appendix 1 lists the abbreviations and names of the 41 countries included.
The solid line is an OLS regression of Family Firms on Risk Avoidance, with a coefficient 0.007 and a zero coefficient
rejected at a p‐level of 0.003.
                                                                                                                                CHL TUR
                   100%
                                                        MYS           IND                         THA    PAK           MEX       PER                                GRC
                                                               PHL                                                                                            PRT
                       90%                                                                                     BRA                                BEL
                                                                                                                     COL              ARG
                                                                                                    AUT
                       80%
                                                  SWE                                                                 ISR
                                                                           IDN
                       70%                                                                              TWN
Family Firm Presence




                                                                                                                     ITA        KOR
                       60%
                                                                      ZAF

                       50%                                                                                                       ESP
                                                  HKG
                       40%                                           CAN
                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                      NOR
                       30%                               IRL
                                                                                            FIN
                                                                      USA        NLD
                       20%       SGP                     GBR
                                                                                        CHE

                       10%                  DNK                              AUS                  GER

                                                                                                                                            JPN
                       0%
                             0         20                      40                            60                            80                           100               120
                                                                                  Risk Avoidance




                                                                                       26
          Table 1. Descriptive Statistics and Correlation Coefficients of Main Variables
Family Firms is the fraction of the top ten business or business groups, weighted by number of employees, controlled by old‐
moneyed families. Power Distance measures the extent to which social inequality is tolerated and endorsed. Individualism
measure the extent individuals value their own welfare above that of collectives to which they belong. Gender Differentiation is the
magnitude of differences between male and female responses. Risk Avoidance refers to a preference for the status quo. Log
per capital GDP is the logarithm of gross domestic product in U.S. dollars at purchasing power parity. Appendix 1 lists the
41 countries included. Correlations significant at 10% are in boldface in Panel B.
Panel A. Descriptive Statistics
                                                                           Standard
                                   Mean                Median                                   Minimum              Maximum
                                                                           Deviation
Family Firms                       0.607                0.699                0.347                0.000                 1.00
Power Distance                      52.4                 55.0                 21.2                 11.0                 104
Individualism                       49.5                 48.0                 24.9                 13.0                 91.0
Gender Differentiation              50.0                 52.0                 18.9                 5.00                 95.0
Risk Avoidance                      63.7                 65.0                 24.1                 8.00                 112
Log GDP per capita                  9.43                 9.75                0.732                 7.63                 10.3


Panel B. Simple Correlation Coefficients

                              Power Distance        Individualism            Gender          Risk Avoidance        Log per capita
                                                                         Differentiation                                GDP
                                   0.546                ­0.639               ‐0.036                0.455              ­0.706
Family Firms
                                   (0.00)               (0.00)                (0.82)              (0.00)              (0.00)
                                                        ­0.671                0.124                0.149              ­0.596
Power Distance
                                                        (0.00)                (0.44)              (0.35)              (0.00)
                                                                             ‐0.012               ­0.281               0.609
Individualism
                                                                              (0.94)              (0.07)              (0.00)
                                                                                                   0.147              ‐0.073
Gender Differentiation
                                                                                                  (0.36)               (0.65)
                                                                                                                      ‐0.169
Risk Avoidance
                                                                                                                       (0.29)


                                                                 27
      Table 2. Ordinary Least Squares Regression of Family Dominance on Cultural Value
                                        Dimensions
The dependent variable is Family Firms, the fraction a country’s top ten businesses or business groups controlled by old‐
moneyed families. Independent variables include one or all of the following: Power Distance measures the extent to which
social inequality is tolerated and endorsed. Individualism measure the extent individuals value their own welfare above that of
collectives to which they belong. Gender Differentiation is the magnitude of differences between male and female responses. Risk
Avoidance refers to a preference for the status quo. Per capital GDP is the logarithm of 1980 GDP in U.S. dollars at purchasing
power parity. Bold face font denotes significance at the 5% level. Probability levels for rejecting the null hypothesis of a zero
coefficient are in parentheses. Appendix 1 lists the 41 countries included.

Specification          2.1        2.2       2.3        2.4          2.5       2.6       2.7       2.8        2.9        2.10
Intercept              0.140      1.869     1.038      2.029        0.645     2.703     0.187     2.235      0.438      1.701
                       (0.268)    (0.004)   (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.194)   (0.001)    (0.109)    (0.002)

Power Distance         0.009      0.005                                                                      0.004      0.003
                       (0.001)    (0.071)                                                                    (0.100)    (0.306)

Individualism                               ­0.009     ­0.006                                                ­0.005     ‐0.001
                                            (0.001)    (0.011)                                               (0.026)    (0.361)
Gender
Differentiation                                                     ‐0.001    ‐0.001                         ‐0.002     ‐0.002
                                                                    (0.822)   (0.870)                        (0.305)    (0.306)

Risk Avoidance                                                                          0.007     0.006      0.005      0.006
                                                                                        (0.003)   (0.000)    (0.010)    (0.001)

Per capita GDP                    ­0.176               ­0.134                 ­0.242              ­0.239                ­0.163
                                  (0.006)              (0.037)                (0.001)             (0.001)               (0.010)
Adjusted R‐sq          27.8%      39.7%     39.3%      44.5%        ‐2.4%     34.3%     18.6%     54.9%      48.3%      56.5%




                                                               28
       Table 3. Regression of per capita GDP on Cultural Value
                            Dimensions
Power Distance measures the extent to which social inequality is tolerated and endorsed.
Individualism measure the extent individuals value their own welfare above that of
collectives to which they belong. Risk Avoidance gauges preference for the status quo. The
dependent variable is the real GDP per capita measured in 2005. Historical Economic
Prosperity is measured as the log of GDP per capita in 1980. Probability levels for rejecting
the null hypothesis of a zero coefficient are in parentheses. Appendix 1 lists the 41
countries included.




Specification                               3.1           3.2           3.3           3.4
                                          2.439         3.038         2.663         2.487
Intercept                                 (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)
                                          0.011
Power Distance                            (0.03)
                                          ­0.019
Power Distance  Family Dominance         (0.01)
                                                        ­0.011
Individualism                                           (0.01)
                                                        0.010
Individualism  Family Dominance                        (0.10)
                                                                       0.001
Gender Differentiation                                                 (0.72)
Gender Differentiation                                               ­0.013
Family Dominance                                                      (0.04)
                                                                                     0.001
Risk Avoidance                                                                       (0.76)
                                                                                    ‐0.001
Risk Avoidance  Family Dominance                                                   (0.84)
                                           0.575        ­1.038         0.302        ‐0.228
Family Dominance                           (0.12)       (0.01)         (0.40)       (0.64)

Historical economic prosperity            0.787         0.856         0.808         0.824
                                          (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)
Adj. R‐squared                             0.915         0.909         0.912         0.894




                                            29
                                  Appendix 1
The sample of countries used in graphs and tables, and the three‐letter codes
representing them in the graphs.

CODE   Country              CODE   Country               CODE   Country
ARG    Argentina            GER    Germany               NZL    New Zealand
AUS    Australia            GRC    Greece                PAK    Pakistan
AUT    Austria              HKG    Hong Kong             PER    Peru
BEL    Belgium              IDN    Indonesia             PHL    Philippines
BRA    Brazil               IND    India                 PRT    Portugal
CAN    Canada               IRL    Ireland               SGP    Singapore
CHE    Switzerland          ISR    Israel                SWE    Sweden
CHL    Chile                ITA    Italy                 THA    Thailand
COL    Colombia             JPN    Japan                 TUR    Turkey
DNK    Denmark              KOR    South Korea           TWN    Taiwan
ESP    Spain                MEX    Mexico                USA    United States
FIN    Finland              MYS    Malaysia              VEN    Venezuela
FRA    France               NLD    Netherlands           ZAF    South Africa
GBR    United Kingdom       NOR    Norway




                                         30
References
Albrecht, Karl, 2006. Social intelligence: The new science of success. Jossey‐Bass, San
        Francisco: Wiley Imprint.
Anderson, Ronald, Reeb, David, 2003. Founding family ownership and firm performance:
        evidence from the S&P 500. Journal of Finance 58, 28
Applbaum, K. D. 1995. Marriage with the proper stranger: Arranged marriage in
        metropolitan Japan, Ethnology, 34, 37‐51.
Atal, Y., Ed. 1992. The Changing Family in Asia. UNESCO: Bangkok.
Barca, Fabrizio, Becht, Marco, 2001. The control of corporate Europe. New York: Oxford
        University Press.
Basabe, N., Páez, D., Valencia, J., González, J.L., Rimé, B., Pennebaker, and J.Y Diener, E., 1999.
        El Anclaje Sociocultural de la Experiencia Emocional de las Naciones: un análisis
        colectivo. Boletín de Psicología 62, 7‐42.
Basabe, Nakane, and Maria Ros, 2005. Cultural dimensions and social behavior correlates:
        Individualism‐collectivism and power distance. RIPS/IRSP, 18 (1), 189‐225, Presses
        Universitaires de Grenoble.
Becker, Gary Stanley, 1981. A treatise on the family. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University
        Press.
Becker, Gary Stanley, Tomes, Nigel, 1985. Human capital and the rise and fall of families.
        Dept. of Economics, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.
Bertrand, Marianne, Johnson, Simon, Samphantharak, Krislert, Schoar, Antoinette, 2008.
        Mixing Family With Business: A Study of Thai business groups and the families
        behind them. Journal of Financial Economics 88 3, 466‐498.
Bertrand, Marianne, Schoar, Antoinette, 2006. The role of family in family firms. Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 20 2, 73.
Bloom, Nicholas, Van Reenen, John, 2007. Measuring and explaining management practices
        across firms and countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 57
Bunkanwanicha, Pramuan, Joseph Fan and Yupana Wiwattanakantang, 2010. Family
        matters: Valuing marriage in family firms, working paper.
Burkart, Mike, Panunzi, Fausto, Shleifer, Andrei, 2003. Family firms. Journal of Finance 58 5,
        2167‐201




                                                31
Buss, 1989. Sex differences in human mate preferences: Evolutionary hypotheses tested in
       37 cultures. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 12: 1‐49.
Buunk, Abraham, Justin Park, and Shelli Dubbs. 2008. Parent‐Offspring Conflict in Mate
       Preferences. Review of General Psychology 12(1) 47‐62.
Carnegie, Andrew, 1889. The gospel of wealth. London: F. C. hagen & co..
Caselli, Francesco, Gennaioli, Nicola, 2006. Dynastic management. In: Centre for Economic
       Performance Discussion Papers 741.
Casey, B. Mulligan, 1999. Galton versus the human capital approach to inheritance. The
       Journal of Political Economy 107, S184.
Chandler, Alfred D., 1977. The visible hand: The managerial revolution in American
       business. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap Press.
Chauncey, George, 2004. Why marriage?: The history shaping today's debate over gay
       equality. Cambridge, MA: Basic Books.
Chutatong, Charumilind, Raja, Kali, Yupana, Wiwattanakantang, 2006. Connected lending:
       Thailand before the financial crisis 79 1, 181‐218.
Claessens, Stijn, Djankov, Simeon, Lang, Larry H. P., 2000. The separation of ownership and
       control in East Asian corporations. Journal of Financial Economics 58 1‐2, 81‐112
Collins, Marcus. 2001. Pride and Prejudice: West Indian Men in Mid‐Twentieth‐Century
       Britain. Journal of British Studies 40(3) 391‐418
Coontz, Stephanie, 2005. Marriage, a history: From obedience to intimacy, or How love
       conquered marriage. Viking, New York.
Cooper, Robert K., Sawaf, Ayman, 1997. Executive EQ: emotional intelligence in leadership
       and organizations. New York: Grosset/Putnam.
Da Silveira, Alexandre Di Miceli, Leal, Ricardo P.C., Carvalhal Da Silva, Andre, Barros, Lucas
       Ayres B.De C., 2007. Evolution and determinants of firm‐level corporate governance
       quality in Brazil In: Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ) ‐ The COPPEAD
       Graduate School of Business working paper.
Davies, Bernie, and Osamu Ikeno, 2002. The Japanese mind: Understanding contemporary
       Japanese culture. Tokyo: Tuttle Publishing.
Devlin, Bernie, 1997. Intelligence, genes, and success: Scientists respond to The bell curve.
       New York: Springer.




                                              32
Dion, K. L., and K. K. Dion, 1983. Gender and ethnocultural comparisons in styles of love.
        Psychology of Women Quarterly, 17, 463‐473.
Dion, K. K. and K. K. Dion, 1996. Cultural perspectives on romantic love. Personal
        Relationships, 3, 5‐18.
Eldering, Lotty and Erik J. Knorth, 1998. Marginalization of immigrant youth and risk
        factors in their everyday lives: The European experience. Child and Youth Care
        Forum 27 3, 153‐169.
Ellul, Andrew, Pagano, Marco, Panunzi, Fausto, 2008. Inheritance law and investment in
        family firms, Center for Economic Policy Research Discussion Papers 6977.
Faccio, Mara, 2006. Politically Connected Firms. American Economic Review 96 1, 369‐86.
Faccio, Mara, Lang, Larry H. P., 2002. The ultimate ownership of western European
        corporations. Journal of Financial Economics 65 3, 365‐95.
Faccio, Mara, Masulis, Ronald W., McConnell, John J., 2006. Political connections and
        corporate bailouts. Journal of Finance 61 6, 2597‐635.
Ferguson, Niall, 1998. The World's Banker: The history of the house of Rothschild. London:
        Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Fischer, Claude S., 1996. Inequality by design : cracking the bell curve myth. Princton
        University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Fiske, A.P., Markus, H.R., Kitayama, S., and Nisbett, R.E., 1998. The cultural matrix of social
        psychology. In D. Gilber, S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social
        psychology, (4th ed., p. 915‐981). Boston, MA: McGraw Hill.
Fogel, Kathy, 2006. Oligarchic family control, social economic outcomes, and the quality of
        government. Journal of International Business Studies 37, 603.
Fraser, Steve, 1995. The bell curve wars: race, intelligence, and the future of America. New
        York: BasicBooks.
Galton, Francis, 1869. Hereditary genius: An inquiry into its laws and consequences.
        London: Macmillan.
Galton, Francis, 1889. Natural inheritance. London: Macmillan.
Galton, Francis, 1909. Essays in eugenics. London: Eugenics education society.
Gardner, Howard, 1983. Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New York:
        Basic Books.




                                               33
Gautam, Ashutosh, 2002. Physical Chemistry. India: Har Anand Publication.
Gilbert, D. T., Fiske, S. T., & Lindzey, G. (Eds.), 1998. The handbook of social psychology (4th
        ed.). New York: McGraw‐Hill.
Goleman, Daniel, 1995. Emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam Books.
Goodwin, Gail, 1999. Childhood days: 1999 Calendar. San Rafael CA: CEDCO Publishing.
Gouveia, Valdiney and Maria Ros, 2000. Hofstede and Schwartz’s models for classifying
        individualism at the cultural level: their relation to macro‐social and macro‐
        economic variables. Psicothema, 12:25‐33.
Guiso, Luigi, Sapienza, Paola, and Zingales, Luigi. 2005. Cultural Biases in Economic
        Exchange, Working Paper, Chicago, IL, University of Chicago.
Haan, L. de, Ferreira, Ana, 2006. Extreme value theory: An introduction. New York; London:
        Springer.
Hayek, Friedrich A. von, 1941. The pure theory of capital. London: Macmillan.
Herrnstein, Richard J., Murray, Charles A., 1994. The bell curve : intelligence and class
        structure in American life. New York: Free Press.
Hofstede, Geert H., 1980. Culture's consequences: International differences in work‐related
        values. Beverly Hills, Calif: Sage Publications.
Hofstede, Geert H., 1991. Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind. London; New
        York: McGraw‐Hill.
Hofstede, Geert H., 1994. Uncommon sense about organizations: Cases, studies, and field
        observations. Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage Publications.
Hofstede, Geert H., 1998. Masculinity and femininity: The taboo dimension of national
        cultures. Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage Publications.
Hofstede, Geert H., 2001. Culture's consequences (2nd ed.), Sage Publications.
Hofstede, Gert Jan, Pedersen, Paul, Hofstede, Geert H., 2002. Exploring culture : exercises,
        stories, and synthetic cultures. Yarmouth, Me: Intercultural Press.
Högfeldt, Peter 2005. The history and politics of corporate ownership in Sweden. In: Morck
        R (ed.) A history of corporate governance around the world: family business groups
        to professional managers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, p. 62.
Holtz‐Eakin, Douglas, Joulfaian, David, Rosen, Harvey S., 1993. The Carnegie conjecture:
        Some empirical evidence. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 413.




                                               34
Inglehart, Ronald and Wayne E. Baker, 2000. Modernization, Cultural Change, and the
       Persistence of Traditional Values. American Sociological Review, Vol. 65, No. 1,
       Looking Forward, Looking Back: Continuity and Change at the Turn of the
       Millennium February, p. 19‐51.
Inglehart, Ronald and Baker, Wayne, 2000. Modernization, Cultural Change, and the
       Persistence of Traditional Values. American Sociological Review 65, 19‐51
Inglehart, Ronald, 1998. Modernization and post‐modernization: Cultural, economic, and
       political change in 43 Societies. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Iwasawa, Miho, 2004. Partnership transition in contemporary Japan: Prevalence of
       childless non‐cohabiting couples. The Japanese Journal of Population 2 1, 76‐92.
Jacoby, Russell, Glauberman, Naomi, Herrnstein, Richard J., 1995. The bell curve debate :
       history, documents, opinions. New York: Times Books.
James, Harold, 2006. Family capitalism : Wendels, Haniels, Falcks, and the continental
       European model. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Kaplan, Marion A., 1985. The Marriage bargain : women and dowries in European history.
       Institute for Research in History. New York: Haworth Press.
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna G., Morck, Randall K., 2005. The Evolution of concentrated
       ownership in India: Broad patterns and a history of the Indian software Industry. In:
       A History of corporate governance around the World: family business groups to
       professional managers. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press. A National
       Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report. p. 283‐320.
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna, 1999. Policy shocks, market intermediaries, and corporate
       strategy: The evolution of business groups in Chile and India. Journal of Economics
       and Management Strategy 8 2, 271‐310.
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna, 2000. Is group affiliation profitable in emerging markets?
       An analysis of diversified Indian business groups. Journal of Finance 55 2, 867‐91.
Khanna, Tarun & Jan Rivkin, 2001. Estimating the performance effects of business groups in
       emerging markets. Strategic Management Journal.
Khanna, Tarun, Yafeh, Yishay, 2005. Business groups and risk sharing around the world.
       Journal of Business 78 1, 301‐40.




                                             35
Khanna, Tarun, Yafeh, Yishay, 2007. Business groups in emerging markets: Paragons or
       parasites? Journal of Economic Literature 45 2, 331‐72.
Kincheloe, Joe L., Steinberg, Shirley R., Gresson, Aaron David, 1996. Measured lies : The bell
       curve examined. New York: St. Martin's Press.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez‐de‐Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, 1999. Corporate ownership
       around the World. Journal of Finance 54 2, 471‐517.
Landes, David S., 2006, Dynasties (Viking Penguin: New York).
Lee, G. R., and L. H. Stone, 1980. Mate‐selection systems and criteria: Variation according to
       family structure. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 42, 319‐326.
Levine, R., S. Sato, T. Hashimoto, and I. Verma, 1995. Love and marriage in eleven cultures.
       Journal of Cross‐Cultural Psychology, 26, 554‐571.
Lim, Wonhyuk, Haggard, Stephan, Kim, Euysung, 2003. The Emergence of the Chaebol and
       the Origins of the Chaebol Problem. In: Economic crisis and corporate restructuring
       in Korea: Reforming the chaebol. Cambridge; New York and Melbourne: Cambridge
       University Press, Cambridge Asia‐Pacific Studies, p. 35‐52.
Lynn, R. & Martin, T., 1995. National differences for thirty‐seven nations in extraversion,
       neuroticism, psychoticism and economic, demographic and other correlates.
       Personality and Individual Differences, 19, 403‐406.
Lynn, Richard, 2008. The global bell curve: race, IQ, and inequality worldwide. Augusta, Ga:
       Washington Summit Publishers.
Mastroianni, George R., 2006. Kurt Gottschaldt's ambiguous relationship with national
       socialism. History of Psychology 9, 16.
Medora, N. P., J. H. Larson, N. Hortacsu, and P. Dave, 2002. Perceived attitudes towards
       romanticism: A cross‐cultural study of American, Asian‐Indian, and Turkish young
       adults. Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 33, 155‐178.
Miller, William 1979. Men in Business: Essays on the Historical Role of the Entrepreneur.
       Published by Greenwood publishing.
Miller, Danny, Le Breton‐Miller, Isabelle, 2005. Managing for the long run : lessons in
       competitive advantage from great family businesses. Boston, Mass: Harvard
       Business School Press.




                                              36
Miller, Danny, Le Breton‐Miller, Isabelle, Lester, Richard, Cannella, Albert, 2008. Are family
       firms really superior performers? Journal of Corporate Finance 13 5, 829‐858.
Montagu, Ashley, 1999. Race and IQ. Oxford University Press, New York.
Morck, Randall K., Percy, Michael, Tian, Gloria Y., Yeung, Bernard, 2005a. The rise and fall of
       the widely held firm: A history of corporate ownership in Canada. In Randall Morck,
       ed. A history of corporate governance around the world: Family business groups to
       professional managers. University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 65‐140.
Morck, Randall K., Stangeland, David A., Yeung, Bernard, 2000. Inherited wealth, corporate
       control, and economic growth: The canadian disease? In: Concentrated corporate
       ownership. University of Chicago Press, NBER Conference Report series. Chicago
       and London, pp. 319‐69.
Morck, Randall, Wolfenzon, Daniel, Yeung, Bernard, 2005b. Corporate Governance,
       Economic Entrenchment, and Growth. Journal of Economic Literature 43 3, 655‐720
Morck, Randall, Yeung, Bernard 2004. Family control and the rent‐seeking society.
       Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice 28, 18.
Mount, Ferdinand, 1982. The subversive family: An alternative history of love and marriage.
       London: Jonathan Cape.
Nieves, Robert and Bahaudin Mujtaba, 2006. The Effect of Cultural Values, Professional
       Engineering Cultures, And Technology On International Joint Ventures In Mexico
       And The United States. International Business & Economics Research Journal, 5:45‐
       56.
Oyserman, D., Coon, H.M. & Kemmelmeier, M. 2002. Rethinking individualism and
       collectivism: Evaluation of theoretical assumptions and meta‐analyses.
       Psychological Bulletin, 128, 3‐72.
Paine, Thomas, Conway, Moncure Daniel, Philadelphia Yearly Meeting of the Religious
       Society of Friends. Meeting for Sufferings., 1776. Common sense: Addressed to the
       inhabitants of America on the following interesting subjects. Philadelphia.
Perez‐Gonzalez, Francisco, 2006. Inherited Control and Firm Performance. American
       Economic Review 96, 29.
Rockman, H. 1994. Matchmaker matchmaker make me a match: The art and conventions of
       Jewish arranged marriages. Sexual and Marital Therapy 9 277–284.




                                              37
Schmitt, David.P., Realo, Anu., Voracek, Martin, Allik, Juri, 2008. Why can’t a man be more
       like a woman? Sex differences in Big Five personality traits across 55 cultures.
       Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 94, 14.
Schumpeter, Joseph Alois, 1912. Theorie der wirtschaftlichen entwicklung. Duncker &
       Humblot, Leipzig.
Schumpeter, Joseph Alois, 1951. Imperialism and social classes. New York: A.M.Kelly.
Schwartz, S.H., 1994. Beyond individualism/collectivism: New cultural dimensions of
       values. In U. Kim, H.C. Triandis, C. Kagitcibasi, S. Choi, S., & G. Yoon, (Eds.),
       Individualism and collectivism: Theory, method and applications (p. 85‐119).
       Thousands Oaks, CA: Sage.
Schwartz, Shalom H, Bardi, Anat and Bianchi, Gabriel. 2000. Value Adaptation to the
       Imposition and Collapse of Communist Regimes in East‐Central Europe. In Renshon,
       Stanley A. and Duckitt, John, Eds. Political Psychology: Cultural and Cross‐Cultural
       Foundations. New York, New York University Press.
Shaw, Alison. 2001. Kinship, Cultural Preference and Immigration: Consanguineous
       Marriage among British Pakistanis. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute
       7(2) 315‐334
Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., Brennan, Michael J., 1996. Large Shareholders and
       Corporate Control. In: The theory of corporate finance. Volume 1. Cheltenham: Elgar,
       p. 145‐72.
Simmons, D.D., von Molke, A. and Shimizu, Hideo, 1986. Attitudes toward romantic love
       among American, German and Japanese students. Journal of Social Psychology, 126,
       327‐336.
Smith, Brian, Amoako‐Adu, Ben, 2005. Management Succession and Financial Performance
       in Family Controlled Firms. In: Governance and Ownership. Cheltenham: Elgar, p.
       27.
Smith, P.B., & Bond, M.H., 1998. Social psychology across cultures, 2nd ed.. London: Prentice
       Hall.
Squire, Susan, 2008. I don't: A contrarian history of marriage. Bloomsbury: Distributed to
       the trade by Macmillan, New York, NY.




                                                38
Sterckx, L., and Bouw, C. 2005. Liefde op maat: Partnerkeuze van Turkse en Marokaanse
       jongeren. Amsterdam: Het Spinhuis.
Sternberg, Robert J and Weis, Karin, 2008. The new psychology of love. New Haven: Yale
       University Press.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers, 2008. Marriage and the market. Cato Unbound, Cato
       Institute, January 18, 2008.
Supple, Barry E., 1957. A Business Elite: German‐Jewish Financiers in Nineteenth‐Century
       New York. The Business History Review, Vol. 31, pp. 143‐178.
Tabutin, Dominique, Bruno Schoumaker, Godfrey Rogers, Jonathan Mandelbaum, and
       Catriona Dutreuilh. 2005. The Demography of the Arab World and the Middle East
       from the 1950s to the 2000s. A Survey of Changes and a Statistical Assessment.
       Population 60(5/6) 505‐615.
Talbani, A. and Hasanali, P. 2000. Adolescent females between tradition and modernity:
       Gender role socialization in South Asian immigrant culture. Journal of Adolescence
       23 615–627.
Tang, Linghui, and Peter E Koveos, 2008. A framework to update Hofstede's cultural value
       indices: economic dynamics and institutional stability. The Journal of International
       Business Studies, May 2008.
Taussig, Frank William, 1930. Inventors and money‐makers. New York, NY: Macmillan,.
Todd, E. 1985. The explanation of ideology, family structures and social systems. Oxford:
       Basil Blackwell.
Villalonga, Belen, Amit, Raphael, 2006. How do family ownership, management and control
       affect firm value? Journal of Financial Economics 80, 32.
Westermarck, Edward, 1922. The history of human marriage. Johnson Reprints (1975).




                                             39
