NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCIENTIFIC PRODUCTIVITY AND ACADEMIC PROMOTION:
A STUDY ON FRENCH AND ITALIAN PHYSICISTS
Francesco Lissoni
Jacques Mairesse
Fabio Montobbio
Michele Pezzoni
Working Paper 16341
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16341

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

Early drafts of the paper benefitted from many comments by three anonymous referees and from remarks
by participants to several CID workshops and to the DIME conference on “Knowledge in space and
time: economic and policy implications of the Knowledge-based economy” (Strasbourg, April 2008);
the BRICK-DIME workshop on “The Organisation, Economics and Policy of Academic Research”
(Moncalieri, July 2008); the NBER Productivity Seminar (Cambridge MA, March 2009). We are particularly
grateful to Pierre Azoulay and Paula Stephan stimulating suggestions. This work was supported by
the Italian Ministry of Education [FIRB to J.M.]; European Cooperation in Science and Technology
[IS0604 to M.P.]; European Commission [FP6–043345 to F.L., FP6–043345 to F.M.] The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Francesco Lissoni, Jacques Mairesse, Fabio Montobbio, and Michele Pezzoni. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Scientific Productivity and Academic Promotion: A Study on French and Italian Physicists
Francesco Lissoni, Jacques Mairesse, Fabio Montobbio, and Michele Pezzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 16341
September 2010
JEL No. I23,I28,J24,J45,O31
ABSTRACT
The paper examines the determinants of scientific productivity (number of articles and journals’ impact
factor) for a panel of about 3600 French and Italian academic physicists active in 2004-05. Endogeneity
problems concerning promotion and productivity are addressed by specifying a generalized Tobit model,
in which a selection probit equation accounts for the individual scientist’s probability of promotion
to her present rank, and a productivity regression estimates the effects of age, gender, cohort of entry,
and collaboration characteristics, conditional on the scientist’s rank. We find that the size and international
nature of collaborative projects and co-authors’ past productivity have very significant impacts on
current productivity, while age and gender, and past productivity are also influential determinants
of both productivity and probability of promotion. Furthermore we show that the stop-and-go policies
of recruitment and promotion, typical of the Italian and French centralized academic systems of governance,
can leave significant long-lasting cohort effects on research productivity.

Francesco Lissoni
DIMI-Università di Brescia
via Branze 38 - 25123 Brescia
Italy
and KITES-Università Bocconi
lissoni@ing.unibs.it
Jacques Mairesse
CREST-INSEE
15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
FRANCE
and UNU-MERIT (Maastricht University)
and also NBER
mairesse@ensae.fr

Fabio Montobbio
Insubria University
Via Montegeneroso 71
21100 Varese
Italy
and KITES-Università Bocconi
fabio.montobbio@unibocconi.it
Michele Pezzoni
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Gestionale
Università di Bergamo
viale Marconi 5 - 24044 Dalmine
Italy
and KITES-Università Bocconi
michele.pezzoni@unibg.it

1. Introduction and overview
Countries exhibit very substantial differences in their scientific productivity
as well as in the institutional settings of their research activities (May, 1997; King,
2004). However, most of the available studies on academic scientists’ productivity
and careers are based upon US data, and their theoretical insights and policy
implications take for granted the institutional characteristics of US universities
(Long, 1978; Allison and Long, 1990; Levin and Stephan, 1991; Lee and Bozeman,
2005). Little is known in fact on the determinants of academic scientists’
productivity in Europe. European university systems differ substantially both
from their US counterparts and among themselves, the most important differences
being related to the degree of autonomy of universities, the size and flexibility of
the academic job market, and the relative weight and quality of universities and
public research organizations (PROs) within the national science system.
In this paper we study various determinants of careers and scientific
productivity of academic physicists in France and Italy, by taking explicitly into
consideration the institutional context of the two countries. In both France and
Italy, universities have very limited autonomy and compete for human and
financial resources with large PROs (especially important in France). Their
tenured staff are civil servants recruited and promoted through centralized
procedures controlled by the State. This centralization tends to originate highly
irregular recruitment and promotion “waves”, such that career opportunities may
be absent for long intervals of time, and then appear all of a sudden as a
2

consequence of a policy decision. We expect such irregularities to result in long‐
lasting cohort effects on productivity, which we wish to compare with other
productivity determinants found to be significant by US‐based studies.
We thus investigate the effects of age, gender, cohort of entry and past
productivity both on individual scientists’ current productivity and on their
career progress. We also consider the role of size and nature (international vs.
national) of research projects as well as the influence of co‐authors’ productivity.
We base our analysis upon a panel of about 3600 academic physicists, with the
exception of nuclear and astro‐physicists, all of them active in academic year 2004‐
05. Our productivity measures, both in terms of “quantity” and of “quality”,
derive from information from the ISI‐Web of Science pertaining to a set of some
360 journals covering most specialized journals in physics with some reputation
(namely, with at least a five‐year average impact factor of 0.5).
We consider five productivity regressions, one for each main position in the
academic ranking of the two countries, from assistant to full professor: precisely
Maitre de Conference (MCF) and Professor (PR) in France, and Ricercatore
Universitario (RU), Professore Associato (PA) and Professore Ordinario (PO) in
Italy. We also specify three selection probit equations accounting for the
individual scientist’s probability of promotion from respectively MCF to PR, RU to
PA, and PA to PO. The three productivity regressions for PR, PA and PO are
estimated jointly with the three corresponding promotion equations as a
generalized Tobit model by means of Heckman two‐step method. Estimating a
3

productivity regression for each rank, and jointly with a promotion probit
equation for professors helps in controlling for unobserved individual
heterogeneity across ranks and in correcting for selectivity in promotion to
professorship. We also take care of individual heterogeneity among individual
physicists by including past productivity variables in all equations: three year
average lagged productivity in the promotion probit equations, and average
productivity before recruitment (for MCF and RU) or promotion (for PR, PA and
PO) in the productivity regressions.
As expected from the background literature, our results confirm the
existence of age and gender effects both on the probability to be promoted and on
productivity conditional on academic rank, although with some differences
between ranks and countries. They also confirm that physicists’ own past
productivity has very significant positive impacts on promotion probability and
current productivity. We find that the size and international nature of
collaborative projects, as well as co‐authors’ past productivity, are influential
determinants of current productivity. Finally, we provide significant evidence that
the physicists recruited or promoted in 1980 in Italy and in 1985 in France (when
massive recruitment and promotion waves took place after several years with
limited career opportunities) are on average less productive than the other
physicists, showing the damaging and long‐lasting effects of the stops‐and‐goes in
recruitment and promotion policies typical of the two centralized academic
systems.
4

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we very
briefly outline the background literature, and in section 3 we present at some
length the institutional features and relevant historical developments of the French
and Italian academic systems in the past 30 years. In section 4 we explain our data
and justify our choice of econometric specification, and in section 5 we comment
in detail our results. Section 6 concludes.

2. Background literature
Interest in the determinants of individual scientists’ productivity goes back
to the XIX century1. From the very start, enquiries on scientific productivity were
meant to cast light on a two separate issues: the soundness of eugenic principles
proposed by Sir Francis Galton, whose studies on the “hereditary genius” had
been largely based on the demographics of “eminent men of science”; and the
impact of academic institutional arrangements and incentive schemes on a
country’s scientific performance, as measured by the number of outstanding
scientists from that country (Cattell, 1903; Godin, 2006; Godin 2007)2. Both the

1

James Cattell published in 1903 the first systematic data collection on scientific papers per author

and provided strong evidence of the existence of large differences across individuals, a result later
systematized by Alfred Lotka’s well‐known “power law”(Lotka, 1926).
2

A third purpose served by these early enquiries was the study of disciplines, from their birth to

consolidation. This is still a very much beaten path, although recent studies add to simple paper
counts increasingly sophisticated applications of network analysis (Crane, 1972).

5

issues have been debated ever since and are still present in today’s studies,
although quite often in a disguised manner.
Since the 1960s, sociologists of science have tested whether increasing
returns to scientific reputation and productivity (presently referred to as
“Matthew effect”) may explain Lotka’s law better than the unequal distribution of
intelligence in the population (Merton, 1968; Merton, 1988; David 1994). A typical
result in this direction has been obtained by Long and Fox (1995), who find that,
other things being equal, graduates from prestigious universities have a higher
chance to get their first job at institutions in the same league, with substantial
advantages in terms of present and future research productivity. As for individual
determinants, gender is the one that has attracted most of the attention, with
cognitive and genetic explanations of gender differences (as opposed to social
ones) being still debated (Etzkowitz et al., 2000; Fox, 1999; Spelke, 2005).
Understanding the relationship between academic institutions, incentive
schemes, and scientists’ performance has become increasingly important over the
last 30 years or so. This surge of interest can be explained by the policy makers’
wish to measure and increase the effectiveness of the public funding of science.
Leading research universities and scientists, facing possible budget cuts, have also
actively lobbied in favour of a higher concentration of resources on the basis of
publication‐ and citation‐based indicators of excellence (Graham and Diamond,
1997).

6

An important line of research explores the impact of age and tenure on
scientists’ productivity. In particular, many studies have explored the possibility
that individual scientific productivity follows a life cycle: productivity increases
when the scientist is young, reaches a peak at/before middle age, and declines
afterwards (Levin and Stephan, 1991). At the same time, studies on tenure have
tried to clarify whether observable life cycles are due to biological factors or to the
incentive structure, such as the reduced “publish‐or‐perish” pressure on senior
scientists with tenured positions. In a rare study on a non‐US sample, Turner and
Mairesse (2002) find that while promotion has a positive effect on the quantity and
quality of publications, the time spent on the same tenured senior position has a
negative impact on both variables. They also show that being a member of a
highly productive laboratory fuels individual productivity. This confirms that
some institutional variables, such as the stratification of universities according to
prestige and funding, may generate increasing returns in science.

3. Recruitment and careers of academic scientists in France and Italy
Most of the available literature on scientific productivity is based both
theoretically and empirically on the US case. This is an important limitation,
because the latter is not representative of university systems worldwide 3 . The
centrality of universities for public science, the degree of academic job mobility,

3

Noteworthy exceptions are Turner and Mairesse (2002), Bonaccorsi and Daraio (2003), Hall et al.

(2005), Mairesse and Turner (2006), and Breschi et al. (2007, 2008).

7

and the clear stratification of universities according to research intensity are
typical characteristics of the USA (Ben‐David, 1992; Clark, 1993). In countries such
as France and Germany, for example, large public research organizations such as
CNRS (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique) or the Max Plank Institute have
been regarded by policy makers as the main pillars of the public research system;
Italy also followed this model for many years with CNR (Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche).
As for job mobility, we observe that US universities select candidates for
professorial jobs in total autonomy, with no control from the central (federal) or
state governments. Professors of all ranks are university employees who can
bargain for their wages and working conditions on an individual basis; in addition,
the existence of a proper academic job market allows scientists with a strong
publication record to move across universities in search of better paid or better
funded research positions (Ehrenberg et al., 1990). This is hardly the case in France
and Italy. In these centralized systems university staffs are considered civil
servants, who are employed by the government and selected by commissions of
senior peers, chosen by national members of the relevant discipline or nominated
by government. In these countries, there is not a strong competition between
universities for recruiting or promoting the most promising or productive
scientists.
At the same time, strict dependence of universities on government funding
(which tend to be highly pro‐cyclical) and the frequent reforms of the recruitment
8

procedures tend to make career perspectives highly erratic. Italy, for example, has
a long history of prolonged periods during which universities did not recruit new
scientists, due to funding shortages or ongoing policy revisions, followed by
sudden waves of mass recruitment and promotions, often under the political
pressure exerted by the large number of scientists seeking a tenured position after
many years of temporary contracts.

3.1 Academic careers in France and Italy
The French academic system has two main positions: “Maitre de conférence”
(MCF; roughly equivalent to the US rank of assistant professor) and “Professeur”
(PR). In Italy there are three positions: “Ricercatore universitario” (RU), “Professore
Associato” (PA) and “Professore ordinario” (PO). In French physics, MCFs amount to
around two thirds of tenured faculty, while in Italy each of the three ranks adds
up to around one third of tenured faculty (see figure 1).
[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
All positions are tenured, and for all of them the teaching and research
duties, as well as the wages, are defined by national laws, with limited possibility
of negotiation at the local level. Whatever their rank, academics are classified by
the government according to their discipline. Such disciplines act very much as
professional guilds, since their members (and not individual universities or

9

department) control the recruitment process4. Before accessing any of the above‐
mentioned positions (most often RU in Italy and MCF in France) young scientists
go through post‐doc positions of various lengths. Universities that wish to recruit
a young scientist or promote any member of the academic staff are subject to a
series of administrative constraints, which limit their freedom to allocate funds to
recruitment or career progress in the absence of governmental approval, and
require them to follow a set of complex procedures to place a job call and collect
the related applications. In addition, the job calls may be suspended by the
government at any time for either financial or regulatory reasons, forcing
universities to delay their recruitment or promotion plans.
In Italy and France, these constraints have often clashed against an
increasing demand for higher education instruction, whose growth was
particularly intense in the 1960s and 70s. In those years, both countries answered
to the growing number of students of those years by hiring a large number of
young assistants with fixed‐terms contracts or when tenured weak prospects of
promotion (Professori incaricati as well as contrattisti and assegnisti in Italy, and
Assistants and Maitres Assistants in France). In early 1980s, two reform acts were
passed: law 382 in Italy (in 1980) and the Higher Education Act in France (in 1984).
Both laws reformed the recruitment process by introducing the ranking system we
4

Notice also that the US system is openly stratified according to the research vs. teaching intensity

of institutions. On the contrary, both the Italian and French laws forbid universities to differentiate
openly their mission, and to assign different research versus teaching loads to the faculty.

10

described above, and by changing the hiring rules. At the same time, a number of
ad hoc measures were passed along with the new laws, which were meant to allow
many professori incaricati and assistants to obtain tenured positions as ricercatori or
professori associati in Italy, or maitres de conference in France. In Italy, the ad hoc
procedures were merely formal and candidates did not face any selective
competition5 (Clark, 1977; Moscati, 2001). As a result, in each country there was a
massive recruitment wave (respectively in 1980 and 1985), followed by a
prolonged period without any recruitment in Italy, and by a sensible decline in
recruitment in France. Figures 2 and 3 illustrate this effect for the field of physics:
they report the number of scientists ‐ who were on active duty in 2004‐05 ‐ by year
of recruitment (for RU and MCF) or year of last promotion (for those in
professorial positions). The 1980 and 1985 entry/promotion peaks are clearly
visible.
[FIGURES 2 AND 3 ABOUT HERE]
The 1980 and 1984 laws also had lasting effects on the selection procedures.
In Italy, it was established that the promotion to PA and PO had to occur at a
national level, for a number of positions issued every other year by the ministry,
and managed by a professors’ committee whose members were first chosen by all

5

See article 50 and 57 DPR 382/1980 for Italy and article 59 Décret n 84‐431 du 6 juin 1984 for

France. These laws can be found (in original language) on the following websites:
http://www.pd.infn.it/infn_ric/GruppiLavoro/Stato_Giuridico/Stato%20Giuridico%20Universitari_
DPR382_1980.html and http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/

11

peers in each discipline, and then further selected by the ministry. As for RUs,
these were selected at the university level by a committee of three among PAs and
POs, all appointed by the ministry. Together with the universities’ lack of financial
autonomy, this highly centralized system soon became responsible for a number
of difficulties in speeding up the recruitment process by universities throughout
the 1980s and early 1990s (see again Figure 3).
In 1998 a new recruitment system was introduced, which was still in place
at the time of our study6. The system allows each university to offer new positions
by launching its own call for applications (concorso), and to set up an examination
committee. All the committee members, however, must belong to the same
discipline for which the position is offered and (with the exception of just one
member) they are not selected by the university, but elected by all the discipline
affiliates at the national level. Nominally, the commission has not the task to pick
the most suitable candidate for the university that launched the call (on the basis,
for example, of the coincidence of the candidate’s and the university’s research
interests), but the best possible candidate in absolute terms, who should be the one
with the best publication record (called “idoneo”, which means fit‐for‐the‐job). In
principle, if the university does not like this candidate, it can always refuse to
nominate him/her and launch a new job call. In practice, most commissions try to

6

While we revised the paper, the Ministry of Education announced a new change in the

recruitment laws, which by June 2009, however, had not yet been entirely disclosed to the
Parliament.

12

steer the selection process towards candidates deemed suitable for the university.7
Once again the introduction of the new law coincided with a new wave of
recruitment; although less dramatic than the 1980 one, this is still visible in Figure
2, in the years between 1999 and 2001.
The French recruitment system is also very centralized and discipline‐
centred 8 . Every year, the central government issues a list of vacancies, by
discipline and institution, both for the MCF and PR positions. The applicants need
first to get a qualification certificate, which is granted by the CNU (Conseil National
des Universités) – whose members are partly elected and partly designated by the
Ministry of Education. Once obtained, the qualification is valid for four years and
the qualified candidates are the only ones who can apply for the vacant positions.
Applications will then be examined at the university level, by disciplinary
commissions, composed both of local and non‐local members9.

7

This requires many behind‐the–scene manoeuvres by the university, aimed at steering the

election of the committee members in favour of friendly candidates. For a more in‐depth
discussion of this point, and of its consequences for academic careers in Italy, see Pezzoni et al.
(2009)
8

In August 2007, the Sarkozy presidency initiated a number of much debated and still on‐going

reforms which are

aimed

at giving autonomy to universities by shifting powers and

administration of resources from the Ministry to them.
9

These disciplinary commissions are made up of 10 to 20 members, coming both from the

discipline or possibly other disciplines in the university, and from the discipline in other
universities. These commissions, in which PR and MCF sit in equal number, are elected for 4 years;

13

Both the Italian and the French recruitment systems have undergone severe
criticism over the years, which resulted in a succession of reforms that shifted the
balance of decision power in recruitment matters back and forth between the
national and local level (Chevaillier, 2001; Moscati, 2001; Musselin, 2005). None of
these reforms, however, has gone as far as to grant universities total freedom in
recruitment matters, nor it has diminished much the power of disciplines. More
importantly, the procedural uncertainty created by this succession of reforms,
combined with repeated cuts in the public spending for universities, has made the
recruitment process very irregular over time.
Time irregularities in recruitment and career advancement mechanisms
determine the age composition of the academic workforce. Table 1 reports the
number of physicists in France and Italy in 2004‐05 by rank and decade of birth.
As expected, the lower academic ranks are populated by younger scientists in both
countries. However, in Italy the top academic rank (PO) is populated by much
older scientists than its French equivalent (PR): while in France 19.6% of the full
professors (PR) were born in the 1960s, in Italy the percentage of PO from the
same decade is only 2.6%. Although less striking, such differences in age
composition hold also for the lower ranks: only 11.6% of Italian RU were born in
the 1970s, as opposed to 25.0% of French MCF. This is a very likely consequence of

they meet to deliberate on the recruitment of MCF in plenary formation, and on the promotion of
PR in a formation restricted to PR.

14

the higher emphasis on seniority‐career links in Italy, and of the higher
irregularity of the Italian recruitment process.
[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Finally, an important institutional feature of both the French and the Italian
research systems is the role of large PROs such as CNRS and CNR, respectively. In
France, CNRS has been traditionally regarded as the most important actor of the
research system (even more so in physics, with the exception of nuclear physics,
where that role is contended by CEA, a special agency for atomic energy). As such,
it has often out‐competed universities in attracting the best and most motivated
young scientists, who may perceive the academic position of MCF as overloaded
with teaching and administrative duties (not so much the professor’s position,
which is often targeted by CNRS Chargés de recherche). In Italy, the history of CNR
starts similarly to that of CNRS, which indeed was taken as a model for its
creation, in the late 1930s. Badly hit by successive budget cuts, the CNR has
progressively lost its centrality in the Italian research system, as well as the
possibility to offer permanent positions to young scientists. This implies that while
French universities have at least one competitor in the academic labour market,
Italian universities have none.10

10

Note also in France the existence of institutions of higher education called “Grandes Ecoles”,

such as “Ecole Normale Supérieure” and “Ecole Polytechnique” to cite two oldest and most
prestigious ones. They are of very small size compared to universities, but they select excellent
students, and have also developed good research activities in the last twenty years.

15

3.2 Implications for scientific productivity
The analysis of the recruitment process in the two countries, and of the
relative balance of universities and PROs inside the research system, suggests
some observations on the factors affecting scientific productivity. In principle,
productivity is a key determinant of career advancement in both countries, at least
for senior positions. In a related paper we show that this is indeed the case in
France for moves up to PR positions, and in Italy for promotion from RU to PA
but less so for promotion from PA to PO (see Pezzoni et al., 2009). As a
consequence, other things being equal, we should expect scientists who are
currently on higher positions to be more productive than those in lower ones. We
should also expect such scientists to exhibit a less pronounced life cycle that is to
be highly productive over a longer time spell, and to incur a productivity
slowdown at a later age. However, especially for Italy, informal recruitment and
promotion practices push in the direction of career by seniority and can give great
advantages to local candidates, no matter their productivity. If these effects were
dominant, they would significantly weaken the effectiveness of incentives to high
productivity.
We also expect to find strong effect for the different years of
entry/promotion both in Italy and France, for at least three reasons. First, access to
tenured academic positions has increasingly become more difficult over the 1980s
and 1990s, so we may presume that scientists who have been recruited over these
two decades are more productive than their predecessors. Second, late generations
16

of scientists have more international experience and may be expected to find it
easier to publish in international journals, which in our data are better represented
than national ones. Last, cohorts of scientists recruited en masse over short periods
of time (after periods of no recruitment) could be either more productive or less
productive than the average. We expect the RU, PA and MCF that entered the
university system in 1980 in Italy and 1985 in France (or reached their last
academic rank), to be less productive, due to the explicit lack of selective pressure
in those two years. We do not have any a priori on the effect of the 1980 and 1985
entry waves on the productivity of scientists in higher positions (PO and PR),
which were much less affected by these legislative changes.
We expect productivity to grow over time (calendar years) for at least three
reasons. First, both in Italy and in France public research funding has been
increasingly distributed on the basis of competitive grants. Second, physics, as any
other discipline, has enjoyed decreasing publishing cost, thanks to new
procedures and media. Finally, and especially in physics, “big science” and large
projects have favoured teamwork, which tends to increase productivity, as
measured by publishing (Price and Beaver, 1966)11.

11

: “..It is especially noteworthy that nobody who worked without collaborators or with only one

co‐author succeeded in producing more than four papers in the five‐year period, whereas
everybody with more than twelve collaborators produced fourteen or more papers in the same
time..” (Price and Beaver, 1966, p. 1014)

17

As for gender, no apparent reason exists to think of peculiarities for France
and Italy with respect to the US, so we expect to find evidence of a statistically
significant gender effect in both countries. Stratification effects may also exist,
which we try to capture with information on the affiliation and productivity of our
scientists’ co‐authors.

4. Data and methods

4.1 Data collection and sample
Our data collection is based on lists of all tenured academics in Italian and
French universities, active in academic year 2004/2005, provided by the Ministries
of Education of the two countries. The lists classify academics according to their
disciplinary affiliation: as indicated in Table 2, the individuals we have selected
are those active in all fields of physics, with the exception of astro‐physics and
nuclear physics12. The lists also provide the academics’ dates of birth, gender and
university, as well as their rank in 2004/2005 and seniority in these ranks. For all

12

Not all the scientists classified in one discipline, in fact, have homogeneous research interests. In

addition, it is often the case that some scientists are pushed to join (nominally) the discipline with
the highest opportunities of promotion at a given point in time. Face‐to‐face interviews to Italian
physicists show that some nuclear and particle physicists are classified as Fisica Sperimentale (Field
FIS/01), which enters our study, instead of being classifies as Fisica Nucleare e Subnucleare (Field
FIS/04), which we excluded from our study.

18

individuals who in 2004/2005 were at the bottom rank of the academic ladder
(namely, MCF in France and RU in Italy) we thus know when they were recruited
in such position; for all those who in the same year occupied a higher position (PR
in France, PA or PO in Italy), we know when they were promoted to such position,
but we ignore when they were recruited (as MCF or RU) or first promoted to
lesser ranks.
We gathered the information on scientific publications from the ISI Web of
Science, from Thompson‐Darwent, by matching the surnames and names of the
physicists in the ministerial lists with the surnames and initial of names (as coded
by ISI) for the authors of all articles published in physics journals going back to
1975. We considered a total of 363 journals classified as mainly physics journals in
the ISI records and with a minimum reputation as defined by an average five year
impact factor of at least 0.5 13 . This list of journals includes all the main
international journals specialised in physics and covers well all of its subfields14.

13

This means in other words that we excluded the physics journals which have regularly received

over a five year period less than 0.5 citations per article. It is also the case that ISI does not cover as
well those low reputation journals.
14

The list of the 20 journals with the larger number of publications in our database is reported in

the Appendix Table 6. Interviews with a few physicists have confirmed that no top journals
specialised in physics are missing.

19

Note that we have preferred not to consider generalist journals such as Science or
Nature15.
[TABLE 2 AND TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]
Such a collection strategy is the only one compatible with the publication
data gathered from the Web of Science, but it generates problems of homonymy
for the small group of physicists with the same surnames and initial of names in
the ministerial lists, as well as for those with very common surnames. Ignoring
these problems may lead to over‐estimating the productivity of these physicists. In
other cases homonyms can be found in the original ministerial databases, so that it
is impossible to correctly attribute papers. Therefore after some trials we finally

15

Including generalist journals such as Science and Nature may create even more problems of

homonymy than the ones we already have (if there are several “Smith J.” in physics, there must
plenty when considering all disciplines!). Moreover, we believe there are strong correlations
between publishing in specialized journals of good quality and generalist journals of outstanding
reputation as Science and Nature. Such generalist journals are few and they are not alternative
outlets to specialist physics journals. Top physicists who manage to publish the results of their
research in Science and Nature also publish these results in specialized physics journals. In terms
of descriptive statistics on “quantity” productivity, the errors we introduce should be more or less
negligible. On “quality” productivity, the absence of a few very‐high‐impact‐factor journals such
as Science and Nature probably results in chopping up slightly the long tail of the productivity
distribution of scientists. In terms of biases in our econometric analysis, one can expect that they
will not be sizeable. At the same time, it is very unlikely that a physicist with a small publication
record in specialized journals will publish many papers in Science or Nature.

20

dropped from our search all homonyms in the ministerial lists and all physicists
with an apparent productivity record far too high for being credible, and with
quite common surnames. These choices resulted in dropping about 3% of
surnames from the original lists, leaving us with 2151 French physicists (instead of
2211) and 1769 Italians (instead of 1816) 16. Note also that unless one would think
that the spelling of surnames could in some way be related to the scientific
productivity, cleaning our study sample from homonyms should not introduce
any biases in our econometric results.
Looking at our publications data, we found that about 3% (52) of the
academic physicists in Italy and about 11% (235) of the French ones have no
articles at all before and after recruitment or promotion, and hence a computed
zero productivity throughout their observed careers. This significant difference
could reflect the French academics’ tendency to write much more than Italians also
in journals not included in the ISI Web of Science; or by a higher share, in France,
of academics involved nearly exclusively in teaching, and/or administrative,
advising and consulting activities. Given the lack of specific data for investigating
why these “zero‐productive” physicists self‐select as “non researchers”, we

16

Most of the surnames of physicists we discarded are the homonyms in the ministerial lists.

Otherwise we have had in fact to discard only 4 names of physicists for France and 2 for Italy
because their computed productivity appeared much too large to be credible (with 30 papers or
more for at least 10 years!) and they had also widespread surnames (e.g., CHEN or WANG).

21

thought it was better to simply leave them out from our analysis17. Our final study
sample is thus made of 1916 French and 1717 Italian academic physicists, for
which have a corpus of respectively 44100 and 52919 articles published from 1975
up to 2005 in 363 physics journals. Table 3 gives the number of physicists in France
and Italy, active in 2004‐2005, by gender and rank in the overall sample (before
cleaning) and in our study sample. All the statistics and econometric estimates
reported in the following sections of this paper are obtained from our study
sample.
4.2 Specification and estimation problems and solutions
Our data constitute an unbalanced panel, where individual physicists are
observed from year T0 to 2005. For most scientists, year T0 coincides with the year
of their first recorded publication; alternatively, for the oldest scientists, year T0
coincides with 1975, the first year for which any publication record is available in
our version of ISI‐Web of Science; finally, for the few MCFs and RUs without any
recorded publication before their known year of recruitment, T0 coincides with the
latter.
To assess sensibly and with reasonable confidence the effects of the various
determinants of scientific productivity, we have to worry about three major kinds
17

Following a referee’s request, we have also replicated our econometric analysis for the sample

including the “zero‐publications” physicists. Our main results do not change significantly, with the
exception of the estimated effects of the 1980 and 1985 entry waves on productivity and promotion,
which appear to be stronger. The tables showing these results are available on request.

22

of interrelated specifications errors: selectivity, endogeneity, and unobserved
(correlated) individual heterogeneity. All three are potential sources of estimation
biases, as well as of uncertainty regarding the proper meaning and correct
interpretation of our estimates. We have tried to take of care of them in a specific
and particularly cautious way.
First, we have considered five productivity regressions, both in terms of
quantity and quality, one for each position in the academic ranking of the two
countries (PR and MCF in France; RU, PA, and PO in Italy); each of these
regression exercises is conducted on the subsamples of physicists who had
reached these ranks in 2004‐2005, restricted to the years after their promotion to
the rank. Our estimated impacts of productivity determinants are thus conditional
on rank. This helps in controlling for selectivity and endogeneity as well as
unobserved heterogeneity of physicists across ranks. We could have tried to
estimate only two productivity regressions, one for each country, with rank as an
explanatory variable (possibly interacted with other explanatory variables). Even
putting aside the difficulty that we do not exactly know the full career history of
professors before they were promoted, this would have been a more risky
alternative, and a more difficult one since rank is endogenously determined and
would have to be instrumented18

18

Of course the interest of this alternative is to be more parsimonious and provide direct estimates

of unconditional impacts. We intend to explore it in future work.

23

Second, we estimate three selection probit equations accounting for the
individual physicist probability of promotion from respectively MCF to PR, RU to
PA and PA to PO. These equations are specified jointly with the corresponding
productivity regressions as three generalized Tobit models, one for each of the
professor ranks. To estimate consistently such Tobit models we have simply relied
on Heckman’s two‐step method, where the probit equation is estimated in the first
step, and the productivity equation estimated in the second step including as an
additional explanatory variable in the equation the inverse Mill’s ratio of the
probability of promotion as predicted by the probit equation (Heckman, 1979;
Dubin and Rivers, 1989; Wooldridge, 2002) 19 . Besides providing interesting
information per se on the determinants of promotion, estimating jointly a model of
promotion and productivity helps controlling for selectivity, endogeneity and
unobserved heterogeneity.20

19

Note that while the productivity equations are estimated for the professor subsamples restricted

to the observations after promotion, the promotion probit equations are estimated on all the
observations, both before and after promotion, of these subsamples. We have preferred to use the
two‐step Heckman method to the maximum likelihood, which encountered in some cases
problems of convergence due apparently to our very large number of variables (including in
particular in both the promotion and productivity regressions interactions of cohort of entry and
year dummies, as explained in the next sub‐section).
20

Note that we might have also considered two probit equations accounting for the individual

physicist probability of being recruited as respectively MCF and RU. That was not, however, really
possible because of a much too short history of publications before recruitment (or even none) and

24

Last, we also control for individual heterogeneity in both the promotion
and productivity equations by introducing past productivity variables. In our
analysis, individual heterogeneity mainly corresponds to individual characteristics
such as ability and motivation. These are not directly observable, but have a major
impact on individual performance. In so far as these individual characteristics are
mostly permanent, they are bound to be strongly correlated with past productivity.
Thus the presence of past productivity in the promotion and current productivity
equations will take care of the most likely unobserved heterogeneity biases, if not
fully at least to a large extent.21
4.3 The determinants of promotion and scientific productivity
Table 4 lists all the variables we consider for our econometric exercise. The
latter requires estimating two equations: a selection equation in which the
dependent variable is promotion of the scientist to the present position (PO, PA,
PR), with past scientific productivity as the key explanatory variable; and a
for lack of other background information, such as on graduate studies. Moreover, that also seemed
a priori less relevant than concerning promotion to professor.
21

The standard approach in a panel data setting as ours is to control for permanent unobserved

heterogeneity by including fixed individual effects in the equations. Although we may want to go
back to this approach in future analysis, our first attempts were not promising. The advantage of
our approach here is that past productivity variables largely correct for the likely heterogeneity
biases by picking‐up the correlated components of individual fixed effects, while being more
informative than fixed effects per se and preserving, contrary to them, the relevant cross‐sectional
information in the data.

25

productivity equation in which the dependent variable is productivity, for all
scientists in the same position. Each estimation exercise of the productivity
equation is run twice, for two different dependent variables that measure
respectively the quantity and quality of the scientific productivity of each
individual scientist:
‐

Quantity: log(1 + number of articles in year t)

‐

Quality: log(1 + average 5‐year impact factor of journals with articles in year t)
[TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]
We do not correct the number of articles, and the related quality measure,

by the number of co‐authors of each article; that is, we do not try to capture the
individual scientist’s contribution to the article. We have two reasons for doing so.
First, almost all articles in physics are co‐authored, often by quite a large number
of scientists. Papers written in isolation or by a few authors may be either
theoretical ones or, if applied, they may reflect the isolation of their authors from
the rest of the scientific community, rather than a larger individual contribution.
Introducing arbitrary corrections according to the number of authors would have
meant giving greater weight to theoretical papers or, possibly, to papers by

26

peripheral authors. Instead, we control for the productivity of co‐authors before t,
which we expect to be correlated to the number of papers at time t22.
The key explanatory variables in both the selection and productivity equation
are related to the scientists’ age, the historical conditions of the academic labour
market at the time of their recruitment or promotion, and time trends in
productivity23. Additionally, promotion is explained by productivity, which enters
the regression through two distinct variables: Quantity flow and Quality flow. These
are the average number of papers published by the scientist between t‐4 and t‐2,
and the related average value of the five year impact factor of journals24. Finally,
promotion is also a function of Academics per year, which is the number of
individuals who achieved promotion in year t.
Introducing age, cohort, and historical time in the promotion or the
productivity equation creates the identification problem discussed by Hall et al.
(2005). In particular, it is impossible to take simultaneously into account age, time
22

We have also produced a series of ancillary regressions with author‐weighted measures of

quantity and quality, whose results do not differ substantially from those reported in this paper,
and are available on request.
23

It is common knowledge that bibliometric measures of productivity exhibit an increasing trend

over time. Our data do not escape this regularity, both for quantity and quality.
24

Publications in t‐1 are excluded because the recruitment procedure (concorso in Italy or concours

in France) can take many months, up to one year or so. Therefore, some publications appear after a
candidate has filed for the job and are not considered by the commissions relevant for the
appointment.

27

and birth cohorts, one variable being a linear combination of the other two (age =
year – birth cohort). In line with Hall et al. (2005) we attack this problem by using a
semi‐parametric model in which these effects enter linearly, and are represented
by variables the least affected by identification problems.
First, we do not consider birth cohorts, but only entry cohorts. That is, our
Cohort dummies refer to the scientists’ years of entry in the academic workforce,
namely the first year in which the individual scientist published an article or, if the
scientist does not have publications before last promotion, the date of last
promotion. This is similar to the approach used by Levin and Stephan (1991)
which define as cohort the year in which a scientist received her PhD. It also
captures more precisely than the year of birth the influence of changes in the
importance of research fields or legislation on a cohort’s productivity. The entry
cohort dummies are interacted with a full set of Period dummies that refer to
calendar years; in other words, our semi‐parametric model includes a dummy
variable for each cohort‐period combination (Cohort x Period).
In addition, we estimate the impact of being recruited or promoted in 1980
in Italy and 1985 in France. We expect scientists belonging to these recruitment
waves to display, other things being equal, lower productivity levels than
scientists from all other cohorts, due to lack of selective pressure. Notice that the
share of scientists recruited/promoted as RU, PA, and PO in 1980 in Italy and as
MCF and PR in 1985 in France account for respectively 34%, 52%, 19%, 20% and
13% of the observations in the productivity regression samples (see Appendix
28

Table 2 and 3), and therefore they represent a substantial share of the academics
active in 200525. In both the selections and the productivity equation we identify
these scientists with the Wave 1980 and Wave 1985 dummy variables. Besides, in
the selection equation, we control for the ease of entry into academia by counting,
in each year t, the number of scientists promoted in that year and still active in the
same rank in 2005 (Academics per year).
As for the scientist’s age, we address the above‐mentioned identification
problem by using age groups; more precisely, we introduce in both the selection
and the productivity equations five Age dummy variables, representing ten‐years
age‐intervals of our scientists (see Table 4)26. Our expectation is to find a negative
impact of scientist’s age on productivity (Levin and Stephan, 1991; Hall et al., 2005).
On the contrary, when considered as a determinant of promotion (selection
equation), Age is expected to have a positive impact: the older the scientists, the
higher their chances to be promoted (as in Long, 1993).
In both the selection and productivity equations we test for gender effects
(Gender=1 for women). In our sample, women represent respectively the 23% and
27% of the French MCFs and Italian RUs. At the same time they are the 7% and 6%

25

It’s worthwhile remarking that we do not have the full career profile of the scientists and

therefore we do not know how many PR, PO and PA ‐ that were promoted after 1980 in Italy and
after 1984 in France – were previously recruited or promoted in the Wave 1980 and in the Wave 1985.
26

We have also tried different specifications using directly the age variable and age squared and

the results do not change substantially.

29

of the French PRs and Italian POs. The literature typically indicates that women
publish less than men (Levin and Stephan, 1998). However this result often
depends on cross‐sectional data that cannot control for individual heterogeneity.
Moreover, in both the selection and productivity equations, we control for
the scientist’s specific research fields through a set of dummies reflecting ministerial
classifications of disciplines (Field 28 and Field 30 for France; Field FIS/01, Field
FIS/02, and Field FIS/03 for Italy). We expect the probability to be recruited or
promoted to be field‐specific for two reasons. First, resources to hire new
employees are not distributed homogeneously among all the disciplines. Second,
some disciplines could be more prolific in terms of new discoveries and research
paths, thus attracting more junior scientists. As for productivity, this can also be
affected by the scientist’s specific field of research, due to differences in the
resources needed to produce a paper.
In order to characterize the work environment in the productivity equations,
we also control for our scientists’ relationship with other members of the scientific
community. First, we consider the past productivity of each scientist’s co‐authors
in year t (Co‐author’s quantity and quality). The co‐authors we consider are only
those who also belong to our sample (that is, we ignore all co‐authors who are
neither French nor Italian physicists for which we have no publication data). Their
overall Quantity and Quality is calculated over the interval [t‐3, t‐1] and divided by
the number of years in the interval. We expect both variables to bear positive
effects on the scientist’s productivity, however measured, to the extent that
30

working contacts with other productive individuals provide access to knowledge
and information27.
Second, we consider the size and geographical reach of the projects in
which our scientists are involved. We produce four time‐varying and mutually
exclusive dummy variables that summarize information on the number of co‐
authors and their addresses, as reported by the ISI publication records (in this case
we consider all co‐authors, not only the French and Italian scientists)28. In order to
do so we consider the scientist’s publications from t‐3 to t‐1. The variable Large
Project dummy, then, takes value one if the scientist has at least one article (among
this set of lagged publications) with 30 or more authors29. All these large projects
are international, that is for all papers with 30 or more co‐authors, the ISI records
27

In order to avoid endogeneity problems, we do not consider the co‐authors’ publication to which

the observed scientist also contributed.
28

The information on affiliation and related addresses provided by ISI is not precise. For each

publication, in fact, the authors’ names and affiliations are reported in separate fields, with no one‐
to‐one matching between the two. So there is no way to know how many authors of a publication
come from a university or research institute among those listed; but only that at least one authors
comes for sure from such university or institute.
29

The share of articles with 30 or more co‐authors is higher in Italy (8.57%) then in France (5.95%).

Appendix Table 4 shows the percentage of large projects in the two countries and the information
available about the affiliations (addresses) from the ISI database. Moreover, Appendix Table 5
reports the average number of authors (per article) according to a list of 22 nationalities and PROs.
US, German and English scientists are quite frequent co‐authors in Large Projects publications, both
in Italy and France.

31

report several non‐Italian and non‐French addresses. Alternatively, in case the
scientist’s lagged publications do not come from any large project, we check
whether there is at least one publication resulting from an international project,
although of a smaller scale. As a result the Small_project_with_foreign_co‐author
dummy takes value one if the scientist has no publications with 30 or more
authors over [t‐3,t‐1], but she has at least one publication with at least a foreign co‐
author.
A third dummy variable, named Small_project_with_only_national_co‐authors
signals that none of the co‐authors has a foreign affiliation30. Finally since in many
cases the information on affiliation and addresses reported by ISI is incomplete,
we control for the possibility that none of the scientist’s articles contains
information on its authors’ affiliation or addresses (Small_project_with_co‐
authors_of_unknown_affiliations dummy). Scientists with no publications over [t‐3,
t‐1] constitute the reference case.
In order to capture unobserved heterogeneity in the productivity equations,
we control for the scientist’s productivity before promotion, that is the yearly
average quantity and quality since entry year (Quantity before promotion; Quantity
before promotion).

30

This dummy is an approximation since the addresses of the authors are not always reported in

the articles.

32

Finally, we control for problems arising from data design. First, in the
productivity equation we deal with the left truncation problem due to the
unavailability of information on publications before 1975. To this end, a dummy
variable Promotion before 1975 is inserted, which takes value one for scientists who
reached the present position before the first year of observation. As for the
promotion equation, we simply do not consider observations affected by this
problem. Second, we deal with the presence of zero values in all measures of
quantity and quality when used as explanatory variables by inserting a number of
dummies which take value 1 in case of absence of any publication31.

31

In the promotion equations we include a Zero lagged flow dummy indicating when past quantity

and quality‐productivity are zeros, while in the productivity equations we include a Zeros before
promotion dummy. The reasons for including these two dummies is to allow for some functional
form flexibility without imposing that a strict linearity through the value of zero for the effects of
the corresponding variables which are measured in terms of log(1+x) (i.e., respectively the
Quantity‐productivity lagged flow and Quality‐productivity lagged flow variables and the Quantity‐
productivity before promotion and Quality‐productivity before promotion variables). The reason for the
inclusion in the productivity equations of the Zeros after promotion dummy is different one. It is to
fully abstract from the information that will be conveyed in the estimation of the productivity
equations if we did not include it. It is thus simply equivalent to excluding the physicists with only
zero publications after promotion from our study sample before estimating these equations. We
could have also excluded these few physicists when estimating the promotion equations. Since
these physicists have published one or more articles before promotion, we thought, however,
better to keep them included (and at the same time to use a study sample based on the information
concerning the exact same set of physicists in estimating both types of equations).

33

Appendix Tables 1, 2 and 3 report summary statistics for all the regressors,
by rank.

5. Results and discussion
In what follows we comment separately the results from the estimation of the
selection and productivity equations. In the case of RU and MCF we do not see
enough history of the individual to explain the promotion with a probit model. For
example, many RUs and MCFs published very few or no articles before being
promoted to their present rank; and the latter may have been achieved mainly
thanks to the candidates’ graduate work or educational attainments, which we
also do not observe.
5.1 Promotion equation
Results from the selection equation for Italy and France are reported in
Table 5. Cohort‐period interactions are included in the estimation, but not
displayed. As expected, the promotion probability of both Italian and French
scientists increases with age, which confirms the role of seniority in both academic
systems. Note however that for full professors in both countries (PO in Italy and
PR in France), the estimated coefficient for Age group 5 (that is, for academics who
are more than 60 years old) is smaller than the coefficient for Age group 4. This
suggests a non‐monotonic effect of seniority on promotion probability
[TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]
34

The positive sign and absolute size of the coefficients for Wave 1980 and
Wave 1985 confirm that in those two years a scientist’s chances of being promoted
were much higher than at any other time in recent history. This result holds
despite we also controlled for the (positive) effect of Academics per year on the
probability of promotion. For example, the estimated marginal effect for Academics
per year in the PO equation suggests that one more PO promoted in year t gives
any (Italian) candidate to the same position 0.23% more chances of success (1.2%
for PA and 0.46% for PR). On top of this, being a candidate to the same position in
1980 meant a 40% higher probability of success (38% also for PA and 18%, in 1985,
for PR). Overall, in 1980, 62 individuals reached the PO position, for a combined
increase in the probability of promotion of around 54%, other things being equal
(40% from the Wave 1980 dummy, plus 62x0.23% from Academics per year).
The Gender effect is strongly negative in both countries and confirms that,
other things being equal, women in physics face more difficulties than men to be
promoted. Field effects are also significant, with some relevant differences across
ranks.32
As for productivity, its effect on the probability of being promoted is
captured by the two variables Quality flow and Quantity flow, whose estimated

32

In Italy, promotion to PO appears to be easier in Fisica teorica (Field FIS/02) rather than Fisica della

materia (Field FIS/03, the reference dummy). On the other hand the chances of being promoted to a
PA position are higher in Fisica sperimentale (Field Fis/01). In France, promotion to PR are more
likely in Milieux dilués et optique (Field 30), compared to Milieux denses et matériaux (Field 28).

35

coefficients differ across countries. In Italy, promotion seems to be affected largely
by quantity, the impact of quality being negligible for promotions to PO but
negative to PA position33. In France quality, but not quantity, affects positively and
significantly the probability of promotion to PR34.
5.2 Productivity equation
Results from the productivity equations for Italy and France are reported in
Tables 6 and 7. In Table 6 the dependent variable is quantity while Table 7 refers to
quality. As expected, the age of academics has a negative impact on both the
quantity and quality of articles published. In all equations, this is captured by the
age group coefficients, which are all negative and significant (with the exception
of Age group 1) and increasingly larger when moving from Age group 3 to Age group
535.

33

Variables quality and quantity flow are highly correlated

34

Notice that the variable Zero flow is positive and statistically significant in all the selection

equations. At first sight this result looks puzzling, but in fact it depends on the design of the
pooled‐probit exercise. In such exercise the dependent variable is a binary one, which takes value
one from time t onward, for all scientists who are promoted at time t. After t many scientists may
stop publishing altogether, so the value one of the dummy Zero flow is often coupled with unitary
model outcome. This variable should be considered as a control for the zeros and its omission does
not affect the estimates of other regressors.
35

In a separate regression exercise we have tested the effect of age on productivity of Italian PO, in

the absence of controls for participation to large and/or international projects. In this case, the
impact of age on productivity (quantity) appears to be negligible. One interpretation is that PO

36

[TABLE 6 AND TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE]
Elaborations on the estimated coefficients in Table 6 tell us that over‐60
Italian POs produce around 2.25 articles per year less than their 30‐to‐40 year old
peers. A similar comparison suggests that over‐60 French PR produce 0.65 articles
per year less than their younger peers36. As for quality (Table 7), Italian POs seem
the most affected by age, with over‐60s exhibiting a loss of average impact factor
per year equal to 1.99. Since

we observe the productivity conditional to the

scientist’s ranking in 2005, our estimates capture on one side the life cycle effect, as
discussed in section 4.3; but on the other side, and only for RUs, PAs and MCFs,
they capture the effect of less productive scientists that are not promoted and
remain at lower academic ranks.

suffer of a productivity loss at the individual level, which they compensate by participating to
large international projects.
36

Throughout Section 5 we express the impact of the covariates on quantity (the number of articles)

or quality, (average impact factor) by means of marginal effects, which we compute on the basis of
the estimated coefficients in Tables 6 and 7. The marginal effect of any dummy covariates is given
by: y  e

R D

 (e   1) where e R  D is the average predicted value of the model minus the

dummy D effect and



is the coefficient of D. As for the marginal effects of a continuous or

discrete covariate, this is given by:

d (1  y ) dLog (1  y )  1  y 


 where
d (1  x) dLog (1  x)  1  x 

average value of the ratio between the dependent variable and the covariate and

1 y 

 is the
 1 x 

dLog (1  y )
is
dLog (1  x)

the coefficient (elasticity) estimated in the regressions.

37

Gender impacts differently in Italy and in France, and across academic ranks.
With reference to quantity estimates in Table 6, we observe that Italy exhibits a
negative gender effect only for RU: Italian ricercatrici publish 0.27 papers less than
their male peers, per year; on the contrary, women in PA or PO position are not
less productive than their male equivalents. As for France, we observe a negative
gender effect on quantity both for PR and for MCF, where women produce
respectively 0.26 and 0.13 papers less than men, per year. Results for quality are
similar, the women’s gap in average impact factor per year being: ‐0.49 for PR, ‐
0.24 for MCF, and ‐0.39 for RU. In the absence of additional data, we can provide
intuitive explanations for such results. In particular, we notice that, for Italy, the
existence of a gender effect only for the most junior position (RU) is consistent
with the possibility that gender matters more at the early career stages, when
familiar engagements may also be demanding. Thus, a self‐selection process may
take place, by which only the best or most motivated researchers try to access the
higher ranks, at which the gender effect appears to be less remarkable or even not
significant. If this was the correct interpretation, we need then to explain why we
observe a gender effect also at the senior level of French PR. In this respect we note
that women in France are 10% of PR (as opposed to 6% of Italian PO). Moreover,
going back to the selection equation (Table 5), we notice that the negative gender
effect on promotion is smaller for PR relatively to PO. One possibility is therefore
that French women face less difficulties in the promotion to full professorship

38

(thanks, for example, to the first centralized step managed by CNU), which may
explain why we observe the negative gender to persist at the top academic rank.
The estimated coefficient of the Wave 1980 and Wave 1985 dummies is
negative and significant in the quantity model, for all positions (with the exception
of French PR; see Table 6), while it is still negative, but never significant in the
quality model (with the exception of Italian RU where it is significant and PR and
PA where is positive; see Table 7). As for quantity, POs promoted to such rank in
1980 publish 0.20 articles less per year than other POs. Similarly, PAs and RUs last
promoted in 1980 publish respectively 0.19 and 0.35 articles less per year than
colleagues last promoted in more recent years. The effect for France is still
noticeable, but less pronounced: MCFs who were recruited in 1985 (and never
promoted to PR) produce 0.05 articles less than other MCFs, per year. Bearing in
mind that we do not observe how many scientists, among those who entered the
academic system as RU or MCF in 1980 and 1985, have been subsequently
promoted to higher positions (as opposed to having retired or left Italy), the
interpretation of our results may be as follows: the 1980 and 1985 big recruitment
waves in the two countries filled up the RU, PA, and MCF positions with less
productive scientists, who did not progress much further in their careers, and are
now responsible for the negative signs we observe in Table 6 and (for RU) in Table
7. We can estimate the total scientific productivity loss due to the entry wave of
1980 in Italy, where the effect is stronger, comparing the total number of papers
published by scientists promoted in these entry cohorts, with the estimated

39

number of papers published by scientists from other entry cohorts, other things
being equal. This exercise suggests that the 62 Italian POs promoted in 1980 have
published about 314 articles less than what expected by similar POs from other
cohorts, over the same years of activity. Similar calculations suggest a production
gap of 785 articles by PAs and of 639 articles by RUs from the 1980 wave, for a
total scientific loss of around 1738 articles. Our calculations may under‐estimate
the effects of the massive entry waves, since they are based on a sample which
includes only academics who published at least one article since 1975. A large
share of the French and Italian unproductive scientists, excluded from the
regression sample, comes precisely from the 1985 and 1980 waves [respectively
17% (40/235) and 36.5% (19/52)], so that their inclusion would have increased
further the size of the estimated coefficients for the two wave dummies37.
These figures suggest that the percentage of unproductive scientists over all
scientists hired during the 1980 and 1985 waves is at least two (for MCF) or three
times higher (for PA and RU) than the same percentage for the rest of the sample38.

37

More precisely, among the Italians hired during the 1980 wave the unproductive PO, PA and RU

are respectively 1.6%, 6.7% and 7.6%. In France 21.9% are MCF and 9.8% are PR. Notice that,
following referee request we rerun all the regression including all scientists with zero publications.
The effect of the waves is confirmed and become even stronger.
38

Another peculiarity of the waves is that in Italy were hired considerably younger academics if

compared to the average age of hiring in other years; this is true also for PR in France but not for
MCF with an average age of 41 instead of the usual age of 32 in other years. In general there are no

40

Some descriptive statistics help understanding why the “wave effect”
appears to be stronger in Italy than in France. In Italy, over 10% (62/588) of PO,
26% (166/618) of PA and 14% (73/511) of RU active in 2005 were promoted to such
positions in 1980. In France, only less than 8% (55/705) of PR and 10% (121/1212) of
MCF reached their present position in 1985. In other words, the 1980 wave in Italy
was bigger and produced more enduring effect than its French equivalent. As for
Italian RUs, this effect is also visible for the quality‐based measure of productivity.
As explained in the previous section, we control for the individuals’
unobservable heterogeneity by means of lagged measures of productivity
(Quantity before promotion and Quality before promotion). As expected, all such
controls bear a positive and significant sign (the only exception being the negative
sign of the impact of past quality‐productivity on current quantity‐productivity in
the case of PO).
Productive

co‐authors

impact

positively

on

individual

scientists’

productivity. For quantity measures of productivity, estimates in Table 6 suggest
that Italian PO and French PR and MCF produce 0.08, 0.06 and 0.18 extra articles
per year for every additional article produced by their co‐authors over the three
preceding years. The marginal effect of co‐authors’ quality on the scientist’s
quality output per year is positive for all ranks and countries, and it ranges
between 0.37 for Italian RU and 0.53 for PR.
big differences for the gender composition of the academics promoted during the waves except for
the rank of RU where, during the wave were promoted 14% more women (36% instead of 22%).

41

Involvement in large and/or international projects affects strongly a
scientist’s yearly productivity. This is especially true for Italian POs, where the
dummy Large project produces a marginal effect on quantity of more than 5.5
articles per year. Similar results hold also for PAs and RUs, whose productivity is
increased significantly by participation to Large project (4.40 and 3.43 more articles
per year; the reference group is given by scientists with no publications in the
three years before t). The effect of Large project for France, albeit high if compared
to the effect of other covariates, is weaker than in Italy, the marginal effects for PRs
and MCFs being respectively equal to 4.63 and 3.33. Even quality is affected by
participation to large international projects, with increases in the average impact
factor per year comprised between 3.54 (for MCF) and 9.09 (for PO). Scientists who
are not involved in large projects, but had at least one foreign co‐author in the
three years before t, also have larger quantity and quality scores than the reference
group (but lower than their peers participating to large projects). Italian POs with
dummy Small_project_with_foreign_co‐authors equal to one, for example, publish
2.41 more papers per year than the reference group. On the other hand, POs with
participation to Small_project_with_only_national_co‐authors publish 1.50 papers
more than the reference group. Similar results hold for all position in both
countries.
Controls for field effects also prove significant. Italian POs belonging to
Fisica sperimentale (Field Fis/01) and Fisica teorica, modelli e metodi matematici (Field
Fis/02) publish respectively 0.46 and 0.65 articles less than colleagues from Fisica

42

della materia (Field Fis/03), per year. The quality of the publications is also lower. In
France, MCFs belonging to Milieux dilués et optique (Field 30) publish more and
higher quality articles if compared to Milieux denses et matériaux (Field 28).
Tables 6 and 7 show also the estimated inverse Mill’s ratio (lambda)
produced by the Heckman procedure to correct for the problem of selection bias.
Its negative sign means that the probability of not being promoted affects
negatively the individual scientific productivity. The coefficient is significant for
PR, PO and PA in the quantity regressions and for PR and PO in the quality
regressions. Lack of significance for PA in the quality regression means that the
two equations, selection and productivity, could have been estimated separately,
without any kind of correction for endogeneity of the academic rank.

6. Conclusions
In this paper we have investigated the determinants of scientific
productivity for a sample comprising most of the academic physicists active in
French and Italian universities in 2004‐2005. We have performed this analysis both
conditional on being in an assistant or professorial position (MCF and PR in
France and RU, PA and PO in Italy) and together with a joint analysis of the
determinants of promotion to professor (from MCF to PR in France and RU to PA
and PA to PO in Italy). We consider this approach to be more informative than

43

most alternatives, as well as better at addressing the interrelated econometric
problems of endogeneity, selectivity, and unobserved heterogeneity.
Our estimates of promotion equations show that the probability of a French
or Italian physicist to be promoted professor increases with age until he/she
reaches his/her sixties. Other things being equal, we also find that such probability
is significantly lower for women. In Italy promotion is influenced by the quantity
of past publications (quantity‐productivity lagged flow), and in France, it is
influenced by their quality (quality‐productivity lagged flow). In both academic
systems we observe big recruitments waves, in 1980 and 1985, which affect
significantly the probability of promotion.
In the productivity equations we show that the age of academics has a
negative impact on the quantity and quality of articles published by French PR
and Italian PO publications. For the other academic ranks the age effect is mixed
with the other effect of not being promoted, due to the database design. French
MCFs and Italian PAs and RUs are characterized by a strong negative impact of
age.
As for gender effect on productivity, Italian women at the early stage of
their careers (for example RU) are penalized in their publication activity. However,
if Italian women manage to be promoted to higher ranks, then they publish as
much as their male colleagues. On the contrary, in France we observe a negative
gender effects across all ranks. We find evidence that the work environment is
very important for individual scientists’ productivity. In particular being involved

44

in large projects, or at least having an international collaboration, has a strong and
positive effect on quantity and quality of published articles
Finally we show that the big recruitment and promotion waves of 1980 and
1985 had negative and lasting effects on the average scientific productivity of the
two countries, especially for Italy. Such big waves came after a prolonged spell
with no recruitment of new scientists and few promotions, and were the result of
policy provisions aimed at providing permanent positions for many scientists
with temporary assignments. Many of the physicists recruited in these years
appear not to have progressed much in their careers, and to have been persistently
less productive than the average physicists of the same rank, recruited or
promoted in other years. Our results on age, gender and past productivity confirm
many of the ones already found in the literature, but our findings on the enduring
negative effects of en masse recruitment in France and, most notably, in Italy are
more original.

45

References
Allison, P.D. and Long, J.S. (1990), ‘Departmental effects on scientific productivity’,
American Sociological Review, 55(4), 469–478.
Ben‐David, J. (1992), Centers of Learning: Britain, France, Germany, United States. Transaction
Publishers.
Breschi S., Lissoni F., Montobbio F. (2007). ‘The Scientific Productivity Of Academic
Inventors: New Evidence From Italian Data’, Economics of Innovation and New Technology
16(2), 101‐118
Breschi S., Lissoni F., Montobbio F. (2008) ‘University patenting and scientific
productivity. A Quantitative Study of Italian Academic Inventors’, European Management
Review 5(2), 91‐109
Bonaccorsi, A. and Daraio, C. (2003), ‘Age effects in scientific productivity’, Scientometrics,
58(1), 49–90.
Cattell, J.M. (1903), ‘Statistics of American Psychologists’, American Journal of Psychology,
14, 310–328.
Chevaillier, T. (2001), ‘French academics: Between the professions and the civil service’,
Higher Education, 41(1), 49–75.
Clark, B.R. (1977), Academic Power in Italy: Bureaucracy and Oligarchy in a National
University System. University of Chicago Press.
Clark, B.R. (1993), The Research Foundations of Graduate Education: Germany, Britain, France,
United States, Japan. University of California Press

46

Crane, D. (1972), Invisible Colleges: Diffusion of Knowledge in Scientific Communities.
University of Chicago Press.
David, P.A. (1994), ‘Positive Feedbacks and Research Productivity in Science: Reopening
Another Black Box’, The Economics of Technology, Elsevier, 65‐89.
Dubin, J.A. and Rivers, D. (1989), ‘Selection Bias in Linear Regression, Logit and Probit
Models’, Sociological Methods and Research, 18(2), 360–90.
Ehrenberg, R.G., Kasper, H. and Rees, D.I. (1990), ‘Faculty Turnover at American Colleges
and Universities: Analysis of AAUP Data’, Working Paper No. 3239. Available at SSRN
Etzkowitz, H., Kemelgor, C. and Uzzi, B. (2000), Athena Unbound: The Advancement of
Women in Science and Technology. Cambridge University Press.
Fox, M.F. (1999), ‘Gender, Hierarchy, and Science’, Handbook of the Sociology of Gender, 441–
457.
Godin, B. (2006), ‘On the origins of bibliometrics’, Scientometrics, 68(1), 109–133.
Godin, B. (2007), ‘ From Eugenics to Scientometrics: Galton, Cattell, and Men of Science’,
Social Studies of Science, 37(5), 691.
Graham, H.D. and Diamond, N. (1997), The Rise of American Research Universities: Elites and
Challengers in the Postwar Era. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hall, B.H., Mairesse, J. and Turner, L. (2007), ‘Identifying Age, Cohort and Period Effects
in Scientific Research Productivity: Discussion and Illustration Using Simulated and
Actual Data on French Physicists’, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 16(1/2), 159‐
177..

47

Heckman, J. (1979), ‘ Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error’, Econometrica, 47(1),
153–161.
King, DA. (2004); ‘The Scientific Impact of Nations’, Nature, 430, 311‐316
Lee, S. and Bozeman, B. (2005), ‘The Impact of Research Collaboration on Scientific
Productivity’, Social Studies of Science, 35(5), 673.
Levin, S.G. and Stephan, P.E. (1991), ‘Research Productivity Over the Life Cycle: Evidence
for Academic Scientists’, American Economic Review, 81(1), 114–132.
Levin, S.G. and Stephan, P.E. (1998), ‘Gender Differences in the Rewards to Publishing in
Academe: Science in the 1970s’, Sex Roles, 38(11), 1049–1064.
Long, J.S. (1978), ‘Productivity and Academic Position in the Scientific Career, ‘American
Sociological Review, 43(6), 889–908.
Long, J.S. (1993), ‘Rank Advancement in Academic Careers: Sex Differences and the
Effects of Productivity’, American Sociological Review, 58(5), 703–722.
Long, J.S. and Fox, M.F. (1995), ‘Scientific Careers: Universalism and Particularism’,
Annual Reviews in Sociology, 21(1), 45–71.
Lotka, A.J. (1926), ‘The Frequency Distribution of Scientific Productivity’, Journal of the
Washington Academy of Sciences, 16(12), 317–323.
Mairesse, J. and Turner, L. (2006), ‘Measurement and Explanation of the Intensity of Co‐
publication in Scientific Research: An Analysis at the Laboratory Level‘, in New Frontiers
in the Economics of Innovation and New Technology: Essays in honour of Paul David, eds. C.
Antonelli, D. Foray, B. Hall and E. Steinmueller, Edward Elgar Publishing, 255‐295.
May, RMM. (1997), ‘The Scientific Wealth of Nations’, Science, 275, 793‐796.

48

Merton, R.K. (1968), ‘The Matthew Effect in Science’, Science, 159(3810), 56–63.
Merton, R.K. (1988), ‘The Matthew Effect in Science, II: Cumulative Advantage and the
Symbolism of Intellectual Property’ Isis, 79(4), 606.
Moscati, R. (2001), ‘Italian University Professors in Transition’, Higher Education, 41(1),
103–129.
Musselin, C. (2005), Le Marché des Universitaires: France, Allemagne, États‐Unis. Presses de
Sciences Po.
Pezzoni, M., Sterzi, V. and Lissoni, F. (2009), ‘Career Progress in Centralized Academic
Systems: an Analysis of French and Italian Physicists’,

KITeS Working Paper 27,

Università “L.Bocconi”, Milano
Price, D.J. and Beaver, D.D. (1966), ‘Collaboration in an Invisible College’ , American
Psychologist, 1966, 1011–8.
Spelke, E.S. (2005), ‘Sex Differences in Intrinsic Aptitude for Mathematics and Science?: A
Critical Review’, American Psychologist, 60(9), 950.
Turner, L. and Mairesse, J. (2002), ‘Individual Productivity Differences in Scientific
Research: An Econometric Exploration of French Physicists’ Publications’, Cahiers de la
Maison des Sciences Economiques n°66, Université Paris I‐ Panthéon‐Sorbonne. Revised
2006.
Wooldridge J. (2002), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.

49

Figures

1

Figure 1: Rank distribution of physicists active in 2004‐05 in France (MCF, PR) and in Italy (RU,
PA, PO)

100%
90%
80%

PR=35%

PO=34%

70%
60%
50%

PA=36%

40%
30%

MCF=65%

20%
RU=29%
10%
0%
France

Italy

Source: Authors elaboration on ministerial records

Figure 2: Distribution of physicists active in 2004‐05 in France by year of recruitment (MCF) or
year of last promotion (PR)

Source: Authors elaboration on ministerial records

2

Figure 3: Distribution of physicists active in 2004‐05 in Italy by year of recruitment (RU) or year
of last promotion (PA; PO)

Source: Authors elaboration on ministerial records

3

Tables

4

Table 1: Disciplinary fields and ranks
French Universities
•

Fields

Ranks

Italian Universities

•

28 Milieux denses et
matériaux
30 Milieux dilués et optique

•
•
•

Fis/01 Fisica Sperimentale
Fis/02 Fisica Teorica, Modelli E Metodi Matematici
Fis/03 Fisica Della Materia

•
•

(PR) Professor
(MCF) Maitre de Conference

•
•
•

(RU) Ricercatore Universitario
(PA) Professore Associato
(PO) Professore Ordinario

Table 2: Number of physicists active in 2004‐05 in France and Italy by cohort of
birth and rank
1930s
France‐Ranks:
PR

1940s

COHORT
1950s
1960s

1970s

23
2.94
12
0.84

423
54.16
341
23.85

179
22.92
134
9.37

153
19.59
586
40.98

168
27.01
72
10.89

301
48.39
222
33.59

137
22.03
177
26.78

16
2.57
187
28.29

3
0.45

% by cohort

1
0.19

54
10.13

115
21.58

301
56.47

62
11.63

533
100
1816

Total

276

1341

742

1243

425

4027

% by cohort

MCF
% by cohort

Italy‐Ranks:
PO
% by cohort

PA
% by cohort

RU

3
0.38
357
24.97

Total
781
100
1430
100
2211
622
100
661
100

Note: Computed on French and Italian overall samples (before cleaning) -- see Section 4.

5

Table 3: Number of physicists in France and Italy, active in 2004‐05 by gender and rank in
overall sample (before cleaning) and on study sample
Overall sample

MCF
PR

FRANCE
Women
Man
410
1020
80
701

Total

490

1721

Total
1430
781
2211

RU
PA
PO
Total

ITALY
Men
401
559
582
1542

Total
533
661
622
1816

ITALY
Women
Men
124
387
93
525
38
550
255
1462

Total
511
618
588
1717

Women
132
102
40
274

Note: Computed on overall French and Italian samples (i.e. before cleaning).

Study sample

MCF
PR
Total

FRANCE
Women
Men
299
912
50
655
349

1567

Total
1211
705
1916

RU
PA
PO
Total

Note: Computed on French and Italian study samples (i.e. after cleaning for homonymy and “zero-productive’
academics).

6

Table 4: Dependent and explanatory variables in promotion and productivity equations
VARIABLE

DEFINITION

Dependent variables in promotion and productivity equations
Promotion
Step indicator for being promoted in year t(p): =0 if promoted [i.e., t>=t(p)], and =1 if
not promoted [i.e., t<t(p)].
Quantity‐productivity
Logarithm of the numbers of articles published in year t, plus 1
Quality‐productivity

Logarithm of the average five years impact factor in year t for the journals in which
articles have been published in that year, plus 1

Explanatory variables in the promotion equations only:
Quantity‐productivity
Logarithm of the average number of articles in the three years t‐2,t‐3 and t‐4, plus 1
lagged flow
Quality‐productivity
Logarithm of the average five years impact factor of the journals in which articles have
lagged flow
been published in the three years t‐2, t‐3 and t‐4, plus 1.
Zero lagged flow
Dummy=1 when Quantity flow=Quality flow=0 (and =0 if not).
Academics per year

Estimates of the number of academics promoted in year t as PR, PA or PO.

Explanatory variables in the productivity equations only:
Quantity‐productivity
Logarithm of the average number of articles per year published before the year of
before promotion
recruitment or last promotion, plus 1
Quality‐productivity
Logarithm of the average impact factor of the journals in which articles have been
before promotion
published before the year of recruitment or last promotion, plus 1.
Co‐authors quantity
Logarithm of the moving average of co‐authors’ number of articles (with other
scientists than the author) in the three years t‐1, t‐2 and t‐3, plus 1.
Co‐authors quality
Logarithm of 1 plus the moving average of average impact factor of the articles
published by the co‐authors (with other scientists than the author) in the three years t‐
1, t‐2 and t‐3, plus 1.
Co‐authors quantity and
Dummy=1 when co‐authors quantity is 0 (and=0 if not); and Dummy=1 when co‐authors
quality zeros
quality is 0 (and =0 if not).
Co‐authors number and
Large Project Dummy=1 if in the three years before t (t‐1,t‐2 and t‐3) scientists have at
affiliation dummies
least one article with 30 or more co‐authors (and=0 if not);
Small Project with Foreign co‐authors Dummy=1 if in the three years before t (t‐1,t‐2 and t‐
3) scientists have no articles with 30 or more co‐authors and have at least one article
with an address indicating at least one foreign co‐authors (and=0 if not);
Small Project with only national co‐authors Dummy=1 if in the three years before t (t‐1,t‐2
and t‐3) scientists have no articles with 30 or more co‐authors and have no articles with
addresses indicating foreign co‐authors (and=0 if not);
Small Project with co‐authors of unknown affiliations Dummy=1 if in the three years before
t (t‐1,t‐2 and t‐3) scientists have no articles with 30 or more co‐authors and have only
articles with missing addresses (and=0 if not).
Zero in three preceding
Dummy=1 when scientists published 0 articles in the three years t‐1, t‐2 and t‐3 before
years
year of observation (and=0 if not).
Zeros before promotion
Dummy=1 when Quantity before promotion=Quality before promotion=0 (and =0 if not).
Zeros after promotion

Dummy=1 when scientists published 0 articles after recruitment or last promotion
(and=0 if not).

7

Table 4 (continued): Dependent and explanatory variables in promotion and productivity
equations

Explanatory variables in both the promotion and productivity equations:
Wave 1980/1985
Dummy=1 if academic experienced last promotion in 1980 in Italy or in 1985 in
France
Gender
Gender dummy variable: Female=1, Male=0
Age group dummies

Dummy= 1 if academic belongs to a specific age class: age group 1 (age<30), age
group 2 (30<=age<40), age group 3 (40<=age<50), age group 4 (50<=age<60), age
group 5 (age>=60)
Field
Country specific fields of affiliation of physicists in French and Italian universities.
(28, 30, FIS01, FIS02,
In France 28= Milieux denses et matériaux and 20= Milieux dilués et optique. In Italy
FIS03)
Fis01= Fisica Sperimentale, Fis02= Fisica Teorica and Fis03= Fisica Della Materia.
(Year) and (cohort of entry) Interactions between dummies for year of publication and cohort of entry defined
interactions dummies
as the first year we see the scientist publish (or in case of zero publications before
entering or being promoted the year of entry or of promotion)
Promotion before 1975
Dummy variable for the (small) subset of professors promoted before 1975. The
inclusion of this dummy in the productivity equations controls for the fact that the
publication history of this subset of professors is unknown between promotion
and 1975. Its inclusion in the promotion equations is equivalent to eliminating
them in the estimation of these equations (the dependent step indicator of being
promoted is always equal to one for them).

8

Table 5: Probit equations for professor promotion
Quantity flow
Quality flow
Zero flow
Academics per year
Wave 1985 (FR)/ Wave 1980 (IT)
Gender
Age group 1
Age group 3
Age group 4
Age group 5
Field 30 (FR)/Fis01 (IT)

PR (FR)
0.018
(0.011)
0.060***
(0.011)
0.15***
(0.013)
0.0046**
(0.0018)
0.18***
(0.0095)
‐0.11***
(0.021)
n.r.

PO (IT)
0.048***
(0.012)
‐0.0050
(0.014)
0.18***
(0.022)
0.0023***
(0.00090)
0.40***
(0.0084)
‐0.15***
(0.024)
n.r.

PA (IT)
0.059***
(0.0074)
‐0.025***
(0.0088)
0.12***
(0.0079)
0.012***
(0.00061)
0.38***
(0.0097)
‐0.068***
(0.012)
n.r.

0.27***
(0.012)
0.37***
(0.013)
0.23***
(0.010)
0.022**
(0.0092)

0.50***
(0.018)
0.68***
(0.014)
0.56***
(0.011)
0.0020
(0.013)
0.13***
(0.014)
‐

0.15***
(0.0093)
0.22***
(0.0097)
n.r.

Field Fis02 (IT)
Constant

‐

0.029***
(0.0088)
0.0090
(0.011)
‐

Observations
14094
14114
12165
Number of physicists
705
588
618
See Table 4 for the precise definitions of the variables. The coefficients given in the Table are the marginal effects. Their
standard errors are given in parentheses, and the corresponding P‐values if less than 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 are respectively
denoted by ***, ** and *.The equation include controls for the (year) and (cohort of entry) interactions and for the
promotion before 1975 dummy variable; their coefficients are not reported in the Table.

9

Table 6. Quantity‐productivity equation.
VARIABLES
Quantity before promotion
Quality before promotion
Co‐authors quantity
Co‐authors quality
Co‐authors zero Dummy
Large Project Dummy
Small Project with Foreign co‐authors Dummy
Small project with only National co‐authors Dummy
Small Project with co‐authors of unknown affiliations
Dummy
Wave 1985 (FR)/ Wave 1980 (IT)
Gender

PR(FR)
Heckman

MCF(FR)
OLS

PO(IT)
PA(IT)
Heckman Heckman

RU(IT)
OLS

0.45***
(0.019)
0.080***
(0.020)
0.036*
(0.019)
0.069***
(0.026)
‐0.017
(0.053)
1.09***
(0.049)
0.55***
(0.023)
0.33***
(0.024)

0.33***
(0.017)
0.058***
(0.012)
0.13***
(0.015)
0.028
(0.021)
0.099**
(0.044)
1.14***
(0.038)
0.43***
(0.015)
0.21***
(0.016)

0.57***
(0.022)
‐0.094***
(0.022)
0.047**
(0.020)
0.018
(0.028)
‐0.13**
(0.060)
1.13***
(0.039)
0.68***
(0.035)
0.39***
(0.035)

0.37***
(0.020)
0.00038
(0.019)
0.0095
(0.021)
0.036
(0.028)
‐0.083
(0.058)
1.18***
(0.032)
0.55***
(0.025)
0.34***
(0.024)

0.48***
(0.023)
0.013
(0.023)
‐0.041
(0.025)
‐0.021
(0.036)
‐0.27***
(0.077)
0.96***
(0.045)
0.39***
(0.037)
0.18***
(0.035)

0.22***

0.14***

0.22***

0.24***

0.082

(0.035)
0.028
(0.024)
‐0.11***
(0.029)

(0.024)
‐0.032**
(0.016)
‐0.079***
(0.012)
0.097**
(0.043)
‐0.060***
(0.020)
‐0.11***
(0.027)
‐0.074*
(0.040)
0.054***
(0.010)

(0.075)
‐0.061**
(0.027)
0.047
(0.038)

(0.050)
‐0.080***
(0.025)
‐0.024
(0.021)

‐0.42***
(0.095)
‐0.64***
(0.11)
‐0.77***
(0.12)
‐0.13***
(0.021)
‐0.20***
(0.023)
0.46***
(0.16)
‐0.30
‐0.21***
(0.047)
14114
8332
5782
588
0.69

‐0.11***
(0.034)
‐0.27***
(0.043)
‐0.38***
(0.048)
0.011
(0.021)
‐0.039
(0.024)
0.056
(0.10)
‐0.27
‐0.17***
(0.041)
12165
8089
4076
618
0.62

(0.072)
‐0.14***
(0.047)
‐0.11***
(0.021)
‐0.015
(0.16)
‐0.078**
(0.032)
‐0.25***
(0.057)
‐0.40***
(0.12)
‐0.013
(0.024)
‐0.055**
(0.027)
0.26
(0.25)

Age group 1
Age group 3
Age group 4
Age group 5
Field 30 (FR)/Fis01 (IT)

‐0.19***
(0.047)
‐0.26***
(0.061)
‐0.31***
(0.066)
0.0011
(0.015)

Field Fis02 (IT)
Constant

0.19
(0.18)
‐0.33
‐0.20***
(0.06)
14094
9018
5076
705
0.61

0.37
(0.53)

rho
lambda
standard error lambda
Observations
12057
5106
Uncensored observation
Censored observations
Number of physicists
1211
511
Sigma
R‐squared
0.344
0.526
See Table 4 for the precise definitions of the variables. We control for the (year) and (cohort of entry) interactions
dummies, for the Zero after promotion dummy variable and for the promotion before 1975 dummy variable, all three not
reported in the Table. The Zero in preceding years is normalized to be the reference group for the co‐authors number and
affiliation dummies. Standard errors are given in parentheses, and P‐values less than 0.10, 0.05 and 0.01 are respectively
denoted by *, ** and ***.

10

Table 7. Quality‐productivity equation.
VARIABLES
Quantity before promotion
Quality before promotion
Co‐authors quantity
Co‐authors quality
Co‐authors zero Dummy
Large Project Dummy
Small Project with Foreign co‐authors Dummy
Small project with only National co‐authors Dummy
Small Project with co‐authors of unknown affiliations
Dummy
Wave 1985 (FR)/ Wave 1980 (IT)
Gender

PR(FR) MCF(FR)
Heckman
OLS

Age group 4
Age group 5
Field 30 (FR)/Fis01 (IT)

0.21***
(0.026)
0.14***
(0.019)
0.067***
(0.024)
0.20***
(0.033)
0.32***
(0.070)
0.96***
(0.061)
0.71***
(0.024)
0.43***
(0.025)

0.30***
(0.025)
0.15***
(0.025)
‐0.027
(0.022)
0.25***
(0.031)
0.21***
(0.067)
1.24***
(0.044)
1.04***
(0.039)
0.72***
(0.039)

0.18***
(0.026)
0.093***
(0.024)
‐0.053**
(0.026)
0.25***
(0.036)
0.20***
(0.074)
1.18***
(0.041)
0.88***
(0.032)
0.58***
(0.031)

0.21***
(0.029)
0.11***
(0.030)
‐0.083***
(0.032)
0.20***
(0.047)
0.052
(0.099)
0.95***
(0.059)
0.73***
(0.047)
0.46***
(0.045)

0.47***

0.28***

0.49***

0.38***

0.35***

(0.047)
0.075**
(0.032)
‐0.15***
(0.039)

(0.038)
‐0.0039
(0.026)
‐0.11***
(0.019)
0.16**
(0.069)
‐0.090***
(0.031)
‐0.11**
(0.044)
‐0.059
(0.064)
0.076***
(0.017)

(0.084)
‐0.028
(0.030)
0.021
(0.042)

(0.064)
0.024
(0.032)
‐0.019
(0.027)

‐0.17
(0.11)
‐0.34***
(0.12)
‐0.45***
(0.13)
‐0.15***
(0.023)
‐0.094***
(0.025)
‐0.23
(0.18)
‐0.15
‐0.11**
(0.052)
14114
8332
5782
588
0.76

‐0.037
(0.043)
‐0.15***
(0.055)
‐0.31***
(0.061)
‐0.071***
(0.026)
‐0.073**
(0.031)
‐0.13
(0.13)
0.052
0.040
(0.052)
12165
8089
4076
618
0.78

(0.093)
‐0.18***
(0.061)
‐0.10***
(0.028)
‐0.085
(0.20)
‐0.065
(0.042)
‐0.27***
(0.074)
‐0.55***
(0.15)
‐0.081***
(0.032)
‐0.018
(0.035)
0.13
(0.32)

‐0.16**
(0.063)
‐0.22***
(0.081)
‐0.27***
(0.088)
0.029
(0.020)

Field Fis02 (IT)
Constant

RU(IT)
OLS

0.37***
(0.026)
0.34***
(0.027)
‐0.057**
(0.025)
0.19***
(0.034)
0.14**
(0.071)
1.04***
(0.066)
0.84***
(0.031)
0.61***
(0.032)

Age group 1
Age group 3

PO(IT)
PA(IT)
Heckman Heckman

‐0.013
(0.24)
‐0.25
‐0.20***
(0.081)
14094
9018
5076
705
0.81

‐0.070
(0.85)

rho
lambda
standard error lambda
Observations
12057
5106
Uncensored observation
Censored observations
Number of physicists
1211
511
Sigma
R‐squared
0.288
0.402
See Table 4 for the precise definitions of the variables. We control for the (year)x(cohort of entry) interactions dummies,
for the Zero after promotion dummy variable and for the promotion before 1975 dummy variable, all three not reported in
the Table. The Zero in preceding years is normalized to be the reference group for theco‐authors number and affiliation
dummies. Standard errors are given in parentheses, and P‐values less than 0.10, 0.05 and 0.01 are respectively denoted
by *, ** and ***.

11

Appendix Tables

12

Appendix Table 1: Summary statistics of dependent and explanatory variables in promotion
equations

min

max

mean

sd

min

max

mean

sd

min

max

PA (obs. 12165)

sd

PO (obs. 14114)

mean

PR (obs. 14094)

Promotion

0.64

0.48

0

1

0.59

0.49

0

1

0.66

0.47

0

1

Quality flow

0.87

0.61

0

4.01

1.21

0.71

0

3.78

0.97

0.74

0

3.65

Quantity flow

1.42

0.75

0

3.00

1.72

0.70

0

3.16

1.46

0.81

0

3.02

Zero flow

0.14

0.35

0

1

0.08

0.27

0

1

0.16

0.36

0

1

Academics per year

26.97

15.84

0

55

19.12

29.40

0

109

22.24

30.21

0

166

Wave 1985 (FR)/
Wave 1980 (IT)

0.10

0.30

0

1

0.12

0.32

0

1

0.35

0.48

0

1

Gender

0.07

0.25

0

1

0.06

0.25

0

1

0.15

0.35

0

1

Age group 1

0.01

0.08

0

1

0.00

0.07

0

1

0.01

0.09

0

1

Age group 3

0.38

0.49

0

1

0.35

0.48

0

1

0.37

0.48

0

1

Age group 4

0.29

0.45

0

1

0.32

0.47

0

1

0.23

0.42

0

1

Age group 5

0.06

0.23

0

1

0.16

0.37

0

1

0.08

0.27

0

1

Field 30 (FR)

0.30

0.46

0

1

Fis01 (IT)

0.52

0.50

0

1

0.62

0.49

0

1

Fis02 (IT)
Promotion before
1975

0.23

0.42

0

1

0.18

0.38

0

1

0.05

0.22

0

1

0.02

0.14

0

1

13

Appendix Table 2: Summary statistics of dependent and explanatory variables in productivity
equation for France

sd

min

max

mean

sd

min

max

Productivity(Quantity)

MCF (obs. 12057)

mean

PR (obs. 9018)

0.81

0.75

0

4.26

0.48

0.64

0

4.89

Productivity(Quality)

1.21

0.98

0

3.19

0.81

0.98

0

3.18

Productivity(effort)
Quantity before
promotion
Quality before
promotion

0.15

0.14

0

0.69

0.09

0.13

0

0.69

0.81

0.47

0

2.82

0.60

0.44

0

2.81

1.63

0.65

0

2.73

1.34

0.74

0

3.11

Co‐authors quantity

0.58

0.75

0

4.04

0.48

0.72

0

4.19

Co‐authors quality
Co‐authors zero
Dummy

0.84

0.98

0

3.11

0.68

0.95

0

3.11

0.56

0.50

0

1

0.64

0.48

0

1

0.02

0.15

0

1

0.02

0.14

0

1

0.52

0.50

0

1

0.36

0.48

0

1

0.24

0.43

0

1

0.23

0.42

0

1

0.05

0.22

0

1

0.06

0.24

0

1

Large Project Dummy
Small Project with
Foreign co‐authors
Dummy
Small project with only
National co‐authors
Dummy
Small Project with co‐
authors of unknown
affiliations Dummy
Wave 1985 (FR)

0.13

0.33

0

1

0.20

0.40

0

1

Gender

0.06

0.23

0

1

0.23

0.42

0

1

Age group 1

0.00

0.00

0

0

0.02

0.13

0

1

Age group 3

0.40

0.49

0

1

0.28

0.45

0

1

Age group 4

0.43

0.50

0

1

0.21

0.40

0

1

Age group 5

0.09

0.28

0

1

0.04

0.20

0

1

Field 30 (FR)

0.29

0.46

0

1

0.34

0.47

0

1

Zeros before promotion

0.09

0.29

0

1

0.15

0.36

0

1

Promotion before 1975

0.03

0.18

0

1

0.00

0.00

0

0

Zero after promotion

0.03

0.18

0

1

0.09

0.28

0

1

14

Appendix Table 3: Summary statistics of dependent and explanatory variables in productivity
equation for Italy

0 4.38

max

min

sd

mean

RU (obs. 5106)

max

0.82 0.88

min

4.36

sd

min
0

mean

1.16 0.89

PA (obs. 8089)

max

Productivity(Quantity)

sd

mean

PO (obs. 8332)

0.94 0.88

0 4.43

Productivity(Quality)

1.55 0.95

0

3.76

1.16 1.02

0 3.17

1.34 1.02

0 3.57

Productivity(effort)
Quantity before
promotion
Quality before
promotion

0.15 0.15

0

0.69

0.13 0.16

0 0.69

0.13 0.15

0 0.69

1.00 0.59

0

3.24

0.86 0.53

0 3.32

0.82 0.63

0 3.31

1.65 0.81

0

3.11

1.52 0.66

0 2.80

1.35 0.80

0 2.86

Co‐authors quantity

1.06 0.79

0

3.50

0.81 0.83

0 3.89

1.00 0.85

0 3.43

Co‐authors quality
Co‐authors zero
Dummy

1.47 0.96

0

3.62

1.09 1.03

0 3.12

1.32 1.01

0 3.11

0.28 0.45

0

1

0.46 0.50

0

1

0.35 0.48

0

1

Large Project Dummy
Small Project with
Foreign co‐authors
Dummy
Small project with only
National co‐authors
Dummy
Small Project with co‐
authors of unknown
affiliations Dummy

0.22 0.42

0

1

0.16 0.37

0

1

0.20 0.40

0

1

0.48 0.50

0

1

0.33 0.47

0

1

0.39 0.49

0

1

0.19 0.39

0

1

0.26 0.44

0

1

0.24 0.42

0

1

0.01 0.11

0

1

0.02 0.15

0

1

0.02 0.14

0

1

Wave 1980 (IT)

0.19 0.39

0

1

0.52 0.50

0

1

0.34 0.47

0

1

Gender

0.05 0.21

0

1

0.13 0.34

0

1

0.28 0.45

0

1

Age group 1

0.00 0.00

0

0

0.00 0.00

0

0

0.00 0.06

0

1

Age group 3

0.25 0.44

0

1

0.44 0.50

0

1

0.38 0.49

0

1

Age group 4

0.47 0.50

0

1

0.34 0.48

0

1

0.13 0.33

0

1

Age group 5

0.27 0.44

0

1

0.12 0.33

0

1

0.01 0.09

0

1

Fis01 (IT)

0.49 0.50

0

1

0.64 0.48

0

1

0.50 0.50

0

1

Fis02 (IT)

0.27 0.44

0

1

0.20 0.40

0

1

0.24 0.43

0

1

Zeros before promotion

0.15 0.36

0

1

0.08 0.27

0

1

0.17 0.37

0

1

Promotion before 1975

0.08 0.28

0

1

0.00 0.00

0

0

0.00 0.00

0

0

Zero after promotion

0.01 0.09

0

1

0.02 0.15

0

1

0.01 0.08

0

1

15

Appendix Table 4: Two ways distribution of number of co‐authors and of addresses explicitly
listed in the articles.
Addresses
6‐
11‐
0‐5
10
20 >20

1‐5 65,66 0,16
6‐10 23,25 0,85
11‐20 2,63 0,77

0,01
0,05

21‐29

0,06 0,00

Large
projects

0,32 0,27
0,28 0,67
92,15 2,72

Italy

65,82
24,11
3,46

Authors

Authors

France

0,66

1,12 3,88
5,95
1,25 3,88 100,00

Addresses
6‐
11‐
0‐5
10
20 >20
1‐5 65,61 1,27
6‐10 15,61 1,86
11‐20 3,21 1,82

0,01 0,00
0,02
0,15

66,89
17,49
5,18

21‐29

0,33 0,00

1,87

Large
projects

0,60 0,95
0,65 1,27
85,68 7,16

2,56 4,08
8,57
3,06 4,09 100,00

Appendix Table 5: Average number of authors per nationality or affiliation to CERN, CNRS and
CERN, for Large Project articles, based on the addresses explicitly listed.
France
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

USA
GERMANY
INFN
ENGLAND
ITALY
CNRS
FRANCE
RUSSIA
CHINA
BELGIUM
CERN
GREECE
JAPAN
INDIA
NORWAY
SPAIN
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
DENMARK
CNR

Italy
4.39
1.70
1.28
1.28
1.06
0.83
0.72
0.51
0.48
0.41
0.31
0.29
0.29
0.23
0.19
0.19
0.11
0.08
0.07
0.02

USA
INFN
ITALY
GERMANY
ENGLAND
FRANCE
CNRS
CERN
JAPAN
RUSSIA
BELGIUM
SPAIN
SWITZERLAND
CHINA
GREECE
NORWAY
INDIA
SWEDEN
DENMARK
CNR

2.60
2.30
2.00
1.25
1.08
0.61
0.54
0.46
0.35
0.34
0.25
0.24
0.24
0.22
0.21
0.16
0.13
0.09
0.08
0.04

* List limited to the 20 of most frequently cited countries or PROs.

16

Appendix Table 6: Total number of articles by the French and Italian physicists in the 20 first
journals listed in terms of decreasing numbers of articles*
Publications
N.

Journal

Entry
date

1

PHYSICAL REVIEW B

1975

Exit
date

Italy

France

Total

2005

4225

3424

7649

2

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

1975

2005

3000

2566

5566

3

1975

2005

4129

1045

5174

4

PHYSICS LETTERS B
NUCLEAR INSTRUMENTS & METHODS IN
PHYSICS RESEARCH SECTION A‐
ACCELERATORS SPECTROMETERS DETECTORS
AND ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT

1984

2005

2446

552

2998

5

JOURNAL OF APPLIED PHYSICS

1975

2005

1245

1542

2787

6

APPLIED PHYSICS LETTERS

1975

2005

1178

1347

2525

7

NUCLEAR PHYSICS B

1975

2005

2039

308

2347

8

PHYSICAL REVIEW A

1975

2005

1281

1036

2317

9

JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS

1975

2005

875

1376

2251

10

PHYSICAL REVIEW D

1975

2005

1586

499

2085

11

PHYSICAL REVIEW E

1993

2005

1207

811

2018

12

SOLID STATE COMMUNICATIONS

1975

2005

831

938

1769

13

JOURNAL OF PHYSICS‐CONDENSED MATTER

1989

2005

726

945

1671

14

1986

2005

778

858

1636

15

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS
JOURNAL OF MAGNETISM AND MAGNETIC
MATERIALS

1977

2005

535

1060

1595

16

JOURNAL DE PHYSIQUE

1975

1990

257

1193

1450

17

OPTICS COMMUNICATIONS

1975

2005

625

810

1435

18

1991

2005

264

1140

1404

19

JOURNAL DE PHYSIQUE IV
NUCLEAR INSTRUMENTS & METHODS IN
PHYSICS RESEARCH SECTION B‐BEAM
INTERACTIONS WITH MATERIALS AND ATOMS

1984

2005

731

652

1383

20

PHYSICS LETTERS A

1975

2005

960

349

1309

* The Table shows the first and last year in which we observe an article published on a journal (Entry date of
the journal in the database and exit date of the journal from the database). It also gives the number of
publications (Italian, French and the sum) available in the database for each journal.

17

